The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Quasi-clique: Hardness, Equivalence with Densest-k-Subgraph, and
Quasi-partitioned Community Mining
Aritra Konar1 , Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos2
1

KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
aritra.konar@kuleuven.be, nikos@virginia.edu.
2

Abstract

1984). In practice, a simple vertex peeling-based greedy approximation algorithm (Charikar 2000) is used, as it enjoys
linear-time complexity and provides a 0.5-approximation
guarantee for DSG. Recently, “multi-pass” generalizations
of the greedy algorithm have been developed which exhibit
superior performance (Boob et al. 2020; Chekuri, Quanrud,
and Torres 2022). Another well-known formulation is the
core decomposition (Seidman 1983), which is tantamount to
maximizing the minimum induced degree - the resulting vertex subset is known as the maxcore, which can be obtained
via a slight modification of the greedy peeling algorithm for
DSG. These approaches suffer from an inherent limitation
- there is no means of explicitly controlling the size of the
extracted subgraphs. Hence, one cannot rule out the possibility that these extracted subgraphs will have low density.
Unfortunately, such cases can occur on real-world graphs.
For example, the peeling algorithm for DSG can output the
entire graph as the solution (Tsourakakis et al. 2013). Meanwhile, empirical studies have revealed that the maxcores typically do not form a dense quasi-clique (Shin, Eliassi-Rad,
and Faloutsos 2016).

Dense subgraph discovery (DSD) is a key primitive in graph
mining that typically deals with extracting cliques and nearcliques. In this paper, we revisit the optimal quasi-clique
(OQC) formulation for DSD and establish that it is NP–hard.
In addition, we reveal the hitherto unknown property that
OQC can be used to explore the entire spectrum of densest subgraphs of all distinct sizes by appropriately varying a
single hyperparameter, thereby forging an intimate link with
the classic densest-k-subgraph problem (DkS). We corroborate these findings on real-world graphs by applying the simple greedy algorithm for OQC with improved hyperparameter tuning, to quickly generate high-quality approximations
of the size-density frontier. Our findings indicate that OQC
not only extracts high quality (near)-cliques, but also large
and loosely-connected subgraphs that exhibit well defined local community structure. The latter discovery is particularly
intriguing, since OQC is not explicitly geared towards community detection.

Introduction

If the density of DSG/maxcore proves to be unsatisfactory, the Densest-k-Subgraph (DkS) problem (Feige, Peleg,
and Kortsarz 2001) can be employed - given a pre-specified
size parameter k, extract the densest size-k vertex subset
(i.e., the one which harbors the maximum number of induced edges). By solving the problem for various k, we obtain a collection of the densest subgraphs of distinct sizes,
from which a solution of desired density can be selected.
We designate the entire spectrum of such subgraphs (i.e., the
densest of each distinct size) the optimal size-density frontier. Unfortunately, this extra flexibility comes at a price DkS is NP–hard and is notoriously difficult to approximate
in the worst-case (Manurangsi 2017). Notwithstanding this
fact, practical algorithms which work well for this problem
on real graphs include (Papailiopoulos et al. 2014; Konar
and Sidiropoulos 2021). However, a limitation of these approaches is that they entail solving an optimization problem for each k, which can prove computationally expensive
when generating candidate solutions of various sizes. An alternative is the recent Generalized Mean Densest Subgraph
(GMDSG) framework (Veldt, Benson, and Kleinberg 2021),
which employs a single parameter p for computing generalized means of degree sequences of a subgraph. By vary-

Dense subgraph detection (DSD) is a key primitive in graph
mining that aims to extract highly interconnected subsets of
vertices from a graph. Applications of the problem range
from discovering regulatory motifs in genomic DNA, mining trending topics in social media, finding functional modules in gene co-expression networks, and communities in
social networks – see (Cadena, Chen, and Vullikanti 2018;
Lanciano et al. 2023) and references therein. In recent years,
DSD has also found application in spotting fraudulent behavior in user-product graphs (Hooi et al. 2016) and financial transaction networks (Zhang et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020;
Chen and Tsourakakis 2022).
Directly maximizing subgraph density (defined as the
fraction of the maximum number of possible edges in a
subgraph) admits trivial solutions such as a single edge.
This motivates using alternative surrogates for density maximization. The classic Densest Subgraph (DSG) problem
(Goldberg 1984) aims to extract a dense vertex subset that
maximizes the average induced degree. DSG can be solved
exactly in polynomial-time via maximum-flow (Goldberg
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8608

