The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Discrepancy in Feature Statistic for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xiaoyuan Guan1,2 , Jiankang Chen1,2 , Shenshen Bu1 , Yuren Zhou1 * , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2 , Ruixuan
Wang1,2,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE, Guangzhou, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{guanxy36,chenjk36,bushsh}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhouyuren@mail.sysu.edu.cn,wszheng@ieee.org,
wangruix5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a crucial task in the
field of machine learning, particularly in scenarios where
models are deployed in the real world. In such cases, it is
necessary to ensure that the model is able to recognize inputs
that are outside of the distribution on which it was trained,
as failure to do so could potentially lead to significant consequences. For instance, in autonomous driving (Geiger, Lenz,
and Urtasun 2012), a model that is unable to detect OOD inputs may fail to recognize a new type of obstacle on the road,
leading to fatal accidents.
Various techniques have been developed to address OOD
detection, including uncertainty estimation methods (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Malinin and
Gales 2018, 2019; Nandy, Hsu, and Lee 2020), confidencebased methods (DeVries and Taylor 2018; Hein, Andriushchenko, and Bitterwolf 2019), and density estimation
methods (Jiang, Sun, and Yu 2021; Ren et al. 2019; Serrà
et al. 2020; Zisselman and Tamar 2020). For example, one
of the confidence-based methods called the maximum softmax probability (MSP) (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017) can

be used as a score for detecting OOD inputs. However, OOD
data often result in high prediction confidence. Density estimation methods based on generative models can also suffer
from the same vulnerability to OOD inputs. Nalisnick (Nalisnick et al. 2019) found that using generative models to estimate the data distribution can result in OOD inputs obtaining
higher density estimates than in-distribution data.
The vulnerabilities of existing out-of-distribution detection methods have highlighted the importance for researchers to capture more potential differences between
ID and OOD data from various aspects. To this end, ReAct (Sun, Guo, and Li 2021) proposed performing activation
pruning on feature vectors that are output from the penultimate layer of CNN networks, which can reduce more activations for the OOD feature and increase the gap between
ID and OOD scoring value. LINe (Ahn, Park, and Kim
2023) was proposed to clip feature activation output from the
penultimate layer and consider the difference in the number
of activated units. Similar methods that perform rectification
on feature vectors include BATS (Zhu et al. 2022) and RankFeat (Song, Sebe, and Wang 2022). ViM (Wang et al. 2022)
was proposed to combine multiple sources of information to
improve OOD detection performance. In particular, by discarding some information from the feature vector and using
the discarded information to generate an extra logit, ViM can
capture differences between ID and OOD data from both the
feature space and the logit space. The aforementioned studies either enlarge the differences between ID and OOD data
by post-hoc operations or enhance the OOD detection performance by fusing differences from multiple sources.
This paper further exploits potential difference in features
between ID and OOD data and introduces a novel approach
to OOD detection based on the discrepancy between the statistical information of feature vectors. Specifically, we observe that the average of feature vector elements from the
penultimate layer of a CNN classifier tends to be larger for
ID data than for OOD data. By combining the feature average information with certain existing strong OOD methods,
we propose a method that outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on multiple OOD detection benchmarks. The main
contributions are summarized below.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a simple and effective OOD detection
method by exploiting the statistical discrepancy between
in-distribution and out-of-distribution data. Our method

Recent studies on out-of-distribution (OOD) detection focus
on designing models or scoring functions that can effectively
distinguish between unseen OOD data and in-distribution
(ID) data. In this paper, we propose a simple yet novel approach to OOD detection by leveraging the phenomenon
that the average of feature vector elements from convolutional neural network (CNN) is typically larger for ID data
than for OOD data. Specifically, the average of feature vector elements is used as part of the scoring function to further separate OOD data from ID data. We also provide
mathematical analysis to explain this phenomenon. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that, when combined with a
strong baseline, our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance on several OOD detection benchmarks. Furthermore, our method can be easily integrated into various CNN
architectures and requires less computation. Source code
address: https://github.com/SYSU-MIA-GROUP/statistical
discrepancy ood.

Introduction

19858

