The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Zero-Shot Aerial Object Detection with Visual Description Regularization
Zhengqing Zang1,2 * , Chenyu Lin1,2 * , Chenwei Tang1,2 , Tao Wang1,2† , Jiancheng Lv1,2
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, P. R. China
2
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence,
Ministry of Education, Chengdu, 610065, P. R. China
{2022223045158, 2022223040017}@stu.scu.edu.cn, tangchenwei@scu.edu.cn, twangnh@gmail.com
lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing object detection models are mainly trained on largescale labeled datasets. However, annotating data for novel
aerial object classes is expensive since it is time-consuming
and may require expert knowledge. Thus, it is desirable to
study label-efficient object detection methods on aerial images. In this work, we propose a zero-shot method for aerial
object detection named visual Description Regularization, or
DescReg. Concretely, we identify the weak semantic-visual
correlation of the aerial objects and aim to address the challenge with prior descriptions of their visual appearance. Instead of directly encoding the descriptions into class embedding space which suffers from the representation gap problem, we propose to infuse the prior inter-class visual similarity conveyed in the descriptions into the embedding learning. The infusion process is accomplished with a newly designed similarity-aware triplet loss which incorporates structured regularization on the representation space. We conduct
extensive experiments with three challenging aerial object detection datasets, including DIOR, xView, and DOTA. The results demonstrate that DescReg significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art ZSD methods with complex projection designs and generative frameworks, e.g., DescReg outperforms
best reported ZSD method on DIOR by 4.5 mAP on unseen
classes and 8.1 in HM. We further show the generalizability
of DescReg by integrating it into generative ZSD methods as
well as varying the detection architecture. Codes will be released at https://github.com/zq-zang/DescReg.

Figure 1: Illustration of weak semantic-visual correlation
problem. We perform hierarchical clustering with semantic
embeddings and show the radial dendrogram for the 20 common object classes from the Pascal VOC dataset (left) and
the 20 aerial object classes from the DIOR dataset(right).
The common object classes show clear clustering result
which corresponds well to visual appearance (e.g., horse,
cow, and sheep), while the semantic clustering of aerial object classes are inevident and shows much less correlation
with visual appearance. Best viewed with zoom-in.

a fully supervised paradigm. However, labeling objects for
large-scale aerial images is extremely costly due to the small
object size and irregular viewing angle. Hence expanding the
vocabulary becomes a challenge for fully supervised aerial
object detection methods (Lam et al. 2018).
Zero-shot object detection (ZSD), which aims to detect unseen object classes without bounding box annotations (Bansal et al. 2018; Demirel, Cinbis, and IkizlerCinbis 2018; Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2018), appears as a
promising approach for reducing the copious label demand
in aerial object detection. ZSD methods mainly leverage the
semantic relation between object classes to detect unseen
classes, e.g., Cat and Dog are semantically similar, and thus
the knowledge learned on Cat could be transferred to recognize Dog. Methodologically, this knowledge transfer process is typically realized through learning a command embedding function to align visual and semantic features (Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2018; Bansal et al. 2018; Zheng
et al. 2020; Rahman, Khan, and Barnes 2020), or learning
a universal synthesizer function to generate training sam-

Introduction
Aerial object detection aims to detect objects from aerial
images (Xia et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019; Ding et al.
2021), e.g., images captured from an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). It plays an important role in many remote sensing
applications, such as UAV-aided environmental monitor and
disaster response systems. Benefiting from the development
of deep convolution neural networks (CNNs), aerial object
detection has been extensively studied and advanced (Yang
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022, 2020; Deng et al.
2020; Han et al. 2021) in recent years. Prior research mainly
focuses on improving the accuracy or efficiency based on
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6926

