The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sim-to-Lab-to-Real: Safe Reinforcement Learning with Shielding and
Generalization Guarantees (Abstract Reprint)
Kai-Chieh Hsu1 , Allen Z. Ren2 , Duy P. Nguyen1 , Anirudha Majumdar2 , Jaime F. Fisac1
1

2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, United States
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, United States

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Hsu, Ren, Nguyen, Majumdar, and Fisac (2023).

Abstract
Safety is a critical component of autonomous systems and
remains a challenge for learning-based policies to be utilized in the real world. In particular, policies learned using
reinforcement learning often fail to generalize to novel environments due to unsafe behavior. In this paper, we propose
Sim-to-Lab-to-Real to bridge the reality gap with a probabilistically guaranteed safety-aware policy distribution. To
improve safety, we apply a dual policy setup where a performance policy is trained using the cumulative task reward
and a backup (safety) policy is trained by solving the Safety
Bellman Equation based on Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reachability analysis. In Sim-to-Lab transfer, we apply a supervisory control scheme to shield unsafe actions during exploration; in Lab-to-Real transfer, we leverage the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)-Bayes framework to provide lower bounds on the expected performance and safety
of policies in unseen environments. Additionally, inheriting from the HJ reachability analysis, the bound accounts
for the expectation over the worst-case safety in each environment. We empirically study the proposed framework for
ego-vision navigation in two types of indoor environments
with varying degrees of photorealism. We also demonstrate
strong generalization performance through hardware experiments in real indoor spaces with a quadrupedal robot. See
https://sites.google.com/princeton.edu/sim-to-lab-to-real for
supplementary material.

References
Hsu, K.-C.; Ren, A. Z.; Nguyen, D. P.; Majumdar, A.; and
Fisac, J. F. 2023. Sim-to-Lab-to-Real: Safe reinforcement
learning with shielding and generalization guarantees. Artificial Intelligence, 314: 103811.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22699

