The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scaling and Masking: A New Paradigm of Data Sampling for Image and Video
Quality Assessment
Yongxu Liu1,2 * , Yinghui Quan2,1 , Guoyao Xiao2,1 , Aobo Li3 , Jinjian Wu3
1

Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Hangzhou 311200, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{yongxu.liu, gyxiao}@xidian.edu.cn, {yhquan, jinjian.wu}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, abli@stu.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract
Quality assessment of images and videos emphasizes both local details and global semantics, whereas general data sampling methods (e.g., resizing, cropping or grid-based fragment) fail to catch them simultaneously. To address the deficiency, current approaches have to adopt multi-branch models
and take as input the multi-resolution data, which burdens the
model complexity. In this work, instead of stacking up models, a more elegant data sampling method (named as SAMA,
scaling and masking) is explored, which compacts both the
local and global content in a regular input size. The basic idea
is to scale the data into a pyramid first, and reduce the pyramid into a regular data dimension with a masking strategy.
Benefiting from the spatial and temporal redundancy in images and videos, the processed data maintains the multi-scale
characteristics with a regular input size, thus can be processed
by a single-branch model. We verify the sampling method in
image and video quality assessment. Experiments show that
our sampling method can improve the performance of current single-branch models significantly, and achieves competitive performance to the multi-branch models without extra model complexity. The source code will be available at
https://github.com/Sissuire/SAMA.

…

(a) Scaling/cropping

(b) Grid-based fragment

(c) The proposed sampling method

Introduction

Figure 1: An illustration of data sampling methods in quality
assessment. Scaling would cause detail loss, while cropping
might harm global perception. The proposed method scales
the data into a pyramid and masks the pyramid based on data
redundancy. The resulting data holds the multi-scale nature
with a regular input size.

Image/video quality assessment (I/VQA) is to quantify the
perceptual quality/feeling of the given image/video data
from the perspective of users (Wu et al. 2019a; Liu et al.
2022b; Wu et al. 2023c,d,b). The best choice of measuring perceptual quality is to conduct a subjective experiment
and collect the mean opinion scores (MOS) from a group of
subjects (Fang et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2022). However, the
huge cost and inefficiency of the subjective quality assessment cannot satisfy most demands in reality, thus pushing
the development of I/VQA methods. As user-generated content (e.g., selfies, short videos) is dramatically overflowing
in everyone’s mobile phone, every platform (such as TikTok
and Facebook), and the whole internet, I/VQA serves as the
criterion for quality monitoring, data screening or preference
recommendation, and is becoming more active in the society
of multimedia and computer vision (Zhu et al. 2020; Wang,
Chan, and Loy 2023; Zhang et al. 2023b).

The intrinsic nature of quality assessment implies that
the sampled data prepared for the quality assessment model
should well preserve both local details and global appearance, which is not trivial for the fixed input size in deep
learning-based models. Before inputting the data into the
quality assessment model, a natural process is to interpolate the data into a fixed size (e.g., 224 × 224). However,
the scaling method would introduce the loss of local details,
which is inappropriate for I/VQA. Previous work has suggested that preserving the higher resolution of the input data
is critical (Hosu et al. 2020). As a consequence, croppingbased sampling is widely used in both IQA and VQA (Ying
et al. 2020, 2021). The concern is when facing an image

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3792

