The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pantypes: Diverse Representatives for Self-Explainable Models
Rune Kjærsgaard1 , Ahcène Boubekki2 , Line Clemmensen1
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
2
Machine Learning and Uncertainty, Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Germany
rdokj@dtu.dk

Abstract

Transparency may be defined by two properties; (i) the
learned concepts are used in the decision making process
without the use of a black-box model and (ii) the learned
concepts can be visualized in the input space.
Trustworthiness may be defined by three properties; (i)
the predictive performance of the model matches its closest
black-box counterpart, (ii) explanations are robust and (iii)
the explanations directly represent the contribution of the input features to the model predictions.
Diversity may be defined by one property; (i) the concepts
learned by the SEM are represented by non-overlapping information in the latent space.
While significant work has been put forth in the literature to cement the transparency and trustworthiness axis of
SEMs, only limited effort using qualitative measures exists
for the diversity axis. Similarly, the relation between the diversity axis and appropriate inference remains largely unexplored. Diversity is typically ensured by introducing model
regularization towards learning non-overlapping concepts
(Vilone and Longo 2020). However, this condition may not
be strong enough, as non-overlapping concepts can still be
learned in a small region of the input space, causing a lack of
representativity for the full data distribution, known as representation bias (Shahbazi et al. 2022). Representation bias
can cause smaller sub-populations to remain hidden in lowdensity regions and ultimately cause biased inference (Jin
et al. 2020). To provide sufficient coverage and to mitigate
the impact of data bias during model inference, it is critical
to capture the full diversity of the data, and to have this diversity be represented in the prototypes learned by the SEM. To
this end, we introduce pantypes, a new family of prototypical objects designed to empower SEMs by sufficiently covering the dataspace. Pantype generation is promoted using a
novel volumetric loss inspired by a probability distribution
known as a Determinantal Point Process (DPP) (Kulesza,
Taskar et al. 2012). This loss induces higher prototype diversity, enables more fine-grained diversity control, and at
the same time allows prototype pruning wherein the number
of prototypes is determined dynamically dependent on the
diversity expressed within each class. Prototype pruning enables the capacity to learn additional prototypes for complex
classes and to grasp simple classes through a sparser set of
objects, improving the interpretability of the class representatives.

Prototypical self-explainable classifiers have emerged to meet
the growing demand for interpretable AI systems. These classifiers are designed to incorporate high transparency in their
decisions by basing inference on similarity with learned prototypical objects. While these models are designed with diversity in mind, the learned prototypes often do not sufficiently represent all aspects of the input distribution, particularly those in low density regions. Such lack of sufficient data
representation, known as representation bias, has been associated with various detrimental properties related to machine
learning diversity and fairness. In light of this, we introduce
pantypes, a new family of prototypical objects designed to
capture the full diversity of the input distribution through a
sparse set of objects. We show that pantypes can empower
prototypical self-explainable models by occupying divergent
regions of the latent space and thus fostering high diversity,
interpretability and fairness.

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) systems are increasingly affecting
individuals across various societal domains. This has put
into question the black-box nature of these systems, and fostered the field of explainable AI (XAI), wherein model inference is corroborated with justifications and explanations in
an effort to increase transparency and trustworthiness. In this
line of research two approaches have arisen; that of ad-hoc
black-box model explanations (Selvaraju et al. 2017; Yosinski et al. 2015), and that of self-explainable models (SEMs)
(Chen et al. 2019a; Alvarez Melis and Jaakkola 2018). A
popular approach for SEMs substitutes traditional black-box
networks with glass-box counterparts, where class representative prototypes are generated and used in the decision process (Chen et al. 2019a) leading to increased trustworthiness
and interpretability.
The various initiatives emerging in the literature share the
same overarching goals, but there is still a lack of consensus
on the exact properties a SEMs should display (Gautam et al.
2023). We adopt three prerequisites of a SEM outlined in
(Gautam et al. 2022), namely transparency, trustworthiness
and diversity.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13230

