The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

High-Dimensional Analysis for Generalized Nonlinear Regression: From
Asymptotics to Algorithm
Jian Li1 , Yong Liu2 * , Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
lijian9026@iie.ac.cn, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn, wangweiping@iie.ac.cn
2

Abstract

2022), neural networks (Ba et al. 2020; Frei, Chatterji, and
Bartlett 2022; Somepalli et al. 2022), sketching (Chen et al.
2023), and random projections (Bach 2023). These studies
have shown that in the under-parameterized regime, there is
a U-shaped performance curve, with models achieving benign overfitting when over-parameterized. Despite the extensive literature devoted to understanding the double descent phenomenon, there are still several open problems:
1) The lack of a general asymptotic analysis framework for
generalized nonlinear regression models that covers various
models. 2) Existing asymptotic results often remain as selfconsistency equations that are hard to estimate, and there is a
need for a connection to traditional model complexity measures, such as effective dimension and Rademacher complexity, to aid in understanding. 3) Benign overfitting can be
caused by overparameterization, and subsampling may also
achieve better performance from a dual view.
In this paper, we address these challenges by developing
a generalized high-dimensional analysis framework and an
improved algorithm for nonlinear regression models, thanks
to the asymptotic equivalents involving effective dimension in (Bach 2023) and the insights from downsampling in
(Chen et al. 2023). We first devise a generalized nonlinear
model that covers linear regression, random features, neural networks, random projections, and sketching. Next, we
establish the implicit regularization and asymptotic equivalents that are implicitly related to effective dimension in
high-dimensional analysis for generalized nonlinear regression. Using these tools, we derive asymptotic risks for nonlinear ridge regression and ridgeless regression models. Motivated by the theoretical finding that the excess risk decreases with the effective dimension, we design a random
feature regression model with effective dimension (RFRed)
to minimize the training loss and effective dimension by
jointly optimizing the feature mapping and model parameters. We conduct experiments to explore the impacts of nonlinear feature mappings and subsampling, respectively. We
leave the proofs and more experiments in the appendix1 . Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

Overparameterization often leads to benign overfitting, where
deep neural networks can be trained to overfit the training
data but still generalize well on unseen data. However, it lacks
a generalized asymptotic framework for nonlinear regressions and connections to conventional complexity notions. In
this paper, we propose a generalized high-dimensional analysis for nonlinear regression models, including various nonlinear feature mapping methods and subsampling. Specifically, we first provide an implicit regularization parameter
and asymptotic equivalents related to a classical complexity notion, i.e., effective dimension. We then present a highdimensional analysis for nonlinear ridge regression and extend it to ridgeless regression in the under-parameterized and
over-parameterized regimes, respectively. We find that the
limiting risks decrease with the effective dimension. Motivated by these theoretical findings, we propose an algorithm,
namely RFRed, to improve generalization ability. Finally, we
validate our theoretical findings and the proposed algorithm
through several experiments.

Introduction
In conventional machine learning (Vapnik 1999), an explicit
regularization term should be added to the learning objective
to avoid overfitting, where the model fits the training data
well but generalizes poorly on unseen data. From the perspective of statistical learning, the regularization parameter
λ balances the bias and variance (Li, Liu, and Wang 2023b).
However, recent studies on overparameterized models, including neural networks and kernel methods, have shown
that even without explicit regularization, these models often achieve benign overfitting, interpolating the training
data while still generalizing well (Belkin, Ma, and Mandal
2018; Liang and Rakhlin 2020; Bartlett et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021). Furthermore, the ”double descent” performance
curve has been observed beyond neural networks (Nakkiran et al. 2021). Based on random matrix theory, subsequent
works have theoretically analyzed this phenomenon using
high-dimensional asymptotics for various models, including linear models (Belkin, Hsu, and Xu 2020; Hastie et al.
2022), random Fourier features (Liao, Couillet, and Mahoney 2020; Mei and Montanari 2022; Li, Liu, and Zhang

• We provide a generalized asymptotic analysis framework
for general nonlinear regression models, where the limit-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Full version: https://lijian.ac.cn/files/2024/NonlinearHDA.pdf
Code: https://github.com/superlj666/NonlinearHDA

13500

