The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DP-AdamBC: Your DP-Adam Is Actually DP-SGD
(Unless You Apply Bias Correction)
Qiaoyue Tang, Frederick Shpilevskiy, Mathias Lécuyer
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
{qiaoyuet, fshpil}@cs.ubc.ca, mathias.lecuyer@ubc.ca

Abstract

2021) and GNN (Daigavane et al. 2021) models. However
we observe that when combined with DP, Adam does not
perform as well as without privacy constraints.
To understand this effect, we go back to the original intuition behind Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014) that relies on
exponential moving averages estimating the first and second moments of mini-batch gradients. We show that while
DP noise does not affect the first moment, it does add a
constant bias to the second. Drawing on a recent empirical investigation that suggests that the performance of Adam
may be linked to its update rule performing a smooth version of the sign descent update (Kunstner et al. 2023), we
show that the additive shift in Adam’s second moment estimate caused by DP noise moves the Adam update away
from that of sign descent, by scaling the gradient dimensions
with different magnitudes differently. Indeed, under typical
DP parameters, the DP bias added to the second moment
estimates of DP-Adam dominate the second moment estimate, and makes DP-Adam a rescaled version of DP-SGD
with momentum. We show how to correct this DP noise induced bias, yielding a variation that we call DP-AdamBC.
Empirically, correcting Adam’s second moment estimate for
DP noise increases test performance for Adam with DP, on
tasks for which Adam is well suited. We make the following
contributions:

The Adam optimizer is a popular choice in contemporary
deep learning, due to its strong empirical performance. However we observe that in privacy sensitive scenarios, the traditional use of Differential Privacy (DP) with the Adam optimizer leads to sub-optimal performance on several tasks. We
find that this performance degradation is due to a DP bias in
Adam’s second moment estimator, introduced by the addition
of independent noise in the gradient computation to enforce
DP guarantees. This DP bias leads to a different scaling for
low variance parameter updates, that is inconsistent with the
behavior of non-private Adam. We propose DP-AdamBC, an
optimization algorithm which removes the bias in the second
moment estimation and retrieves the expected behaviour of
Adam. Empirically, DP-AdamBC significantly improves the
optimization performance of DP-Adam by up to 3.5 percentages in final accuracy in image, text, and graph node classification tasks.

1

Introduction

The Adam optimization algorithm (Kingma and Ba 2014) is
the default optimizer for several deep learning architectures
and tasks, notably in Natural Language Processing (NLP),
for which Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) tends to struggle. Even in vision tasks where Adam is less prevalent, it
typically requires less parameter tuning than SGD to reach
good performance.
On all these tasks, deep learning models can leak information about their training set (Carlini et al. 2019, 2021, 2022;
Balle, Cherubin, and Hayes 2022). We consider settings in
which the deep learning model’s training data is privacy
sensitive, and models are trained with Differential Privacy
(Dwork et al. 2006; Abadi et al. 2016) to provably prevent
training example information leakage (Wasserman and Zhou
2010). Intuitively, training DP models requires computing
each minibatch gradient with DP guarantees by clipping perexample gradients and adding Gaussian noise (§3), to bound
the maximal influence of any data-point on the final model.
The DP gradients can then feed into any optimization algorithm without modification to update the model’s parameters. Due to its success in the non-private setting, Adam is
also prevalent when training DP models, for NLP (Li et al.

1. We analyze the interaction between DP and the Adam
optimizer, and show that DP noise introduces bias in
Adam’s second moment estimator (§3). We show theoretically, and verify empirically, that under typical DP parameters DP-Adam reduces to DP-SGD with momentum
(§3). This behavior violates the sign-descent hypothesis
for Adam’s performance.
2. We propose DP-AdamBC, a variation of DP-Adam that
corrects for the bias introduced by DP noise. We show
that DP-AdamBC is a consistent estimator for the Adam
update, under the same simplifying assumptions that justify Adam’s update. (§4).
3. We empirically evaluate the effect of DP-AdamBC, and
show that it yields significant improvements (up to 3.5
percentage points of test accuracy) over DP-Adam. (§5).
Our implementation is available at: https://github.com/ubcsystopia/DP-AdamBC. All Appendixes referenced in the paper are available in the long version of the paper (Tang, Sh-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15276

