The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

H2GFormer: Horizontal-to-Global Voxel Transformer
for 3D Semantic Scene Completion
Yu Wang1 , Chao Tong2,3 *
1

Sino-French Engineer School, Beihang University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
{wangyu0089, tongchao}@buaa.edu.cn
2

Isometric View

Abstract
3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has emerged as a
novel task in vision-based holistic 3D scene understanding.
Its objective is to densely predict the occupancy and category of each voxel in a 3D scene based on input from either LiDAR or images. Currently, many transformer-based
semantic scene completion frameworks employ simple yet
popular Cross-Attention and Self-Attention mechanisms to
integrate and infer dense geometric and semantic information of voxels. However, they overlook the distinctions among
voxels in the scene, especially in outdoor scenarios where
the horizontal direction contains more variations. And voxels located at object boundaries and within the interior of objects exhibit varying levels of positional significance. To address this issue, we propose a transformer-based SSC framework called H2GFormer that incorporates a horizontal-toglobal approach. This framework takes into full consideration the variations of voxels in the horizontal direction and
the characteristics of voxels on object boundaries. We introduce a horizontal window-to-global attention (W2G) module
that effectively fuses semantic information by first diffusing
it horizontally from reliably visible voxels and then propagating the semantic understanding to global voxels, ensuring
a more reliable fusion of semantic-aware features. Moreover,
an Internal-External Position Awareness Loss (IoE-PALoss)
is utilized during network training to emphasize the critical positions within the transition regions between objects.
The experiments conducted on the SemanticKITTI dataset
demonstrate that H2GFormer exhibits superior performance
in both geometric and semantic completion tasks. Our code
is available on https://github.com/Ryanwy1/H2GFormer.

Camera

Bird’s Eye View

XZ

Camera View

Camera
YZ

Figure 1: The isometric view, camera view, and bird’s-eye
view of SemanticKITTI (Cai et al. 2021). In outdoor scenes,
voxel categories exhibit greater variation along the horizontal direction than along the vertical ground direction.

within this task are tightly intertwined. Subsequent methods
(Li et al. 2019a; Garbade et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020b) continue this perspective and place a greater emphasis on indoor
scenes. Other works (Roldao, de Charette, and VerroustBlondet 2020; Cheng et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2021; Xia et al. 2023) leverage 3D geometric data, such as
LiDAR point clouds, extending this task to outdoor scenes.
Compared to the relatively higher cost of LiDAR sensors, visual cameras not only offer cost-effective solutions but also
provide abundant visual cues of the scene. It has prompted
recent research endeavors to shift towards vision-based solutions. MonoScene (Cao and de Charette 2022) was the pioneering approach that introduced semantic scene completion
utilizing monocular images as input. Other works (Huang
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023) aimed to improve the model’s
ability to generate dense 3D scenes from sparse observations
by refining the design of the network architecture.
However, these Transformer-based visual approaches
predominantly focus on holistic voxel feature modeling,
thereby overlooking distinctions between voxels along the
horizontal and vertical directions, as well as the disparities between voxels within objects and those outside. Hence,
these methods encounter inherent challenges such as the inability to accurately and efficiently diffuse 2D image features into 3D voxels. In reality, the uniform treatment of all
voxels is not tenable, especially in outdoor scenarios where
the horizontal dimension exhibits more variations, as shown

Introduction
Holistic 3D understanding has emerged as a crucial challenge in computer vision, advancing notably in scenarios
like autonomous driving, robot behavior planning, and virtual reality applications. However, occlusions and incomplete observations pose challenges in acquiring precise 3D
information.
To address these challenges, SSCNet (Song et al. 2017)
pioneered the introduction of 3D semantic scene completion
and demonstrated scene completion and semantic labeling
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5722

