The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Analysis of Differentially Private Synthetic Data: A Measurement Error Approach
Yangdi Jiang1 , Yi Liu1 , Xiaodong Yan2 , Anne-Sophie Charest3 , Linglong Kong1 , Bei Jiang1
1

Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta
2
Zhongtai Securities Institute for Financial Studies, Shandong University
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Laval University
{yangdi, yliu16}@ualberta.ca, yanxiaodong@sdu.edu.cn, anne-sophie.charest@mat.ulaval.ca, {lkong, bei1}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

and thus take on more privacy risk. This could be problematic as it limits the number of analyses that researchers can
run, which can result in the dataset not being fully explored.
In consequence, it diminishes the probability of serendipitous discovery and amplifies the odds of being tricked by
unanticipated data problems (Evans et al. Working Paper).
To address the problem above, various methods of releasing differentially private synthetic datasets (Liu 2016;
Bowen and Liu 2020; Gambs et al. 2021) have been proposed. Using the post-processing property of DP, any analysis on the DP synthetic dataset will be differentially private without the additional cost of privacy budget. Therefore, releasing DP synthetic dataset circumvents the problem of running out of privacy budget. Here we will mention
a few notable methods of generating DP synthetic datasets.
In general, the methods of generating DP datasets can be categorized into the non-parametric method and the parametric
method. For the non-parametric methods, the DP dataset is
constructed based on the empirical distribution of the data.
The simplest approach would be directly adding Laplace or
Gaussian noises to the confidential dataset. For the parametric methods, the DP dataset is constructed based on a parametric distribution/model of the data. Using the robust and
flexible model of vine copula, Gambs et al. (2021) draw the
DP synthetic dataset from the DP-trained vine copula model.
From the Bayesian perspective, Liu (2016) proposes generating DP synthetic dataset by drawing samples from the DP
version of the posterior predictive distribution. For a more
comprehensive overview of different DP dataset generation
methods, refer to Bowen and Liu (2020).
Dwork and Roth (2014) characterizes differential privacy
as a definition of privacy tailored to the problem of privacypreserving data analysis. However, for a statistician, the goal
of statistical inference is often as important as data analysis. Under the framework of differential privacy, the methods
for making statistical inferences are under-explored. Fortunately, the interest in statistical inference under differential
privacy has been rising recently including the works like
Sheffet (2017) and Barrientos et al. (2019). Different differential privacy algorithms lead to distinct statistical models. It has been discovered that additive mechanisms, such as
the Laplace mechanism or Gaussian mechanism, yield statistical models that are inherently linked to measurement error models. In other words, each additive mechanism can be

Differentially private (DP) synthetic datasets have been receiving significant attention from academia, industry, and
government. However, little is known about how to perform
statistical inference using DP synthetic datasets. Naive approaches that do not take into account the induced uncertainty
due to the DP mechanism will result in biased estimators and
invalid inferences. In this paper, we present a class of maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)-based easy-to-implement
bias-corrected DP estimators with valid asymptotic confidence intervals (CI) for parameters in regression settings, by
establishing the connection between additive DP mechanisms
and measurement error models. Our simulation shows that
our estimator has comparable performance to the widely used
sufficient statistic perturbation (SSP) algorithm in some scenarios but with the advantage of releasing a synthetic dataset
and obtaining statistically valid asymptotic CIs, which can
achieve better coverage when compared to the naive CIs obtained by ignoring the DP mechanism.

Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) is a mathematically rigorous definition that quantifies privacy risk. It builds on the idea of releasing “privacy-protected” query results, such as summary
statistics, using randomized responses. In recent years, the
use of differential privacy has quickly gathered popularity
as it promises that there will be no additional privacy harm
for any individual whether the said individual’s data belongs
in a private dataset or not, and therefore encourage data sharing.
One important characteristic of DP is its composition
property (Dwork and Roth 2014). That is, to avoid the scenario where the same analysis is rerun and averaging away
the noises from the randomized responses, the composition
property indicates that running the same analysis twice will
have to double the amount of privacy risk as running the
analysis once. The data providers often set a total amount
of privacy risk/budget allowed, commonly referred to as the
privacy budget, and each analysis from researchers uses a
portion of the privacy budget. Once the total privacy budget
is exhausted, any new analysis would not be possible unless
the data provider decides to increase the total privacy budget
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21206

