The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fair Sampling in Diffusion Models through Switching Mechanism
Yujin Choi1 * , Jinseong Park1 * , Hoki Kim1 , Jaewook Lee1 , Saeroom Park2†
1

Seoul National University
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
uznhigh@snu.ac.kr, jinseong@snu.ac.kr, ghrl9613@snu.ac.kr, jaewook@snu.ac.kr, srompark@unist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

work. For instance, Friedrich et al. (2023) introduces the
fair guidance to generate sample fair data to resolve the imbalanced sampling for certain classes. However, assessing
models through a specific classifier falls short of capturing
the broader performance spectrum (Xu et al. 2019). In addition, evaluating the fairness of a generative model through
classification tasks introduces complexities in distinguishing
whether the observed discrimination stems from the generator or the classifier. Instead, in this study, we employ the
concept of ϵ-fairness, as introduced in (Feldman et al. 2015;
Xu et al. 2018). We aim to evaluate data fairness concerning the sensitive attribute itself without a specific label by
achieving data fairness in diffusion models.
To achieve the goal, we present a sampling method called
attribute switching to generate synthetic data under the ϵfairness framework. Inspired by the finding in (Choi et al.
2022) that diffusion models learn different characteristics at
each step, our work aims to generate data that is both independent of sensitive attributes and satisfies utility requirements. Subsequently, we prove the theoretical condition of
the transition point, ensuring independence so that achieving
fairness. Furthermore, our model does not require additional
training on top of standard diffusion models, offering flexibility in its applicability to various pre-trained models. As
our method is solely designed for diffusion sampling, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of attribute switching using
various recent diffusion models. We summarize our main
contributions as follows:

Diffusion models have shown their effectiveness in generation tasks by well-approximating the underlying probability
distribution. However, diffusion models are known to suffer from an amplified inherent bias from the training data
in terms of fairness. While the sampling process of diffusion
models can be controlled by conditional guidance, previous
works have attempted to find empirical guidance to achieve
quantitative fairness. To address this limitation, we propose
a fairness-aware sampling method called attribute switching
mechanism for diffusion models. Without additional training,
the proposed sampling can obfuscate sensitive attributes in
generated data without relying on classifiers. We mathematically prove and experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method on two key aspects: (i) the generation of fair data and (ii) the preservation of the utility of the
generated data.

Introduction
Generative models have shown promise across diverse
domains to generate unseen data examples. Recently,
diffusion-based models (Song et al. 2020; Rombach et al.
2022) have shown the effectiveness in various fields, including image (Rombach et al. 2022), video (Blattmann et al.
2023), and audio (Kong et al. 2020) generation. However,
diffusion models also suffer from generating data possessing inherited and amplified bias from the training dataset
(Friedrich et al. 2023), similar to the problems observed in
other using generative models such as autoencoder (Amini
et al. 2019) or generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Sattigeri et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018). Since the diffusion model
needs specific methods to generate synthetic data by denoising from stochastic differential equation (SDE) and ordinary differential equation (ODE) (Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020), it requires unique methods for achieving fairness in
contrast to previous fair generative models (Kenfack et al.
2021). In response, recent studies have investigated fairness
issues in diffusion models (Friedrich et al. 2023; Sinha et al.
2021). These studies have mainly focused on quantitative aspects of achieving fairness within the diffusion model frame-

• We address the data fairness issue in diffusion models,
aiming to ensure sensitive attribute independence without
requiring additional classifiers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to investigate ϵ-fairness
within diffusion models.
• We introduce a novel sampling approach, which we call
attribute switching, that can generate fair synthetic data
by matching the data distribution. Additionally, we mathematically prove its effectiveness and present an efficient
algorithm to find the optimal transition point to achieve
fairness.

* These authors contributed equally.

• We show the effectiveness of the proposed fair sampling
on various datasets including the state-of-art diffusion
models without additional training.

†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21995

