The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CRA-PCN: Point Cloud Completion with Intra- and Inter-level Cross-Resolution
Transformers
Yi Rong, Haoran Zhou, Lixin Yuan, Cheng Mei, Jiahao Wang, Tong Lu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{rongyi, dg1833031, meicheng, wangjh}@smail.nju.edu.cn, hrzhou98@gmail.com, lutong@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

Point cloud completion is an indispensable task for recovering complete point clouds due to incompleteness caused
by occlusion, limited sensor resolution, etc. The family of
coarse-to-fine generation architectures has recently exhibited
great success in point cloud completion and gradually became mainstream. In this work, we unveil one of the key
ingredients behind these methods: meticulously devised feature extraction operations with explicit cross-resolution aggregation. We present Cross-Resolution Transformer that efficiently performs cross-resolution aggregation with local attention mechanisms. With the help of our recursive designs,
the proposed operation can capture more scales of features
than common aggregation operations, which is beneficial for
capturing fine geometric characteristics. While prior methodologies have ventured into various manifestations of interlevel cross-resolution aggregation, the effectiveness of intralevel one and their combination has not been analyzed. With
unified designs, Cross-Resolution Transformer can perform
intra- or inter-level cross-resolution aggregation by switching
inputs. We integrate two forms of Cross-Resolution Transformers into one up-sampling block for point generation, and
following the coarse-to-fine manner, we construct CRA-PCN
to incrementally predict complete shapes with stacked upsampling blocks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on several widely used benchmarks. Codes are available
at https://github.com/EasyRy/CRA-PCN.

encoding block
generation block

(b)

…

input

encoding phase decoding phase
inter-level
(d)

inter-level

…

(c)

generated point clouds

…

inter-level intra-level
2
1

(e)
1

2

cross-resolution
aggregation
point expansion
farthest point
sampling

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. Here, we analyze
several point generation methods from the perspective of
cross-resolution aggregation (CRA). (a) Common pipeline
of coarse-to-fine completion approaches. (b) The plain generation operation simply generates points without considering explicit CRA. (c) & (d) Several methods exploit skip
connections to aggregate features of other generated point
clouds or partial inputs for the current point cloud, which can
efficiently capture multi-scale features. (e) Our method not
only extracts more fruitful multi-scale features with noveldesigned enhanced inter-level CRA but also combines intraand inter-level CRA for better capturing geometric characteristics.

Introduction
Driven by the rapid development of 3D acquisition technologies, 3D vision is in great demand for research. Among various types of 3D data, point cloud is the most popular description and commonly used in real-world applications (Cadena et al. 2016; Reddy, Vo, and Narasimhan 2018; Rusu
et al. 2008). However, due to self-occlusion and limited
sensor resolution, acquired point clouds are usually highly
sparse and incomplete, which impedes further applications.
Therefore, recovering complete point clouds is an indispensable task, whose major purposes are to preserve details of
partial observations, infer missing parts, and densify sparse
surfaces.

In the realm of deep learning, various approaches have
been proposed to tackle this problem (Yang et al. 2018;
Choy et al. 2016; Girdhar et al. 2016; Xie et al. 2020). Especially with the success of PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) and
its successors (Qi et al. 2017b; Wang et al. 2019; Zhao et al.
2021), most approaches recover complete point clouds directly based on 3D coordinates (Yuan et al. 2018; Wen et al.
2020, 2021; Tchapmi et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2021; Wang,
Ang Jr, and Lee 2020). Due to the unordered and unstructured nature of point cloud data, learning fine geometric
characteristics and structural features is essential for predicting reasonable shapes. To accomplish this aim, mainstreams of the recent methods (Xiang et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2022; Huang et al.
2020; Tang et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022) formulate the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4676

