The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

patchDPCC: A Patchwise Deep Compression Framework for Dynamic Point
Clouds
Zirui Pan1 , Mengbai Xiao1 * , Xu Han1 , Dongxiao Yu1 , Guanghui Zhang1 , Yao Liu2
1

Shandong University
2
Rutgers University
panzirui@mail.sdu.edu.cn, xiaomb@sdu.edu.cn, hanx@mail.sdu.edu.cn,
dxyu@sdu.edu.cn, gh.zhang@sdu.edu.cn, yao.liu@rutgers.edu
Abstract

ones (Quach, Valenzise, and Dufaux 2020; Wang et al.
2021b,a), octree-based ones (Huang et al. 2020; Que, Lu,
and Xu 2021; Fu et al. 2022), and point-based ones (Huang
and Liu 2019; Gao et al. 2021). In the voxel-based methods, the 3D space is split into blocks that are compressed
individually. A block is further voxelized, and the compression task is turned into a classification task checking if voxels are occupied. The octree-based methods convert a point
cloud into an octree (Laboratory and Meagher 1980) first
and focus on optimizing the following entropy coding with
a learning-based model (Mekuria, Blom, and César 2017;
Kammerl et al. 2012). However, such methods have to align
the point coordinates to the voxels or the tree nodes in preprocessing, leading to geometric information losses. On the
other hand, the point-based methods directly accept point
coordinates and extract latent features to compress. By processing points in the continuous space, the geometric fidelity losses caused by voxelization could be avoided. However, the point-based methods can hardly scale to arbitrary
points since a trained model must process fixed-size inputs.
Furthermore, most learning-based methods are designed to
compress static point clouds, failing to exploit the high similarity between consecutive frames in a dynamic point cloud.

When compressing point clouds, point-based deep learning
models operate points in a continuous space, which has a
chance to minimize the geometric fidelity loss introduced
by voxelization in preprocessing. But these methods could
hardly scale to inputs with arbitrary points. Furthermore, the
point cloud frames are individually compressed, failing the
conventional wisdom of leveraging inter-frame similarity. In
this work, we propose a patchwise compression framework
called patchDPCC, which consists of a patch group generation module and a point-based compression model. Algorithms are developed to generate patches from different
frames representing the same object, and more importantly,
these patches are regulated to have the same number of points.
We also incorporate a feature transfer module in the compression model, which refines the feature quality by exploiting the
inter-frame similarity. Our model generates point-wise features for entropy coding, which guarantees the reconstruction speed. The evaluation on the MPEG 8i dataset shows
that our method improves the compression ratio by 47.01%
and 85.22% when compared to PCGCv2 and V-PCC with the
same reconstruction quality, which is 9% and 16% better than
that D-DPCC does. Our method also achieves the fastest decoding speed among the learning-based compression models.

In this work, we propose patchDPCC, a deep compression framework for dynamic point clouds. Our framework
consists of a patch group generation module followed by a
deep compression model, which is point-based so that the
reconstruction quality is guaranteed. The patch group generation module is designed to separate point cloud frames into
fixed-size patches, enabling our framework to compress arbitrary points. However, it is challenging to divide consecutive point cloud frames into patches while also exploiting the
inter-frame similarity. If we divide point clouds individually,
the patches from different frames can hardly represent the
same part of an object. To solve this, we organize point cloud
frames into groups of frames (GoFs), where there are a leading I-frame and the following P-frames. The I-frame is splitted into fixed-size patches individually. By referencing the
I-frame patches, algorithms are developed to divide the Pframes into patches with high similarity. More importantly,
all patches have the same number of points, and the ones
representing the same part of an object in different frames
are grouped together. Our deep compression model accepts
a patch group to compress, where a feature transfer module

Introduction
Dynamic point clouds are essential to emerging virtual reality (VR) applications like immersive filmmaking1 and interactive advertising.2 To offer a truly engaging and captivating experience, millions of points must be rendered,
which challenges storing, transmitting, and processing the
dynamic point cloud. Therefore, effectively compressing dynamic point clouds is crucial to deploying these VR applications in the real world.
A dynamic point cloud could be compressed with
deep learning (DL) in an end-to-end manner. Compared
to the rule-based methods like Moving Picture Experts
Group (MPEG) standards (Schwarz et al. 2019), the DLbased methods usually achieve higher compression ratios.
The DL-based methods are categorized into voxel-based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iwUkbi4 wWo
2
https://www.anayi.com/include html/4d/21ss 4d 11.html

4406

