The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generating and Reweighting Dense Contrastive Patterns
for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Songmin Dai1 * , Yifan Wu1 * , Xiaoqiang Li1† , Xiangyang Xue2
1

School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
laodar@shu.edu.cn, VictorWu@shu.edu.cn, xqli@shu.edu.cn, xyxue@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

GRAD (Ours)

AU-ROC [%]

Recent unsupervised anomaly detection methods often rely
on feature extractors pretrained with auxiliary datasets or on
well-crafted anomaly-simulated samples. However, this might
limit their adaptability to an increasing set of anomaly detection tasks due to the priors in the selection of auxiliary
datasets or the strategy of anomaly simulation. To tackle this
challenge, we first introduce a prior-less anomaly generation
paradigm and subsequently develop an innovative unsupervised anomaly detection framework named GRAD, grounded
in this paradigm. GRAD comprises three essential components: (1) a diffusion model (PatchDiff) to generate contrastive
patterns by preserving the local structures while disregarding
the global structures present in normal images, (2) a selfsupervised reweighting mechanism to handle the challenge
of long-tailed and unlabeled contrastive patterns generated
by PatchDiff, and (3) a lightweight patch-level detector to
efficiently distinguish the normal patterns and reweighted contrastive patterns. The generation results of PatchDiff effectively expose various types of anomaly patterns, e.g. structural
and logical anomaly patterns. In addition, extensive experiments on both MVTec AD and MVTec LOCO datasets also
support the aforementioned observation and demonstrate that
GRAD achieves competitive anomaly detection accuracy and
superior inference speed.

SINBAD

DADF

GCAD
DSR

FastFlow

PatchCoreens

S-T

Diameter
8

PatchCore

64

256 Params (MB)

Latency [ms]

Figure 1: Anomaly detection performance vs. latency per
image on an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. Each bubble’s area
is proportional to the number of parameters in each detector,
and each AU-ROC value is an average of the image-level
detection AU-ROC values on MVTec LOCO (Bergmann
et al. 2022).

et al. 2009) pretrained feature extractor. Nevertheless, such
reliance may limit their generalization capabilities in scenarios (Bergmann et al. 2022) where ImageNet pretrained
features are insufficiently informative, or on other types of
image-like data (Bergmann et al. 2021; Horwitz and Hoshen
2023). Additionally, some methods have achieved promising results on the MVTec AD (Bergmann et al. 2019) without using pretrained feature extractors. These methods utilize manually-selected external out-of-distribution (OOD)
datasets (Liznerski et al. 2021) or carefully designed anomalysimulated data to sample anomaly patterns (Li et al. 2021;
Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021; Yang et al. 2023). However, previous anomaly acquisition strategies can be considered as ad-hoc solutions that overly rely on priors or
visual inspection of test images, such as in MVTec AD,
where most anomalies are low-level structure anomalies
(e.g., scratches, dents, and contaminations). Such reliance
may cause these strategies to fail in detecting other types of
anomalies, such as logical anomalies recently proposed in the
MVTec LOCO (Bergmann et al. 2022). These logical anomalies are represented as violations of logical constraints in

Introduction
Image anomaly detection plays a crucial role in various fields,
including industrial product defect detection, medical image
lesion detection, security screening using X-ray images, and
video surveillance (Zheng et al. 2018; Bergmann et al. 2019;
Sato et al. 2018; Kiran, Thomas, and Parakkal 2018; Akcay,
Atapour-Abarghouei, and Breckon 2018). However, securing
real-world anomalous data for training is typically challenging and scarce due to the inability to cover a sufficiently
diverse range of potential anomaly patterns. Consequently,
the setting of one-class learning, which employs only normal
samples for model training, has proven to be better suited
for most industrial anomaly detection tasks (Bergmann et al.
2019, 2022). In recent years, many high-accuracy industrial
anomaly detection methods heavily rely on ImageNet (Deng
* The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1454

