The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Human-Guided Moral Decision Making in Text-Based Games
Zijing Shi1 , Meng Fang2 , Ling Chen1 , Yali Du3 , Jun Wang4
1

AAII, University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
3
King’s College London, London, United Kingdom
4
University College London, London, United Kingdom
zijing.shi@student.uts.edu.au, Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk, ling.chen@uts.edu.au,
yali.du@kcl.ac.uk, junwang@cs.ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
Training reinforcement learning (RL) agents to achieve desired goals while also acting morally is a challenging problem.
Transformer-based language models (LMs) have shown some
promise in moral awareness, but their use in different contexts
is problematic because of the complexity and implicitness of
human morality. In this paper, we build on text-based games,
which are challenging environments for current RL agents,
and propose the HuMAL (Human-guided Morality Awareness Learning) algorithm, which adaptively learns personal
values through human-agent collaboration with minimal manual feedback. We evaluate HuMAL on the Jiminy Cricket
benchmark, a set of text-based games with various scenes and
dense morality annotations, using both simulated and actual
human feedback. The experimental results demonstrate that
with a small amount of human feedback, HuMAL can improve
task performance and reduce immoral behavior in a variety of
games, and is adaptable to different personal values.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in
a variety of complicated tasks (Mnih et al. 2013; Vinyals
et al. 2017; Fang, Li, and Cohn 2017). However, one major
concern is that RL agents may act in an immoral manner,
particularly when they are trained in environments that do
not consider moral considerations (Soares and Fallenstein
2017; Russell 2022). Therefore, it is a crucial and ongoing
goal to create agents that can perform specific tasks while
also aligning with moral values.
Existing research in this direction unifies morality as socially acceptable behaviour, with the aim of incorporating social common sense knowledge from language models (LMs)
(Hendrycks et al. 2021b; Ammanabrolu et al. 2022). These
works build on text-based games that can be used to mimic
the real world and provide challenging environments for
studying a variety of natural language processing (NLP) tasks
(Murugesan et al. 2021; Ammanabrolu, Jia, and Riedl 2022;
Fang et al. 2024). Text-based games provide a partially observable environment in which an agent interacts with objects,
receives observations, and issues natural language commands.
Moreover, these games incorporate complex simulations of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21574

moral dilemmas into their virtual worlds, enabling agents to
become moral actors (Shi et al. 2022).
Recently, the Jiminy Cricket benchmark released a set of
text-based games with dense moral annotations to completely
evaluate game agents’ morality (Hendrycks et al. 2021b).
These annotations cover a wide range of moral scenarios,
from bodily harm to theft to altruism. Prior works develop
RL-based algorithms that use a fixed moral prior derived
from specially trained transformer-based LM (Hendrycks
et al. 2021b; Ammanabrolu et al. 2022). In this way, the
morality of current actions can be assessed by the moral prior
to further condition agents through policy or reward shaping.
Such methods rely heavily on the performance of the moral
prior on out-of-distribution data.
The obvious problem is that human morality is itself enormously complex and implicit (Moor 2006). While the existence of a general morality is universal, its precise content
varies between cultures. Moreover, moral judgements and
decisions are contextual, so that what constitutes moral behaviour depends on the particular features of a given situation
(Wallach and Allen 2008). For example, Ammanabrolu et al.
(2022) review the human annotations in the Jimmy Cricket
benchmark and found that they agreed on the exact valence,
goal, and severity only 24% of the time. The straightforward
application of a static, unified moral standard embedded in
LMs to particular contexts is therefore problematic.
In this work, we build on text-based games, but consider
an alternative solution to allow humans to provide moral evaluative feedback on current actions during training, guiding
the agent to complete specific tasks while learning personal
values. However, given the large state and action space of
text-based games, the number of human feedback interactions required is impractical. In this work, we overcome this
difficulty by using an adaptive action generator and a moral
prior, which are integrated with moral awareness based on a
limited number of human feedback interactions.
We present the HuMAL (Human-guided Morality Awareness Learning) algorithm, which consists of a cycle of two
learning phases, i.e. game play for agent learning and humanagent collaboration for morality learning. During agent learning, the agent collects high-quality trajectories from past
experience in a data buffer. Then, during morality learning,
humans are asked to provide evaluative feedback on moral
scenarios stored in the buffer, which is then used to improve

