The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Confusing Pair Correction Based on Category Prototype for Domain Adaptation
under Noisy Environments
Churan Zhi1 , Junbao Zhuo2 * , Shuhui Wang2
1

2

Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
leo.churanzhi@hotmail.com, junbao.zhuo@vipl.ict.ac.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

under noisy environments is to correct noisy labels and clarify classification boundaries for similar classes.
Some existing methods (Shu et al. 2019; Han et al. 2020;
Zuo et al. 2021) for UDA under noisy environments use
small loss criteria to separate clean and noisy samples and
obtain pseudo labels from the label space. However, existing
works (Kang et al. 2019) empirically show that using information from the feature space is more robust. For instance,
the feature-based method CAN (Kang et al. 2019), outperforms the label-based algorithms, TCL (Shu et al. 2019) and
RDA (Han et al. 2020), on the office-31 dataset with 40%
label corruption.
However, those feature-based methods overlook the phenomenon that two classes with similar features are more
likely to overlap in the feature space, which becomes more
evident in the presence of label noise. The predictions of
samples near the classification boundary of the two classes
switch frequently (Figure 1 (b)). As the model converges,
one class will dominate, and samples of the other class will
be misclassified as the dominant class (Figure 1 (c)), which
severely deteriorates the model’s performance.
To address the issue mentioned above, we propose a novel
method that detects the confusing class pair, two classes that
have similar features. We apply the confusing pair correction
strategy in the confusing zone, the overlap area between the
two classes (Figure 1 (d)). With this method, the pairs are
less likely to overlap, resulting in a more distinct classification boundary between them (Figure 1 (a)).
Specifically, we establish a shared prototype to identify
confusing class pair according to the sample distribution
among two classes. The shared prototype is constructed with
the noisy labeled source domain and the pseudo-labeled target domain for mitigating domain shift and resulting in more
accurate pseudo labels of the target domain. Subsequently,
we remove the farthest samples from the prototype to enhance the clarity of classification boundaries. More accurate
pseudo labels of the target domain help capture a more accurate sample distribution of classes.
We further categorize classes into easy and hard groups
by utilizing the small loss criterion, as we assume that the
confusing class pair appear in these hard classes. We leverage the top-2 (class pair) predictions of target samples to
capture the confusing pair between the two classes. The frequency of a specific class pair indicates the probability that

In this paper, we address unsupervised domain adaptation under noisy environments, which is more challenging and practical than traditional domain adaptation. In this scenario, the
model is prone to overfitting noisy labels, resulting in a more
pronounced domain shift and a notable decline in the overall model performance. Previous methods employed prototype methods for domain adaptation on robust feature spaces.
However, these approaches struggle to effectively classify
classes with similar features under noisy environments. To
address this issue, we propose a new method to detect and
correct confusing class pair. We first divide classes into easy
and hard classes based on the small loss criterion. We then
leverage the top-2 predictions for each sample after aligning
the source and target domain to find the confusing pair in the
hard classes. We apply label correction to the noisy samples
within the confusing pair. With the proposed label correction method, we can train our model with more accurate labels. Extensive experiments confirm the effectiveness of our
method and demonstrate its favorable performance compared
with existing state-of-the-art methods. Our codes are publicly
available at https://github.com/Hehxcf/CPC/.

Introduction
Domain shift between train and test data usually leads to
a deterioration in the models’ performance. Therefore, numerous methods (Ma, Zhang, and Xu 2019; Yan et al. 2019;
Ganin et al. 2016) have been proposed to mitigate the domain shifts. However, these studies often assume that the
source labels are clean. In reality, obtaining clean datasets is
time-consuming and expensive. In many cases, it is simpler
to acquire weakly labeled data via the social media. However, such data inevitably contain noise, leading to a more
challenging situation, named unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) under noisy environments.
The main challenge of UDA under noisy environments is
that the model tends to fit noisy labels, leading to adverse
effects on the overall training process. Moreover, due to label noise, it is more difficult to classify two classes that have
similar features, posing additional difficulties in the domain
adaptation process. Therefore, the key to addressing UDA
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17060

