The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing RAW-to-sRGB with Decoupled Style Structure in Fourier Domain
Xuanhua He1,2 * , Tao Hu1,2 * , Guoli Wang3 , Zejin Wang3 , Run Wang3 , Qian Zhang3 , Keyu Yan1,2 ,
Ziyi Chen4 , Rui Li1 , Chenjun Xie1 , Jie Zhang1† , Man Zhou5†
1

Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Horizon Robotics
4
Tencent Technology
5
Nanyang Technological University
{hexuanhua,ht simon,keyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {cjxie,zhangjie}@iim.ac.cn,manzhountu@gmail.com

Abstract
RAW to sRGB mapping, which aims to convert RAW images from smartphones into RGB form equivalent to that
of Digital Single-Lens Reflex (DSLR) cameras, has become
an important area of research. However, current methods often ignore the difference between cell phone RAW images
and DSLR camera RGB images, a difference that goes beyond the color matrix and extends to spatial structure due to
resolution variations. Recent methods directly rebuild color
mapping and spatial structure via shared deep representation,
limiting optimal performance. Inspired by Image Signal Processing (ISP) pipeline, which distinguishes image restoration
and enhancement, we present a novel Neural ISP framework,
named FourierISP. This approach breaks the image down
into style and structure within the frequency domain, allowing for independent optimization. FourierISP is comprised of
three subnetworks: Phase Enhance Subnet for structural refinement, Amplitude Refine Subnet for color learning, and
Color Adaptation Subnet for blending them in a smooth manner. This approach sharpens both color and structure, and extensive evaluations across varied datasets confirm that our approach realizes state-of-the-art results. Code will be available
at https://github.com/alexhe101/FourierISP.

RAW

AWISP(RAW): 22.09dB

LiteISP: 24.45dB

Ours: 24.70dB

MWISP(GAN) 20.08dB

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Results from the ZRR dataset. Our approach results in clear textures, surpassing other methods.

mobile devices in achieving DSLR-like image quality. To
bridge this gap, learning RAW-to-sRGB mapping through
deep ISP models holds great promise (Ignatov, Van Gool,
and Timofte 2020; Ignatov et al. 2020). These models hold
the potential to convert mobile RAW data into high-quality
sRGB images resembling those captured by DSLR cameras,
without the need for manual fine-tuning.
Recent deep learning-based ISP methods that utilize mobile phone RAW images have shown promise in producing
RGB images comparable to those from DSLR cameras (Dai
et al. 2020; Ignatov et al. 2021). This innovation enables
cost-effective mobile sensors to deliver visually appealing
results. However, existing techniques often focus solely on
the Raw-to-RGB conversion as a color mapping task, overlooking the crucial spatial relationship between different image types. This oversight leads to outputs with reduced clarity. In conventional ISP pipelines, processes like denoising,
demosaicing, white balance, and gamma correction serve
two interconnected yet distinct purposes: image restoration,
which preserves spatial structure, and image enhancement,
which involves color adjustments (Liang et al. 2021). The
effectiveness of enhancement relies heavily on successful

Introduction
The Image Signal Processing (ISP) pipeline, responsible for
transforming RAW data captured by camera sensors into
sRGB images, involves a series of low-level vision tasks
including demosaicing, denoising, gamma correction, white
balance, and color correction (Ramanath et al. 2005). Traditionally, these individual subprocesses are executed via independent algorithms, often requiring significant manual parameter adjustments (Zhou and Glotzbach 2007). With the
rise of mobile photography, smartphones have become the
preferred choice for image capture due to their portability.
However, the inherent limitations of sensor size and aperture in comparison to DSLR cameras pose challenges for
* Co-first authors contributed equally. This work was done when
Xuanhua He was an intern at Horizon Robotics. † Corresponding
author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2130

