The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LogoStyleFool: Vitiating Video Recognition Systems via Logo Style Transfer
Yuxin Cao1 * , Ziyu Zhao2 * , Xi Xiao1† , Derui Wang3 , Minhui Xue3 , Jin Lu4
1
2

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
Fan Gongxiu Honors College, Beijing University of Technology, China
3
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia
4
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd., China

Abstract

/ toxic videos to evade DNN-based detectors, which may result in severe social-economic consequences. Therefore, the
outpouring of adversarial videos has raised security-critical
concerns for machine-learning-assisted systems such as video
verification systems (Cao et al. 2023). To date, most attacks
against videos focus on crafting imperceptible perturbations
restricted by ℓp norms. This branch of attacks considers restricted perturbations and consumes a large number of queries
under the black-box setting. A recent work utilizes style transfer to introduce pixel-wise unrestricted perturbations that do
not affect the semantic information of the video (Cao et al.
2023). However, seldom work utilizes sub-region perturbations, such as adversarial patches (Yang et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2022), in the attack. Nevertheless, the sub-region perturbations are considered as more generalizable and practical
in the physical world.
In this paper, we investigate the risk brought by unrestricted sub-region perturbations towards video recognition
systems. Such attacks face two main challenges. 1) Style
transfer-based attacks add perturbations to all pixels (Cao
et al. 2023), which may cause artifacts as a result of naturalness reduction. Such perturbations can also be detected with
ease (Xiao et al. 2019; Jia et al. 2019). 2) Due to the limited
search space of reinforcement learning (RL), patch-based
video attacks (Chen et al. 2022) only support untargeted attacks (the performance of the targeted version plummets),
while targeted attacks are in higher demand and of greater
harm. From another perspective, despite many existing patchbased attacks in the image domain (Brown et al. 2017; Karmon, Zoran, and Goldberg 2018; Chindaudom et al. 2020;
Li, Schmidt, and Kolter 2019; Yang et al. 2020; Gong et al.
2023), directly extending patch-based attacks from images to
videos is hard due to the increase in data dimensionality and
the lack of temporal consistency.
To address the above challenges, we follow the paths of
both style transfer-based attacks and patch-based attacks in
the video domain and propose LogoStyleFool, a black-box
adversarial attack against video recognition systems via logo
style transfer. Dissimilar to the existing style transfer-based
video attack which imposes perturbations on all pixels, we
first plumb the possibility of vitiating video recognition systems by transferring the style of the logo and forming local
perturbations to superimpose on the video. Our attack first
finds style images with random color initialization and builds

Video recognition systems are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Recent studies show that style transfer-based and
patch-based unrestricted perturbations can effectively improve
attack efficiency. These attacks, however, face two main challenges: 1) Adding large stylized perturbations to all pixels
reduces the naturalness of the video and such perturbations
can be easily detected. 2) Patch-based video attacks are not
extensible to targeted attacks due to the limited search space
of reinforcement learning that has been widely used in video
attacks recently. In this paper, we focus on the video blackbox setting and propose a novel attack framework named LogoStyleFool by adding a stylized logo to the clean video. We
separate the attack into three stages: style reference selection,
reinforcement-learning-based logo style transfer, and perturbation optimization. We solve the first challenge by scaling down
the perturbation range to a regional logo, while the second challenge is addressed by complementing an optimization stage
after reinforcement learning. Experimental results substantiate
the overall superiority of LogoStyleFool over three state-ofthe-art patch-based attacks in terms of attack performance
and semantic preservation. Meanwhile, LogoStyleFool still
maintains its performance against two existing patch-based
defense methods. We believe that our research is beneficial
in increasing the attention of the security community to such
subregional style transfer attacks.

Introduction
Short videos have become omnipresent in the current era.
With the tentacles of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) extending from images to videos, the quality in services such as
video recognition (Ji et al. 2012; Carreira and Zisserman
2017; Hu et al. 2023), video segmentation (Zhou et al. 2022;
Gao et al. 2023) and video compression (Chen et al. 2017;
Ma et al. 2019) has been greatly improved. However, they
are also encountered with severe security threats – DNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial examples which are generated by
surreptitiously introducing minuscule perturbations fooling
the model (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015). For example, attackers can perturb malicious
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

945

