The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Uncovering and Mitigating the Hidden Chasm: A Study on the Text-Text
Domain Gap in Euphemism Identification
Yuxue Hu1,2,3,4 , Junsong Li1 , Mingmin Wu1 , Zhongqiang Huang1 , Gang Chen5 , Ying Sha1,2,3,4 *
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
Key Laboratory of Smart Farming for Agricultural Animals, Wuhan, China
3
Hubei Engineering Technology Research Center of Agricultural Big Data, Wuhan, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan, China
5
Jointown Healthcare Technology Group, Wuhan, China
{hyx, shaying}@mail.hzau.edu.cn, {kikuss, wmm nlp, hzq}@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, chengang@jk998jt.wecom.work
2

Abstract

Example sentences (euphemisms are in bold)
1. For all vendors of ice, it seems pretty obvious that it
is not as pure as they market it.
2. Back up before I pull my nine on you.
3. I’m looking for the girlfriend experience, without
having to deal with an actual girlfriend.

Euphemisms are commonly used on social media and darknet marketplaces to evade platform regulations by masking
their true meanings with innocent ones. For instance, “weed”
is used instead of “marijuana” for illicit transactions. Thus,
euphemism identification, i.e., mapping a given euphemism
(“weed”) to its specific target word (“marijuana”), is essential for improving content moderation and combating underground markets. Existing methods employ self-supervised
schemes to automatically construct labeled training datasets
for euphemism identification. However, they overlook the
text-text domain gap caused by the discrepancy between the
constructed training data and the test data, leading to performance deterioration. In this paper, we present the text-text
domain gap and explain how it forms in terms of the data distribution and the cone effect. Moreover, to bridge this gap, we
introduce a feature alignment network (FA-Net), which can
both align the in-domain and cross-domain features, thus mitigating the domain gap from training data to test data and improving the performance of the base models for euphemism
identification. We apply this FA-Net to the base models, obtaining markedly better results, and creating a state-of-the-art
model which beats the large language models.

Table 1: Examples of sentences containing euphemisms.

(a) t-SNE visualization

(b) UMAP visualization

Figure 1: Representation distribution of training and test
data using selfEDI on Drug by (a) t-SNE visualization and
(b) UMAP visualization.

Introduction
Euphemism, a significant form of linguistic communication, refers to the use of gentle and implicit expressions to
convey indirect information. Now, euphemisms are widely
employed on social media (Zhu et al. 2021; Yuan et al.
2018) and darknet marketplaces (Li et al. 2021; Foye et al.
2021) to mask the true meaning of undesirable information,
such as discrimination, hatred, and illicit transactions. Table 1 illustrates the use of euphemisms to circumvent monitoring for illegal activities. For instance, the euphemism
“ice” in Table 1 was used as a substitute for the target keyword “methamphetamine”. These euphemisms can seem innocent and vague, making it challenging to trace illicit transactions. Therefore, euphemism identification, which identifies the target keyword of a given euphemism, is essential for improving content moderation and combating un-

derground markets. However, euphemisms are continually
evolving like a ‘treadmill’ (Pinker 2003), making it difficult
to maintain an up-to-date corpus for training the euphemism
identification task. Furthermore, the use of euphemisms in
either a literal or figurative sense adds complexity to the task.
Due to the challenges above, there are only a few works
on euphemism identification. The work by Yuan et al. (2018)
pioneered the task of euphemism identification. However,
they focused on identifying the hypernyms of euphemisms
rather than directly identifying the specific meanings of
them. The most relevant work was reported by Zhu et al.
(2021), who explicitly proposed euphemism identification
task for the first time. They developed a self-supervised
framework to construct labeled training datasets while using
the sentences with target keywords masked out as samples
and the corresponding target keywords as labels. This ingenious idea provides a new way to solve this similar problem.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18270

