The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PVALane: Prior-Guided 3D Lane Detection with View-Agnostic Feature
Alignment
Zewen Zheng1,2 * , Xuemin Zhang1 , Yongqiang Mou1† , Xiang Gao1,2 , Chengxin Li1,3 ,
Guoheng Huang2 , Chi-Man Pun4 , Xiaochen Yuan5
2

1
X Lab, GAC R&D CENTER, Guangdong, China
Guangdong University of Technology, Guangdong, China
3
South China Normal University, Guangdong, China
4
University of Macau, Macau, China
5
Macao Polytechnic University, Macao, China
yongqiang.mou@gmail.com

Abstract

Misaligned

Projection

Monocular 3D lane detection is essential for a reliable autonomous driving system and has recently been rapidly developing. Existing popular methods mainly employ a predefined 3D anchor for lane detection based on front-viewed
(FV) space, aiming to mitigate the effects of view transformations. However, the perspective geometric distortion between FV and 3D space in this FV-based approach introduces
extremely dense anchor designs, which ultimately leads to
confusing lane representations. In this paper, we introduce a
novel prior-guided perspective on lane detection and propose
an end-to-end framework named PVALane, which utilizes 2D
prior knowledge to achieve precise and efficient 3D lane detection. Since 2D lane predictions can provide strong priors
for lane existence, PVALane exploits FV features to generate sparse prior anchors with potential lanes in 2D space.
These dynamic prior anchors help PVALane to achieve distinct lane representations and effectively improve the precision of PVALane due to the reduced lane search space. Additionally, by leveraging these prior anchors and representing lanes in both FV and bird-eye-viewed (BEV) spaces, we
effectively align and merge semantic and geometric information from FV and BEV features. Extensive experiments
conducted on the OpenLane and ONCE-3DLanes datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of our method compared to existing state-of-the-art approaches and exhibit excellent robustness.

Loss

(a)
Front-Viewed
Image

Bird-Eye-Viewed
Feature

Inverse Perspective
Mapping (IPM)

Dense 3D
Anchors

BEV Lanes

false positive lane

Projection
Indistinguishable

(b)

...

Scattered

Front-Viewed
Image

Dense Sampled
Features

Front-Viewed
Feature

3D Lanes

Prior Anchor Network

S

: Feature Sampling
: Ground-to-FV
Projecting
: Ground-to-BEV
Projecting

2D Predictions

(c)

Prior Anchor

FV Sampled
Features

S
Front-Viewed
Image
IPM

Alignment

Bird-Eye Viewed Feature

S
BEV Sampled
Features

3D Lanes

Figure 1: Illustration of the difference among (a) the BEVbased methods, (b) the FV-based methods, and (c) our
PVALane.

Introduction
As a fundamental module in autonomous driving systems,
robust lane detection has received a lot of research attention and made unprecedented progress. However, the frontviewed (FV) lane detection models that can only provide
prediction results in the 2D image space are not directly applicable to complex real-world scenarios (Neven et al. 2018;
Pan et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021b). As a promising direction,
3D lane detection is proposed to tackle the above problem. It

aims to construct a model that extracts lane features from a
monocular 2D image and then detects the lanes in the ground
coordinate system.
Fueled by the success of 3D object detection (Liang et al.
2018; Li et al. 2022), current 3D lane detection models (Garnett et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022) often detect 3D lanes by transforming FV features to birdeye-viewed (BEV) space using inverse perspective mapping
(IPM). Due to the similar appearance and geometry of different lanes on the top-view plane, the BEV-based method exhibits geometry translational invariance. Although the representation in BEV space provides better geometric infor-

* Work done during the internship at GAC R&D CENTER.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7597

