The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Test-Time Adaptation via Style and Structure Guidance
for Histological Image Registration
Shenglong Zhou1 , Zhiwei Xiong1, 2 * , Feng Wu1, 2
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
slzhou96@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn, fengwu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

as grading, classification, and 3D reconstruction. However,
different preparation processes and the use of consecutive
tissue slices introduce complex and inevitable deformations.
Therefore, non-rigid registration becomes essential to facilitate further processing.
Traditional methods solve the registration task by formulating it as an optimization problem for each image pair.
Though traditional methods provide reliable registration accuracy, one obvious limitation is that the optimization can be
computationally expensive. Recently, learning-based methods (Dalca et al. 2018; Mok and Chung 2020; Hu et al.
2022a; Zhou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023) utilize networks
to learn the optimization process from the training image
pairs, thus regarding the registration task as a mapping from
an image pair to a deformation field during testing. Along
with the development of network structures from direct designs such as U-Net (Dalca et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019), to
progressive designs such as Pyramid (Hu et al. 2020; Mok
and Chung 2020) and Cascade (Zhao et al. 2019a; Hu et al.
2022b), learning-based methods achieve a promising registration performance with a reduced inference burden.
In the field of histological image registration, learningbased methods also attract research attention. As mentioned
in (Borovec et al. 2020), TUB proposes a supervised convolutional neural network that relies on manually labeled key
points. DeepHistReg (Wodzinski and Müller 2021) proposes
an unsupervised method by designing a pyramid-based nonrigid registration network, which does not demand any manual annotations. It is worth mentioning that, different from
biomedical datasets such as MRI or CT, the registration of
histological images usually suffers from the following challenges as shown in Fig. 1. First, there are appearance variances between histological images due to multiple stains.
These appearance variances not only exist between the fixed
image and the moving image, but also between training images and test images, even with pre-processes such as gray
translation or color normalization. Such appearance variances can significantly affect the robustness and generalization of learning-based registration methods. Second, there
are local structure changes such as repetitive textures and
missing sections in histological images. Therefore, learningbased methods are hard to learn and may perform poorly
when encountering changed structures in test images. How
to design robust and generalizable learning-based registra-

Image registration plays a crucial role in histological image analysis, encompassing tasks like multi-modality fusion
and disease grading. Traditional registration methods optimize objective functions for each image pair, yielding reliable accuracy but demanding heavy inference burdens. Recently, learning-based registration methods utilize networks
to learn the optimization process during training and apply a
one-step forward process during testing. While these methods
offer promising registration performance with reduced inference time, they remain sensitive to appearance variances and
local structure changes commonly encountered in histological image registration scenarios. In this paper, for the first
time, we propose a novel test-time adaptation method for histological image registration, aiming to improve the generalization ability of learning-based methods. Specifically, we design two operations, style guidance and shape guidance, for
the test-time adaptation process. The former leverages style
representations encoded by feature statistics to address the
issue of appearance variances, while the latter incorporates
shape representations encoded by HOG features to improve
registration accuracy in regions with structural changes. Furthermore, we consider the continuity of the model during
the test-time adaptation process. Different from the previous
methods initialized by a given trained model, we introduce
a smoothing strategy to leverage historical models for better
generalization. We conduct experiments with several representative learning-based backbones on the public histological
dataset, demonstrating the superior registration performance
of our test-time adaptation method.

Introduction
Image registration is an important task in computer vision,
particularly within the realm of medical image analysis
(Chakravarty et al. 2006; Li et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023).
The goal of image registration is to establish a transformation that aligns a pair of images (i.e., a fixed image and a
moving image), thereby enabling a wide range of clinical
applications. In the field of histological image analysis, the
utilization of various stains during histology sample preparation can offer valuable information, and each stain reveals
distinct tissue properties. Their fusion can benefit tasks such
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7677

