The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Robustness for Joint Optimization of Camera Poses
and Decomposed Low-Rank Tensorial Radiance Fields
Bo-Yu Cheng, Wei-Chen Chiu, Yu-Lun Liu
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
tomas1999.ee06@nycu.edu.tw, walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw, yulunliu@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an algorithm that allows joint refinement of camera pose and scene geometry represented by decomposed low-rank tensor, using only 2D images as supervision. First, we conduct a pilot study based on a 1D signal and
relate our findings to 3D scenarios, where the naive joint pose
optimization on voxel-based NeRFs can easily lead to suboptimal solutions. Moreover, based on the analysis of the frequency spectrum, we propose to apply convolutional Gaussian filters on 2D and 3D radiance fields for a coarse-to-fine
training schedule that enables joint camera pose optimization.
Leveraging the decomposition property in decomposed lowrank tensor, our method achieves an equivalent effect to bruteforce 3D convolution with only incurring little computational
overhead. To further improve the robustness and stability of
joint optimization, we also propose techniques of smoothed
2D supervision, randomly scaled kernel parameters, and
edge-guided loss mask. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that our proposed framework
achieves superior performance in novel view synthesis as well
as rapid convergence for optimization. The source code is
available at https://github.com/Nemo1999/Joint-TensoRF.

1

Figure 1: Robust joint pose refinement on decomposed tensor. Our method enables joint optimization of camera poses
and decomposed voxel representation by applying efficient
separable component-wise convolution of Gaussian filters
on 3D tensor volume and 2D supervision images.

voxel grid via replacing the dense 3D grid with decomposed
low-rank tensor. TensoRF achieves a high data compression
ratio and low computational cost at the same time while also
achieving state-of-the-art performance. Providing a win-win
situation on memory usage and computational efficiency, the
decomposed low-rank tensor architecture has been widely
adopted in many recent works (Xu et al. 2023; FridovichKeil et al. 2023; Goel et al. 2022; Han and Xiang 2023; Shao
et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2022; Meuleman et al. 2023).
On the other hand, the effectiveness of NeRF (and most of
the aforementioned works) hinges on precise camera poses
of input images, which are often calculated using Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) algorithms like COLMAP (Schönberger
and Frahm 2016). While some works (Wang et al. 2021; Lin
et al. 2021; Chng et al. 2022) aim to bypass the slow and occasionally inaccurate COLMAP process by optimizing camera pose and scene representation jointly on the original
MLP-based NeRF, their success is often tied to the spectral
bias (Yüce et al. 2022) of the MLP architecture which ensures the smoothness of 3D radiance field early in training.
Voxel-based methods, however, lack such properties and can
overemphasize sharp edges, making naive joint optimization
problematic as getting trapped in local optima (Fig. 2 (a)).
In this work, we present simple yet effective methods
for refining the camera pose and the 3D scene using decomposed low-rank tensors (cf. Fig. 1). We identify that

Introduction

In recent years, neural rendering has become a widely-used
method for high-quality novel view synthesis. NeRF as a pioneer work (Mildenhall et al. 2020) represents a 3D radiance
field as an implicit continuous function built upon multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) which is trained with differentiable volume rendering. While achieving excellent synthesis quality, NeRF suffers from training/inference inefficiency due to
dense evaluation of the computationally expensive MLPs.
To this end, voxel-based methods built upon the explicit
scene representation of 3D voxel grid (Sun, Sun, and Chen
2022; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2020) are proposed to achieve faster training and provide better rendering
quality than the original MLP-based NeRF, hence becoming
the more preferred choices for downstream applications.
Nevertheless, maintaining a dense 3D voxel grid is in turn
memory intensive, thus still restricting wider applications
of voxel-based methods. Fortunately, TensoRF (Chen et al.
2022) proposes to tackle such memory-intensive issue of the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

990

