The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAT-Based Algorithms for Regular Graph Pattern Matching
Miguel Terra-Neves1 , José Amaral1 , Alexandre Lemos1 ,
Rui Quintino1 , Pedro Resende2 , Antonio Alegria1
1

OutSystems
2
Zharta
miguel.neves@outsystems.com, jose.francisco.amaral@outsystems.com, alexandre.lemos@outsystems.com,
rui.quintino@outsystems.com, pt.resende@icloud.com, antonio.alegria@outsystems.com
Abstract

their usefulness, these approaches suffer from limitations.
Neither of these allows one to check if a graph satisfies some
specific complex structural properties, such as, for example,
if some target graph contains two nested cycles since, given
another similar reference graph that satisfies that property,
one can increase their distance arbitrarily by adding extra
nodes to, for example, the inner cycle.
Alternatively, regular-path queries (Cruz, Mendelzon, and
Wood 1987) allow one to specify paths between nodes
through a regular expression. Different formalisms for this
type of query exist in the literature (Angles et al. 2018; Fan
et al. 2012; Reutter, Romero, and Vardi 2017; Wang et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2016; Libkin, Martens, and Vrgoc 2013).
These are very expressive and useful, but do not allow one to
check if a graph contains some complex subgraph structure.
For example, it is not possible to specify a sequence of arbitrary nested loops with no external connections. Therefore,
we propose Regular Graph Patterns (ReGaPs) as a generalization of graph isomorphism. The goal is to be able to
define complex structural properties through a declarative
specification in the form of a special graph. The proposed
specification also borrows inspiration from regular expressions. This graph may contain special nodes, referred to as
wildcards, representing arbitrary structures such as variablesized sequences or subgraphs. These wildcards enable one
to define compact representations of infinite sets of graphs.
The main contributions of this paper are three-fold: (i) a
generalization of graph isomorphism matching in the form
of ReGaP matching; (ii) a novel Boolean Satisfiability (SAT)
encoding for the ReGaP matching problem; and (iii) a graph
simplification technique for improving the performance of
the SAT solver. The proposed solution is evaluated using
control-flow graphs extracted from the Python code snippets in the CodeSearchNet dataset (Husain et al. 2020). The
ReGaPs replicate the kind of bad code patterns that are integrated in the AI Mentor Studio (OutSystems 2023) code
analysis engine for the OutSystems visual programming language. Note that, although the evaluation focuses on a specific use case, the concept and algorithm are generic, and
thus may be applied in other contexts.

Graph matching is a fundamental problem in pattern recognition, with many applications such as software analysis and
computational biology. One well-known type of graph matching problem is graph isomorphism, which consists of deciding if two graphs are identical. Despite its usefulness, the
properties that one may check using graph isomorphism are
rather limited, since it only allows strict equality checks between two graphs. For example, it does not allow one to check
complex structural properties such as if the target graph is an
arbitrary length sequence followed by an arbitrary size loop.
We propose a generalization of graph isomorphism that allows one to check such properties through a declarative specification. This specification is given in the form of a Regular
Graph Pattern (ReGaP), a special type of graph, inspired by
regular expressions, that may contain wildcard nodes that represent arbitrary structures such as variable-sized sequences or
subgraphs. We propose a SAT-based algorithm for checking if
a target graph matches a given ReGaP. We also propose a preprocessing technique for improving the performance of the
algorithm and evaluate it through an extensive experimental
evaluation on benchmarks from the CodeSearchNet dataset.

1

Introduction

Pattern recognition is an important research area (Foggia,
Percannella, and Vento 2014) due to its numerous applications ranging from detecting bad code patterns (Piotrowski
and Madeyski 2020) and software analysis (Park et al. 2010;
Singh et al. 2021; Zou et al. 2020) in general, to computational biology (Carletti, Foggia, and Vento 2013; Zaslavskiy,
Bach, and Vert 2009). One fundamental problem in pattern
recognition is graph matching (Livi and Rizzi 2013). Two
common approaches are: (i) graph isomorphism (Cordella
et al. 1999; Dahm et al. 2012; Ullmann 1976, 2010; Larrosa
and Valiente 2002; Ullmann 2010; Zampelli, Deville, and
Solnon 2010) and (ii) approximated graph matching (Bunke
1997; Raymond and Willett 2002; Sanfeliu and Fu 1983).
The first consists of deciding if two graphs are identical,
which can be too strict for some applications (Auwatanamongkol 2007; Conte et al. 2004). Approximated graph
matching algorithms are less strict and normally employ
some sort of distance metric to evaluate the graphs. Despite

2

Background

In this section, we introduce the necessary background. We
start with a brief introduction to graph isomorphism in Sec-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8136

