The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Social Physics Informed Diffusion Model for Crowd Simulation
Hongyi Chen1,3 , Jingtao Ding2, * , Yong Li2 , Yue Wang2 , Xiao-Ping Zhang1,∗
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
3
Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
chenhy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dingjt15@tsinghua.org.cn, xpzhang@ieee.org
Abstract

Early approaches (Helbing and Molnar 1995; Van Den Berg
et al. 2011; Sarmady, Haron, and Talib 2010; Henderson
1971) attempted to adopt physical rule-based models to
explain the underlying mechanisms behind the pedestrian
movement, falling within the research domain of social
physics (Jusup et al. 2022). One notable pioneer is the
Social Force Model (SFM) (Helbing and Molnar 1995),
which draws inspiration from physics principles and represents pedestrians as particles influenced by various forces.
With advanced deep learning, methods inspired by physicsinformed machine learning (Karniadakis et al. 2021) have
achieved state-of-the-art fidelity in crowd simulation. Examples include the PCS (Physics-informed Crowd Simulator) (Zhang et al. 2022) approach that replaces the core
terms of SFM with GNNs (Graph Neural Networks), and
the NSP (Neural Social Physics) (Yue, Manocha, and Wang
2022) model that designs a learnable SFM with key parameters characterized by LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory)
based modules.
On the other hand, the inherent uncertainty of human
behavior gives rise to the indeterminacy of pedestrian trajectories, commonly referred to as the multi-modality of
human movement (Korbmacher and Tordeux 2022). Early
works (Alahi et al. 2016; Mohamed et al. 2020) made
simplistic assumptions, such as Gaussian distributions, to
model this multi-modality. Follow-up approaches utilized
generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Gupta et al. 2018; Dendorfer, Elflein,
and Leal-Taixé 2021; Kosaraju et al. 2019; Sadeghian
et al. 2019) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Yue,
Manocha, and Wang 2022; Mangalam et al. 2020; Ivanovic
and Pavone 2019; Chen et al. 2021) to generate multimodal
samples. In recent years, diffusion probabilistic models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020) have demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in various generative tasks. This approach designs a multi-step Markov chain to reconstruct the original
data distribution and generates data by stepwise denoising
the noisy samples along this chain, achieving outstanding
performance in capturing multimodal distributions. However, when it comes to crowd simulation, current diffusion
model-based solutions (Gu et al. 2022; Mao et al. 2023) are
purely data-driven and thus lack guidance from prior knowledge of human movement.
Different from them, this paper comprehensively consid-

Crowd simulation holds crucial applications in various domains, such as urban planning, architectural design, and traffic arrangement. In recent years, physics-informed machine
learning methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in crowd simulation but fail to model the heterogeneity and
multi-modality of human movement comprehensively. In this
paper, we propose a social physics-informed diffusion model
named SPDiff to mitigate the above gap. SPDiff takes both
the interactive and historical information of crowds in the current timeframe to reverse the diffusion process, thereby generating the distribution of pedestrian movement in the subsequent timeframe. Inspired by the well-known social physics
model, i.e., Social Force, regarding crowd dynamics, we design a crowd interaction module to guide the denoising process and further enhance this module with the equivariant
properties of crowd interactions. To mitigate error accumulation in long-term simulations, we propose a multi-frame rollout training algorithm for diffusion modeling. Experiments
conducted on two real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance of SPDiff in terms of macroscopic and microscopic evaluation metrics. Code and appendix are available at https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/SPDiff.

Introduction
Crowd simulation is a process of simulating the movements
of a large number of people in specific scenarios, with a
focus on interaction dynamics (Rasouli 2021). This technique finds its primary applications in fields such as urban
planning, architectural design, and traffic management. For
example, simulating how crowds move in a building under
different scenarios (i.e., crowd density, flux, etc.) enables
decision-makers to assess and optimize architectural design
accordingly to improve emergency response and evacuation
strategies (Yang et al. 2020).
However, the spatio-temporal crowd trajectories are complex and heterogeneous as human behaviors are often affected by individual preferences and the surrounding environment. For example, in a shopping mall, individuals
move at different speeds and follow distinct paths based
on their personal interests and the mall’s layout, resulting in diverse and intricate movement patterns over time.
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

474

