The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PPO-Clip Attains Global Optimality: Towards Deeper Understandings of Clipping
Nai-Chieh Huang, Ping-Chun Hsieh, Kuo-Hao Ho, I-Chen Wu
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{naich.cs09, pinghsieh, lukewayne123.cs05}@nycu.edu.tw, icwu@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract

derivatives for policy improvement. PPO encompasses two
main variants: PPO-KL and PPO-Clip, each with distinct
characteristics. PPO-KL adds a Kullback-Leibler divergence
penalty to the objective, while PPO-Clip integrates probability ratio clipping. These variants showcase remarkable performance across various environments, with PPO standing
out for its computational efficiency (Chen, Peng, and Zhang
2018; Ye et al. 2020; Byun, Kim, and Wang 2020).
Given the empirical success of these policy optimization
algorithms, recent works have made significant strides in enhancing their theoretical guarantees. In particular, (Agarwal
et al. 2020; Bhandari and Russo 2019) prove the global convergence result of the policy gradient algorithm under different settings. Additionally, (Mei et al. 2020) establishes the
convergence rates of the softmax policy gradient in both the
standard and the entropy-regularized settings. Furthermore,
it has been shown that various policy gradient algorithms
also enjoy global convergence (Fazel et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2021). In the context of TRPO and PPO,
(Shani, Efroni, and Mannor 2020) have utilized the mirror
descent method to establish the convergence rate of adaptive
TRPO under both the standard and entropy-regularized settings. Furthermore, (Liu et al. 2019) have provided the convergence rate of PPO-KL and TRPO under neural function
approximation.1 By contrast, despite that PPO-Clip is computationally efficient and empirically successful, the following question about the theory of PPO-Clip remains largely
open: Does PPO-Clip enjoy provable global convergence or
have any convergence rate guarantee?
In this paper, we answer the above question affirmatively.
To begin with, we generalize the PPO-Clip objective to encompass a wider range of variants, enhancing our comprehension of its efficacy. Accordingly, we present the first-ever
global convergence guarantee for a PPO-Clip variant under both tabular and neural function approximation. Notably,
through convergence analysis, we offer two pivotal insights
into the clipping mechanism: (i) Under PPO-Clip, the policy updates scale with advantage magnitudes, while the sign
dictates whether to increase or decrease the action probabilities. Notably, given the representation power of neural
networks, incorrect signs typically emerge when the advan-

Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm employing a clipped
surrogate objective (PPO-Clip) is a prominent exemplar of
the policy optimization methods. However, despite its remarkable empirical success, PPO-Clip lacks theoretical substantiation to date. In this paper, we contribute to the field by
establishing the first global convergence results of a PPO-Clip
variant in both tabular and neural function
√ approximation settings. Our findings highlight the O(1/ T ) min-iterate convergence rate specifically in the context of neural function
approximation. We tackle the inherent challenges in analyzing PPO-Clip through three central concepts: (i) We introduce a generalized version of the PPO-Clip objective, illuminated by its connection with the hinge loss. (ii) Employing entropic mirror descent, we establish asymptotic convergence for tabular PPO-Clip with direct policy parameterization. (iii) Inspired by the tabular analysis, we streamline convergence analysis by introducing a two-step policy improvement approach. This decouples policy search from complex
neural policy parameterization using a regression-based update scheme. Furthermore, we gain deeper insights into the
efficacy of PPO-Clip by interpreting these generalized objectives. Our theoretical findings also mark the first characterization of the influence of the clipping mechanism on PPO-Clip
convergence. Importantly, the clipping range affects only the
pre-constant of the convergence rate.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization is a prevalent method for solving reinforcement learning problems, involving iterative parameter
updates to maximize objectives. Policy gradient methods, a
prominent subset of this approach, were introduced as a direct solution using gradient descent. Their primary aim is
to identify an optimal policy that maximizes the total expected reward through interactions with the environment.
The selection of an appropriate step size is crucial as it significantly influences policy gradient algorithm performance.
Addressing this challenge, Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) was created (Schulman et al. 2015). Utilizing a trust-region approach with a second-order approximation, TRPO guarantees substantial policy improvement. Unlike computationally intensive TRPO, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al. 2017) leverages first-order

1
For the detailed discussion about related work, please refer to
Appendix H.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12600

