The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

G2L-CariGAN: Caricature Generation from Global Structure to Local Features
Xin Huang1 , Yunfeng Bai1 , Dong Liang1 , Feng Tian2 , Jinyuan Jia1 *
1

Tongji University
Duke Kunshan University
{huangxin0124, 2131480, sse liangdong, jyjia}@tongji.edu.cn, feng.tian978@dukekunshan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

one style of exaggeration at a time. Subsequently, DualStyleGAN (Yang et al. 2022) proposed an example-based
method, which can generate high-quality caricatures and
achieve various exaggeration styles based on reference caricatures. However, both StyleCariGAN and DualStyleGAN
exaggerate geometry shapes in vector-based latent space that
makes it difficult for an encoder to compress an image’s
local semantics in a disentangled way. As a result, some
prominent local facial features, such as a hook nose or wide
mouth, cannot be exaggerated properly (Fig. 1 (a)). The
other problem is that the caricatures these methods generated fail to preserve the identity of the character (Fig. 1 (b)).
In order to address these limitations, in this paper, we
put forward G2L-CariGAN, a new caricature generation approach based on reference caricatures to exaggerate a character’s global and local features. G2L-CariGAN consists
of a global exaggeration module and three local exaggeration modules, which exaggerate the (global) facial structure (shape) and (local) facial features, respectively. G2LCariGAN uses feature maps instead of vector-based latent
codes as the latent representation of face’s shape because
(a) feature maps retain the spatial information of the photo,
which helps to maintain the facial details; (b) feature maps
can easily enhance distinguishing features for local exaggeration; (c) feature maps make it easy to exaggerate using
multiple references on different regions with spatial masks.
As a result, feature maps with different spatial dimensions
can control the geometric features such as a round face or
squared face, from coarse to fine. As for color style, G2LCariGAN uses the vector-based latent code for representation. The reason is that if feature maps are used to extract
the color style, the spatial distribution of color in the reference caricature will be completely reflected in the generated
caricatures, which often results in undesirable effects. Moreover, we develop a new caricature identity loss based on the
principle of ”exaggerating the difference from the mean”
(EDFM) (Brennan 1985). The loss has well balanced the
exaggeration of a character’s local features and the preservation of its identity in the generated caricature.
The main contributions of the paper include:

Existing GAN-based approaches to caricature generation
mainly focus on exaggerating a character’s global facial structure. This often leads to the failure in highlighting significant
facial features such as big eyes and hook nose. To address
this limitation, we propose a new approach termed as G2LCariGAN, which uses feature maps of spatial dimensions
instead of latent codes for geometric exaggeration. G2LCariGAN first exaggerates the global facial structure of the
character on a low-dimensional feature map and then exaggerates its local facial features on a high-dimensional feature
map. Moreover, we develop a caricature identity loss function based on feature maps, which well retains the character’s
identity after exaggeration. Our experiments have demonstrated that G2L-CariGAN outperforms the state-of-arts in
terms of the quality of exaggerating a character and retaining its identity.

Introduction
Drawing caricatures involves exaggerating distinctive facial features that convey comedy and sarcasm. The early
approaches to automatic caricature generation are mainly
based on graphics and image-to-image generation. Graphicbased methods (Akleman 1997a; Akleman, Palmer, and Logan 2000) pay attention to exaggeration, while image-toimage conversion methods (Huang et al. 2018; Zhu et al.
2017) mainly focus on color transfer. With the advancement of artificial neural networks, several methods based
on generative adversarial networks (GAN) have been proposed (Cao, Liao, and Yuan 2018; Shi, Deb, and Jain 2019;
Chu et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2021), combing both exaggeration
and color transfer. However, the quality of caricatures generated by these methods is generally not high, as exaggeration
through 2D image warping tends to cause distortion.
With the development of generative AI, a recent work
StyleGAN (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) was developed
to produce high-quality realistic portraits. A few methods
based on StyleGAN have been proposed to generate caricatures without abnormal distortion by exaggerating in StyleGAN’s latent space. StyleCariGAN (Jang et al. 2021) has
made fine adjustments to StyleGAN, but can achieve only

• We propose a new GAN-based neural network G2LCariGAN for extracting both a character’s overall facial
structure and its facial features, enabling exaggerations
with multiple references.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2391

