The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LINGO-Space: Language-Conditioned Incremental Grounding for Space
Dohyun Kim, Nayoung Oh, Deokmin Hwang, Daehyung Park*
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{dohyun141, lightsalt, gsh04089, daehyung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We aim to solve the problem of spatially localizing composite
instructions referring to space: space grounding. Compared
to current instance grounding, space grounding is challenging due to the ill-posedness of identifying locations referred
to by discrete expressions and the compositional ambiguity of referring expressions. Therefore, we propose a novel
probabilistic space-grounding methodology (LINGO-Space)
that accurately identifies a probabilistic distribution of space
being referred to and incrementally updates it, given subsequent referring expressions leveraging configurable polar
distributions. Our evaluations show that the estimation using
polar distributions enables a robot to ground locations successfully through 20 table-top manipulation benchmark tests.
We also show that updating the distribution helps the grounding method accurately narrow the referring space. We finally
demonstrate the robustness of the space grounding with simulated manipulation and real quadruped robot navigation tasks.
Code and videos are available at https://lingo-space.github.io.

Figure 1: An illustration of incremental space grounding in
the navigation task. Our method, LINGO-Space, identifies
the distribution of the target location indicated by a natural
language instruction with referring expressions.

Introduction
Robotic natural-language grounding methods have primarily focused on identifying objects, actions, or events (Brohan
et al. 2023; Mees, Borja-Diaz, and Burgard 2023). However,
to robustly carry out tasks following human instructions in
physical space, robots need to identify the space of operations and interpret spatial relations within the instructions.
For example, given a directional expression (e.g., “place a
cup on the table and close to the plate”), a robot should determine the most suitable location for placement based on
the description and environmental observations.
We aim to solve the problem of localizing spatial references within instructions. Referred to as “space grounding,”
this problem involves identifying potential locations for
reaching or placing objects. Unlike conventional instance
grounding problems, such as visual object grounding (Shridhar, Mittal, and Hsu 2020) and scene-graph grounding (Kim
et al. 2023), space grounding presents complexities due to
inherent ambiguity in identifying referred locations (as illustrated in Fig. 1). Given the ambiguity and the compositional nature of referring expressions, a grounding solution

should be capable of reasoning about potential space candidates with uncertainty and adapting to new references.
Conventional space grounding approaches often map spatially relational expressions (e.g., “to the right side of a box”)
to specific directional and distance-based coordinates, learning patterns from training dataset (Jain et al. 2023; Namasivayam et al. 2023). However, positional ambiguity (e.g.,
missing distance information) in spatial expressions and referential ambiguity (e.g., a plurality of similar objects) in
the scene often lower effective space grounding (Zhao, Lee,
and Hsu 2023). Furthermore, representational ambiguity restricts the scalability of space grounding when dealing with
complex expressions and scenes.
On the other hand, understanding composite expressions
is crucial for accurate grounding in space. Most instructions
entail sequences of spatiotemporal descriptions (e.g., “Enter the room, then place the cup on the table”). However,
most approaches often encode multiple expressions simultaneously without explicit separation (Roy et al. 2019). Recently, PARAG ON (Zhao, Lee, and Hsu 2023) decomposes

* D. Park is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10314

