The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bi-directional Adapter for Multimodal Tracking
Bing Cao, Junliang Guo, Pengfei Zhu* , Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
{caobing,guojunliang,zhupengfei,huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Ground Truth

ViPT

TIR

RGB

Due to the rapid development of computer vision, singlemodal (RGB) object tracking has made significant progress
in recent years. Considering the limitation of single imaging
sensor, multi-modal images (RGB, infrared, etc.) are introduced to compensate for this deficiency for all-weather object tracking in complex environments. However, as acquiring sufficient multi-modal tracking data is hard while the
dominant modality changes with the open environment, most
existing techniques fail to extract multi-modal complementary information dynamically, yielding unsatisfactory tracking performance. To handle this problem, we propose a novel
multi-modal visual prompt tracking model based on a universal bi-directional adapter, cross-prompting multiple modalities mutually. Our model consists of a universal bi-directional
adapter and multiple modality-specific transformer encoder
branches with sharing parameters. The encoders extract features of each modality separately by using a frozen, pretrained foundation model. We develop a simple but effective light feature adapter to transfer modality-specific information from one modality to another, performing visual feature prompt fusion in an adaptive manner. With adding fewer
(0.32M) trainable parameters, our model achieves superior
tracking performance in comparison with both the full finetuning methods and the prompt learning-based methods. Our
code is available: https://github.com/SparkTempest/BAT.

Ours

RGB > TIR

RGB = TIR

RGB < TIR

Figure 1: Different dominant modality in complex scenarios.
The image with green box represents the dominant modality,
and the red box represents the auxiliary modality.

tain rich color texture in light condition while failing in
dark condition, TIR images provide significant contrast for
heat objects while presenting low resolution and poor texture. Consequently, to conquer the inherent shortcomings of
single-modality-based methods, multi-modal object tracking emerged, which fully leveraged RGB and thermal images to perform more robust all-weather tracking.
However, existing multi-modal tracking tasks also meet
two main issues: i) Due to the high data labeling cost
of multi-modal object tracking, most existing datasets are
scale-limited, which is insufficient to support building an
effective multi-modal tracker; ii) The dominant correlation
among multi-modal data is not fixed as shown in Fig. 1, because different imaging modalities have varying sensitivities
to objects in changing environments.
Since pure RGB sequences are much easier to acquire
than RGB-T sequence pairs, some multi-modal tracking
works (Zhu et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2019), accounting for
the first limitation, are pre-trained on RGB sequences first
and then transferred to multi-modal scenarios in a full
fine-tuning manner. For example, The mfDiMP (Zhang
et al. 2019) takes pre-trained DiMP as foundation models, and fine-tunes it on the generated RGB-T images.
Some researchers develop attribute-based multi-modal fusion model (Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a; Xiao et al.
2022) to reduce reliance on large-scale training data while
improving fusion capabilities with a small number of pa-

Introduction
Object tracking, a foundation visual task of computer vision, has achieved significant progress over the past decades.
Many excellent approaches (Zhang et al. 2021b; Yang et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2021a; Lu et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2023),
and benchmarks (Li et al. 2016, 2019, 2021; Zhang et al.
2022) have emerged and achieved promising performance
on RGB-based object tracking. However, due to the imaging mechanism of visible light, some complex scenarios in
open environments, such as illumination variation, limit the
practical effectiveness of solely RGB-based object tracking,
leading to target missing or error tracking. Different from
RGB cameras that capture the reflected light of objects, thermal infrared (TIR) imaging sensors capture the heat emitted by the object itself. Compared to RGB images that con* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

927

