The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Synergistic Anchored Contrastive Pre-training for
Few-Shot Relation Extraction
Da Luo, Yanglei Gan, Rui Hou , Run Lin , Qiao Liu * , Yuxiang Cai , Wannian Gao
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{luoda, yangleigan, hour, runlin, yuxiangcai, wanniangao}@std.uestc.edu.cn, qliu@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot Relation Extraction (FSRE) aims to extract relational facts from a sparse set of labeled corpora. Recent studies have shown promising results in FSRE by employing
Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) within the framework
of supervised contrastive learning, which considers both instances and label facts. However, how to effectively harness
massive instance-label pairs to encompass the learned representation with semantic richness in this learning paradigm
is not fully explored. To address this gap, we introduce a
novel synergistic anchored contrastive pre-training framework. This framework is motivated by the insight that the diverse viewpoints conveyed through instance-label pairs capture incomplete yet complementary intrinsic textual semantics. Specifically, our framework involves a symmetrical contrastive objective that encompasses both sentence-anchored
and label-anchored contrastive losses. By combining these
two losses, the model establishes a robust and uniform representation space. This space effectively captures the reciprocal alignment of feature distributions among instances
and relational facts, simultaneously enhancing the maximization of mutual information across diverse perspectives within
the same relation. Experimental results demonstrate that our
framework achieves significant performance enhancements
compared to baseline models in downstream FSRE tasks.
Furthermore, our approach exhibits superior adaptability to
handle the challenges of domain shift and zero-shot relation
extraction. Our code is available online at https://github.com/
AONE-NLP/FSRE-SaCon.

Figure 1: The concepts of single-view CL and multi-view
CL. Each color corresponds to a distinct relation, with circles and triangles symbolizing instances and labels. Solid
lines denote proximity between instances (a) or instancelabel pair (b), while dashed lines indicate instances moving
apart (a) or mismatched instance-label pairs (b).
pre-training frameworks have been introduced into FSRE
(Peng et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022a; Zhang and Lu 2022).
These frameworks aim to learn transferable knowledge in
the form of initial embeddings, which are then fine-tuned
with a learned optimization strategy to enhance performance
with a limited amount of labeled corpora for training.
Among these pre-training frameworks, contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a popular paradigm. The key idea
is to bring together samples from the same class in semantic embedding space, while pushing apart samples from different classes (Chen et al. 2020). In this way, the target for
these frameworks in FSRE changes from learning generic
representations that capture meaningful patterns and structures from large external corpus to creating discriminative
embeddings by pushing apart positive and negative samples.
Recent CL-based pre-training frameworks have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on FSRE benchmarks. However, existing studies (Soares et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2020;
Zhang and Lu 2022) have predominantly focused on establishing instance-label alignment through single-view contrastive learning, where the correlation between instances
and labels is dependent on a single view per instance. In
this regard, we argue that the adoption of mutual contrastive
learning among multiple views can yield representations that
exhibit both robustness to inconsequential variations and re-

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) is a crucial task in Natural Language Processing (NLP), aiming to extract relationships between entities in a given sentence (Zhou et al. 2005). It has
broad applications in question answering (Bordes, Chopra,
and Weston 2014) and knowledge base construction (Luan
et al. 2018). However, the scarcity of annotated data poses
a significant challenge in developing RE models. Therefore,
recent studies have introduced the few-shot relation extraction (FSRE) task as an effective solution.
Inspired by the success of pre-trained language models
(PLMs) in NLP (Dong et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2021), various
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18742

