The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupled Contrastive Multi-View Clustering with High-Order Random Walks
Yiding Lu, Yijie Lin, Mouxing Yang, Dezhong Peng, Peng Hu* , Xi Peng*
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
{yidinglu.gm, linyijie.gm, yangmouxing, penghu.ml, pengx.gm}@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn

Anchor

Abstract
In recent, some robust contrastive multi-view clustering
(MvC) methods have been proposed, which construct data
pairs from neighborhoods to alleviate the false negative issue, i.e., some intra-cluster samples are wrongly treated as
negative pairs. Although promising performance has been
achieved by these methods, the false negative issue is still far
from addressed and the false positive issue emerges because
all in- and out-of-neighborhood samples are simply treated
as positive and negative, respectively. To address the issues,
we propose a novel robust method, dubbed decoupled contrastive multi-view clustering with high-order random walks
(DIVIDE). In brief, DIVIDE leverages random walks to progressively identify data pairs in a global instead of local
manner. As a result, DIVIDE could identify in-neighborhood
negatives and out-of-neighborhood positives. Moreover, DIVIDE embraces a novel MvC architecture to perform interand intra-view contrastive learning in different embedding
spaces, thus boosting clustering performance and embracing the robustness against missing views. To verify the efficacy of DIVIDE, we carry out extensive experiments on
four benchmark datasets comparing with nine state-of-theart MvC methods in both complete and incomplete MvC settings. The code is released on https://github.com/XLearningSCU/2024-AAAI-DIVIDE.

False Negative

True Negative

1st Step

2nd Step

1-NN
2-NN

3-NN

-Neighborhood

-Nearest Neighbors

Random Walk

Figure 1: Our observation and basic idea. As illustrated, the
existing robust contrastive MvC methods construct negative
pairs resorting to ϵ- or k-nearest-neighborhood approaches,
which will treat all in-neighborhood samples as positive and
out-of-neighborhood samples as negative, resulting in the
false positive and false negative issues. Different from these
methods, our method identifies the data pairs in a global
instead of local manner by performing multi-step random
walks on an affinity graph. Thanks to the globality, on the
one hand, our method will treat some in-neighborhood samples as negative if high-order neighbors are with a lower
affinity score, thus avoiding the construction of FPs to some
extent. On the other hand, our method will treat some outof-neighborhood samples as positive, thus avoiding the construction of FNs in part.

Introduction
Multi-view data, which can capture diverse and complementary aspects of the same object from different sources or
modalities (Jiang et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2023), has become
increasingly prevalent in many real-world applications such
as human activity recognition (Yadav et al. 2021) and person re-identification (Yang et al. 2022a). As one of the most
effective tools to analyze multi-view data, multi-view clustering (MvC) could group unlabeled instances into semantic
clusters by exploring and exploiting the latent information
hidden in different views. In other words, multi-view representation learning lies at the heart of MvC (Zhang et al.
2019b, 2020).
As a powerful unsupervised representation learning
method, contrastive learning (He et al. 2020; Chen et al.

2020), which aims to compact semantically similar pairs
(e.g., different views of the same instance) and scatter dissimilar pairs (e.g., different views of different instances)
in the embedding space, has achieved state of the arts in
MvC (Huang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019a; Trosten et al.
2021). Despite the success achieved by the contrastive MvC
methods, they have suffered from the false negative (FN)
issue (Yang et al. 2022b). To be specific, most existing contrastive MvC methods will randomly choose some samples
to construct negative pairs, and thus some intra-cluster samples are wrongly treated as negative pairs with a high probability. In brief, suppose the data could be grouped into C
clusters, there is a probability of 1/C to select the intracluster samples as negative. To alleviate the performance
degradation caused by FNs, some studies (Zhong et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2022b; Huynh et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022;
Sun et al. 2023) have proposed to rectify FNs through ϵ-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14193

