The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RL-SeqISP: Reinforcement Learning-Based Sequential Optimization
for Image Signal Processing
Xinyu Sun1,2 * , Zhikun Zhao1,2 * , Lili Wei1 * , Congyan Long1† ,
Mingxuan Cai3 , Longfei Han4 , Juan Wang2 , Bing Li2,5 , Yuxuan Guo6
1

Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation (Ministry of Education), School of Computer and
Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai JiaoTong University
4
Beijing Technology and Business University
5
PeopleAI Inc. Beijing, China
6
Shenzhen Heytap Technology Corp., Ltd
{xinyusun, zhikunzhao, cylang}@bjtu.edu.cn, caimingxuan@sjtu.edu.cn, bli@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, longfeihan@btbu.edu.cn
(b) Ours: RL-SeqISP

(a) Human Experts Tuning Process

Abstract

Input:

Input:

Hardware image signal processing (ISP), aiming at converting RAW inputs to RGB images, consists of a series of processing blocks, each with multiple parameters. Traditionally,
ISP parameters are manually tuned in isolation by imaging
experts according to application-specific quality and performance metrics, which is time-consuming and biased towards
human perception due to complex interaction with the output image. Since the relationship between any single parameter’s variation and the output performance metric is a complex, non-linear function, optimizing such a large number
of ISP parameters is challenging. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel Sequential ISP parameter optimization
model, called the RL-SeqISP model, which utilizes deep reinforcement learning to optimize all ISP parameters for different imaging applications. Concretely, inspired by the sequential tuning process of human experts, the proposed model
can progressively enhance image quality by seamlessly integrating information from both the image feature space and
the parameter space. Furthermore, a dynamic parameter optimization module is introduced to avoid ISP parameters getting stuck into local optima, which is able to more effectively
guarantee the optimal parameters resulting from the sequential learning strategy. These merits of the RL-SeqISP model
as well as its high efficiency are substantiated by comprehensive experiments on a wide range of downstream tasks,
including two visual analysis tasks (instance segmentation
and object detection), and image quality assessment (IQA),
as compared with representative methods both quantitatively
and qualitatively. In particular, even using only 10% of the
training data, our model outperforms other SOTA methods
by an average of 7% mAP on two visual analysis tasks.

RAW Data

RAW Data

Metric
Score

DPOM

Reward

Human
Experts
…

ISP
Parameters

Agent
…

𝑻
Steps
RGB

ISP
Parameters

Hardware
ISPs

Output:
RGB
Image

Input/Output Flow

𝑻
Steps

RGB

Hardware
ISPs

Output:
RGB
Images

Sequential Tuning Flow

Downstream Task
Metric Space

Segmentation

Detection

IQA

…
Step 0

Step 1

Guidance Information

Step T-2 Step T-1
Termination Conditions

Figure 1: The motivation of our method. (a) Human experts
tuning process. The imaging experts iteratively tune the ISP
parameters through empirical perception. (b) The proposed
RL-SeqISP utilizes deep reinforcement learning to progressively optimize ISP parameters under the guidance of feedback from various specific downstream applications.

images. Due to their high reliability and high efficiency,
they are widely used in many fields, e.g., camera phones
(Ignatov et al. 2023; Ratnasingam 2019) and video surveillance (Lee et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2018; Baina and Dublet
1995). Generally, a typical hardware ISP pipeline consists
of a set of serialized processing blocks (e.g., denoising block
and sharpening block), each of which contains multiple parameters, resulting in a large number of parameters, which
affects the quality of the generated RGB image (Bardenet
et al. 2013; Yahiaoui et al. 2019; Yogatama and Mann 2014).
Traditionally, these parameters are tuned by imaging experts
based on human visual perception, which is time-consuming
and labor-intensive (Board 2017). Moreover, due to biases
in human perception, it is challenging for experts to tune
the parameters that favor actual applications. To solve this

Introduction
Hardware Image Signal Processors (ISPs) are low-level image processing hardwares that convert RAW data to RGB
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5025

