The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Auto311: A Confidence-Guided Automated System for Non-emergency Calls
Zirong Chen, Xutong Sun, Yuanhe Li, Meiyi Ma
Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37235, USA
{zirong.chen, xutong.sun, yuanhe.li, meiyi.ma}@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

a time when local governments face increasing pressure to
do more with fewer resources. Indeed, the number of local
government employees in the United States has shrunk by
nearly 5% in 2021 (Saxon et al. 2022), and a large proportion of counties and municipalities anticipate a significant
general fund shortfall as the United States transitions out of
the COVID pandemic (Afonso 2021).
To mitigate this issue, we introduce Auto311, the first
automated system to handle 311 non-emergency calls.
Auto311 features two key components: incident type detection and information itemization. It identifies probable incident types from ongoing calls and dynamically generates
and updates case reports accordingly. Simultaneously, these
reports direct the information itemization module to gather
necessary information, streamlining the process.
Previous works have aimed to optimize (non-)emergency
management (Sun, Bocchini, and Davison 2020; Wex et al.
2014; Manoj and Baker 2007; Ma et al. 2021a; Ma,
Stankovic, and Feng 2021, 2018; Chen et al. 2008). However, most of those works focus more on the emergency
resource allocation after one case report is placed, for example, route optimization for ambulances and response center localization for faster responses (Mukhopadhyay et al.
2022). Although other available could frameworks like
AWS’s Lex2 and Google’s DialogFlow3 can set up automated dialogue service within a few hours, they require clear
and relatively fixed dialogue charts to guide the conversation. When it comes to non-emergency call handling, leaving
alone privacy and safety issues brought by online solutions,
most incident types have unique dialogue charts compared to
others, making it unrealistic to separately handle the conversation for each incident type. However, Auto311, at a system
level, takes full advantage of the emitted confidence scores
of each component to strategically optimize the dialogue.
However, developing Auto311 poses some key challenges. First, unlike plenty of work that has been done
to solve text classification problems (Kowsari et al. 2019;
Mirończuk and Protasiewicz 2018; Minaee et al. 2021; Aggarwal and Zhai 2012) with outputting the most likely one
category in the end, the incident prediction in this task has
to cope with calls involving multiple incident types instead,

Emergency and non-emergency response systems are essential services provided by local governments and critical to
protecting lives, the environment, and property. The effective handling of (non-)emergency calls is critical for public safety and well-being. By reducing the burden through
non-emergency callers, residents in critical need of assistance
through 911 will receive fast and effective response. Collaborating with the Department of Emergency Communications
(DEC) in Nashville, we analyzed 11,796 non-emergency call
recordings and developed Auto3111 , the first automated system to handle 311 non-emergency calls, which (1) effectively
and dynamically predicts ongoing non-emergency incident
types to generate tailored case reports during the call; (2)
itemizes essential information from dialogue contexts to complete the generated reports; and (3) strategically structures
system-caller dialogues with optimized confidence. We used
real-world data to evaluate the system’s effectiveness and deployability. The experimental results indicate that the system
effectively predicts incident type with an average F-1 score
of 92.54%. Moreover, the system successfully itemizes critical information from relevant contexts to complete reports,
evincing a 0.93 average consistency score compared to the
ground truth. Additionally, emulations demonstrate that the
system effectively decreases conversation turns as the utterance size gets more extensive and categorizes the ongoing
call with 94.49% mean accuracy.

Introduction
Emergency and non-emergency response systems are essential services provided by local governments and critical to
protecting lives, the environment, and property. While 911
is primarily used for emergency services, 311 is a nonemergency phone number that people can call to find information about municipal services, make complaints, or report problems like stolen property, road damage, etc. Both
emergency and non-emergency calls are operated by the
Department of Emergency Communication (DEC) in most
cities. DECs across the nation receive an overwhelmingly
high number of calls, with the national yearly average of
911 calls being close to 240 million (NYC911 2022; Ma
et al. 2019). The growing use of response systems comes at
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and Demo: https://github.com/AICPS-Lab/Auto311

2
3

21967

AWS Lex: https://aws.amazon.com/lex/
Diagflow: https://cloud.google.com/dialogflow?hl=en

