The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TextGT: A Double-View Graph Transformer on Text for Aspect-Based Sentiment
Analysis
Shuo Yin, Guoqiang Zhong*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
yinshuo@stu.ouc.edu.cn, gqzhong@ouc.edu.cn

nsubj

Abstract

nmod

Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) is aimed at predicting the sentiment polarities of the aspects included in a
sentence instead of the whole sentence itself, and is a finegrained learning task compared to the conventional text classification. In recent years, on account of the ability to model
the connectivity relationships between the words in one sentence, graph neural networks have been more and more popular to handle the natural language processing tasks, and
meanwhile many works emerge for the ABSA task. However, most of the works utilizing graph convolution easily
incur the over-smoothing problem, while graph Transformer
for ABSA has not been explored yet. In addition, although
some previous works are dedicated to using both GNN and
Transformer to handle text, the methods of tightly combining
graph view and sequence view of text is open to research. To
address the above issues, we propose a double-view graph
Transformer on text (TextGT) for ABSA. In TextGT, the
procedure in graph view of text is handled by GNN layers, while Transformer layers deal with the sequence view,
and these two processes are tightly coupled, alleviating the
over-smoothing problem. Moreover, we propose an algorithm
for implementing a kind of densely message passing graph
convolution called TextGINConv, to employ edge features in
graphs. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our TextGT over the state-of-the-art approaches, and validate the TextGINConv module. The source code is available
at https://github.com/shuoyinn/TextGT.

cc

cop

case

conj

NNS

IN

NN

VBP

JJ

CC

JJ

Bottles

of

wine

are

cheap

and

good

Figure 1: An example sentence with aspect words highlighted in gold. This text has already been preprocessed by
a dependency parser.
exemplify the aforementioned task using a sentence with a
3-word aspect, as shown in Figure 1.
Due to the great success of deep learning, there are a
few approaches to dealing with the ABSA task based on
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) or convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) (Dong et al. 2014; Vo and Zhang 2015),
but they fail to leverage the syntactical information among
words. Recently, with the development of graph representation learning, research on graph neural networks (GNNs) for
ABSA has been widely used. As shown in Figure 1, the sentence with an aspect is firstly parsed by an external dependency extractor to get the corresponding syntax tree which is
regarded as a graph with edge features. Then kinds of GNNs
designed in the previous works take the dependency graph
as the input and make the subsequent word representations
have the syntactic structure information.
However, most GNNs are message passing “smoothers”
and have the problem of over-smoothing (Li, Han, and Wu
2018; Chen et al. 2020; Oono and Suzuki 2020). Hopefully, some previous works (Wu et al. 2021; Chen, O’Bray,
and Borgwardt 2022; Rampasek et al. 2022) point out that
graph Transformers (GTs) have the potential to alleviate
over-smoothing. In recent years, several vision Transformers
(ViTs) utilizing convolution have become the cutting-edge
methods (Li et al. 2021b; Guo et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021;
Peng et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022), whilst GTs also have been
a popular topic due to their good performance on graph representation learning tasks like node classification and link
prediction (Dwivedi and Bresson 2020; Ying et al. 2021;
Kreuzer et al. 2021).
Although there are many works dedicated to design highperformance graph Transformers, few of them are proposed
for NLP tasks but graph learning ones. Our motivation is to
introduce a well-performed graph Transformer into ABSA,

Introduction
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA), as a fine-grained
learning task, has been more and more popular in natural
language processing (NLP) these years (Wang et al. 2016;
Tang, Qin, and Liu 2016; Sun, Huang, and Qiu 2019). The
goal of ABSA is to recognize the sentiment polarities of
the aspects in a given sentence like a review. The task can
be formalized as follows: Given an n-word sentence S =
(w1 , w2 , ..., wn ) where wi denotes the i-th word, and a kword aspect Sa = (wa1 , wa2 , ..., wak ) ⊂ S with aj standing
for a word index in S, we need to predict the sentiment polarity of Sa . Note that a sentence with more than one aspects
can be seen as multiple instances each with one aspect. We
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19404

