The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Image as a Language: Revisiting Scene Text Recognition via Balanced, Unified and
Synchronized Vision-Language Reasoning Network
Jiajun Wei1 , Hongjian Zhan1 * , Yue Lu1 , Xiao Tu1 , Bing Yin2 , Cong Liu2 , Umapada Pal3
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
iFLYTEK Research, iFLYTEK, Hefei, China
3
CVPR Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India
jjwei@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {hjzhan, xtu, ylu}@cee.ecnu.edu.cn, {bingyin, congliu2}@iflytek.com, umapada@isical.ac.in
Abstract

Scene text recognition is inherently a vision-language task.
However, previous works have predominantly focused either
on extracting more robust visual features or designing better language modeling. How to effectively and jointly model
vision and language to mitigate heavy reliance on a single
modality remains a problem. In this paper, aiming to enhance
vision-language reasoning in scene text recognition, we
present a balanced, unified and synchronized vision-language
reasoning network (BUSNet). Firstly, revisiting the image as
a language by balanced concatenation along length dimension alleviates the issue of over-reliance on vision or language. Secondly, BUSNet learns an ensemble of unified external and internal vision-language model with shared weight
by masked modality modeling (MMM). Thirdly, a novel
vision-language reasoning module (VLRM) with synchronized vision-language decoding capacity is proposed. Additionally, BUSNet achieves improved performance through iterative reasoning, which utilizes the vision-language prediction as a new language input. Extensive experiments indicate
that BUSNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on several
mainstream benchmark datasets and more challenge datasets
for both synthetic and real training data compared to recent
outstanding methods. Code and dataset will be available at
https://github.com/jjwei66/BUSNet.

Figure 1: Different modality reliance recognition pipelines.
(a) The vision-based model emphasizes vision side. (b) The
internal language-based model emphasizes language side.
(c) The external language-based model extremely emphasizes vision in vision part and language side in language
part. (d) Our vision-language-based model simultaneously
emphasizes vision and language side by balanced modeling.

often proves inadequate when handling images with noise
or occlusion. Heavy reliance on the language model may
cause over-refinement issues like Figure 1 (b) and (c). STR
inherently involves vision and language modalities, and how
to effectively model the interaction between vision and language to fully leverage complementary information remains
an open challenge. Addressing this problem requires exploring the following perspectives:
(i) The imbalanced reliance of vision and language: as depicted in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b), methods like SVTR
(Du et al. 2022) and PARSeq (Bautista and Atienza 2022),
which respectively emphasize the vision or language side.
Furthermore, methods (Yu et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2021) like
Figure 1(c) independently handle each modality, resulting in
an extreme imbalance in every single part. The key problem
under the imbalance is treating STR as an image-to-text task
and assigning distinct roles to two modalities. However, the
ultimate target is to obtain a text modality prediction and the
information from vision and language should ideally be utilized with no fundamental difference. To overcome the imbalance, a new perspective of handling vision and language
in a balanced manner like Figure 1(d) is needed.
(ii) Choice of internal or external modeling: Fang et al
(Fang et al. 2021) adopt an approach that decouples the

Introduction
Acquiring the capability to read text from scene images is
a crucial objective for artificial intelligence. Early methods
(He et al. 2016b; Su and Lu 2017) treat text recognition as a
straightforward classification task. Nevertheless, to enhance
accuracy in handling challenging factors like occlusion, blur,
and noise in text images, researches (Baek et al. 2019; Cheng
et al. 2017; Fang et al. 2021; Bautista and Atienza 2022)
have shifted towards incorporating language modeling.
However, with previous works mainly treating scene text
recognition (STR) as an image-to-text task, researchers of
STR mostly focus on extracting more robust visual features
(Aberdam et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Zhong et al. 2022)
or more appropriate language modeling (Fang et al. 2021;
Bautista and Atienza 2022) to improve performance. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), relying solely on visual features
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5885

