The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Off-Policy Constrained Reinforcement Learning through Adaptive
Ensemble C Estimation
Hengrui Zhang1,2 , Youfang Lin1,2 , Shuo Shen3 , Sheng Han1,2 , Kai Lv1,2 *
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
Cooperation Product Department, Interactive Entertainment Group, Tencent
{18112037, yflin, 19140027, shhan, lvkai}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

urgent need to realize off-policy algorithms that can learn
more efficiently from past experiences without the necessity
for continuous and costly interaction with the environment.
Designing an off-policy CRL algorithm is generally considered more challenging than designing an on-policy CRL
algorithm due to the distinct mechanisms each employs for
data handling and policy updates. In on-policy RL, the policy is updated based on the rollout experience obtained during each iteration. This allows the algorithm to directly sample experiences that reflect the current policy. By considering the cumulative discounted cost calculated from this fresh
data, it becomes easier to determine whether the current policy violates any given constraint. In contrast, off-policy algorithms utilize a replay buffer to store and sample past experiences. The reliance on older data in the replay buffer makes
it more difficult to accurately assess whether the current policy violates the constraint.
One possible solution that has been explored in previous
literature is to introduce a C-function (Ma et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022a), similar to the
Q-function, to estimate the cumulative cost and determine
whether the current policy satisfies the constraint. However,
accurately estimating the C-function presents several challenges. Similar to the estimation of the Q-function, the Cfunction also involves function approximation, which introduces errors. Additionally, the C-function estimation can result in underestimation or overestimation due to the maximization of the constraint objective.
To resolve this issue, we propose an Adaptive Ensemble
C-learning (AEC) technique containing an adaptive variable
K denoting the number of C-values. We demonstrate that
K can control the deviation between the C-value estimation and its true value. Furthermore, to ensure a precise correspondence between the C-value estimation and the stipulated constraint threshold, we advocate for implementing
the First C Buffer (FCB) technique. This approach entails
the establishment of a novel buffer pool, archiving the initial
state of each episode. Subsequent sampling from this pool
enables a refined assessment of whether the current policy
aligns with the constraints.
Our main contributions are threefold. Firstly, we underscore the phenomenon in off-policy CRL, where the balance between task goals and constraint goals results in imprecise estimation of the C-value. Subsequently, we intro-

In the domain of real-world agents, the application of Reinforcement Learning (RL) remains challenging due to the
necessity for safety constraints. Previously, Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) has predominantly focused on
on-policy algorithms. Although these algorithms exhibit a degree of efficacy, their interactivity efficiency in real-world settings is sub-optimal, highlighting the demand for more efficient off-policy methods. However, off-policy CRL algorithms grapple with challenges in precise estimation of the
C-function, particularly due to the fluctuations in the constrained Lagrange multiplier. Addressing this gap, our study
focuses on the nuances of C-value estimation in off-policy
CRL and introduces the Adaptive Ensemble C-learning
(AEC) approach to reduce these inaccuracies. Building on
state-of-the-art off-policy algorithms, we propose AEC-based
CRL algorithms designed for enhanced task optimization.
Extensive experiments on nine constrained robotics tasks reveal the superior interaction efficiency and performance of
our algorithms in comparison to preceding methods.

Introduction
Implementing Reinforcement Learning (RL) in real-world
tasks presents a formidable challenge, primarily because
real-world intelligence systems must comply with myriad
safety constraints. For instance, a robotic arm used in an
assembly line in manufacturing must work within the constraints of operating at a particular speed, maintaining the
integrity of the materials it handles, avoiding collisions with
humans and other robots, and adhering to a specified power
consumption. Previously, the primary focus of Constrained
Reinforcement Learning (CRL) has been on on-policy algorithms (Achiam et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020; Liu, Ding,
and Liu 2020; Zhang, Vuong, and Ross 2020; Yang et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2022b; Kim and Oh 2022b; Dai et al.
2023; He, Zhao, and Liu 2023). While they have their merits, their interactive efficiency with real-world environments
falls significantly short of the demands of practical applications. This inefficiency becomes particularly pronounced
when data collection is expensive or risky, as is often the
case with real-world robotic tasks. Consequently, there is an
* Corresponding Author: Kai Lv
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21770

