The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Token-Level Contrastive Learning with Modality-Aware Prompting for Multimodal
Intent Recognition
Qianrui Zhou1,2 , Hua Xu1,2 * , Hao Li1,2 , Hanlei Zhang1,2 , Xiaohan Zhang1, 3 , Yifan Wang1, 3 , Kai Gao3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Beijing 100084, China
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Science and Technology, Shijiazhuang 050018, China
zgr22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhua@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multimodal intent recognition aims to leverage diverse modalities such as expressions, body movements and tone of speech
to comprehend user’s intent, constituting a critical task for
understanding human language and behavior in real-world
multimodal scenarios. Nevertheless, the majority of existing
methods ignore potential correlations among different modalities and own limitations in effectively learning semantic features from nonverbal modalities. In this paper, we introduce a
token-level contrastive learning method with modality-aware
prompting (TCL-MAP) to address the above challenges. To
establish an optimal multimodal semantic environment for
text modality, we develop a modality-aware prompting module (MAP), which effectively aligns and fuses features from
text, video and audio modalities with similarity-based modality alignment and cross-modality attention mechanism. Based
on the modality-aware prompt and ground truth labels, the
proposed token-level contrastive learning framework (TCL)
constructs augmented samples and employs NT-Xent loss on
the label token. Specifically, TCL capitalizes on the optimal
textual semantic insights derived from intent labels to guide
the learning processes of other modalities in return. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves remarkable
improvements compared to state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, ablation analyses demonstrate the superiority of the
modality-aware prompt over the handcrafted prompt, which
holds substantial significance for multimodal prompt learning.
The codes are released at https://github.com/thuiar/TCL-MAP.

Introduction
Intent recognition is a pivotal component in natural language
understanding(NLU), which is employed to classify intent
categories in goal-oriented scenarios based on text information. Prior studies have extensively researched intent recognition and validated the significance of textual modality (Zhang
et al. 2021a,b). Recently, multimodal intent recognition has
been devised to analyze human intents by incorporating both
natural language and other nonverbal information (e.g. video
and audio). Contrary to depending on single modality, leveraging multiple modalities can provide a substantial amount
of information, providing a distinct advantage in accurately
identifying more intricate intent categories. Pioneering works
* Hua Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17114

in this field (Zhang et al. 2022; Saha et al. 2020) gather
multimodal data from the real world to create intent recognition datasets, which affirms the crucial role of multimodal
information on intent recognition tasks.
To effectively leaverage the data from various modalities,
numerous methods have been proposed for multimodal language understanding. As the state-of-the-art methods for
multimodal intent recognition, (Tsai et al. 2019; Hazarika,
Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Rahman et al. 2020) utilize
Transformer-based techniques to integrate information from
different modalities into a unified feature. Another series of
works primarily focus on achieving significant representations by addressing the correlations among modalities. For
instance, (Dong et al. 2022) introduce a framework for crossmodality contrastive learning aimed at narrowing the gap
between modalities and enhancing multimodal representations. Moreover, the latest work (Yu et al. 2023) aims to
incorporate knowledge from large-scale pre-trained models
and has demonstrated remarkable progress.
However, existing approaches are adept at capturing basic semantics such as emotions and encounter limitations in
capturing the deep semantic information inherent in intents
using multimodal data, owing to deficiencies in managing potential correlations across distinct modalities and extracting
high-quality semantic features from nonverbal modalities.To
achieve a deeper understanding of human intents in the real
world, there are two main challenges. Firstly, given that intent recognition is primarily a text-centric task, it is crucial
to explore the association between nonverbal modalities and
text modality. Secondly, mining semantic information from
video and audio modality poses a significant difficulty due to
the complex nature of the intent concept.
In this paper, we propose a Token-Level Contrastive Learning with Modality-Aware Prompting (TCL-MAP) approach,
which generates prompts based on video and audio modalities to enhance the text representation and in return utilizes
the high-quality textual feature to guide other modalities
in learning semantic features. To tackle the first challenge,
we design a modality-aware prompting (MAP) module to
align different modalities based on their similarity and generate modality-aware prompt using a cross-modality attention
mechanism. The generated prompt combines video and audio
information with learnable parameters to establish a foundational semantic environment for text representation learning,

