The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FaceRSA: RSA-Aware Facial Identity Cryptography Framework
Zhongyi Zhang, Tianyi Wei* , Wenbo Zhou* ,
Hanqing Zhao, Weiming Zhang, Nenghai Yu
University of Science and Technology of China
{ericzhang@mail., bestwty@mail., welbeckz@, zhq2015@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

a special cryptographic system without affecting the use of
facial images for other computer vision tasks.
Some traditional anonymization methods simply use
pixel-level operations, such as downsampling, blurring, and
masking. These methods will greatly impair the quality
and usability of the image or could be easily reverted with
advances in deep learning techniques. Recently, some approaches (Maximov, Elezi, and Leal-Taixé 2020; Hukkelås,
Mester, and Lindseth 2019) have utilized generative networks to produce photo-realistic anonymized images, but
these methods pay no attention to recovering the original
images. Inspired by RSA (Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman
1978), a popular public-private key encryption method that
offers provable security and computational privacy protection through mathematical complexity, Gu et al. (Gu et al.
2020) introduced the concept of password and reverse password into face anonymization and deanonymization. However, their approach has several limitations such as lowquality synthesis results and incomplete RSA properties.
RiDDLE (Li et al. 2023) also proposes a face anonymization framework. However, their framework relies on the
same password for both anonymization and deanonymization thus posing a risk of password leakage. Additionally,
their method struggles to preserve identity-irrelevant information in the original image.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we introduce
a novel method, FaceRSA, which is the first facial identity
cryptography framework with full properties analogous to
RSA. It is important to note that our framework only provides RSA-aware properties in the domain of human faces
and does not offer any security guarantees based on mathematical complexity like traditional cryptographic systems.
The security of our system is based on ambiguity, i.e., an attacker could not tell whether an image has been anonymized,
rather than the security based on computational complexity like traditional cryptography. We also need to clarify
that the passwords we use for face anonymization and deanonymization are not RSA keys.
Different from directly using conditional GAN (Chen
et al. 2016) for anonymization at image level, we use the
powerful representation ability of the pre-trained StyleGAN (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) by inverting the real
image into the StyleGAN latent space through GAN inversion methods to realize face anonymization and de-

With the flourishing of the Internet, sharing one’s photos or
automated processing of faces using computer vision technology has become an everyday occurrence. While enjoying the
convenience, the concern for identity privacy is also emerging. Therefore, some efforts introduced the concept of “password” from traditional cryptography such as RSA into the
face anonymization and deanonymization task to protect the
facial identity without compromising the usability of the face
image. However, these methods either suffer from the poor
visual quality of the synthesis results or do not possess the
full cryptographic properties, resulting in compromised security. In this paper, we present the first facial identity cryptography framework with full properties analogous to RSA.
Our framework leverages the powerful generative capabilities of StyleGAN to achieve megapixel-level facial identity
anonymization and deanonymization. Thanks to the great semantic decoupling of StyleGAN’s latent space, the identity
encryption and decryption process are performed in latent
space by a well-designed password mapper in the manner of
editing latent code. Meanwhile, the password-related information is imperceptibly hidden in the edited latent code owing to the redundant nature of the latent space. To make our
cryptographic framework possesses all the properties analogous to RSA, we propose three types of loss functions: single
anonymization loss, sequential anonymization loss, and associated anonymization loss. Extensive experiments and ablation analyses demonstrate the superiority of our method in
terms of the quality of synthesis results, identity-irrelevant
attributes preservation, deanonymization accuracy, and completeness of properties analogous to RSA.

Introduction
In today’s world, privacy has become a crucial concern, especially with regard to facial identity information. However,
many computer vision tasks require uploading photos or
videos, which may compromise user privacy. For instance,
family cameras are used to monitor the behavior of infants
and young children, but an attacker shouldn’t gain access to
facial identity information. At the same time, trusted users,
such as family members, may require access to the original
images. This presents a challenge since we need to design
* Corresponding authors: Wenbo Zhou, Tianyi Wei
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7423

