The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fair Graph Learning Using Constraint-Aware Priority Adjustment and Graph
Masking in River Networks
Erhu He1 , Yiqun Xie2 , Alexander Sun3 , Jacob Zwart4 , Jie Yang5 , Zhenong Jin5 , Yang Wang1 ,
Hassan Karimi1 , Xiaowei Jia1
1

University of Pittsburgh
University of Maryland
3
University of Texas at Austin
4
U.S. Geological Survey
5
University of Minnesota
1
{erh108, yaw70, hkarimi, xiaowei}@pitt.edu, 2 xie@umd.edu, 3 alex.sun@beg.utexas.edu, 4 jzwart@usgs.gov,
5
{yang8884, jinzn}@umn.edu
2

Abstract

environmental engineering, have been developing physicsbased models to simulate water dynamics at all scales
(Markstrom 2012; Regan et al. 2018), but these models are
only approximations of reality due to incomplete or missing
knowledge of certain processes or excessive complexity in
modeling these processes (Gupta and Nearing 2014; Lall
2014). Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been
widely adopted as a data-driven solution to model stream
networks (Jia et al. 2021b; Moshe et al. 2020; Sun et al.
2021; Topp et al. 2023; Chen, Zwart, and Jia 2022; Jia et al.
2021a; Chen et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2023) as they can learn
to capture complex interactions amongst stream segments
(e.g., through mass advection and diffusion).

Accurate prediction of water quality and quantity is crucial
for sustainable development and human well-being. However, existing data-driven methods often suffer from spatial
biases in model performance due to heterogeneous data, limited observations, and noisy sensor data. To overcome these
challenges, we propose Fair-Graph, a novel graph-based recurrent neural network that leverages interrelated knowledge
from multiple rivers to predict water flow and temperature
within large-scale stream networks. Additionally, we introduce node-specific graph masks for information aggregation and adaptation to enhance prediction over heterogeneous
river segments. To reduce performance disparities across river
segments, we introduce a centralized coordination strategy
that adjusts training priorities for segments. We evaluate the
prediction of water temperature within the Delaware River
Basin, and the prediction of streamflow using simulated data
from U.S. National Water Model in the Houston River network. The results showcase improvements in predictive performance and highlight the proposed model’s ability to maintain spatial fairness over different river segments.

Despite promising results demonstrated by initial tests at
small scales, existing GNN methods are often spatially biased and limited in their accuracy when applied to modeling large-scale stream networks due to several reasons.
First, data are highly heterogeneous due to spatial variation
of stream characteristics (e.g., soil properties, channel geometry, and roughness), which are difficult to measure and
cannot be included in the features. Thus, the mapping from
input to the target variables can vary across different stream
segments. Moreover, the effect of water flows from upstream
to downstream segments can also be different. Second, water
temperature and streamflow observations are available for a
small subset of well-observed stream segments while other
segments have much less or no observations. Third, the data
can be noisy due to sensor-induced measurement errors and
limited spatial resolution of weather data. Due to these reasons, existing models often compromise the performance of
certain sites in exchange of better performance at other sites.
Such biases may unintentionally induce unfair distribution
of social resources (e.g., subsidies and assistance) and treatment with respect to environmental policies, especially for
low-income and remote regions where no gauging stations
have been built or fewer field studies have been conducted
to collect high-quality data. Thus, addressing this disparity
in model performance is essential, as it substantially affects
strategic decisions in water resource management and ecological policy-making, particularly in enhancing support for
regions with limited data.

Introduction
Freshwater plays a critical role at the intersection of global
economic, food, and energy services (Konar et al. 2011;
Hoekstra and Mekonnen 2012; Carr et al. 2013), but continues to suffer from increasing demands for water-based
ecosystem services and a shifting climate. The assessment
of water quality and water quantity in freshwater ecosystems
is critical for the future sustainability of the planet and human well-being. Accurate predictions of seasonal changes,
temperature trends, and flow variations can help support decision and policy making on water management (e.g., reservoir operations), maintain the desired habitat for aquatic life,
and detect disasters (e.g., floods and droughts) at an early
stage. This work is focused on predicting water temperature
and streamflow in stream networks.
Given the importance of this problem, researchers from
multiple domains, including hydrology, meteorology, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22087

