The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TEILP: Time Prediction over Knowledge Graphs via Logical Reasoning
Siheng Xiong1 , Yuan Yang1 , Ali Payani2 , James C Kerce1 , Faramarz Fekri1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 225 North Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia 30332 USA
2
Cisco Systems Inc, 300 East Tasman Dr, San Jose, California 95134 USA
{sxiong45, yyang754}@gatech.edu, apayani@cisco.com,
clayton.kerce@gtri.gatech.edu, faramarz.fekri@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract

Dumančić, and Niepert 2018), DE-SimplE (Goel et al. 2020)
and TNT-ComplEx (Lacroix, Obozinski, and Usunier 2020).
The underlying principle is to calculate the score of each
timestamp given the triple of subject, object and relation.
To predict intervals, TimePlex (Jain et al. 2020) introduces
a greedy coalescing strategy, which greedily extends the
timestamp with the highest score into an interval. Although
these methods give time predictions, they can neither handle unseen timestamps nor utilize the intrinsic connections
between timestamps such as temporal order and distance.
Alternatively, inductive logical reasoning methods, e.g.,
StreamLearner (Omran, Wang, and Wang 2019), TLogic
(Liu et al. 2022), and TILP (Xiong et al. 2023), have desirable features when applied to TKGs, as they provide interpretable and robust inference results, and can easily incorporate external background knowledge and domain-specific
rules into the reasoning. However, these qualitative predicates based logical rules alone are not enough for time prediction. Thus, several methods built on the temporal point
process, e.g., Know-Evolve (Trivedi et al. 2017), GHNN
(Han et al. 2020), TLPP (Li et al. 2020) and TELLER (Li
et al. 2021), have been introduced to solve the forecasting
task, i.e., time prediction from previous events. Compared
with the general setting, this task is restricted since all history events are required, and its target is to predict the time
gap between the last known event and the next one.
In this paper, we propose TEILP which converts TKGs
into a temporal event knowledge graph (TEKG) and enables
a differentiable random walk approach to solve the time prediction problem. In TEILP, for each learned rule, a conditional probability density function is associated with the
query interval. This density function is then used in a Gaussian mixture model to predict the time. We achieve better
performance than embedding methods while providing an
additional benefit of human-readable logical explanations.
More specifically, our main contributions are:
• We propose TEILP, a temporal logical reasoning framework for time prediction. It is the first inductive approach
that directly learns temporal logical rules and associated
conditional probability density functions for the time prediction.
• We introduce a novel differentiable temporal random
walk approach by converting TKGs into TEKG where
multi-type nodes denote either events or timestamps, and

Conventional embedding-based models approach event time
prediction in temporal knowledge graphs (TKGs) as a ranking problem. However, they often fall short in capturing essential temporal relationships such as order and distance. In
this paper, we propose TEILP, a logical reasoning framework
that naturaly integrates such temporal elements into knowledge graph predictions. We first convert TKGs into a temporal event knowledge graph (TEKG) which has a more explicit representation of time in term of nodes of the graph.
The TEKG equips us to develop a differentiable random walk
approach to time prediction. Finally, we introduce conditional
probability density functions, associated with the logical rules
involving the query interval, using which we arrive at the time
prediction. We compare TEILP with state-of-the-art methods
on five benchmark datasets. We show that our model achieves
a significant improvement over baselines while providing interpretable explanations. In particular, we consider several
scenarios where training samples are limited, event types are
imbalanced, and forecasting the time of future events based
on only past events is desired. In all these cases, TEILP outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of robustness.

Introduction
Temporal knowledge graphs (TKGs) are an important representation when dealing with dynamic and time-dependent
relationship between entities. They have various applications such as healthcare and medical research, social event
analysis, and recommendation systems. TKGs contain the
quadruple (es , P, eo , t) describing the relation P between
subject entity es and object entity eo at time t. Due to
their large scales, real-world TKGs usually suffer from incompleteness. Thus, link prediction and time prediction,
i.e., inferring missing entity and time with existing facts,
are the common reasoning tasks for TKGs, proposed in either formal structured query or natural language (Saxena,
Chakrabarti, and Talukdar 2021) (Chen, Liao, and Zhao
2023). Compared with link prediction, time prediction is
even more challenging as a regression task (Cai et al. 2022).
Existing embedding-based methods consider time prediction as a ranking problem, e.g., HyTE (Dasgupta, Ray, and
Talukdar 2018), Time-Aware Embedding (Garcı́a-Durán,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16112

