The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Compositional Generalization for Multi-Label Text Classification: A
Data-Augmentation Approach
Yuyang Chai1, * , Zhuang Li2, * , Jiahui Liu1 , Lei Chen1 , Fei Li1 , Donghong Ji1 , Chong Teng1,†
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University
{yychai, liujiahui, chhenl, lifei csnlp, dhji, tengchong}@whu.edu.cn, zhuang.li1@monash.edu
Abstract

Despite significant advancements in multi-label text classification, the ability of existing models to generalize to novel
and seldom-encountered complex concepts, which are compositions of elementary ones, remains underexplored. This
research addresses this gap. By creating unique data splits
across three benchmarks, we assess the compositional generalization ability of existing multi-label text classification
models. Our results show that these models often fail to generalize to compositional concepts encountered infrequently
during training, leading to inferior performance on tests with
these new combinations. To address this, we introduce a data
augmentation method that leverages two innovative text generation models designed to enhance the classification models’
capacity for compositional generalization. Our experiments
show that this data augmentation approach significantly improves the compositional generalization capabilities of classification models on our benchmarks, with both generation
models surpassing other text generation baselines. Our codes
available at https://github.com/yychai74/LD-VAE.

Figure 1: Illustration of the CG challenge in MLTC and an
overview of our proposed data augmentation solution.
complex emotion in a tweet such as ‘sometimes I am sad,
then remember Margaret is dead, and then I rejoice’. This
tweet conveys a nuanced composite of two emotions occurring simultaneously. In contrast to humans, our initial research indicates that current MLTC models struggle to identify these nuanced compositions if they infrequently occur
in the training set. The T5-based (Raffel et al. 2020) MLTC
model (Chai et al. 2022), for example, only achieved less
than 2% accuracy on the SemEval test set (Mohammad et al.
2018) for previously unseen emotional compositions, despite ample training data for each elementary emotion. Conversely, when the training data contains abundant emotional
compositions as those found in the test set, its accuracy exceeded 28%. This discrepancy underscores the urgent need
for MLTC models capable of generalizing to novel compositions, making them more effective in a world that continuously presents new composite knowledge.
This study offers the first in-depth exploration of the
CG challenges that impact MLTC. We utilize three MLTC
benchmarks that tackle three tasks: emotion classification,
subject identification of abstracts, and genre classification
of movie reviews. Traditional MLTC benchmarks typically
employ random splits, where all the compositions of individual labels are prevalent across both training and test sets.
This methodology hinders a rigorous evaluation of the models’ capacity to generalize compositionally. Inspired by the

Introduction
Multi-label text classification (MLTC) involves identifying the labels associated with the input text. This task has
broad applications in natural language processing (NLP),
including sentiment analysis in tweets (Mohammad et al.
2018), subject identification in interdisciplinary academic
articles (Yang et al. 2018), and movie genre classification based on movie reviews (Maiya 2019). Although there
has been significant progress in improving classifier performance across various MLTC benchmarks, whether existing
MLTC models can generalize compositionally has received
limited attention in prior MLTC studies.
Compositional generalization (CG) is a fundamental ability inherent to human intelligence, enabling the recognition
of novel and infrequently occurring high-level concepts that
are compositions of more atomic elements (Chomsky 2014).
For example, once a person learns to understand the emotions of joy and sadness in simple phrases like ‘I am sad’
and ‘I rejoice’, respectively, he can effortlessly recognize a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17727

