The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressive Poisoned Data Isolation for Training-Time Backdoor Defense
Yiming Chen, Haiwei Wu, and Jiantao Zhou

†

State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
{yc17486, yc07912, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) are susceptible to backdoor attacks where malicious attackers manipulate the model’s predictions via data poisoning. It is hence imperative to develop
a strategy for training a clean model using a potentially poisoned dataset. Previous training-time defense mechanisms
typically employ an one-time isolation process, often leading
to suboptimal isolation outcomes. In this study, we present
a novel and efficacious defense method, termed Progressive
Isolation of Poisoned Data (PIPD), that progressively isolates
poisoned data to enhance the isolation accuracy and mitigate the risk of benign samples being misclassified as poisoned ones. Once the poisoned portion of the dataset has been
identified, we introduce a selective training process to train
a clean model. Through the implementation of these techniques, we ensure that the trained model manifests a significantly diminished attack success rate against the poisoned
data. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets
and DNN models, assessed against nine state-of-the-art backdoor attacks, demonstrate the superior performance of our
PIPD method for backdoor defense. For instance, our PIPD
achieves an average True Positive Rate (TPR) of 99.95% and
an average False Positive Rate (FPR) of 0.06% for diverse
attacks over CIFAR-10 dataset, markedly surpassing the performance of state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/RorschachChen/PIPD.git.

Figure 1: Isolation quality comparison of the proposed PIPD
with the state-of-the-art methods on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky,
Hinton et al. 2009).

the victim models during training. This goal can be accomplished by introducing contamination into the data used for
training. The existing backdoor attacks can be roughly divided into two categories (Cheng et al. 2023), namely patching and transforming. Specifically, in patching attacks, a
trigger is injected to a benign sample by merging their pixel
values with a mask. In contrast, transforming attacks inject
the trigger into the input using a transformation function in
the form of an algorithm or a network.
As backdoor attacks pose significant threats to DNNs,
many strategies and techniques have been proposed to effectively defend against these attacks. This paper focuses on the
training-time defense that involves isolating poisoned samples, thereby enabling the training of a clean model on a poisoned dataset. There are several representative works in this
topic including (Li et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022; Gao et al. 2023). Specifically, (Li et al. 2021) leveraged the training loss to isolate poisoned samples then apply
an unlearning process to train a clean model on poisoned
dataset. (Huang et al. 2022) maintained two dynamically updated poisoned and benign data pool based on sample losses
then used semi-supervised learning to fine-tune the model on
these pools. Similarly, (Gao et al. 2023) applied loss-guided
split and meta-learning-inspired split to dynamically update

Introduction
The utilization of diverse datasets in training DNNs enhances their adaptability and performance across various
tasks and domains. However, the demand for multiple
sources of data also introduces a vulnerability to backdoor
attacks (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017). Malicious attackers can exploit this situation by injecting hidden backdoors into the training data, thereby manipulating the predictions of the model. The potential harm of backdoor attacks
lies in their ability to trigger malicious behaviors in the deployed model once activated. Such attacks can lead to the
disruption of system operations, and even system crashes.
Backdoor attack is a type of adversary (Weng, Lee, and
Wu 2020) that implants malicious backdoor behaviors into
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

11425

