The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dialogues Are Not Just Text:
Modeling Cognition for Dialogue Coherence Evaluation
Xue Li1 * , Jia Su2 , Yang Yang1† , Zipeng Gao3 , Xinyu Duan2 , Yi Guan1
1

Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Huawei Cloud
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
20s103245@stu.hit.edu.cn, {sujia3,duanxinyu}@huawei.com, yangyang hit wi@163.com,
gaozp619@mail.ustc.edu.cn, guanyi@hit.edu.cn,
Abstract

versity.(Zhang et al. 2021; Deriu et al. 2021). 2) To address
the above issue, recent works propose learnable evaluation
metrics. They use the large-scale pre-trained language models to consider the semantic information of the dialogue (Sai
et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2022). 3) Besides, a few methods
take some additional information into account when modeling the dialogue, such as the dialogue topic graph (Huang
et al. 2020). However, there still exists a gap between these
metrics and human evaluation (Zhao et al. 2022).
This is because dialogue is a cognitive activity that requires multiple cognitive abilities (Van Dijk 1984; Jang et al.
2013; Branigan et al. 2007), such as adherence to the human
commonsense, seamless integration of context, temporal coherence, and non-confusing participant roles. Dialogue evaluation should not solely focus on the text itself but should
also consider these cognitive abilities. However, none of the
existing methods consider these cognitive abilities. As a result, these metrics fail to capture the corresponding cognitive errors in the generated responses of dialogue systems,
including commonsense error, core-semantic error, temporal error, and role error.
Commonsense error: The generated response does not
conform to commonsense, as shown in Figure 1 (a). Coresemantic error: The generated response deviates from the
core semantic of the utterance due to neglecting crucial entities or misinterpreting fine-grained intent. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the second participant emphasized the word ’else’
but the response ignored it leading to a wrong understanding of intent. Temporal error: The generated response ignores the previous dialogue content and does not continue
the dialogue according to the temporal order. As shown in
Figure 1 (c), the response ignores the second participant’s
utterance. Role Error: The generated response confuses its
current role, responding from the perspective of another role.
As shown in Figure 1 (d), the response is generated from
the perspective of the second participant rather than the first
participant. Usually, an unreasonable response may exhibit
multiple of the four error types simultaneously, for example,
temporal error is accompanied by role error.
To effectively capture four types of cognitive errors, we
define four cognitive abilities that a qualified dialogue evaluation model should possess: commonsense cognition, coresemantic cognition, temporal cognition, and role cognition.

The generation of logically coherent dialogues by humans
relies on underlying cognitive abilities. Based on this, we
redefine the dialogue coherence evaluation process, combining cognitive judgment with the basic text to achieve a
more human-like evaluation. We propose a novel dialogue
evaluation framework based on Dialogue Cognition Graph
(DCGEval) to implement the fusion by in-depth interaction
between cognition modeling and text modeling. The proposed Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) based graph
structure called DCG aims to uniformly model four dialogue
cognitive abilities. Specifically, core-semantic cognition is
modeled by converting the utterance into an AMR graph,
which can extract essential semantic information without redundancy. The temporal and role cognition are modeled by
establishing logical relationships among the different AMR
graphs. Finally, the commonsense knowledge from ConceptNet is fused to express commonsense cognition. Experiments
demonstrate the necessity of modeling human cognition for
dialogue evaluation, and our DCGEval presents stronger correlations with human judgments compared to other state-ofthe-art evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Dialogue coherence evaluation is essential for research on
open dialogue systems, which refers to the coherence and
consistency of the content and structure of the dialogue (See
et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2021). Dialogues exhibit higher coherence when the responses are fluent in the language, clear in
meaning, context-sensitive, and logically tight. Human evaluation is widely used in modern dialogue systems, but it is
expensive and time-consuming (Huang et al. 2020). When
humans understand dialogues, cognition plays a crucial role
(Sperber and Wilson 1986). The auto metrics used for automatic dialogue evaluation can be mainly categorized into
three types. 1) Traditional evaluation metrics calculate lexical word-overlap between generated responses and reference responses, such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) and
ROUGE (Lin 2004). Such approaches overlook semantic information, leading to challenges in addressing response di* This work was done during an internship at Huawei Cloud
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18573

