The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QuerySum: A Multi-Document Query-Focused Summarization Dataset
Augmented with Similar Query Clusters
Yushan Liu1 , Zili Wang2 * , Ruifeng Yuan3
1

Fudan University
INF Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yushanliu21@m.fudan.edu.cn, ziliwang.do@gmail.com, ruifeng.yuan@connect.polyu.hk
2

Abstract

scale dataset is always a crucial problem for query-aware
summarization.
Query-aware summarization has crucial application in
augmenting information retrieval (IR) system. For example,
suppose a user has a question, “why X is so famous”, then
an effective IR system can find a set of documents related
to A across the web and then a query-aware summarization
model can generate a concise summary from these documents as the respond to the question. Hence, under the setting for general web IR applications, an ideal query-aware
summarization dataset would have the following two features. (1) It is a multi-document summarization dataset since
the query-related information typically spreads across multiple documents. (2) The query refers to a certain aspect of
information rather than a specific entity. Otherwise, it becomes simple question-answering. However, most existing
QFS datasets do not comply with the above two requirements or are inadequate in scale. For example, Debatepedia (Nema et al. 2017a) and PubMedQA (Jin et al. 2019)
are single-document summarization datasets in specific domains and Wikihow (Koupaee and Wang 2018) contains
only how questions. AQUAMUSE is proposed in (Kulkarni et al. 2020) to extract QA pairs with long answers from
a question-answering dataset for multi-document QFS, but
most of its queries are factoid-like questions. Although DUC
2005-2007 (Dang 2006) dataset meets the two requirements,
it contains only hundreds of samples and is not large enough
to train a sequence-to-sequence neural model.
To alleviate the QFS dataset shortage problem, and push
forward the research development in this field, we build
a new large-scale query-focused multi-document summarization dataset called QuerySum. The dataset contains in
total 27,041 data samples covering diverse topics. Each
data sample includes a human-written query collected from
Answers.com1 and Google, up to 10 relevant Wikipedia
pages as the source documents and a summary retrieved by
Google. The data samples are manually checked to guarantee their quality. A large proportion of the queries in our
dataset are non-factual questions such as What-, How- and
Why- questions that require summarization. Unlike a factual question which targets at a specific entity answer, nonfactual questions bring challenges in understanding the in-

Query-focused summarization (QFS) aims to summarize the
source document(s) with regard to a specific aspect of information given in a query. It plays an important role in presenting users with a concise answer summary from a set of
query-relevant documents retrieved by the information retrieval system. Nonetheless, the QFS research has long been
hampered by the lack of adequate datasets in terms of both
quality and quantity. In this paper, we introduce a large-scale
multi-document query-focused summarization dataset, called
QuerySum, which contains 27,041 data samples covering
diverse topics and its quality is guaranteed through human
verification. Unlike some previous QFS datasets constructed
directly from the question answering datasets, 74% queries
in our dataset are the challenging non-factoid What-, Why, and How- questions. More importantly, we also provide a
set of similar queries together with the corresponding summaries pairs for each query as the retrieved context, presenting a new feature of QuerySum. We aim to encourage research efforts in query intention understanding in the context of QFS. Leveraging QuerySum’s depth, we propose a
model for query-aware multi-document summarization and
set a new QFS benchmark.

Introduction
Text summarization as the process of generating a shorter
version of the source document(s) while preserving important context information is one of the most challenging
NLP tasks. Sequence-to-sequence neural models have recently obtained significant performance improvements on
text summarization for news articles. The existence of largescale datasets is the key to the success of these models. In
this work, we focus on an important variant of text summarization called query-aware summarization. Text documents
are multi-faceted and users may only prefer a certain aspect
of information. In this case, query-aware summarization requires the model to generate a summary focusing on part of
source documents based on a given query (usually a question). This makes it impossible to get a natural reference
summary directly from the title or headlines like the news
summarization. Therefore, obtaining a high-quality larger* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

18725

https://www.answers.com/

