The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PTMQ: Post-training Multi-Bit Quantization of Neural Networks
Ke Xu1,2 , Zhongcheng Li2 , Shanshan Wang1 * , Xingyi Zhang1,3 *
1

Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
{xuke,wang.shanshan}@ahu.edu.cn lizhongcheng@stu.ahu.edu.cn xyzhanghust@gmail.com

Abstract

compression and acceleration for these very different scenarios with different platforms. It can achieve different resource
budgets by adjusting the bit-width of the quantized model
during inference without further training. Multi-bit quantization improves the scalability of models and their adaptability to different computational resources.
Recent works (Shkolnik et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2022) for multi-bit quantization rely on QuantizationAware Training (QAT) methods (Zhou et al. 2016; Esser
et al. 2020; Bhalgat et al. 2020) to achieve robust adaptive
bit-width optimization, and the optimization process is timeconsuming. For instance, the optimization of ResNet50 in
MultiQuant (Xu et al. 2022) requires 1296 GPU hours using NVIDIA 2080Ti. Furthermore, in order to achieve stable
quantized training, norm layers are typically not folded with
the previous layer. When switching the bit-width, statistical
parameters of the norm layers need to be recalculated, which
affects the real-time response of multi-bit quantization.
Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) only requires a small
number of unlabeled calibration samples to quantize the
pre-trained models without retraining, which is suitable for
rapid deployment. Currently, there are two mainstream approaches: searching for quantization scale factors (Migacz
2017; Banner, Nahshan, and Soudry 2019; Nahshan et al.
2019) and optimizing rounding values (Nagel et al. 2020;
Hubara et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). These
metrics aim to determine the ideal range by minimizing
the discrepancy between FP32 and quantized feature maps
such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) distance (Choukroun,
Kravchik, and Kisilev 2019) and cosine distance (Wu et al.
2020). Searching only scaling factors is insufficient for
achieving robust multi-bit quantization, and full-parameters
fine-tuning can lead to overfitting with limited data. Fortunately, rounding value optimization methods offer possibilities for post-training multi-bit quantization. Additionally,
folding norm layers with previous layers helps mitigate the
influence of statistical parameters (Li et al. 2021b). However, how to optimize rounding values and scaling factors
using calibration samples to achieve high precision in multibit quantization has become a new technical challenge.
To address the above-mentioned issues, we design a novel
framework for post-training multi-bit quantization, called
PTMQ. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first to collaborate the multi-bit-width quantization into the PTQ frame-

The ability of model quantization with arbitrary bit-width
to dynamically meet diverse bit-width requirements during runtime has attracted significant attention. Recent research has focused on optimizing large-scale training methods to achieve robust bit-width adaptation, which is a timeconsuming process requiring hundreds of GPU hours. Furthermore, converting bit-widths requires recalculating statistical parameters of the norm layers, thereby impeding realtime switching of the bit-width. To overcome these challenges, we propose an efficient Post-Training Multi-bit Quantization (PTMQ) scheme that requires only a small amount
of calibration data to perform block-wise reconstruction of
multi-bit quantization errors. It eliminates the influence of
statistical parameters by fusing norm layers, and supports
real-time switching bit-widths in uniform quantization and
mixed-precision quantization. To improve quantization accuracy and robustness, we propose a Multi-bit Feature Mixer
technique (MFM) for fusing features of different bit-widths
to enhance robustness across varying bit-widths. Moreover,
we introduced the Group-wise Distillation Loss (GD-Loss)
to enhance the correlation between different bit-width groups
and further improve the overall performance of PTMQ. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PTMQ achieves comparable performance to existing state-of-the-art post-training
quantization methods, while optimizing it speeds up by 100×
compared to recent multi-bit quantization works. Code can be
available at https://github.com/xuke225/PTMQ.

Introduction
Model quantization reduces computation and storage by
converting weights and activation values into lower precision fixed-point values, thereby enabling the deployment
of deep neural networks on resource-constrained hardware
platforms. However, most quantization methods (Zhang
et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2018; Esser et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021b; Nagel et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023)
are only able to achieve a predetermined bit-width for
quantization, and modifying the bit-width necessitates reoptimization. Multi-bit quantization (Jin, Yang, and Liao
2020; Shkolnik et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022)
provide a significant opportunity for more powerful model
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16193

