The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Evaluation Measures for Evaluating Social Biases in Masked Language
Models
Yang Liu
Tianjin University
lauyon@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Step 1: Get PLL score
Stereotype: She is a nurse. ①
Anti-stereotype: He is a nurse. ②

Many evaluation measures are used to evaluate social biases in masked language models (MLMs). However, we find
that these previously proposed evaluation measures are lacking robustness in scenarios with limited datasets. This is because these measures are obtained by comparing the pseudolog-likelihood (PLL) scores of the stereotypical and antistereotypical samples using an indicator function. The disadvantage is the limited mining of the PLL score sets without capturing its distributional information. In this paper, we
represent a PLL score set as a Gaussian distribution and use
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence and Jensen–Shannon (JS)
divergence to construct evaluation measures for the distributions of stereotypical and anti-stereotypical PLL scores. Experimental results on the publicly available datasets StereoSet
(SS) and CrowS-Pairs (CP) show that our proposed measures
are significantly more robust and interpretable than those proposed previously.

MLMs (e.g. BERT)
PLL score for sentence ①

PLL score for sentence ②

collecting results for each sample
Step 2: Get the bias score
Stereotype score set: {0.6, 0.7, 0.3, 0.2, 0.6}
Anti-stereotype score set: {0.3, 0.5, 0.5, 0.7, 0.4}
The bias score is 60!

Introduction
The performance of natural language processing (NLP)
tasks has been developed in recent years by pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Peters et al. 2018; Howard and Ruder
2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2019;
Radford et al. 2019). Among these advancements, the capability of masked language models (MLMs) to generate
accurate text representations is particularly exciting (Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020). However, studies have
demonstrated that MLMs can acquire concerning social biases from the data they are trained on (May, Knight, and
Vogler 2010; Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan 2017; Zhao et al. 2018). The social biases learned
by MLMs could potentially harm the target groups.
The evaluation of social biases in MLMs can help researchers design less biased models to minimize harm to
the target groups. The process of calculating the bias score
for the prior measures is shown in Figure 1. In each sentence pair, one exhibits stereotypical bias for a specific
bias type (e.g., gender), while the other demonstrates antistereotypical bias. To assess the expressive preference of the
MLM, two sentences are inputted into the model, and their
pseudo-log-likelihood (PLL; Wang and Cho 2019; Salazar

Figure 1: Processes for evaluating social biases in MLMs.

et al. 2020; Nadeem, Bethke, and Reddy 2021; Nangia et al.
2020; Kaneko and Bollegala 2022) is utilized as a score
function. Although PLL scores are implemented in a variety of ways (to be presented in Baseline Section), existing
evaluation measures typically use the percentage of stereotypical sentences preferred by the MLM relative to the antistereotypical sentences as the corresponding bias evaluation measure (i.e., the indicator function-based approach described in Eq. 2).
However, the prior measures have several limitations that
need to be addressed to ensure a robust evaluation. Firstly, it
fails to account for the difference between stereotypical and
anti-stereotypical PLL scores. For instance, if the stereotypical PLL score outweighs the anti-stereotypical PLL score,
there may be a significant difference, whereas a smaller difference might exist when the situation is reversed. This concern will be elucidated with concrete examples and experiments in the PLL Score Analysis Section. Consequently, the
current measure runs the risk of disregarding certain samples

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18707

