The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

R3CD: Scene Graph to Image Generation with Relation-Aware Compositional
Contrastive Control Diffusion
Jinxiu Liu, Qi Liu*
School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology
jinxiuliu0628@foxmail.com, drliuqi@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

in graphs and object-relations in images. To address that,
some works introduced an additional layout prediction module to initialize the spatial arrangements of objects(Ashual
and Wolf 2019; Herzig et al. 2020; Johnson, Gupta, and FeiFei 2018; Yang et al. 2022), while others encoded the entire
scene graph via graph convolution network (GCN) to control the diffusion model more precisely (Yang et al. 2022).
However, these methods are limited to generating abstract
relations (excluding positional information) in scene graphs,
such as eating, chasing shaking, etc., as demonstrated in
Fig. 1. Although semantic-aware attention maps were introduced to guide the generation process, and yet still cannot
perceive the abstract relations. This is because they focus
more on learning the entity shapes and layouts to match the
pixels, and yet it is hard to represent the abstract relations
with pixels, especially for those interaction features between
pixel regions of entities. Another problem is the compliance
between the generated images and original scene graphs,
which is due to the existing approaches using image-like
representations of scene graphs to create coarse sketches.
To that end, a novel Relation-aware Compositional Contrastive Control Diffusion framework, named R3CD, is proposed, as shown in Fig. 3, which consists of twofolds: (1)
a SGFormer (Scene Graph transFormer) to refine the entity
and relation embeddings is initialized by a T5 model (Raffel et al. 2020), for capturing both local and global information; (2) a relation-aware compositional contrastive control framework with joint contrastive loss, which utilizes the
attention maps and the denoising steps as contrastive factors to guide the image generation process. The proposed
R3CD enables to facilitate the alignment between generated
images and original graphs based on various specifications.
We have evaluated the proposal on Visual Genome (Krishna
et al. 2017) and COCO-Stuff (Caesar, Uijlings, and Ferrari
2018) datasets, where R3CD is superior to other competitors
both in quantitative metrics (IS (Heusel et al. 2017), e.g.,
FID (Salimans et al. 2016)), and qualitative visualization results. We also conduct extensive ablation studies to verify
the effectiveness of each module. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows :

Image generation tasks have achieved remarkable performance using large-scale diffusion models. However, these
models are limited to capturing the abstract relations (viz.,
interactions excluding positional relations) among multiple
entities of complex scene graphs. Two main problems exist:
1) fail to depict more concise and accurate interactions via
abstract relations; 2) fail to generate complete entities. To address that, we propose a novel Relation-aware Compositional
Contrastive Control Diffusion method, dubbed as R3CD, that
leverages large-scale diffusion models to learn abstract interactions from scene graphs. Herein, a scene graph transformer
based on node and edge encoding is first designed to perceive
both local and global information from input scene graphs,
whose embeddings are initialized by a T5 model. Then a
joint contrastive loss based on attention maps and denoising
steps is developed to control the diffusion model to understand and further generate images, whose spatial structures
and interaction features are consistent with a priori relation.
Extensive experiments are conducted on two datasets: Visual
Genome and COCO-Stuff, and demonstrate that the proposal
outperforms existing models both in quantitative and qualitative metrics to generate more realistic and diverse images
according to different scene graph specifications.

Introduction
Scene Graph to Image Generation (SG2IM) (Johnson,
Gupta, and Fei-Fei 2018) is a challenging task that aims to
generate realistic and diverse images from graph-structured
inputs. This is because most existing methods align nodes
and connections in graphs with objects and their relations
in images via image-like representations of scene graphs,
which causes suboptimal alignment due to the manually
crafted scene layouts. Nevertheless, scene graphs are rich in
describing entities and their interactions with one another
(Johnson et al. 2015)(Krishna et al. 2017). Therefore, to
study image generation from scene graphs becomes necessary for users to specify through various types of specifications, e.g., labels, captions, and so on (Johnson, Gupta, and
Fei-Fei 2018).
As mentioned above, one challenge for SG2IM is because of suboptimal alignment between nodes-connections

• We propose a novel SGFormer that encodes both nodes
and edges of input scene graphs to capture both local and
global information. Our ablation studies show that our
model outperforms existing methods.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3657

