The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Devignet: High-Resolution Vignetting Removal via a Dual Aggregated Fusion
Transformer with Adaptive Channel Expansion
Shenghong Luo1 * , Xuhang Chen123 * , Weiwen Chen12 , Zinuo Li12 ,
Shuqiang Wang2† , Chi-Man Pun1†
2

1
University of Macau
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huizhou University

Abstract
Vignetting commonly occurs as a degradation in images resulting from factors such as lens design, improper lens hood
usage, and limitations in camera sensors. This degradation affects image details, color accuracy, and presents challenges
in computational photography. Existing vignetting removal
algorithms predominantly rely on ideal physics assumptions
and hand-crafted parameters, resulting in the ineffective removal of irregular vignetting and suboptimal results. Moreover, the substantial lack of real-world vignetting datasets
hinders the objective and comprehensive evaluation of vignetting removal. To address these challenges, we present
VigSet, a pioneering dataset for vignetting removal. VigSet
includes 983 pairs of both vignetting and vignetting-free
high-resolution (over 4k) real-world images under various
conditions. In addition, We introduce DeVigNet, a novel
frequency-aware Transformer architecture designed for vignetting removal. Through the Laplacian Pyramid decomposition, we propose the Dual Aggregated Fusion Transformer to handle global features and remove vignetting in
the low-frequency domain. Additionally, we propose the
Adaptive Channel Expansion Module to enhance details in
the high-frequency domain. The experiments demonstrate
that the proposed model outperforms existing state-of-theart methods. The code, models, and dataset are available at
https://github.com/CXH-Research/DeVigNet.

(a) Input

(b) RIVC

(c) SIVC

(d) ELGAN

(e) Ours

(f) Target

Figure 1: The visual results display the effects of different
methods on the input (a) with vignetting, including the traditional methods (b) and (c), the LLIE model (d), and DevigNet (e). Our model effectively removes vignetting.

effect and restore a more uniform brightness across the image. Therefore, these two tasks serve distinct purposes and
aim to enhance different aspects of image quality.
There are mathematical and prior-based methods available for vignetting removal (Zheng et al. 2008, 2013; LopezFuentes, Oliver, and Massanet 2015). Nevertheless, these approaches have limitations. These approaches ideally assume
that the optical center is located at the center of the image,
which may not be valid in real-world scenarios. Moreover,
these methods can demonstrate bias under certain conditions
and frequently necessitate extensive parameter adjustments
to achieve optimal performance. In addition, these parameters are highly sensitive to high-resolution images, often
leading to inferior outcomes. Another significant challenge
arises from the absence of ground truth in the datasets used
for evaluation, which contributes to subjective assessments
of the experimental results.
To tackle the issue of vignetting, we introduce a dataset
named VigSet. The dataset comprises 983 pairs of images
captured under various environmental and lighting condi-

Introduction
Vignetting is a common optical degradation that results in a
gradual decrease in brightness toward the edges of an image.
It occurs due to multiple factors such as lens characteristics,
filter presence, aperture settings, focal length settings, etc.
Some may confuse the difference between Low-Light Image Enhancement (LLIE) and vignetting removal. LLIE focuses on enhancing the overall brightness of images captured in low-light conditions. Its goal is to improve visibility, reduce noise, and enhance contrast in dark regions. On
the other hand, vignetting removal specifically addresses the
uneven light projection effects in specific regions of an image, typically towards the edges. Its purpose is to correct this
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4000

