The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Domain-Hallucinated Updating for Multi-Domain Face Anti-spoofing
Chengyang Hu1 * † , Ke-Yue Zhang2† , Taiping Yao2 , Shice Liu2 ,
Shouhong Ding2‡ , Xin Tan3 , Lizhuang Ma1,3,4‡
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
East China Normal University
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
huchengyang@sjtu.edu.cn, {zkyezhang, taipingyao, shiceliu, ericshding}@tencent.com,
xtan@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Multi-Domain Face Anti-Spoofing (MD-FAS) is a practical
setting that aims to update models on new domains using
only novel data while ensuring that the knowledge acquired
from previous domains is not forgotten. Prior methods utilize the responses from models to represent the previous domain knowledge or map the different domains into separated
feature spaces to prevent forgetting. However, due to domain
gaps, the responses of new data are not as accurate as those
of previous data. Also, without the supervision of previous
data, separated feature spaces might be destroyed by new domains while updating, leading to catastrophic forgetting. Inspired by the challenges posed by the lack of previous data,
we solve this issue from a new standpoint that generates hallucinated previous data for updating FAS model. To this end,
we propose a novel Domain-Hallucinated Updating (DHU)
framework to facilitate the hallucination of data. Specifically,
Domain Information Explorer learns representative domain
information of the previous domains. Then, Domain Information Hallucination module transfers the new domain data to
pseudo-previous domain ones. Moreover, Hallucinated Features Joint Learning module is proposed to asymmetrically
align the new and pseudo-previous data for real samples via
dual levels to learn more generalized features, promoting the
results on all domains. Our experimental results and visualizations demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
state-of-the-art competitors in terms of effectiveness.

Figure 1: (a) Response regularization-based methods utilize
responses of new data on the prior model. (b) Some methods
map varied domains’ features into different sub-space. (c)
Our method hallucinates the previous domain feature and
aligns the feature from pseudo-previous and new domain.

researchers have incorporated domain generalization (DG)
techniques into FAS to learn features that are applicable
across different domains. However, DG FAS (Jia et al. 2020;
Zhou et al. 2022b, 2023; Liu et al. 2021a) approaches only
utilize the seen data during the training stage, which means
they do not effectively utilize the information from novel
data. As a result, they often exhibit unsatisfactory performance when applied to new domains. Therefore, in order to
improve the performance of FAS on novel domains in realworld scenarios, it is necessary to update the models using
collected novel data. The common approach is to retrain the
model using both old and new data, such as domain adaptation (DA) methods (Jia et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2022a). However, concerns about data privacy policies,
particularly for Personally Identifiable Information (PII) like
facial images, may prevent access to data from the previous
domain during model updating, which might fail DA methods. On the other hand, solely updating models with new
data may result in overfitting, causing the model to forget the
knowledge acquired from the previous data. Consequently,
this might lead to poor generalization performance, which
is important for practical FAS applications. Therefore, the
preservation of FAS knowledge while updating solely with
new data poses significant challenges in model updating,
commonly called the plasticity-stability dilemma. This as-

Introduction
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) is becoming increasingly important in preventing presentation attacks (PA) on face recognition (FR) technology such as photo, and video replay. To
address this issue, researchers distinguish between real people and presentation attacks via deep learning-based methods (Feng et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2014).
Nevertheless, they tend to experience performance degradation in more complex real-world scenarios due to domain
shifts. To promote performance in the new environment,
* Work done during an internship at Youtu Lab, Tencent.
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

2193

