The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Incomplete Contrastive Multi-View Clustering with High-Confidence Guiding
Guoqing Chao, Yi Jiang, Dianhui Chu
Harbin Institute of Technology,
2 West Culture Road, Weihai, Shandong 264209, China
guoqingchao10@gmail.com, jiangyijcx@163.com, chudh@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Chao et al. 2022), subspace-based clustering methods (Wang
et al. 2022; Chao et al. 2019), kernel learning (Liu et al.
2019; Ye et al. 2017), graph spectral clustering (Zhou, Wang,
and Yang 2019) or deep learning (Lin et al. 2021; Wen
et al. 2021; Ke et al. 2023a,b). The popular IMVC methods
PVC (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014) and MIC (Shao, He, and Yu
2015) conduct multi-view clustering by ignoring the missing values, which leads to inferior performance. There are
some other IMVC methods that adopted the missing value
imputation methods to fill in the missing position in each
view (Wen et al. 2023) and then conducted multi-view clustering. These methods just use the relation between features
within each view but ignore the relation between multiple
views.
Multi-view fusion plays a vital role in IMVC process, consistent information and complementary information should be exploited to finish this task. However, most of
current IMVC methods such as (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015) take
good advantage of the consistent information within multiview data but ignore the complementary information. Thus
how to mine the complementary information within multiview data and even make full use of both complementary
and consistent information is worth further investigation.
Recently, deep IMVC methods have achieved great success due to their powerful representation learning capabilities. Based on auto-encoder (AE), generative adversarial network (GAN), graph neural network (GNN), they first use
existing data part to infer and fill in missing data, and then
use traditional MVC methods for clustering. For example,
Completer (Lin et al. 2021) trains the model with paired instances, and then completes the missing data by dual prediction while SDIMC-net (Wen et al. 2021) uses GNN to
tackle incomplete multi-view data problem. Due to the separate processes of missing data handling and multi-view clustering, their performance is not ideal.
To deal with the above problems, we proposed a novel
end-to-end incomplete contrastive multi-view clustering
method with high-confidence guiding. Firstly, we proposed
a multi-view consistency relation transfer plus graph convolutional network (GCN) to handle missing values within
multi-view data. Secondly, we designed an instance-level attention module and high-confidence guiding to exploit the
complementary information while conducted instance-level
contrastive learning for latent representation. Thirdly, we

Incomplete multi-view clustering becomes an important research problem, since multi-view data with missing values
are ubiquitous in real-world applications. Although great
efforts have been made for incomplete multi-view clustering, there are still some challenges: 1) most existing
methods didn’t make full use of multi-view information
to deal with missing values; 2) most methods just employ
the consistent information within multi-view data but ignore the complementary information; 3) For the existing incomplete multi-view clustering methods, incomplete multiview representation learning and clustering are treated as
independent processes, which leads to performance gap.
In this work, we proposed a novel Incomplete Contrastive
Multi-View Clustering method with high-confidence guiding (ICMVC). Firstly, we proposed a multi-view consistency relation transfer plus graph convolutional network to
tackle missing values problem. Secondly, instance-level attention fusion and high-confidence guiding are proposed to
exploit the complementary information while instance-level
contrastive learning for latent representation is designed to
employ the consistent information. Thirdly, an end-to-end
framework is proposed to integrate multi-view missing values handling, multi-view representation learning and clustering assignment for joint optimization. Experiments compared with state-of-the-art approaches demonstrated the effectiveness and superiority of our method. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/liunian-Jay/ICMVC.
The version with supplementary material can be found at
http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08697.

Introduction
In practical applications, the majority of data can be considered as multi-view data (Chao, Sun, and Bi 2021; Yang
and Wang 2018) and exist missing values due to some uncontrollable factors during data collection, transmission or
storage. Incomplete Multi-View Clustering (IMVC) aims to
learn a final clustering result based on the multi-view data
with missing values.
Many IMVC algorithms have been proposed to solve the
missing value problem within multi-view data (Wen et al.
2023). The existing IMVC methods are generally based on
non-negative matrix decomposition (Hu and Chen 2018;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11221

