The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Limited-Supervised Multi-Label Learning with Dependency Noise
Yejiang Wang1 , Yuhai Zhao1 * , Zhengkui Wang2 , Wen Shan3 , Xingwei Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
InfoComm Technology Cluster, Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore
3
Singapore University of Social Sciences, Singapore
wyejiang@gmail.com, {zhaoyuhai,wangxw}@mail.neu.edu.cn,
zhengkui.wang@singaporetech.edu.sg, viviensw@suss.edu.sg

2

Abstract
Limited-supervised multi-label learning (L ML) leverages
weak or noisy supervision for multi-label classification model
training over data with label noise, which contains missing labels and/or redundant labels. Existing studies usually
solve L ML problems by assuming that label noise is independent of the input features and class labels while ignoring the fact that noisy labels may depend on the input features (instance-dependent) and the classes (label-dependent)
in many real-world applications. In this paper, we propose limited-supervised Multi-label Learning with Dependency Noise (M LDN) to simultaneously identify the instancedependent and label-dependent label noise by factorizing the
noise matrix as the outputs of a mapping from the feature and
label representations. Meanwhile, we regularize the problem
with the manifold constraint on noise matrix to preserve local
relationships and uncover the manifold structure. Theoretically, we bound noise recover error for the resulting problem.
We solve the problem by using a first-order scheme based
on proximal operator, and the convergence rate of it is at
least sublinear. Extensive experiments conducted on various
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method.

Figure 1: Examples of label Bear (first row) and Bird (second row) in data corel-5k. It is problematic to assume a same
probability of mislabeling for diverse samples and labels.

a subset of ground-truth labels can be obtained in training
step, which is called multi-label learning with missing labels
(M LML) (Wu et al. 2014; Kumar and Rastogi 2022); The latter assumes that the labels assigned to the training samples
may have redundantly irrelevant labels, which named partial multi-label learning (P ML) (Xie and Huang 2018; Gong,
Yuan, and Bao 2022). The missing labels and redundant labels can be treated as label noise in limited-supervised multilabel learning setting.
There are two main types of methods for dealing with the
label noise in limited-supervised multi-label learning. 1) Implicit noise elimination: These works implicitly correct the
noisy labels before learning. For example, (Xu et al. 2014;
Sun et al. 2019) employ the low-rank assumption of the label
matrix to recover the true label from the assigned label matrix; 2) Explicit noise elimination: Another type of method
decomposed explicitly the assigned label matrix into a true
label matrix and noise matrix. For example, (Xie and Huang
2021; Li, Lyu, and Feng 2020) maintains a small set of clean
data to reduce the noise in the training dataset.
Existing algorithms all assume that the label noise is not
dependent on specific features and labels (Xie and Huang
2021; Schultheis et al. 2022; Ma and Chen 2021). However, in real-world applications, this assumption may not
hold. First, there are a large number of instances with the
same label and the instances may have very different feature
representations. Thus, the probability of being mislabeled is
highly dependent on the specific instance, which is referred
as instance-dependent label noise. For example, although all
the images in the first row of Fig.1 include bear, the second

Introduction
Multi-label learning (M LL) framework has been widely
studied because of its success in fitting multiple semantic meaning problems. In M LL, each instance is associated
with multiple labels simultaneously. Due to its wide suitability, multi-label learning techniques have been adopted for
many applications, and a number of multi-label learning algorithms have been developed (Xu et al. 2023; Dahiya et al.
2021; Lin 2023; Zhao et al. 2022, 2021).
Typically, multi-label learning methods require the training data with complete and accurate label information. However, in the real-world environment, the labels or annotations
are often noisy and imperfect, where labels are usually missing or/and noisy in the training set. To model this problem,
a new setting called limited-supervised multi-label learning
(L ML) has attracted enormous attention. L ML assumes that
there might be incompletely-labeled data and redundantlylabeled data in the dataset. The former implies that only
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15662

