The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

W2P: Switching from Weak Supervision to Partial Supervision for Semantic
Segmentation
Fangyuan Zhang1,2 , Tianxiang Pan1,2 , Junhai Yong1,2 , Bin Wang1,2 *
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), China
zhangfy19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ptx9363@gmail.com, yongjh@tsinghua.edu.cn, wangbins@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
T-mIoU
T-mAcc
V-mIoU

Current weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
techniques concentrate on enhancing class activation maps
(CAMs) with image-level annotations. Yet, the emphasis on
producing these pseudo-labels often overshadows the pivotal role of training the segmentation model itself. This paper underscores the significant influence of noisy pseudolabels on segmentation network performance, particularly in
boundary region. To address above issues, we introduce a
novel paradigm: Weak to Partial Supervision (W2P). At its
core, W2P categorizes the pseudo-labels from WSSS into two
unique supervisions: trustworthy clean labels and uncertain
noisy labels. Next, our proposed partially-supervised framework adeptly employs these clean labels to rectify the noisy
ones, thereby promoting the continuous enhancement of the
segmentation model. To further optimize boundary segmentation, we incorporate a noise detection mechanism that specifically preserves boundary regions while eliminating noise.
During the noise refinement phase, we adopt a boundaryconscious noise correction technique to extract comprehensive boundaries from noisy areas. Furthermore, we devise a
boundary generation approach that assists in predicting intricate boundary zones. Evaluations on the PASCAL VOC 2012
and MS COCO 2014 datasets confirm our method’s impressive segmentation capabilities across various pseudo-labels.

SEAM

IRN

∆

EDAM

AMN

∆

63.6
80.2
64.5

66.3
74.2
63.5

2.7↑
6.0↓
1.0↓

68.0
80.4
70.9

72.2
77.3
69.5

4.2↑
3.1↓
1.4↓

Table 1: We analyze the quality of pseudo-labels and segmentation performance of various WSSS methods on the
PASCAL VOC 2012 train (T) and val (V) set using
the mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU) and Accuracy
(mAcc).
AMN (Lee, Kim, and Shim 2022) achieves a higher mIoU
compared to EDAM (Wu et al. 2021), it does not lead to
improved segmentation performance in the val set. A similar occurrence can be observed between SEAM (Wang et al.
2020) and IRN (Ahn, Cho, and Kwak 2019). This inconsistency can be attributed to the presence of inherent noise during the initial stage, resulting in lower accuracy as shown in
Table 1. Figure 1(b) depicts how training the FSSS network
with low-quality pixels in the pseudo ground-truths causes it
to converge towards sub-optimal solutions.
In this study, we contend that it is crucial to give greater
emphasis to robust learning with noisy labels for the second stage rather than solely focusing on optimizing the
CAMs in the first stage. Unlike image classification, the
process of pixel-wise learning in noisy environments is
more intricate. This complexity arises from the difficulty
of accurately predicting the main supervisory signals in the
boundary regions of WSSS (Rong et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2022). To tackle these challenges, as illustrated in Figure
1(c), we propose a novel framework named Weak to Partial Supervision (W2P), which consists of two modules: the
boundary-preserving noise detection (BPND) module and
the Partially-supervised Learning (PSL) module.
The BPND module trains a segmentation model using a
few iterations with pseudo-labels generated by established
WSSS methods. Motivated by the early-learning theory (Liu
et al. 2020, 2022), which indicates a significant discrepancy between the noisy pseudo-labels and model predictions in the early stages of training, the BPND module employs pixel-wise “small-loss” metric to distinguish between
clean and noisy pseudo-labels. While “small-loss”criterion
effectively selects trustworthy clean pseudo-labels, it fails

Introduction
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) (Lee
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Lee, Kim, and Yoon 2021;
Chen et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2021b; Li et al. 2022; Xu et al.
2022) achieves segmentation by using image-level labels instead of precise pixel-wise annotations in fully-supervised
semantic segmentation (FSSS) (Xie et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2018; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). It follows the
two-stage paradigm: a classification model generates class
activation maps (CAMs) (Zhou et al. 2016) as pseudo-labels,
which are then used to train a segmentation network.
Contemporary methods in WSSS primarily focus on
enhancing CAMs during the initial stage. Despite progressive improvements in the metrics for pseudo-labels,
these enhancements do not translate into improved segmentation performance. Table 1 demonstrates that although
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7042

