The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data Poisoning to Fake a Nash Equilibrium in Markov Games
Young Wu, Jeremy McMahan, Xiaojin Zhu, Qiaomin Xie
University of Wisconsin - Madison
yw@cs.wisc.edu, jmcmahan@wisc.edu, jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu, qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu

NE is an arbitrary pure strategy pair π : :“ pπ1: , π2: q. The
attacker can poison D into another dataset D: by paying
cost CpD, D : q. Two MARL agents then receive D: instead
of D. The attacker aims to enforce that the agents learn the
target NE π : from D: while minimizing C.
This problem is not well studied in the literature. Naive
approaches – such as modifying all the actions in the dataset
to those specified by the target policy pπ1: , π2: q – might
not achieve the attack goal for MARL learners who assign
penalties due to the lack of data coverage. Modifying all the
rewards in the dataset that coincide with the target policy to
the reward upper bound might be feasible, but would not be
optimal in terms of attack cost C. Results on data poisoning against single-agent RL cannot be directly applied to the
multi-agent case. In particular, there are no optimal policies
in MARL, and equilibrium policies are computed instead.
There could be multiple equilibria that are significantly different, and consequently, installing a target policy as the
unique equilibrium is difficult. To resolve this issue, we provide a novel characterization of when a zero-sum Markov
game has a unique Markov perfect Nash equilibrium.
Our framework can be summarized by the mnemonic
“ToM moves to the UN”. (i) UN stands for the Unique Nash
set, which is the set of Q functions that make the target π :
the unique NE. Uniqueness is crucial for the attacker to ensure that MARL agents choose the target NE with certainty,
without breaking ties arbitrarily among multiple NEs. (ii)
ToM stands for the attacker’s Theory of Mind of the MARL
agents, namely the plausible set of Q functions that the attacker believes the agents will entertain upon receiving the
poisoned dataset D: . (iii) The attack is successful if, by controlling D: , the ToM set is moved inside the UN set. A successful attack with the smallest cost CpD, D : q is optimal.
Adversarial attacks on MARL have been studied in some
recent work (Ma, Wu, and Zhu 2021; Gleave et al. 2019;
Guo et al. 2021), but we are only aware of one previous
work (Wu et al. 2023) on offline reward poisoning against
MARL. Nonetheless, they require a strong assumption of
full data coverage, and that the learners compute the Dominant Strategy Markov Perfect Equilibrium (DSMPE). In
contrast, we do not require full coverage, and we consider a weaker solution concept, Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE). Our general attack framework also accommodates other forms of data poisoning.

Abstract
We characterize offline data poisoning attacks on MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), where an attacker
may change a data set in an attempt to install a (potentially
fictitious) unique Markov-perfect Nash equilibrium for a twoplayer zero-sum Markov game. We propose the unique Nash
set, namely the set of games, specified by their Q functions,
with a specific joint policy being the unique Nash equilibrium. The unique Nash set is central to poisoning attacks
because the attack is successful if and only if data poisoning pushes all plausible games inside the set. The unique
Nash set generalizes the reward polytope commonly used
in inverse reinforcement learning to MARL. For zero-sum
Markov games, both the inverse Nash set and the set of plausible games induced by data are polytopes in the Q function
space. We exhibit a linear program to efficiently compute the
optimal poisoning attack. Our work sheds light on the structure of data poisoning attacks on offline MARL, a necessary
step before one can design more robust MARL algorithms.

Introduction
Data poisoning attacks have been well studied in supervised
learning (intentionally forcing the learner to train a wrong
classifier) and reinforcement learning (wrong policy) (Banihashem et al. 2022; Huang and Zhu 2019; Liu and Lai 2021;
Rakhsha et al. 2021a,b, 2020; Sun, Huo, and Huang 2020;
Zhang et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2019; Rangi et al. 2022; Zhang
and Parkes 2008; Zhang, Parkes, and Chen 2009). Can data
poisoning attacks be a threat to Markov Games, too? This
paper answers this question in the affirmative: Under mild
conditions, an attacker can force two game-playing agents to
adopt any fictitious Nash Equilibrium (NE), which does not
need to be a true NE of the original Markov Game. Furthermore, the attacker can achieve this goal while minimizing
its attack cost, which we define below. Clearly, such power
poses a threat to the security of Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (MARL).
Formally, we study two-player zero-sum Markov game
offline data poisoning, stated as the following.
Problem Statement: Offline Data Poisoning. Let D be a
dataset tpspkq , apkq , rpkq quK
k“1 with K tuples of state s, joint
action a “ pa1 , a2 q, rewards pr, ´rq. The attacker’s target
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15979

