The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Text Diffusion with Reinforced Conditioning
Yuxuan Liu1 , Tianchi Yang2 , Shaohan Huang2 , Zihan Zhang2 , Haizhen Huang2
Furu Wei2 , Weiwei Deng2 , Feng Sun2 , Qi Zhang2
1

Peking University
Microsoft Corporation
yx.liu@stu.pku.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated exceptional capability
in generating high-quality images, videos, and audio. Due to
their adaptiveness in iterative refinement, they provide a strong
potential for achieving better non-autoregressive sequence generation. However, existing text diffusion models still fall short
in their performance due to a challenge in handling the discreteness of language. This paper thoroughly analyzes text diffusion models and uncovers two significant limitations: degradation of self-conditioning during training and misalignment
between training and sampling. Motivated by our findings, we
propose a novel Text Diffusion model called TR E C, which
mitigates the degradation with Reinforced Conditioning and
the misalignment by Time-Aware Variance Scaling. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the competitiveness of TR E C
against autoregressive, non-autoregressive, and diffusion baselines. Moreover, qualitative analysis shows its advanced ability
to fully utilize the diffusion process in refining samples.

Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng,
and Ermon 2021) are the de facto state-of-the-art generative
models in the field of vision (Rombach et al. 2022; Ho et al.
2022) and audio (Kong et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022b) given
their promising capability in generating high-quality samples.
However, due to the discrete nature of language modality, it is
non-trivial to extend diffusion to the field of natural language
generation (NLG), and how to empower NLG with diffusion
models is becoming a rapidly emerging research area.
On this front, Austin et al. (2021a) and Hoogeboom et al.
(2021) design a discrete diffusion process based on categorical distributions, while He et al. (2022) explored diffusion
with state absorption (i.e., mask tokens as noise injection). Li
et al. (2022) first proposed to directly remedy the discrete nature by mapping words onto a continuous embedding space.
However, the above studies only achieved unconditional or
coarse-grained control of sequence generation, whose empirical applications are limited.
Consequently, subsequent works mainly focus on conditional generation, which is a more universally applicable
scenario in NLG. Later improvements in the conditioning
strategies are mainly categorized three-fold. The first line
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14069

includes conditioning on controlling attributes, like topics or
sentiments (Lovelace et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022a; Li et al.
2023). The second line applies diffusion models to text-totext generation, i.e., conditioning on input sequences (Gong
et al. 2023; Yuan et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2023).
This yields more applicable tasks like machine translation
or paraphrasing, which are considered more challenging (Li
et al. 2023). The third line study conditioning on predictions
of previous steps, namely self-conditioning (Chen, Zhang,
and Hinton 2023) to boost model performance.
In this paper, we start by taking a thorough analysis of the
vanilla self-conditioning approach and observe it suffers from
degradation - marginalizing the diffusion latent. Hampered
by such degradation, sampling with self-conditioning heavily
depends on the quality of the first step (from pure Gaussian)
and fails to fully utilize the diffusion process. Besides, by
analyzing current sampling methods in text diffusion models,
we discover and study the misalignment issue, bringing out
insights in designing a better variance schedule.
Motivated by our findings, we propose TR E C, a novel approach that empower Text Diffusion models with Reinforced
Conditioning. Specifically, we develop a novel reinforced
self-conditioning that mitigates the degradation by directly
motivating quality improvements from self-conditions with
reward signals. Furthermore, we propose time-aware variance scaling that facilitates training of diffusion. We conduct
a series of experiments on various tasks of NLG, including
machine translation, paraphrasing, and question generation.
Results show that composing operators within our method
manages to generate high-quality sequences, outperforming
a series of autoregressive, non-autoregressive, and diffusion
baselines. Detailed analysis demonstrates the effectiveness
of TR E C in mitigating degradation of self-conditioning with
reward signals, as well as leveraging the diffusion process to
iteratively refine its output.

Preliminaries
Denoising Diffusion Probablistic Models
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) learn a series of state
transitions from prior data distribution z0 ∼ q(x) to pure
Gaussian zT ∼ N (0, I) through forward and reverse diffusion process. Each forward diffusion step t ∈ [1, 2, ..., T ] is

