The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

P2BPO: Permeable Penalty Barrier-Based Policy Optimization for Safe RL
Sumanta Dey1 , Pallab Dasgupta2 , Soumyajit Dey1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India
2
Synopsys Inc, Sunnyvale, USA
sumanta.dey@iitkgp.ac.in, pallabd@synopsys.com, soumya@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

Abstract

avoid accidents, even if it takes a longer time to reach the
destination.
Constrained environments modeled as Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) (Sutton and Barto 1998) with constraints
are generally called Constrained Markov Decision Processes
(CMDPs) (Altman 1999). The RL agent must learn a policy
that maximizes the cumulative reward while satisfying the
constraints for these environments. There can be different
types of constraint configurations: binary or instantaneous
constraints and cumulative constraints. Binary constraints
are evaluated on current state valuations. Whereas for the
latter one, the constraint values (generally termed as costs)
are accumulated over the episodes, and their violation depends on whether the cumulative cost is within a defined
limit or not. The cumulative sum of constraints (costs) could
be discounted or averaged over a few episodes.
Various methods have been proposed in recent years to
train RL agents in CMDP and learn the maximum rewarded policies under given constraints. One such prior
work is Constrained policy optimization (CPO) (Achiam
et al. 2017), which follows the Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al. 2015) algorithm. CPO
solves the CMDP objective function by approximating the
non-convex constrained objective function to a quadratic
optimization problem within some trust regions. Therefore,
like TRPO, CPO improves the policy monotonically. However, CPO demands longer computation time to calculate
the inverse Fisher information matrix and the second-order
derivatives. In addition, CPO requires additional interactions
for feasible recovery if the primal problem or the objective
function is infeasible under certain initial policies. CPO also
does not handle mean valued constraints and is hard to implement with multiple constraints.
Some other approaches (Achiam and Amodei 2019),
(Stooke, Achiam, and Abbeel 2020) use Lagrangian
multiplier-based constraints optimization techniques to
solve CMDP, where the CMDP objective is first converted
into an unconstrained objective function by adding the constraints functions multiplied by the corresponding Lagrange
multipliers value with the original objective. The Lagrange
multipliers are also updated during training based on the
constraint satisfaction and dissatisfaction. This method ensures the constraints will be satisfied when the policy converges. However, Lagrange multipliers-based methods’ per-

Safe Reinforcement Learning (SRL) algorithms aim to learn
a policy that maximizes the reward while satisfying the safety
constraints. One of the challenges in SRL is that it is often difficult to balance the two objectives of reward maximization
and safety constraint satisfaction. Existing algorithms utilize
constraint optimization techniques like penalty-based, barrier
penalty-based, and Lagrangian-based dual or primal policy
optimization methods. However, they suffer from training oscillations and approximation errors, which impact the overall
learning objectives.
This paper proposes the Permeable Penalty Barrier-based
Policy Optimization (P2BPO) algorithm that addresses this
issue by allowing a small fraction of penalty beyond the
penalty barrier, and a parameter is used to control this permeability. In addition, an adaptive penalty parameter is used
instead of a constant one, which is initialized with a low value
and increased gradually as the agent violates the safety constraints. We have also provided theoretical proof of the proposed method’s performance guarantee bound, which ensures
that P2BPO can learn a policy satisfying the safety constraints
with high probability while achieving a higher expected reward. Furthermore, we compare P2BPO with other SRL algorithms on various SRL tasks and demonstrate that it achieves
better rewards while adhering to the constraints.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998), a
nature-inspired reward-based learning method, has shown
potential for complex strategy-based tasks like playing
Chess, Go (Silver et al. 2018), Atari games (Mnih et al.
2013) etc. Considering these, industry leaders in many
safety-critical domains, like industrial robots and autonomous vehicles, are planning or already using RL-based
controllers. In conventional RL algorithms, the RL agents
are trained only to learn the policies that maximize cumulative reward. However, for safety-critical environments, the
learning agent must take action while satisfying safety constraints. Such approaches often discard policies with good
rewards due to potential safety violations leading to undesirable behaviors. For example, an autonomous vehicle must be
cautious and slow in slippery road conditions (rain, snow) to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21029

