The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FusionFormer: A Concise Unified Feature Fusion Transformer for 3D Pose
Estimation
Yanlu Cai1 , Weizhong Zhang1,2,* , Yuan Wu1 , Cheng Jin1,2,*
1

2

Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China
{ylcai20, weizhongzhang, wuyuan, jc}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

have been reported in the literature. To be precise, the multiframe methods, such as PoseFormer (Zheng et al. 2021)
and MHFormer (Li et al. 2022), take advantage of Transformer’s strong capability in long-range relationship modelling to extract robust features and reduce the impact of the
inaccuracies in 2D pose estimation. The multi-view methods (Iskakov et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2021; He et al. 2020)
fuse the features of the images from multiple views via geometric constraints, which can be derived from the camera
parameters. There also exist some camera-parameter-free
methods (Gordon et al. 2022; Shuai, Wu, and Liu 2022).
They leverage Transformers to infer the camera parameters
explicitly or implicitly. Moreover, these camera-parameterfree methods do not require image or voxel features for geometric alignment, which leads to significant computational
cost savings and enables these multi-view methods to jointly
learn from multiple frames instead of single frame as the
camera-parameter-required methods.
In this paper, we focus on the camera-parameter-free approaches as they are more practical in real applications.
However, we notice that the performance of these approaches (Ma et al. 2022; Gordon et al. 2022; Shuai, Wu,
and Liu 2022) can not match the camera-parameter-required
methods although they are able to learn from multiple
frames. We argue that this results from their complex handcrafted feature fusion schemes, which cannot fuse the features flexibly. For instance, grouping keypoint feature fusion
scheme first groups the keypoints within the same limb and
then fuses the features separately for each group, which hinders the cooperative interactions between limbs. The pairwise feature fusion scheme may suffer from a lack of global
perspective and the reference to other views. As a result,
common features may be repeatedly extracted while cetrain
informative features may be overlooked. Spatio-temporal
separated feature fusion scheme restricts the features from
communicating along either in the spatial or temporal dimension. Moreover, we find that the above handcrafted fusion schemes have diverse and complex structures, which
make the principle for developing effective fusion scheme
unclear. They also raise an open problem that whether there
exist more simple, elegant yet effective fusion schemes.
To address the above issues, this paper proposes a concise
unified Fusion Transformer (FusionFormer) with minimized
handcrafted design for 3D pose estimation. FusionFormer

Depth uncertainty is a core challenge in 3D human pose
estimation, especially when the camera parameters are unknown. Previous methods try to reduce the impact of depth
uncertainty by multi-view and/or multi-frame feature fusion
to utilize more spatial and temporal information. However,
they generally lead to marginal improvements and their performance still cannot match the camera-parameter-required
methods. The reason is that their handcrafted fusion schemes
cannot fuse the features flexibly, e.g., the multi-view and/or
multi-frame features are fused separately. Moreover, the diverse and complicated fusion schemes make the principle for
developing effective fusion schemes unclear and also raises
an open problem that whether there exist more simple and elegant fusion schemes. To address these issues, this paper proposes an extremely concise unified feature fusion transformer
(FusionFormer) with minimized handcrafted design for 3D
pose estimation. FusionFormer fuses both the multi-view and
multi-frame features in a unified fusion scheme, in which all
the features are accessible to each other and thus can be fused
flexibly. Experimental results on several mainstream datasets
demonstrate that FusionFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance. To our best knowledge, this is the first cameraparameter-free method to outperform the existing cameraparameter-required methods, revealing the tremendous potential of camera-parameter-free models. These impressive experimental results together with our concise feature fusion
scheme resolve the above open problem. Another appealing
feature of FusionFormer we observe is that benefiting from
its effective fusion scheme, we can achieve impressive performance with smaller model size and less FLOPs.

Introduction
3D human pose estimation (Wang et al. 2021) is a fundamental task in computer vision, which aims to estimate
3D locations of the keypoints on the human body from images or videos. Although great efforts have been made in
the last decade, it remains challenging due to the depth uncertainty. Recent approaches (Zheng et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021; Iskakov et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021b) try to reduce
depth uncertainty by leveraging the clues contained in the
features from multiple views and frames. Promising results
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

900

