The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Few-Shot Learning via Repurposing Ensemble of Black-Box Models
Minh Hoang1 , Trong Nghia Hoang2
1

2

Lewis-Sigler Institute of Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99613
minhhoang@princeton.edu, trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu

Abstract

data (transfer learning); synchronizing the training processes
across different tasks to transform multiple sources of local,
heterogeneous data into a unified, richer source of learning feedback for all models (multi-task learning); or distilling the common inferential knowledge of the resulting
models into a base model that can solve any unseen tasks
(meta learning). Alternatively, there also exists a more recent line of data-free meta learning approaches (Lam et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022) that predict the model parameters
given the task identifier’s representation, which requires access to the internal parameterization of pre-trained solution
models of previous tasks, but not their training data. However, most approaches in these directions require access to
the architectures and internal parameterizations of existing
models, or even the labeled data and training processes that
were used to generate them. Hence, they are not applicable
to modern practices where pre-trained models are often released as black-box functions. For example, these include
the Machine Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) toolsets provided by Microsoft Custom Vision and Amazon SageMaker.

This paper investigates the problem of exploiting existing solution models of previous tasks to address a related target task
with limited training data. Existing approaches addressing
this problem often require access to the internal parameterization of the existing solution models and possibly their training
data, which is not possible in many practical settings. To relax this requirement, We approach this problem from a new
perspective of black-box re-purposing, which augments the
target inputs and leverages their corresponding outputs generated by existing black-box APIs into a feature ensemble.
We hypothesize that such feature ensemble can be learned
to incorporate and encode relevant black-box knowledge into
the feature representation of target data, which will compensate for their scarcity. This hypothesis is confirmed via the
reported successes of our proposed black-box ensemble in
solving multiple few-shot learning tasks derived from various
benchmark datasets. All reported results show consistently
that the set of heterogeneous black-box solutions of previous
tasks can indeed be reused and combined effectively to solve
a reasonably related target task without requiring access to a
large training dataset. This is the first step towards enabling
new possibilities to further supplement existing techniques in
transfer or meta learning with black-box knowledge.

1

To mitigate this limitation, another line of research on blackbox model fusion (Hoang et al. 2020) or reuse (Hoang et al.
2019a,b; Wu, Liu, and Zhou 2019; Shao et al. 2021; Wu
et al. 2021) can be considered as a viable alternative. In particular, Hoang et al. (2020) adopts a generic two-step approach which first collects and embeds the input-output responses of these frozen black-box models into a latent space
that factorizes into task-agnostic and task-specific inferential patterns. Given a new task, the distilled task-agnostic
patterns can then be put together into an implicitly represented base model, which can be fine-tuned with domain
data to produce a customized model. Nonetheless, this approach assumes that the optimal solution model exists on
a relatively simple weight space, e.g. feed-forward neural
networks, and can be easily recomposed from the distilled
patterns. This assumption limits their effectiveness to lowcomplexity tasks such as simple regression or MNIST classification (LeCun, Cortes, and Burges 2010), and precludes
extension to domains that requires more sophisticated architectures such as convolutional neural networks. As another
alternative, the model reuse literature (Wu, Liu, and Zhou
2019; Shao et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Hoang et al. 2019b,a)
instead assumes a black-box sharing protocol where extra
statistics summarizing the private data are available; or that

Introduction

Learning in few-shot settings generally requires (1) distilling transferable knowledge from existing solution models,
which were previously trained to solve other related tasks;
and then (2) recomposing them appropriately in new contexts. This is in fact a common recipe that was seen across
numerous existing solution paradigms to few-shot learning,
which include transfer learning (Du et al. 2020; Pan and
Yang 2009; Tripuraneni, Jordan, and Jin 2020), multi-task
learning (Ben-David and Schuller 2003; Bonilla, Chai, and
Williams 2008; Fifty et al. 2021) and meta learning (Dinh,
Nguyen, and Nguyen 2020; Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar
2020; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Yoon et al. 2018).
The underlied principle here is that well-trained models on
related tasks can be exploited to compensate for the lack of
data on a target task. This can be enabled via either finetuning a modifiable pre-trained model with target domain
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12448

