The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Transformer Extrapolation
Zhen Qin1,2 * , Yiran Zhong1 * † , Hui Deng3
1

OpenNLPLab, Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China
2
TapTap, Shanghai, China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Shaanxi, China
{zhenqin950102, zhongyiran}@gmail.com, denghui986@foxmail.com

Abstract

the sequence length. Another option is to extend the inference sequence length by converting the trained full attention
blocks to sliding window attention blocks (Beltagy, Peters,
and Cohan 2020), but this will result in significantly worse
efficiency than the full attention speed (Press, Smith, and
Lewis 2022). How to permanently resolve this issue without
incurring additional costs has emerged as a new topic.
A mainstream solution for length extrapolation is to design a Relative Positional Encoding (RPE) (Qin et al. 2023c)
that concentrates attention on neighboring tokens. For example, ALiBi (Press, Smith, and Lewis 2022) applies linear
decay biases to the attention to reduce the contribution from
distant tokens. Kerple (Chi et al. 2022) investigates shiftinvariant conditionally positive definite kernels in RPEs and
proposes a collection of kernels that promote the length extrapolation property. It also shows that ALiBi is one of its instances. Sandwich (Chi, Fan, and Rudnicky 2022) proposes
a hypothesis to explain the secret behind ALiBi and empirically proves it by integrating the hypothesis into sinusoidal
positional embeddings.
In order to investigate transformer extrapolation, we first
establish a hypothesis regarding why existing RPE-based
length extrapolation methods (Qin et al. 2023a) have this
capacity to extrapolate sequences in inference based on empirical analysis. Then we identify the conditions of RPEs
that satisfy the hypothesis through mathematical analysis.
Finally, the discovered conditions are empirically validated
on a variety of corpora. Specifically, we assume that due to
decay biases, existing RPE-based length extrapolation methods behave similarly to sliding window attention, i.e., only
tokens within a certain range can influence the attention
scores. A transformer can extrapolate for certain in this scenario since the out-of-range tokens have no effect on the attention outcomes. We derive that a transformer is guaranteed
to satisfy this hypothesis if the series corresponding to the
exponential of its RPE converges. Based on the observation,
we show that previous RPE-based methods (Press, Smith,
and Lewis 2022; Chi et al. 2022) can be seen as particular
instances under the conditions. Two new practices from the
conditions are derived and evaluated in language modeling.
The observed conditions not only shed light on the secret
of length extrapolation but also offer a new perspective on
computing the Theoretical Receptive Fields (TRF) of RPEs.
In contrast to prior approaches that require training gradients

Length extrapolation has attracted considerable attention recently since it allows transformers to be tested on longer sequences than those used in training. Previous research has
shown that this property can be attained by using carefully
designed Relative Positional Encodings (RPEs). While these
methods perform well on a variety of corpora, the conditions
for length extrapolation have yet to be investigated. This paper attempts to determine what types of RPEs allow for length
extrapolation through a thorough mathematical and empirical analysis. We discover that a transformer is certain to possess this property as long as the series that corresponds to
the RPE’s exponential converges. Two practices are derived
from the conditions and examined in language modeling tasks
on a variety of corpora. As a bonus from the conditions, we
derive a new Theoretical Receptive Field (TRF) to measure
the receptive field of RPEs without taking any training steps.
Extensive experiments are conducted on the Wikitext-103,
Books, Github, and WikiBook datasets to demonstrate the viability of our discovered conditions. We also compare TRF
to Empirical Receptive Field (ERF) across different models,
showing consistently matched trends on these datasets. Code
is released at: https://github.com/OpenNLPLab/Rpe.

Introduction
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) is advancing steadily in
the areas of natural language processing (Qin et al. 2023b;
Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2022b,a; Liu
et al. 2022; Qin and Zhong 2023), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022b; Lu et al. 2022; Hao
et al. 2024), and audio processing (Gong, Chung, and Glass
2021; Akbari et al. 2021; Gulati et al. 2020; Sun et al.
2022a). Although it outperforms other architectures such as
RNNs (Cho et al. 2014; Qin, Yang, and Zhong 2023) and
CNNs (Kim 2014; Hershey et al. 2016; Gehring et al. 2017)
in many sequence modeling tasks, its lack of length extrapolation capability limits its ability to handle a wide range
of sequence lengths, i.e., inference sequences need to be
equal to or shorter than training sequences. Increasing the
training sequence length is only a temporary solution because the space-time complexity grows quadratically with
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18897

