The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hierarchize Pareto Dominance in Multi-Objective Stochastic Linear Bandits
Ji Cheng1,2 , Bo Xue1,2 , Jiaxiang Yi3 , Qingfu Zhang1,2 *
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute
3
Department of Material Engineering, Delft University of Technology
{J.Cheng, boxue4-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, J.Yi@tudelft.nl, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

on the rewards with Pareto order, and those arms with optimal rewards are called Pareto optimal arms, in which the
optimality is judged by Pareto dominance. To gauge the performance of a MOMAB algorithm, Pareto regret was proposed (Drugan and Nowe 2013) based on the gap between
the selected arm and the Pareto optimal arms. The goal of
the algorithm is to select arms that judiciously minimize the
Pareto regret according to historical observations. For example, agents in online advertising system have to consider
the click-through rate for exposure as well as the click conversion for revenue simultaneously (Rodriguez, Posse, and
Zhang 2012).
In some scenarios, the objectives are ranked lexicographically (Ehrgott 2005), which means that the first objective
holds absolute priority over the second one, which in turn
has higher precedence over the third one, etc. The bandit algorithm for these problems aims to select arms that yield
high rewards for all the objectives, however, the improvement of the rewards in the low-priority objectives is satisfied
only if the objectives that have higher priority do not sacrifice (Hüyük and Tekin 2021). Real-world applications include learning optimal routing for wireless sensor networks
(Shah-Mansouri, Mohsenian-Rad, and Wong 2008), delivering doses of radiation to target volumes or to normal tissues
in intensity modulated radiation treatment (IMRT) (Jee, McShan, and Fraass 2007), etc.
In this work, we focus on a more general order, mixed
Pareto-lexicographic order, which hierarchizes the Pareto
dominance to consider Pareto order and lexicographical order simultaneously. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to analyze multi-objective stochastic linear bandit
(MOSLB) problems under the mixed Pareto-lexicographic
order. Note that by setting the precedence among objectives,
the mixed order can specialize in the Pareto order or lexicographical order. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
• We formulated the MOSLB framework under two kinds
of mixed Pareto-lexicographic orders, specifically mixed
Pareto-lexicographic order under priority chains (MPLPC) and mixed Pareto-lexicographic order under priority
levels (MPL-PL).
• Aimed at the two MOSLB problems, we defined the optimality justification and the regret evaluation based on
gross-scalars which properly denotes the infinite and in-

Multi-objective Stochastic Linear bandit (MOSLB) plays a
critical role in the sequential decision-making paradigm,
however, most existing methods focus on the Pareto dominance among different objectives without considering any
priority. In this paper, we study bandit algorithms under
mixed Pareto-lexicographic orders, which can reflect decision makers’ preferences. We adopt the Grossone approach
to deal with these orders and develop the notion of Paretolexicographic optimality to evaluate the learners’ performance. Our work represents a first attempt to address these
important and realistic orders in bandit algorithms. To design algorithms under these orders, the upper confidence
bound (UCB) policy and the prior free lexicographical filter are adapted to approximate the optimal arms at each
round. Moreover, the framework of the algorithms involves
two stages in pursuit of the balance between exploration and
exploitation. Theoretical analysis as well as numerical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) model is a general paradigm for
sequential decision-making problems where at each round
the player chooses an action from multiple arms and then
obtains a reward from the environment. The goal of MAB
model is to maximize the total cumulative reward of the chosen arms over T rounds. The MAB model involves various
application (Bouneffouf and Rish 2019), e.g., recommendation system (Mary, Gaudel, and Preux 2015; Gutowski et al.
2021), clinical trials (Villar, Bowden, and Wason 2015; Durand et al. 2018), etc.
However, not all problems only have an exclusive metric
(objective). A more general case is that the player faces more
than one feedback when places an action, which inherently
complicates the decision-making process. The preference
of different objectives is a critical issue among the multiobjective multi-armed bandit (MOMAB) problems. Generally, users would like to maximize all the objectives simultaneously in the context that all the objectives are incommensurable. In this scenario, different arms are compared based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11489

