The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Symbolic Numeric Planning with Patterns
Matteo Cardellini* 1, 2 , Enrico Giunchiglia* 2 , Marco Maratea3
1

DAUIN, Politecnico di Torino, Italy
DIBRIS, Università di Genova, Italy
3
DeMaCS, Università della Calabria, Italy
matteo.cardellini@polito.it, enrico.giunchiglia@unige.it, marco.maratea@unical.it
2

and define a new encoding Π≺ which provably dominates
2
both ΠR and ΠR ∃ : for any bound n, it is never the case
that the latter two allow to find a valid plan for Π while
ours does not. Further, our encoding produces formulas with
fewer clauses than the rolled-up encoding and also with far
fewer variables than the R2 ∃ encoding, even when considering a fixed bound. Most importantly, we believe that our proposal provides a new starting point for symbolic approaches:
a pattern ≺ can be any sequence of actions (even with repetitions) and, assuming n = 1, the formula produced by Π≺
encodes all the sequences of actions in which each action in
≺ is sequentially executed zero, one or possibly even more
than one time. Thus, any planning problem can be solved
with bound n = 1 when considering a suitable pattern, and
such pattern can be symbolically searched and incrementally
defined also while increasing the bound, bridging the gap between symbolic and search-based planning.
To show the effectiveness of our proposal, we (i) considered the 2 planners, benchmarks, and settings of the just
concluded IPC, Agile track (Arxer and Scala 2023); and
(ii) added 4 other planning systems for both simple and
linear numeric problems. Overall, our comparative analysis included 6 other planners, 3 of which symbolic and 3
search-based. The results show that, compared to the other
symbolic planners, our planner PATTY has always better performance on every domain, while compared to all the other
planners, PATTY has overall remarkably good performances,
being the fastest system able to solve most problems on the
largest number of domains.
The paper is structured as follows. After the preliminaries, we present the rolled-up, R2 ∃ and our pattern encodings, and prove that the latter dominates the previous two.
Then, the experimental analysis and the conclusion follow.
One running example is used throughout the paper to illustrate the formal definitions and the theoretical results.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for solving linear
numeric planning problems, called Symbolic Pattern Planning. Given a planning problem Π, a bound n and a pattern –defined as an arbitrary sequence of actions– we encode the problem of finding a plan for Π with bound n as
a formula with fewer variables and/or clauses than the stateof-the-art rolled-up and relaxed-relaxed-∃ encodings. More
importantly, we prove that for any given bound, it is never
the case that the latter two encodings allow finding a valid
plan while ours does not. On the experimental side, we consider 6 other planning systems –including the ones which
participated in this year’s International Planning Competition
(IPC)– and we show that our planner PATTY has remarkably
good comparative performances on this year’s IPC problems.

Introduction
Planning is one of the oldest problems in Artificial Intelligence, see, e.g., (McCarthy and Hayes 1969). Starting from
the classical setting in which all the variables are Boolean, in
simple numeric planning problems variables can also range
over the rationals and actions can increment or decrement
their values by a fixed constant, while in linear numeric
planning problems actions can also update variables to a
new value which is a linear combination of the values of
the variables in the state in which actions are executed, see,
e.g., (Arxer and Scala 2023). Current approaches for solving a numeric planning problem Π are either search-based
(in which the state space is explored using techniques based
on heuristic search, see, e.g., (Bonet and Geffner 2001)) or
symbolic-based (in which a bound n on the number of steps
is a priori fixed and the problem of finding a plan with bound
n is encoded into a formula for which a decision procedure
is available, see, e.g., (Kautz and Selman 1992)).
In this paper, we propose a novel symbolic approach for
solving numeric planning problems, called symbolic pattern
planning. Given a problem Π and a pattern ≺ – defined as a
sequence of actions – we show how it is possible to generalize the state-of-the-art rolled-up encoding ΠR proposed in
(Scala et al. 2016b) and the relaxed-relaxed-∃ (R2 ∃) encod2
ing ΠR ∃ proposed in (Bofill, Espasa, and Villaret 2017),

Preliminaries
We consider a fragment of numeric planning expressible
with PDDL2.1, level 2 (Fox and Long 2003). A numeric
planning problem is a tuple Π = ⟨VB , VN , A, I, G⟩, where
VB and VN are finite sets of Boolean and numeric variables
with domains {⊤, ⊥} and Q, respectively (⊤ and ⊥ are the
symbols we use for truth and falsity). I is the initial state
mapping each variable to an element in its domain. A propo-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20070

