The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Large-Scale Multi-Robot Coverage Path Planning via Local Search*
Jingtao Tang, Hang Ma
Simon Fraser University
{jingtao tang, hangma}@sfu.ca

Abstract
(a)

We study graph-based Multi-Robot Coverage Path Planning
(MCPP) that aims to compute coverage paths for multiple robots to cover all vertices of a given 2D grid terrain
graph G. Existing graph-based MCPP algorithms first compute a tree cover on G—a forest of multiple trees that cover
all vertices—and then employ the Spanning Tree Coverage
(STC) paradigm to generate coverage paths on the decomposed graph D of the terrain graph G by circumnavigating the edges of the computed trees, aiming to optimize the
makespan (i.e., the maximum coverage path cost among all
robots). In this paper, we take a different approach by exploring how to systematically search for good coverage paths
directly on D. We introduce a new algorithmic framework,
called LS-MCPP, which leverages a local search to operate directly on D. We propose a novel standalone paradigm,
Extended-STC (ESTC), that extends STC to achieve complete coverage for MCPP on any decomposed graphs, even
those resulting from incomplete terrain graphs. Furthermore,
we demonstrate how to integrate ESTC with three novel
types of neighborhood operators into our framework to effectively guide its search process. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of LS-MCPP, consistently improving the initial solution returned by two state-of-the-art
baseline algorithms that compute suboptimal tree covers on
G, with a notable reduction in makespan by up to 35.7%
and 30.3%, respectively. Moreover, LS-MCPP consistently
matches or surpasses the results of optimal tree cover computation, achieving these outcomes with orders of magnitude
faster runtime, thereby showcasing its significant benefits for
large-scale real-world coverage tasks.

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Graph-based CPP and MCPP: Gray squares, black
circles, and black stars represent terrain graph vertices, decomposed graph vertices, and initial vertices of robots, respectively; Solid lines and dashed lines represent coverage
paths and spanning edges, respectively. (a) Terrain graph
with uniform edge weights. (b) The single-robot coverage
path generated by STC. (c)(d) Suboptimal and optimal 2robot coverage paths with makespans 2 and 1.5, respectively.

real-world applications, including environmental monitoring (Collins et al. 2021) and search and rescue (Song et al.
2022). A fundamental challenge of MCPP lies in generating
cost-balancing coverage paths to optimize task efficiency,
commonly quantified by the makespan, which is the maximum path cost of all robots. This challenge is further compounded when dealing with large-scale applications where
the number of robots and the size of the terrain increase.
In this paper, we follow existing graph-based MCPP algorithms (Zheng et al. 2010; Li et al. 2023) that represent
the terrain to be covered as a 4-connected 2D grid graph
G, where each edge connects horizontally or vertically adjacent vertices. The robots are required to start at and return
to their respective initial vertices, as in the cover and return setting (Zheng and Koenig 2007). The foundation of
these graph-based MCPP algorithms lies in the Spanning
Tree Coverage (STC) paradigm (Gabriely and Rimon 2001,
2002), initially developed for (single-robot) CPP. STC operates on the terrain graph G but finds a coverage path with
minimal makespan on the decomposed graph D derived
from G. The decomposed graph D is also a 4-connected
2D grid graph, resulting from decomposing each vertex of
G into four decomposed vertices. Fig. 1 shows the terrain
graph G and its corresponding decomposed graph D of
an example terrain to be covered, where STC generates a
single-robot coverage path on D by circumnavigating (i.e.,
always moving along the right side of the spanning edges)
the minimum spanning tree of G.
Like STC, existing graph-based MCPP algorithms operate on the given terrain graph G exclusively to build a tree
cover—a forest of multiple trees, each rooted at the initial

Introduction
Coverage path planning (CPP) is a fundamental problem (Galceran and Carreras 2013) in robotics, which aims to
find a path for a robot to completely cover a terrain of interest, such as indoor floors (Bormann et al. 2018) and outdoor
fields (Torres et al. 2016). Multi-Robot Coverage Path Planning (MCPP) is an extension of CPP tailored for multi-robot
systems, aiming to coordinate the paths of multiple robots to
completely cover the given terrain. With improved task efficiency and system robustness, MCPP has facilitated diverse
* Code: https://github.com/reso1/LS-MCPP
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17567

