The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recent Advancements in Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Alberto Maria Metelli
Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
20133 Milano, Italy
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Introduction

a novel way to assess the dissimilarity between feasible reward sets based on the Hausdorff distance and presents a
new PAC (probabilistic approximately correct) framework.
The most significant contribution of this paper is the introduction of the first sample complexity lower bound, which
highlights the challenges inherent in the IRL problem. Deriving this lower bound necessitated the development of
novel technical tools. The paper also demonstrates that when
a generative model of the environment is available, a uniform sampling strategy achieves a sample complexity that
matches the lower bound, up to logarithmic factors.
Finally, in (Poiani et al. 2023), the IRL problem in the
presence of sub-optimal experts is investigated. Specifically,
the paper assumes the availability of multiple sub-optimal
experts, in addition to the expert agent, which provide additional demonstrations, associated with a known quantification of the maximum amount of sub-optimality. The paper shows that this richer information mitigates the ambiguity problem, significantly reducing the size of the feasible reward set while retaining its favorable geometric properties. Furthermore, the paper explores the associated statistical problem and derives novel lower bounds for sample
complexity, along with almost matching algorithms.
These selected papers represent notable advancements in
IRL, contributing to the establishment of a solid theoretical
foundation for IRL and extending the framework to accommodate scenarios with sub-optimal experts.

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) has seen significant
advancements in recent years. This class of approaches aims
to efficiently learn the underlying reward function that rationalizes the behavior exhibited by expert agents, often represented by humans. In contrast to mere behavioral cloning,
the reconstruction of a reward function yields appealing implications, as it allows for more effective interpretability of
the expert’s decisions and provides a transferable specification of the expert’s objectives for application in even different environments. Unlike the well-understood field of reinforcement learning (RL) from a theoretical perspective, IRL
still grapples with limited understanding, significantly constraining its applicability. A fundamental challenge in IRL is
the inherent ambiguity in selecting a reward function, given
the existence of multiple candidate functions, all explaining
the expert’s behavior.

Content of the Talk
In this talk, I will survey three of my papers that have
made notable contributions to the IRL field: “Provably Efficient Learning of Transferable Rewards” (Metelli et al.
2021), “Towards Theoretical Understanding of Inverse Reinforcement Learning” (Metelli, Lazzati, and Restelli 2023),
and “Inverse Reinforcement Learning with Sub-optimal Experts” (Poiani et al. 2023).
The central innovation introduced by (Metelli et al. 2021)
is a novel formulation of the IRL problem that overcomes
the issue of ambiguity. IRL is reframed as the problem of
learning the feasible reward set, which is the set of all rewards that can explain the expert’s behavior. This approach
postpones the selection of the reward function, thereby circumventing the ambiguity issues. Furthermore, the feasible
reward set exhibits convenient geometric properties that enable the development of efficient algorithms for its computation.
Building on this novel formulation of IRL, (Metelli, Lazzati, and Restelli 2023) addresses the problem of efficiently
learning the feasible reward set when the environment and
the expert’s policy are not known in advance. It introduces

Acknowledgments
This paper is supported by PNRR-PE-AI FAIR project
funded by the NextGeneration EU program.

References
Metelli, A. M.; Lazzati, F.; and Restelli, M. 2023. Towards Theoretical Understanding of Inverse Reinforcement Learning. In
ICML, volume 202, 24555–24591. PMLR.
Metelli, A. M.; Ramponi, G.; Concetti, A.; and Restelli, M. 2021.
Provably Efficient Learning of Transferable Rewards. In ICML,
volume 139, 7665–7676. PMLR.
Poiani, R.; Curti, G.; Metelli, A. M.; and Restelli, M. 2023. Inverse
Reinforcement Learning with Sub-optimal Experts. Preprint.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22680

