The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Chasing Fairness in Graphs: A GNN Architecture Perspective
Zhimeng Jiang1 , Xiaotian Han1 , Chao Fan2 , Zirui Liu3 , Na Zou4 , Ali Mostafavi1 , Xia Hu3
1

Texas A&M University
2
Clemson University
3
Rice University
4
University of Houston,
{zhimengj,han, amostafavi}@tamu.edu, cfan@g.clemson.edu, {zl105, xia.hu}@rice.edu, nzou2@central.uh.edu
Abstract

input graph data (Dai and Wang 2021). The biased node representation largely limits the application of GNNs in many
high-stake tasks, such as job hunting (Mehrabi et al. 2021)
and crime ratio prediction (Suresh and Guttag 2019). Hence,
bias mitigation that facilitates the research on fair GNNs is in
urgent need and we aim to achieve fair prediction for GNNs.
Data, model architecture, and training strategy are the
most popular aspects to improve deep learning performance.
For fairness in graphs, many existing works achieving fair
prediction in graphs either rely on graph pre-processing
(e.g., node feature masking(Köse and Shen 2021), and topology rewiring (Dong et al. 2022)) or fair training strategies
(e.g., regularization (Jiang et al. 2022), adversarial debiasing (Dai and Wang 2021), or contrastive learning (Zhu et al.
2020, 2021b; Agarwal, Lakkaraju, and Zitnik 2021; Ling
et al. 2023b)). The GNNs architecture perspective to improve fairness in graphs is less explored. More importantly,
GNNs are notorious in terms of fairness since GNN aggregation amplifies bias compared to multilayer perception (MLP)
(Dai and Wang 2021). From the GNNs architecture perspective, message passing is a critical component to improve fairness in graphs. Therefore, a natural question is raised:

There has been significant progress in improving the performance of graph neural networks (GNNs) through enhancements in graph data, model architecture design, and training strategies. For fairness in graphs, recent studies achieve
fair representations and predictions through either graph data
pre-processing (e.g., node feature masking, and topology
rewiring) or fair training strategies (e.g., regularization, adversarial debiasing, and fair contrastive learning). How to
achieve fairness in graphs from the model architecture perspective is less explored. More importantly, GNNs exhibit
worse fairness performance compared to multilayer perception since their model architecture (i.e., neighbor aggregation) amplifies biases. To this end, we aim to achieve fairness via a new GNN architecture. We propose Fair Message
Passing (FMP) designed within a unified optimization framework for GNNs. Notably, FMP explicitly renders sensitive
attribute usage in forward propagation for node classification
task using cross-entropy loss without data pre-processing.
In FMP, the aggregation is first adopted to utilize neighbors’ information and then the bias mitigation step explicitly pushes demographic group node presentation centers together. In this way, FMP scheme can aggregate useful information from neighbors and mitigate bias to achieve better
fairness and prediction tradeoff performance. Experiments on
node classification tasks demonstrate that the proposed FMP
outperforms several baselines in terms of fairness and accuracy on three real-world datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhimengj0326/FMP.

Can we achieve fairness via fair message passing using
vanilla training loss 1 without graph pre-processing?
In this work, we provide a positive answer by designing a fair message-passing scheme guided by a unified optimization framework 2 for GNNs. The key idea of achieving
fair message passing is aggregation first and then conducting bias mitigation via explicitly chasing consistent demographic group representation centers. Specifically, we first
formulate an optimization problem that integrates fairness
and smoothness objectives for graph data. Then, we solve
the formulated problem via Fenchel conjugate and gradient descent to generate fair and informative representations,
where the property of softmax function is adopted to accelerate the gradient calculation over primal variables. We also
interpret the optimization problem solver as two main steps

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Ling et al. 2023a;
Han et al. 2022a,b) are widely adopted in various domains,
such as social media mining (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017), knowledge graph (Hamaguchi et al. 2017) and recommender system (Ying et al. 2018), due to remarkable performance in learning representations. Graph learning, a topic
with growing popularity, aims to learn node representation
containing both topological and attribute information in a
given graph. Despite the outstanding performance in various
tasks, GNNs often inherit or even amplify societal bias from

1

The sensitive attributes are not adopted in vanilla training loss.
We only consider node classification tasks and vanilla loss is crossentropy loss in this paper.
2
Many aggregations in popular GNNs can be interpreted as gradient descent step for specific optimization problem with specific
step size and initialization (Ma et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021b).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21214

