The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Twist for Graph Classification: Optimizing Causal Information Flow in Graph
Neural Networks
Zhe Zhao13 , Pengkun Wang12∗ , Haibin Wen4 , Yudong Zhang1 , Zhengyang Zhou12 , Yang Wang 125 *
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China
3
City University of Hong Kong
4
Shaoguan University
5
Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC
{zz4543, zyd2020}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {pengkun, zzy0929, angyan}@ustc.edu.cn, haibin65535@gmail.com
Abstract

such, GNNs exhibit a tendency to utilize potentially spurious
non-causal features for making predictions, as long as they
are associated with the target labels. However, non-causal
features that are correlated with labels but not causally related tend to vary significantly across domains. Overfitting
to one domain may increase spurious correlations, thereby
compromising the generalization and reliability of graph
neural networks (Jaber et al. 2020; Dai and Wang 2021).
Why does the existence of non-causal features affect the
generalization process of graph neural network learning?
To understand this problem, we first investigate the decisionmaking process of GNNs for graph classification from the
perspective of mutual information. Referring to the causal
hypothesis (Ghorbani and Zou 2019; Geirhos et al. 2020;
Schölkopf et al. 2012), non-causal features act as confounding factors (Carlucci et al. 2019; Dosovitskiy and Djolonga
2019; Arjovsky et al. 2019), which open backdoor paths
and spuriously correlate causal features and predictions. By
modeling the causal features as C and the non-causal features as S, the mutual information between the input graph
G and the predicted label Y can be decomposed as:

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-theart performance in graph representation learning by exploiting statistical correlations. However, reliance on correlations risks mismatching with the underlying causal mechanisms, hampering generalization. Our Information-based
Causal Learning (ICL) framework integrates information theory and causality to transform relevance into dependence. We
introduce a mutual information objective enhancing causal
while reducing non-causal features, enabled by a disentanglement layer and variational bounds for tractability. Multiobjective gradient descent balances the optimization, emphasizing causal over correlational patterns. Experiments demonstrate ICL significantly improves GNN robustness and interpretability across distribution shifts. Visual analysis illustrates the conversion from informational to causal dependencies in representations.

Introduction
The continuous advances in representational capacity
(Gilmer et al. 2017; You, Ying, and Leskovec 2019; Xu
et al. 2018; Veličković et al. 2017; Gasteiger, Bojchevski,
and Günnemann 2018; Dwivedi and Bresson 2020), architectural flexibility (Veličković et al. 2017; Gasteiger,
Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2018; Dwivedi and Bresson
2020), and computational efficiency (Chen, Zhu, and Song
2017; Zhao et al. 2021; Chiang et al. 2019) of graph neural
networks (GNNs) have propelled graph classification to unprecedented levels of success across diverse domains including bioinformatics (Chen, Zhu, and Song 2017; Zhao et al.
2021; Chiang et al. 2019), social network analysis (Wu et al.
2020; Yang et al. 2023), and computer vision (Wang et al.
2019). Recent research (Alsentzer et al. 2020; Lv et al. 2022;
Kipf et al. 2018; Schölkopf 2022) has shown that in graph
classification tasks, the salient properties that determine a
graph’s label often originate from specific causal substructures in the graph. Contemporary graph neural networks
(GNNs) learn via end-to-end backpropagation on structurerich graph inputs and predominantly rely on exploiting statistical correlations between graph features and outputs. As

I(Y ; G) = I(Y ; C) + I(Y ; S|C).

(1)

Here, I(Y ; C) represents the mutual information between
causal features C and predictions Y , capturing invariant explanatory mechanisms. I(Y ; S|C) denotes the mutual information between non-causal features S and predictions Y
given causal features C, representing spurious correlations
that do not generalize across distributions. Since GNNs are
prone to exploit arbitrary statistical associations, they tend to
maximize I(Y ; S) while ignoring the underlying I(Y ; C).
However, reliance on I(Y ; S) impairs out-of-distribution
generalization because the non-causal pattern varies across
domains. Therefore, reducing the non-causal information
extracted and predicted by the model during the learning
process and enhancing the causal information will enable
the model to extract more valuable relevant information,
thereby reducing the obstruction of irrelevant information
and enhancing the generalization performance in different
domains.
To this end, we propose an Information-based Causal
Learning (ICL) strategy, which decomposes the process of

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17042

