The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Graph Dynamics Prior for Relational Inference
Liming Pan1, 2 * , Cheng Shi3 * , Ivan Dokmanić3†
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 230026,
2
School of Computer and Electronic Information, Nanjing Normal University, China 210023,
3
Departement Mathematik und Informatik, Universität Basel, Basel, Switzerland 4051
panlm99@gmail.com, cheng.shi@unibas.ch, ivan.dokmanic@unibas.ch

Abstract

GNN-based methods use a graph generator and a dynamics learner1 : the graph generator produces a candidate graph
while the dynamics learner tries to match the dynamics to
data, acting as a surrogate for the original system. Since the
dynamics of a node only depends on its neighbors, it is intuitive to try and emulate it with a single-step message-passing
GNN. Multi-step message passing or spectral GNNs may
confuse direct and indirect neighbors. Indeed, single-step architectures appear in the original NRI work and its various
adaptations (Alet et al. 2019; Löwe et al. 2022; Graber and
Schwing 2020; Ha and Jeong 2023; Zhu et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022; Wang and Pang 2022).
An implicit assumption in a single-step scheme is that the
sampling rate (the number of samples per unit time) is sufficiently high. With a low sampling rate the effective interaction graph is non-local which causes a single-step surrogate to confuse direct and indirect interactions. Single-step
message passing also limits the expressivity of neural surrogates. The vanilla GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) and many
other GNNs implicitly assume homophily and act as lowpass graph filters (Zhu et al. 2020). Although they can handle certain heterophilic data (Ma et al. 2022), single-layer
GNNs can only implement a limited range of graph filters.
Unknown nonlinear dynamics call for graph filters adaptive
to data such as in ChebyNet (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016) or GPR-GNN (Chien et al. 2021).
In this work, we propose a graph dynamics prior (GDP)
for relational inference. The “prior” terminology is an analogy with the deep image prior used in inverse problems in
image processing (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018),
where the inductive bias of model (a convolutional neural
network) steers reconstruction towards images with good
properties, which is an implicit prior. Our model simultaneously uses a high-degree non-local polynomial and a “shallow” adjacency matrix to approximate the effective interactions between consecutive state samples. The polynomial filter is sensitive to graph perturbations which helps avoid poor
local minima. As there are, in general, multiple graph matrices that can result in the same polynomial filters, simultaneously fitting a parallel single-step model resolves the direct interactions without converging to poor local minima

Relational inference aims to identify interactions between
parts of a dynamical system from the observed dynamics.
Current state-of-the-art methods fit the dynamics with a graph
neural network (GNN) on a learnable graph. They use onestep message-passing GNNs—intuitively the right choice
since non-locality of multi-step or spectral GNNs may confuse direct and indirect interactions. But the effective interaction graph depends on the sampling rate and it is rarely localized to direct neighbors, leading to poor local optima for the
one-step model. In this work, we propose a graph dynamics
prior (GDP) for relational inference. GDP constructively uses
error amplification in non-local polynomial filters to steer
the solution to the ground-truth graph. To deal with nonuniqueness, GDP simultaneously fits a “shallow” one-step
model and a polynomial multi-step model with shared graph
topology. Experiments show that GDP reconstructs graphs far
more accurately than earlier methods, with remarkable robustness to under-sampling. Since appropriate sampling rates
for unknown dynamical systems are not known a priori, this
robustness makes GDP suitable for real applications in scientific machine learning. Reproducible code is available at
https://github.com/DaDaCheng/GDP.

Introduction
Understanding interactions is key to understanding the
function of dynamical systems in physics (Arenas et al.
2008), biology, neuroscience (Izhikevich 2007), epidemiology (Pastor-Satorras et al. 2015), and sociology (Castellano, Fortunato, and Loreto 2009), to name a few. It is often
time-consuming or even impossible to determine this structure experimentally: for example, neuronal connectivity is
determined by painstaking analyses of electron microscopy
images. On the other hand, there has been an explosion of
availability of signal measurements. It is thus attractive to
devise methods which determine interactions from the observed dynamics alone.
The seminal work on neural relational inference (NRI)
showed that in some cases graph neural networks (GNNs)
can perform well on this challenge (Kipf et al. 2018).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Even though they are sometimes called differently, these two
components are always present.

14508

