The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Low-Light Face Super-resolution via Illumination, Structure, and Texture
Associated Representation
Chenyang Wang, Junjun Jiang* , Kui Jiang, Xianming Liu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{wangchy02, jiangjunjun, jiangkui, csxm}@hit.edu.cn

LLIE+FSR

Abstract
Super-resolved Result Quality (LPIPS)

Human face captured at night or in dimly lit environments
has become a common practice, accompanied by complex
low-light and low-resolution degradations. However, the existing face super-resolution (FSR) technologies and derived
cascaded schemes are inadequate to recover credible textures. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that decomposes the restoration task into face structural fidelity maintaining and texture consistency learning. The former aims
to enhance the quality of face images while improving the
structural fidelity, while the latter focuses on eliminating perturbations and artifacts caused by low-light degradation and
reconstruction. Based on this, we develop a novel low-light
low-resolution face super-resolution framework. Our method
consists of two steps: an illumination correction face superresolution network (IC-FSRNet) for lighting the face and
recovering the structural information, and a detail enhancement model (DENet) for improving facial details, thus making them more visually appealing and easier to analyze. As
the relighted regions could provide complementary information to boost face super-resolution and vice versa, we introduce the mutual learning to harness the informative components from relighted regions and reconstruction, and achieve
the iterative refinement. In addition, DENet equipped with
diffusion probabilistic model is built to further improve face
image visual quality. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed joint optimization framework achieves significant improvements in reconstruction quality and perceptual quality
over existing two-stage sequential solutions. Code is available at https://github.com/wcy-cs/IC-FSRDENet.

0.25

HR

FSR+LLIE

𝐼!!"
𝐼#"%

0.20
0.15

𝐼#"$

0.10
0.05

𝐼&"

0.00

𝐼!!"

IC-FSRNet

Structure Reconstruction

𝐼#"%

DENet

𝐼#"$

Texture Enhancement

Figure 1: Super-resolved results of different methods. The
bottom row presents the overall framework. IC-FSRNet is
capable of restoring facial structure, but may not be able to
recreate intricate details. DENet can further enhance facial
details and elevate visual quality.

suffer from both low-resolution and low-light degradations.
Thus, there is the pressing need to devise technologies to
recover LR face images under low-light scenarios.
Prior to deep learning, conventional methods improve
face resolution by designing hand-crafted priors and reconstruction operators, but struggle with the generalization on
open-world scenarios. Recently, deep learning has emerged
and shown impressive performance compared to conventional methods (Jiang et al. 2023) on FSR task. However,
these methods are far from generating visually pleasing
and content-fidelity results from the low-light low-resolution
(LLR) face images since they are customized for recovering
normal light LR face images. One possible approach is to
perform face super-resolution and low-light image enhancement (LLIE) sequentially. This can be done either as FSR
followed by LLIE (FSR+LLIE) or LLIE followed by FSR
(LLIE+FSR). However, the simple cascaded solutions struggle with generating results with satisfactory facial structure
and visual quality as shown in Figure 1. The reason lies in

Introduction
Face super-resolution (FSR) aims to recover the fine-grained
and high-resolution (HR) details from a low-resolution (LR)
observed face image. It has been widely studied and applied
to many outdoor computer vision systems. Although prior
methods are effective in processing face images captured under normal light conditions, there is still scope for improvement when it comes to low-light conditions. In practice, due
to the diverse and complex imaging environment (i.e., inadequate lighting at night or the limited exposure time in the
video surveillance scenario), the captured face images would
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5318

