The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Supervised Framework Based on Subject-Wise Clustering for Human Subject
Time Series Data
Eunseon Seong* , Harim Lee* , Dong-Kyu Chae
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea
{emilyseong, hrimlee, dongkyu}@hanyang.ac.kr

Subject-wise
Time-series data

Abstract
With the widespread adoption of IoT, wearable devices, and
sensors, time series data from human subjects are significantly increasing in the healthcare domain. Due to the laborious nature of manual annotation in time series data and
the requirement for human experts, self-supervised learning
methods are attempted to alleviate the limited label situations. While existing self-supervised methods have been successful to achieve comparable performance to the fully supervised methods, there are still some limitations that need
to be addressed, considering the nature of time series data
from human subjects: In real-world clinical settings, data
labels (e.g., sleep stages) are usually annotated by subjectlevel, and there is a substantial variation in patterns between subjects. Thus, a model should be designed to deal
with not only the label scarcity but also subject-wise nature of data to ensure high performance in real-world scenarios. To mitigate these issues, we propose a novel selfsupervised learning framework for human subject time series data: Subject-Aware Time Series Clustering (SA-TSC).
In the unsupervised representation learning phase, SA-TSC
adopts a subject-wise learning strategy rather than instancewise learning which randomly samples data instances from
different subjects within the batch during training. Specifically, we generate subject-graphs with our graph construction method based on Gumbel-Softmax and perform graph
spectral clustering on each subject-graph. In addition, we utilize graph neural networks to capture dependencies between
channels and design our own graph learning module motivated from self-supervised loss. Experimental results show
the outstanding performance of our SA-TSC with the limited & subject-wise label setting, leading to its high applicability to the healthcare industry. The code is available at:
https://github.com/DILAB-HYU/SA-TSC

label:

label:

Subject-A
clustering

Subject-B
clustering

Subject-C
clustering

label:

(a) instance-wise clustering

(b) Subject-wise clustering

Figure 1: The necessity of subject-wise learning
labeled data on time series has gained great attention from
researchers recently. In this context, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) methods have been widely adopted.
Especially, as time-series data from human subjects are
increasing due to the widespread adoption of wearable devices and sensors (Mohammadi et al. 2018), self-supervised
models such as TS-TCC (Eldele et al. 2021) and CA-TCC
(Eldele et al. 2022) have gained prominence in areas like
human activity and sleep data research. Furthermore, some
studies (e.g., SleepDPC (Xiao et al. 2021), CoSleep (Ye
et al. 2021), SSLAPP (Lee, Seong, and Chae 2022)) specifically focus on the sleep staging task. Self-supervised learning methods first learn a meaningful representation of data in
an unsupervised manner and then fine-tune the model using
only a few labels in its downstream task. Remarkably, these
strategies exhibit comparable performance to the supervised
methods even in the limited labeled settings.
Despite the significant achievements of such selfsupervised methods on time series data, there still exist limitations that need to be addressed specifically for time series
data from human subjects1 which are vastly collected nowa-

Introduction
Time series data plays an important role in representing various real-life domains and situations (Lee, Park, and Chae
2023; Kim and Chae 2023). However, unlike images or
texts, time series data is less human-friendly, making manual
annotation significantly time-consuming, laborious, and requires human experts (Eldele et al. 2021). Therefore, designing a machine learning framework that considers the limited

1
In a clinical setting, time series data is collected from various
subjects with multiple data instances (e.g., EEG, EOG, EMG), with
the collection/annotation process being conducted on a subject-bysubject basis. Here, subjects typically refer to ‘patients’. Given the
constraints and complexities of such studies, it is often expected
that only a very limited number of subjects can be recruited.

* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22341

