The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dual Self-Paced Cross-Modal Hashing
Yuan Sun1,2 , Jian Dai3 , Zhenwen Ren4 , Yingke Chen5 , Dezhong Peng1,2 , Peng Hu1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
National Innovation Center for UHD Video Technology, Chengdu, China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
School of National Defense Science and Technology, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China
5
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, UK
sunyuan work@163.com, daijian1000@163.com, rzw@njust.edu.cn, yke.chen@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn,
penghu.ml@gmail.com
2

Abstract

have been proposed to project different modalities into a
common Hamming space, which can be roughly categorized
into unsupervised and supervised CMH methods. Specifically, unsupervised CMH methods often exploit data structures without semantic labels to learn hash codes. The representative methods include unsupervised contrastive crossmodal hashing (Hu et al. 2022), collective reconstructive
embeddings (Hu et al. 2019a), unsupervised cross-modal
hashing (Tu et al. 2023), and deep graph-neighbor coherence
preserving network (Yu et al. 2021). Different from unsupervised methods, supervised CMH methods use semantic labels to learn discriminative hash codes. Benefiting from semantic information, supervised methods can learn more discriminative hash codes and achieve better performance (Hu
et al. 2021, 2019b; Sun et al. 2023a).
Although these methods have achieved promising performance, most existing cross-modal hashing methods implicitly assume the collected multi-modal data (Yang et al.
2023a) is ideally clean without noise, which is hard to hold
in real-world scenarios. In practice, multimodal data inevitably exist noise due to occlusion, equipment fault, and
other open-world anomalies, producing noisy points or outliers. Therefore, data-driven methods will undoubtedly suffer from disturbances and get stuck into bad local minima
during training, thereby remarkably degrading the performance. To tackle this problem, self-paced learning (SPL)
(Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010; Shao et al. 2022; Huang
et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2020) was proposed to train the model
from ‘easy’ to ‘hard’ samples inspired by human cognitive
learning, which has been proven to be beneficial in alleviating the noise/outlier problem (Li et al. 2021). However,
almost all CMH methods treat all instances and features
equally during learning hash codes, while ignoring the difficulty differences caused by noise or outliers. Based on this
observation, we expect to mitigate the effect of noise by
learning from ‘easy’ to ‘hard’, thus enhancing robustness.
To achieve this, we propose a novel Dual Self-paced
Cross-Modal Hashing (DSCMH) that enables our model to
eliminate noise/outliers in the latent space. Our DSCMH
elaborately mimics human cognitive learning that starts with
easy instances and features, and gradually progresses to
more difficult ones. As shown in Fig.1, our key idea is to
gradually learn latent hash representations from ‘easy’ to
‘hard’ instances and features, respectively, thereby enhanc-

Cross-modal hashing (CMH) is an efficient technique to retrieve relevant data across different modalities, such as images, texts, and videos, which has attracted more and more
attention due to its low storage cost and fast query speed. Although existing CMH methods achieve remarkable processes,
almost all of them treat all samples of varying difficulty levels
without discrimination, thus leaving them vulnerable to noise
or outliers. Based on this observation, we reveal and study
dual difficulty levels implied in cross-modal hashing learning,
i.e., instance-level and feature-level difficulty. To address this
problem, we propose a novel Dual Self-Paced Cross-Modal
Hashing (DSCMH) that mimics human cognitive learning to
learn hashing from ‘easy’ to ‘hard’ in both instance and feature levels, thereby embracing robustness against noise/outliers. Specifically, our DSCMH assigns weights to each instance and feature to measure their difficulty or reliability, and
then uses these weights to automatically filter out the noisy
and irrelevant data points in the original space. By gradually
increasing the weights during training, our method can focus on more instances and features from ‘easy’ to ‘hard’ in
training, thus mitigating the adverse effects of noise or outliers. Extensive experiments are conducted on three widelyused benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of the proposed DSCMH over 12 state-of-the-art
CMH methods.

Introduction
With the rapid development of multimedia technology,
cross-modal retrieval (Jing et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2023; Qin
et al. 2023a) has attracted increasing attention from both
academic and industrial communities. However, due to the
massive growth of multimedia data (Qin et al. 2023b; Qin,
Pu, and Wu 2023; He et al. 2022), continuous-value methods suffer from high storage costs and computation time. To
solve this issue, cross-modal hashing (CMH) methods (Tan
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023b) have been
proposed to achieve efficient performance. The essential key
of CMH is to map multimodal data into discriminative binary codes while eliminating the cross-modal gap.
To learn common hash representations, numerous CMH
methods (Liu et al. 2023; Tan et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15184

