The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatial-Contextual Discrepancy Information Compensation
for GAN Inversion
Ziqiang Zhang1 , Yan Yan1 * , Jing-Hao Xue2 , Hanzi Wang1
1

Xiamen University, China
University College London, UK
zhangzq@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yanyan@xmu.edu.cn, jinghao.xue@ucl.ac.uk, hanzi.wang@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

first inverts the real image back into a latent code of a pretrained GAN model, and then a new image can be reconstructed or edited from the inverted latent code.
Some GAN inversion methods (Richardson et al. 2021;
Tov et al. 2021) invert a real image into the native latent
space of StyleGAN (i.e., the W space) and achieve good editability. However, such a way inevitably leads to the loss of
image details during inversion. As a result, the reconstructed
images are often less faithful than the original images. Although some methods (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka 2019; Kang,
Kim, and Cho 2021) extend the W space to the W + /W*
space or perform per-image optimization to enhance the
reconstruction fidelity, their editability can be greatly affected. Such a phenomenon is also known as the distortioneditability trade-off, indicating the conflict between image
reconstruction fidelity and image editing quality.
To alleviate the distortion-editability trade-off, some recent methods (such as HFGI (Wang et al. 2022) and CLCAE
(Liu, Song, and Chen 2023)) recover the missing information by enriching the latent code and the feature representations of a particular layer in the GAN generator. In this
way, they can achieve better fidelity than traditional GAN
inversion methods. However, HFGI considers the distortion
information only at the pixel level, which easily introduces
significant artifacts; CLCAE generates images based on contrastive learning, and it may still lose some image details and
degrade the editability. Therefore, existing GAN inversion
methods still suffer from the gap in image details between
the original image and the reconstructed/edited image.
To address the above problems, we propose a novel
spatial-contextual discrepancy information compensationbased GAN inversion method (SDIC), which consists of
a discrepancy information prediction network (DIPN) and
a discrepancy information compensation network (DICN).
SDIC adopts a “compensate-and-edit” paradigm, which first
compensates both the latent code and the GAN generator with the spatial-contextual guided discrepancy map, and
then performs image inversion or editing.
Specifically, DIPN, which consists of a two-branch
spatial-contextual hourglass module and a discrepancy map
learning hourglass module, is designed to encode the multilevel spatial-contextual information of the original and initial reconstructed images, and predict a spatial-contextual
guided discrepancy map. In DIPN, a spatial attention mech-

Most existing GAN inversion methods either achieve accurate reconstruction but lack editability or offer strong editability at the cost of fidelity. Hence, how to balance the distortioneditability trade-off is a significant challenge for GAN inversion. To address this challenge, we introduce a novel
spatial-contextual discrepancy information compensationbased GAN-inversion method (SDIC), which consists of
a discrepancy information prediction network (DIPN) and
a discrepancy information compensation network (DICN).
SDIC follows a “compensate-and-edit” paradigm and successfully bridges the gap in image details between the original
image and the reconstructed/edited image. On the one hand,
DIPN encodes the multi-level spatial-contextual information
of the original and initial reconstructed images and then predicts a spatial-contextual guided discrepancy map with two
hourglass modules. In this way, a reliable discrepancy map
that models the contextual relationship and captures finegrained image details is learned. On the other hand, DICN
incorporates the predicted discrepancy information into both
the latent code and the GAN generator with different transformations, generating high-quality reconstructed/edited images. This effectively compensates for the loss of image details during GAN inversion. Both quantitative and qualitative
experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves
the excellent distortion-editability trade-off at a fast inference
speed for both image inversion and editing tasks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ZzqLKED/SDIC.

Introduction
Over the past few years, a variety of powerful GAN models,
such as PGGAN (Karras et al. 2017) and StyleGAN (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020), have been developed to generate high-quality images based on the latent
code in the latent space. Based on these models, we can manipulate some attributes of generated images by modifying
the latent code. However, such manipulation is only applicable to the images given by the GAN generator due to the
lack of inference capability in GANs (Xia et al. 2022).
Recently, GAN inversion methods (Xia et al. 2022) have
been proposed to manipulate real images. These methods
usually follow an “invert first, edit later” procedure, which
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7432

