The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking the Development of Large Language Models from the Causal
Perspective: A Legal Text Prediction Case Study
Haotian Chen1 , Lingwei Zhang2 , Yiran Liu3 , Yang Yu3
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
3
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
htchen18@fudan.edu.com, lzhan218@jhu.edu, liu-yr21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yangyu1@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

0.6

92.13% of original
performance

0.5

72.4%
66.7%

F1-score

While large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive performance on a wide range of NLP tasks, most of them fail
to learn the causality from correlation, which disables them
from learning rationales for predicting. Rethinking the whole
developing process of LLMs is of great urgency as they are
adopted in various critical tasks that need rationales, including legal text prediction (e.g., legal judgment prediction). In
this paper, we first explain the underlying theoretical mechanism of their failure and argue that both the data imbalance and the omission of causality in model design and selection render the current training-testing paradigm failed
to select the unique causality-based model from correlationbased models. Second, we take the legal text prediction task
as the testbed and reconstruct the developing process of
LLMs by simultaneously infusing causality into model architectures and organizing causality-based adversarial attacks
for evaluation. Specifically, we base our reconstruction on
our theoretical analysis and propose a causality-aware selfattention mechanism (CASAM), which prevents LLMs from
entangling causal and non-causal information by restricting
the interaction between causal and non-causal words. Meanwhile, we propose eight kinds of legal-specific attacks to form
causality-based model selection. Our extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed CASAM achieves
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances and the strongest robustness on three commonly used legal text prediction benchmarks. We make our code publicly available at https://github.
com/Carrot-Red/Rethink-LLM-development.

1

Fact description:
… between the competent
body and [the first applicant]
and the parents have been
alerted to all legal cases…

0.7

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

× 103

Evidence Words of
Legal-BERT
(on the Test Set of
ECtHR)
the
.
of
,
to
and
[UNK]
in
on
appli.
had
a
that
s
court

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

No. Evidence Words
= 𝟓%
No. Total Words
Macro-F1 Q: According to the fact
Micro-F1
description. How many
1

articles are violated?

Legal-BERT Judger
✓
None of them is violated!
Q: What if the character ‘[’ gets
masked from this description?
Legal-BERT Judger
Oh! Then it will violate ×
article 1, 5, 9, 10, 11, and 14!

Figure 1: An example of reversed prediction caused by character substitution. We also present the frequency of evidence words considered by Legal-BERT. Making predictions merely according to these evidence words (5% words
of each input document) reserves 92.13% performance of
Legal-BERT. “No.” denotes the number of words.

stake tasks that require rationales for decisions (e.g., legal judgment prediction). For example, we found clues that
the commonly adopted state-of-the-art (SOTA) LJP models (Chalkidis et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Chalkidis et al.
2022a) learn the spurious correlations and simultaneously
achieve the minimum training loss. As shown in Figure 1,
the prediction of Legal-BERT (Chalkidis et al. 2020) is reversed by a small change that does not cause an essential semantic change. Furthermore, the most important keywords
deciding the model predictions mainly concentrate on punctuation marks and function words. A large number of predictions only rely on less than 5% of words from the fact
descriptions rather than considering the whole text. These
potential risks make the causality-understanding model become an urgent need. We have to rethink the whole developing process of LLMs.
In this paper, we first argue that data imbalance is the main
factor that hampers the traditional developing paradigm

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have undergone significant
development and significantly impacted our life in a wide
range of applications (OpenAI 2023), including legal judgment prediction (Feng, Li, and Ng 2022; Chalkidis et al.
2022a), drug discovery (Singha Roy and Mercer 2023), and
quantitative trading (Sawhney et al. 2021; Ju et al. 2023).
While we enjoy their human-surpassing performance, they
exhibit certain risks caused by confusing causality from
correlation (Chen, Chen, and Zhou 2023). Their failure of
learning causality (rationales) not only degrades their performance but also renders them untrustworthy, thus impeding their real-world applications, especially in those highCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20958

