The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DA-Net: A Disentangled and Adaptive Network for Multi-Source Cross-Lingual
Transfer Learning
Ling Ge1 , Chunming Hu1,2,3, * , Guanghui Ma1 , Jihong Liu4, * , Hong Zhang5 ,
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
College of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
4
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Beihang University, Beijing, China
5
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team / Coordination Center of China, Beijing, China
{geling, hucm, maguanghui, ryukeiko}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangh@isc.org.cn
Abstract

Aggregation

Multi-Source cross-lingual transfer learning deals with the
transfer of task knowledge from multiple labelled source languages to an unlabeled target language under the language
shift. Existing methods typically focus on weighting the predictions produced by language-specific classifiers of different
sources that follow a shared encoder. However, all source languages share the same encoder, which is updated by all these
languages. The extracted representations inevitably contain
different source languages’ information, which may disturb
the learning of the language-specific classifiers. Additionally,
due to the language gap, language-specific classifiers trained
with source labels are unable to make accurate predictions
for the target language. Both facts impair the model’s performance. To address these challenges, we propose a Disentangled and Adaptive Network (DA-Net). Firstly, we devise a
feedback-guided collaborative disentanglement method that
seeks to purify input representations of classifiers, thereby
mitigating mutual interference from multiple sources. Secondly, we propose a class-aware parallel adaptation method
that aligns class-level distributions for each source-target language pair, thereby alleviating the language pairs’ language
gap. Experimental results on three different tasks involving
38 languages validate the effectiveness of our approach.

Alignment Space
Encoder

Classifiers

Figure 1: Existing works align all languages through alignment loss Lalign , causing the model only retaining information invariant across all languages.
realistic scenario where multiple sources with different languages are available. Since the target language may be similar to different source languages over various aspects, i.e.,
word order, capitalization, and script style (Hu et al. 2021;
de Vries et al. 2022), multi-source cross-lingual transfer
learning (Moon et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020a) generally produces superior performance (Hu et al. 2021) compared to
single-source algorithms and has garnered much interest.
The competitive approaches (Chen et al. 2019; Jin et al.
2022) typically learn a shared encoder, along with languagespecific classifiers, which yield an ensemble prediction for
target language. However, these approaches have two limitations. (1) Since multiple sources share one same encoder,
the representations extracted by the encoder inevitably contain information from different source languages, which
may confuse the optimisation of language-specific classifiers. (2) Due to the language gap, language-specific classifiers trained with source labels are unable to make accurate
predictions for target samples. Although these methods attempt to alleviate this problem via performing all languages
alignment (shown in Fig 1), unfortunately, this constraint is
so strict that the shared features in each source-target language pair would be eliminated, thus deteriorating the adaptability of all language pairs and exacerbating this problem.
Obviously, both limitations impair the model’s performance.
In this paper, we propose a Disentangled and Adaptive
Network (DA-Net) to tackle the two problems simultaneously. The proposed architecture has several separate lan-

Introduction
Recent advances in multilingual models (Devlin et al. 2019;
Conneau and Lample 2019) have enabled significant improvements in many cross-lingual tasks, owing partly to the
availability of large-scale annotated data. However, some
tasks in no-annotated languages may suffer from the socalled “data hungriness” and fail to enjoy this technological
advancement. This problem can be alleviated by conducting cross-lingual transfer learning (Zeng et al. 2022; Moreo
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023), which seeks to transfer languageindependent knowledge from the labelled language (source)
to the unlabeled language (target) (Sherborne and Lapata
2022; Ding et al. 2022; Ge et al. 2023), so that unlabeled
languages can benefit from existing techniques.
Despite impressive results, most existing works focus
only on the single-source setting and fail to consider a more
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18047

