The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Autoregressive Text-to-Graph Framework for Joint
Entity and Relation Extraction
Urchade Zaratiana1,2 , Nadi Tomeh2 , Pierre Holat1,2 , Thierry Charnois2
1

2

FI Group, Puteaux, France
LIPN - Université Sorbonne Paris Nord - CNRS UMR 7030, Villetaneuse, France
{zaratiana, tomeh, charnois}@lipn.fr, pierre.holat@fi-group.com

Abstract

While these models have achieved remarkable performance,
we argue that they also expose room for improvement, especially in terms of grounding the output in the input text.
In this paper, we present an autoregressive transformer
encoder-decoder model that generates a linearized graph instead of generating plain text. Our model makes use of a
pointing mechanism (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015) on
a dynamic vocabulary of spans and relations, providing explicit grounding in the original text. In fact, without grounding, models can generate output that are semantically coherent but contextually detached from the input. Our pointing mechanism mitigates this issue by ensuring that the decoder’s outputs, specifically the entity spans, are directly tied
to the input text. Furthermore, by generating spans and relations directly from the text, rather than producing standalone plain text, our model encode the structural characteristics and boundaries of entities/spans more accurately,
which can be missed by previous generative information extraction models. The cornerstone of our solution is the explicit enumeration of all spans1 at the encoder’s output, making them readily available to the decoder. Although the number of spans can be extensive, we note that when bounding
the span size, our model’s vocabulary is typically smaller
than that of traditional language models (Devlin et al. 2019;
Raffel et al. 2019), as discussed in subsequent sections.
Moreover, as previous generative IE models operate at the
token level, they scatter the information regarding an entity’s
span and its boundaries over multiple decoding steps. In contrast, generating an entity and its type in our approach is
accomplished in a single decoding step, resulting in shorter
sequence (Figure 5). Additionally, our method naturally ensures the well-formedness of the output while some generative IE models that produce text, often require non-regular
constraints. As an example, in TANL (Paolini et al. 2021),
if a portion of the generated sentence has an invalid format,
that segment is discarded. Such issues are readily addressed
in our model since the vocabulary can be fully controlled.
We evaluated our model on three benchmark datasets for
joint entity and relation extraction: CoNLL 2004, SciERC,
and ACE 05. Our model demonstrated competitive performance on all datasets. Our contributions can be summarized
as follows:

In this paper, we propose a novel method for joint entity
and relation extraction from unstructured text by framing
it as a conditional sequence generation problem. In contrast to conventional generative information extraction models that are left-to-right token-level generators, our approach
is span-based. It generates a linearized graph where nodes
represent text spans and edges represent relation triplets.
Our method employs a transformer encoder-decoder architecture with pointing mechanism on a dynamic vocabulary of
spans and relation types. Our model can capture the structural characteristics and boundaries of entities and relations
through span representations while simultaneously grounding
the generated output in the original text thanks to the pointing mechanism. Evaluation on benchmark datasets validates
the effectiveness of our approach, demonstrating competitive
results. Code is available at https://github.com/urchade/ATG.

Introduction
Joint entity and relation extraction is a fundamental task in
Natural Language Processing (NLP), serving as the basis for
various high-level applications such as Knowledge Graph
construction (Ye et al. 2022b) and question answering (Chen
et al. 2017). Traditionally, this task was tackled via pipeline
models that independently trained and implemented entity
recognition and relation extraction, often leading to error
propagation (Brin 1999). Deep learning has led to the creation of end-to-end models, allowing for the use of shared
representations and joint optimization of loss functions for
both tasks (Wadden et al. 2019; Wang and Lu 2020; Zhao
et al. 2021; Zhong and Chen 2021; Yan et al. 2021). Despite
this advancement, these models essentially remain pipelinebased, with entity and relation predictions executed by separate classification heads, thereby ignoring potential interactions between these tasks.
Recent advancements have seen a shift towards “real”
end-to-end solutions, where the prediction of entities and relations is intertwined, accomplished through autoregressive
models. These models treat the joint entity-relation task as a
process of generating plain text, employing augmented languages to encode and decode structural information (Paolini
et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Fei et al. 2022).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

19477

Up to a certain length in practice.

