The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Test-Time Personalization with Meta Prompt for Gaze Estimation
Huan Liu1 , Julia Qi1,2 * † , Zhenhao Li1 * , Mohammad Hassanpour1 , Yang Wang3 ,
Konstantinos Plataniotis4 , Yuanhao Yu1
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Canada
University of Waterloo, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Canada
4
The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada
{huan.liu127, zhenhao.li1, mohammad.hassanpour, yuanhao.yu}@huawei.com, j6qi@waterloo.ca,
yang.wang@concordia.ca, kostas@ece.utoronto.ca
2

Abstract
Despite the recent remarkable achievement in gaze estimation, efficient and accurate personalization of gaze estimation
without labels is a practical problem but rarely touched on in
the literature. To achieve efficient personalization, we take inspiration from the recent advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP) by updating a negligible number of parameters, “prompts”, at the test time. Specifically, the prompt is
additionally attached without perturbing original network and
can contain less than 1% of a ResNet-18’s parameters. Our
experiments show high efficiency of the prompt tuning approach. The proposed one can be 10 times faster in terms of
adaptation speed than the methods compared. However, it is
non-trivial to update the prompt for personalized gaze estimation without labels. At the test time, it is essential to ensure
that the minimizing of particular unsupervised loss leads to
the goals of minimizing gaze estimation error. To address this
difficulty, we propose to meta-learn the prompt to ensure that
its updates align with the goal. Our experiments show that
the meta-learned prompt can be effectively adapted even with
a simple symmetry loss. In addition, we experiment on four
cross-dataset validations to show the remarkable advantages
of the proposed method.

1

Gaze360

Baseline
PnP-GA

RUDA
Ours
TPGaze
(Ours)

Figure 1: Illustration of performance comparison in terms
of gaze error and tunable parameters. Our method achieved
the lowest gaze error with negligible tunable parameters required for personalization. Gaze errors are calculated by averaging four cross-dataset validations.

et al. 2019; Funes Mora, Monay, and Odobez 2014; Zhang
et al. 2020, 2017b) essentially learn a mapping on the training data in a supervised manner. Although achieving high
accuracy on the training dataset, these methods suffer from
performance degradation when tested in real-world scenarios with distribution shift. In addition, collecting labeled
data in the real world is extremely difficult, making it challenging to fine-tune. These issues raise concerns about the
practical value of purely supervised methods. To address the
above concern, recent attempts have focused on gaze estimation in the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) setting (Kellnhofer et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2021b). However, these UDA methods assume the availability of source data, which may not be available in real-world
applications due to privacy concerns. In the literature, only
few methods, such as (Wang et al. 2022) and (Bao et al.
2022), consider addressing UDA without source data.
In this paper, we study a new variant of UDA, i.e., testtime personalization. With the widespread use of portable

Introduction

Gaze, which refers to the direction of an individual’s visual
focus, is a crucial indicator of human attention. Gaze estimation is a rapidly evolving area of research, with the aim
of determining the direction of an individual’s gaze based on
the positioning and orientation of their eyes and head. Due
to its potential applications in diverse fields such as healthcare (Castner et al. 2020), gaming (Burova et al. 2020), and
human-computer interaction (Admoni and Scassellati 2017),
it has attracted significant attention.
Recent years have witnessed tremendous success of utilizing deep learning in addressing the gaze estimation problem. However, most of deep learning based methods (Krafka
et al. 2016; Fischer, Chang, and Demiris 2018; Kellnhofer
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3621

