The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Model Reprogramming: Resource-Efficient Cross-Domain Machine Learning
Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract
In data-rich domains such as vision, language, and speech,
deep learning prevails to deliver high-performance taskspecific models and can even learn general task-agnostic
representations for efficient finetuning to downstream tasks.
However, deep learning in resource-limited domains still
faces multiple challenges including (i) limited data, (ii) constrained model development cost, and (iii) lack of adequate
pre-trained models for effective finetuning. This paper provides an overview of model reprogramming to bridge this
gap. Model reprogramming enables resource-efficient crossdomain machine learning by repurposing and reusing a welldeveloped pre-trained model from a source domain to solve
tasks in a target domain without model finetuning, where
the source and target domains can be vastly different. In
many applications, model reprogramming outperforms transfer learning and training from scratch. This paper elucidates
the methodology of model reprogramming, summarizes existing use cases, provides a theoretical explanation of the success of model reprogramming, and concludes with a discussion on open-ended research questions and opportunities.

1

Figure 1: Visual illustration of data scale (bottom to top:
small to large) and number (#) of trainable parameters
(left to right: small to large) in different machine learning
paradigms. We note that the visualization does not reflect
the actual relative differences due to excessively varying orders. A foundation model like GPT-3 has 175 billion trainable parameters and 499 billion tokens as training data. The
trainable parameters in model reprogramming can be as few
as the size of the data input (e.g., the number of image pixels
can be in the order of thousands or fewer), and model reprogramming is particularly suited to small-scale data regime.
In model reprogramming, the visualization does not take
into account the pre-trained source model because it is kept
intact and unchanged. The dashed box in transfer learning
means variations in the number of model parameters used
for fine-tuning, ranging from only training the last dense
layer (linear head) to fine-tuning all parameters. The number of training epochs may also vary for each paradigm.

Introduction

Designing and developing a top-notch deep learning model
is a time-consuming and costly process. It is no secret that
employing a high-capacity neural network model consisting of a tremendous number of trainable parameters, together with a proper selection of the network architecture
and hyperparameter optimization, can lead to state-of-theart machine learning performance when trained on a massive amount of data. Take the Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3) (Brown et al. 2020) as an example, which
is one of the largest language models ever trained to date.
GPT-3 has 175 billion parameters and is trained on a dataset
consisting of 499 Billion tokens. The estimated training cost
is about 4.6 Million US dollars even with the lowest priced
GPU cloud on the market in 20201 . Such a large-scale language model is shown to be effective when applied to several downstream language-related tasks in the same domain
(source). However, having invested so much to obtain a topnotch model, one interesting question to ask is: Can we reuse

this valuable asset for machine learning in another domain
(target), especially in the resource-limited setting when at
least one of the following scenarios is concerned: (i) lack
of high-quality pre-trained models in the target domain for
finetuning, (ii) scarcity of the available data in the target domain, and (iii) constraints on the model development and
training cost (e.g. limited memory or training epochs).
To address these challenges, this paper provides an
overview of the model reprogramming framework towards
resource-efficient cross-domain machine learning. The general rationale behind model reprogramming lies in repurpos-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See https://lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3

22584

