The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SEIT: Structural Enhancement for Unsupervised Image Translation
in Frequency Domain
Zhifeng Zhu1 , Yaochen Li1 * , Yifan Li1 , Jinhuo Yang1 , Peijun Chen1 , Yuehu Liu2
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
z1965761380@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yaochenli@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
{3121358033, jinhuo, 3123358029}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, liuyh@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
For the task of unsupervised image translation, transforming the image style while preserving its original structure
remains challenging. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised image translation method with structural enhancement in frequency domain named SEIT. Specifically, a frequency dynamic adaptive (FDA) module is designed for image style transformation that can well transfer the image
style while maintaining its overall structure by decoupling
the image content and style in frequency domain. Moreover, a wavelet-based structure enhancement (WSE) module
is proposed to improve the intermediate translation results by
matching the high-frequency information, thus enriching the
structural details. Furthermore, a multi-scale network architecture is designed to extract the domain-specific information using image-independent encoders for both the source
and target domains. The extensive experimental results well
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Figure 1: The SSIM vs. FID of different methods on the Day
→ Night task. The method closest to the top left corner is the
best and the red circle represents our proposed SEIT.

Introduction
Unsupervised image translation is a challenging task that
aims to transform images from source domain to target domain without paired training data. In recent years, the development of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020) has led to significant advances in computer vision tasks such as image defogging (Fu et al. 2021),
image deraining (Chen et al. 2022), etc. The GAN-based
methods have also demonstrated success in accomplishing source-to-target domain translations through adversarial
training of generators and discriminators. However, the resulting translated images may exhibit structural distortions
and image artifacts.
To address these issues, researchers have made efforts to
refine GAN-based techniques for image translation tasks.
For example, GCGAN(Fu et al. 2019) ensures the consistency between the input image and the corresponding output
by preserving image transformation, such as flipping or rotating. In the work of LPTN(Liang, Zeng, and Zhang 2021),
Liang et al. design a framework based on Laplacian decomposition and reconstruction to maintain the image structural

information. VSAIT(Theiss et al. 2022) addresses semantic inversion issues by learning inverse mapping in a highdimensional vector space based on vector symbolic architectures to ensure consistency of source domain content. Although these methods have achieved success in maintaining
image structure, the generated results still lack satisfactory
style effects.
To keep both the structure and style well during image
translation, we propose an unsupervised image translation
method with structural enhancement in the frequency domain named SEIT. The method is based on the GAN framework and consists of a generator and a discriminator. To improve the style of the translation results, we leverage both the
source and target domain images as input to the generator, as
in previous work (Jiang et al. 2020), to extract more style information during image translation. When image translation
is performed in this framework, the content features of the
source domain image should be fully preserved and the style
features of the target domain image should be fully transferred to the translation result. To meet these requirements, a
frequency dynamic adaptive (FDA) module for style conver-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7820

