The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CCTR: Calibrating Trajectory Prediction for Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning
in Autonomous Driving
Chengtai Cao1 , Xinhong Chen1 , Jianping Wang1 , Qun Song2 , Rui Tan3 , Yung-Hui Li4
1

City University of Hong Kong
Delft University of Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
Hon Hai Research Institute
{chengtcao2-c, xinhchen2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, jianwang@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

hand, end-to-end autonomous driving frameworks have been
proposed to circumvent such uncertainty issues (Zeng et al.
2019, 2020; Sadat et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2021). For instance, Zeng et al. (2019) introduce an end-to-end interpretable neural motion planner that learns a cost volume representation to model uncertainty in scene forecasting. Regions with higher cost volume values are more likely to
contain other agents or obstacles. However, the end-to-end
frameworks introduce complexities in disentangling intertwined uncertainties from various input sources and incorporating individual state-of-the-art designs. On the other hand,
some approaches output predictions in the form of a distribution such that uncertainty can be represented as the variance
of the distribution. Prior works have employed Gaussian distributions (Alahi et al. 2016; Girgis et al. 2022; Nakamura
and Bansal 2022) and Laplace distributions (Zhou et al.
2022, 2023) for such uncertainty modeling. Nevertheless,
the absence of an explicit ground truth for variance and the
lack of a dedicated loss term for uncertainty introduce potential unreliability in the predicted uncertainty (Feng et al.
2019). Thus, an additional calibration procedure is imperative to adjust the output variance appropriately.
Directly applying existing calibration techniques from
other domains may yield sub-optimal results. For instance,
when directly utilizing temperature-based calibration methods (Guo et al. 2017; Zhang, Kailkhura, and Han 2020; Feng
et al. 2019), a global temperature scaler will be employed
for all predictions, regardless of instructive contextual information. While a recent model introduces a variance scaling
algorithm designed for real-time safety maintenance and updates (Nakamura and Bansal 2022), its resource-intensive
confidence estimation and high-dimensional computations
violate the prerequisites for calibration methods outlined
in (Zhang, Kailkhura, and Han 2020). Consequently, its applicability in resource-constrained vehicles is constrained.
In this work, we introduce a plug-and-play framework
– Customized Calibration Temperature with Regularizer
(CCTR) – that effectively calibrates prediction uncertainty to improve motion planning performance. Specifically, CCTR comprises two modules: 1) a calibration-based
regularizer that enforces variance to match the actual divergence between prediction and ground truth, ensuring the
calibrated variances accurately capture uncertainty, and 2)
a post-processing procedure that customizes temperature

Autonomous driving systems rely on precise trajectory prediction for safe and efficient motion planning. Despite considerable efforts to enhance prediction accuracy, inherent uncertainties persist due to data noise and incomplete observations. Many strategies entail formalizing prediction outcomes
into distributions and utilizing variance to represent uncertainty. However, our experimental investigation reveals that
existing trajectory prediction models yield unreliable uncertainty estimates, necessitating additional customized calibration processes. On the other hand, directly applying current
calibration techniques to prediction outputs may yield suboptimal results due to using a universal scaler for all predictions and neglecting informative data cues. In this paper,
we propose Customized Calibration Temperature with Regularizer (CCTR), a generic framework that calibrates the output distribution. Specifically, CCTR 1) employs a calibrationbased regularizer to align output variance with the discrepancy between prediction and ground truth and 2) generates
a tailor-made temperature scaler for each prediction using
a post-processing network guided by context and historical
information. Extensive evaluation involving multiple prediction and planning methods demonstrates the superiority of
CCTR over existing calibration algorithms and uncertaintyaware methods, with significant improvements of 11%-22%
in calibration quality and 17%-46% in motion planning.

Introduction
Over the past decade, autonomous driving has achieved remarkable advancements, driven by substantial progress in
key supporting technologies. Notably, trajectory prediction
and motion planning have emerged as two pivotal elements
within the autonomous driving software pipeline. The prediction module estimates the future locations of surrounding
entities based on observed data, while the planning module
uses these prediction outputs to derive a collision-free motion path. The sequential interdependence of these two modules raises a pressing concern that the prediction inaccuracy
may compromise planning safety and even cause serious accidents. Therefore, addressing the uncertainty between these
two modules is vital in ensuring overall driving safety.
Current works mainly deal with the uncertainty associated with trajectory prediction in two manners. On the one
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20949

