The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Multi-Label Classification via Dynamic Label-Order Learning
Jiangnan Li1,3† , Yice Zhang1,3† , Shiwei Chen1,2 , Ruifeng Xu1,2,3*
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
lijiangnan@stu.hit.edu.cn, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn

If memorize the order

Abstract
Generative methods tackle Multi-Label Classification (MLC)
by autoregressively generating label sequences. These methods excel at modeling label correlations and have achieved
outstanding performance. However, a key challenge is determining the order of labels, as empirical findings indicate the
significant impact of different orders on model learning and
inference. Previous works adopt static label-ordering methods, assigning a unified label order for all samples based
on label frequencies or co-occurrences. Nonetheless, such
static methods neglect the unique semantics of each sample. More critically, these methods can cause the model to
rigidly memorize training order, resulting in missing labels
during inference. In light of these limitations, this paper proposes a dynamic label-order learning approach that adaptively learns a label order for each sample. Specifically, our
approach adopts a difficulty-prioritized principle and iteratively constructs the label sequence based on the sample’s
semantics. To reduce the additional cost incurred by labelorder learning, we use the same SEQ 2 SEQ model for labelorder learning and MLC learning and introduce a unified
loss function for joint optimization. Extensive experiments
on public datasets reveal that our approach greatly outperforms previous methods. We will release our code at https:
//github.com/KagamiBaka/DLOL.

then

SEQ2SEQ Model
SEQ2SEQ Model

missed label

Figure 1: Training with a static order results in the model
rigidly memorizing the order itself and further causes the
model to miss labels during inference.

during training, as empirical findings indicate the significant
impact of different orders on label generation (Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur 2016; Jin and Nakayama 2016; Chen et al.
2018). Early works primarily rely on alphabetical order or
label frequencies to establish this order (Jin and Nakayama
2016; Nam et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018). More recent work
exploits label co-occurrences to determine a more appropriate order (Madaan et al. 2022). These methods are categorized as static label-ordering approaches since the relative
order of labels within each sample remains constant.
However, static label-ordering approaches suffer from
two significant limitations. Firstly, the optimal order varies
greatly across different samples as it is closely tied to the semantics of each sample. Imposing a static order for all samples disregards the unique characteristics inherent in each
sample. Secondly, training with a static order will result
in the model rigidly memorizing the order itself, as discussed in previous studies (Tsai and Lee 2020; Yazici et al.
2020). The rote memorization of the training order restricts
the model’s ability to generate label sequences that differ
from the training order. This limitation further leads to the
model’s increased likelihood of missing labels since certain
labels can be overlooked if they are not generated at specific
positions, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Moreover, we observe a notable trend wherein labels positioned later in the label sequence tend to result in lower
performance. The trend can be attributed to the concept of
shortcut learning (Geirhos et al. 2020), wherein the model
heavily relies on earlier gold labels provided during training to infer the subsequent labels. This reliance serves as a
shortcut and reduces the model’s dependence on the inher-

Introduction
Multi-Label Classification (MLC) aims to assign multiple
labels to a single sample (Zhang and Zhou 2014). It holds
substantial significance within the field of natural language
processing and machine learning, finding applications in
various real-world scenarios, including text categorization
(Hayes and Weinstein 1990; Agrawal et al. 2013), information retrieval (Prabhu et al. 2018), and fine-grained emotion
classification (Demszky et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021).
Prior efforts have applied SEQ2SEQ models to MLC tasks
(Nam et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018, 2019; Madaan et al.
2022). Through autoregressive modeling, these methods
exhibit a notable capability to capture label correlations,
thereby yielding remarkable performance. One key challenge in these methods lies in determining the order of labels
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*

18527

