The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LRANet: Towards Accurate and Efficient Scene Text Detection with Low-Rank
Approximation Network
Yuchen Su1,2 , Zhineng Chen1, * , Zhiwen Shao3 , Yuning Du2 , Zhilong Ji4 , Jinfeng Bai4 , Yong Zhou3 ,
Yu-Gang Jiang1
1

Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Baidu Inc.
3
China University of Mining and Technology
4
Tomorrow Advancing Life
ycsu23@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, duyuning@biadu.com, jizhilong@tal.com, jfbai.bit@gmail.com,
{zhiwen shao, yzhou}@cumt.edu.cn
Abstract
Recently, regression-based methods, which predict parameterized text shapes for text localization, have gained popularity in scene text detection. However, the existing parameterized text shape methods still have limitations in modeling
arbitrary-shaped texts due to ignoring the utilization of textspecific shape information. Moreover, the time consumption
of the entire pipeline has been largely overlooked, leading to
a suboptimal overall inference speed. To address these issues,
we first propose a novel parameterized text shape method
based on low-rank approximation. Unlike other shape representation methods that employ data-irrelevant parameterization, our approach utilizes singular value decomposition and
reconstructs the text shape using a few eigenvectors learned
from labeled text contours. By exploring the shape correlation among different text contours, our method achieves consistency, compactness, simplicity, and robustness in shape
representation. Next, we propose a dual assignment scheme
for speed acceleration. It adopts a sparse assignment branch
to accelerate the inference speed, and meanwhile, provides
ample supervised signals for training through a dense assignment branch. Building upon these designs, we implement an accurate and efficient arbitrary-shaped text detector named LRANet. Extensive experiments are conducted on
several challenging benchmarks, demonstrating the superior
accuracy and efficiency of LRANet compared to state-of-theart methods. Code is available at: https://github.com/ychensu/
LRANet.git

Figure 1: The comparisons of several popular scene text detectors on the CTW1500 dataset. Our method achieves the
best trade-off between accuracy and efficiency.

2020; Zhu and Du 2021; Liao et al. 2022) and regressionbased methods (Sheng et al. 2019; Hou et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020b; Zhang et al. 2022b; Su et al. 2022). To explore
an arbitrary-shaped scene text detector, segmentation-based
methods model text instances with pixel-level classification
masks that allow naturally fitting of arbitrary shapes, but
they mainly focus on local textual cues rather than the integrated geometric layout of texts, leading to a lack of global
perception. Complex post-processing is often required to
merge the pixel-level results to text regions.
Recently, regression-based methods, which predict parameterized text shapes for text localization, have sparked a
new wave of research in arbitrary-shaped text detection due
to their enhanced ability to consider the integrated geometric
layout of texts. However, there are still two main problems
that remain to be explored.
One problem is that the existing parameterized text
shape methods are still challenging in modeling arbitraryshaped texts. For horizontal and multi-oriented text, regressing quadrilaterals is sufficient to represent the text shape.
However, sophisticated representation is required for representing arbitrary-shaped text. Some methods adopt contour
points or parametric curves to fit the text shape, but they either lack imposing geometric constraints or fail to consider

Introduction
Scene text detection has garnered significant attention in
computer vision due to its fundamental role as the initial step
for end-to-end text recognition (Sheng, Chen, and Xu 2019;
Du et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2023a). Driven by the rapid development of deep learning, scene text detection methods
have made significant progress (Song et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022b; Fang et al. 2022; Song et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022;
Song et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2023b; Du
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Shu et al. 2023).
Existing scene text detection can be roughly divided into
segmentation-based methods (Wang et al. 2019b; Zhou et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4979

