The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SOGDet: Semantic-Occupancy Guided Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Qiu Zhou1 * , Jinming Cao2† * , Hanchao Leng3 , Yifang Yin4 , Yu Kun3 , Roger Zimmermann2
1

Independent Researcher
National University of Singapore
3
Xiaomi Car
4
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
{zhouqiulv, jinming.ccao, hanchao.leng}@gmail.com, yin yifang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, yukun@xiaomi.com,
rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

barrier
bicyc.
bus
car
veh.
moto.
pedes.
cone
trailer
truck
drive
flat
walk
terrain
manm.
veget.

Abstract
In the field of autonomous driving, accurate and comprehensive perception of the 3D environment is crucial. Bird’s Eye
View (BEV) based methods have emerged as a promising solution for 3D object detection using multi-view images as
input. However, existing 3D object detection methods often
ignore the physical context in the environment, such as sidewalk and vegetation, resulting in sub-optimal performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach called SOGDet
(Semantic-Occupancy Guided Multi-view 3D Object Detection), that leverages a 3D semantic-occupancy branch to improve the accuracy of 3D object detection. In particular, the
physical context modeled by semantic occupancy helps the
detector to perceive the scenes in a more holistic view. Our
SOGDet is flexible to use and can be seamlessly integrated
with most existing BEV-based methods. To evaluate its effectiveness, we apply this approach to several state-of-the-art
baselines and conduct extensive experiments on the exclusive
nuScenes dataset. Our results show that SOGDet consistently
enhance the performance of three baseline methods in terms
of nuScenes Detection Score (NDS) and mean Average Precision (mAP). This indicates that the combination of 3D object
detection and 3D semantic occupancy leads to a more comprehensive perception of the 3D environment, thereby aiding
build more robust autonomous driving systems. The codes are
available at: https://github.com/zhouqiu/SOGDet.

a 3D Object
Detection

b 3D Semantic
Occupancy Prediction

c Hybrid Feature

Figure 1: Illustration of 3D object detection and semantic
occupancy prediction tasks. On the rightmost legend, the top
10 categories in the blue box are shared for both tasks, and
the bottom 6 categories in the green box are exclusively used
by semantic occupancy prediction. (a) 3D object detection
usually focuses on objects on roads, such as bicycles and
cars. In contrast, 3D semantic occupancy prediction (b) concerns more about physical contexts (e.g., sidewalk and vegetation) in the environment. By combining these two (c), we
can obtain a more comprehensive perception of the traffic
conditions, such as pedestrians and bicycles mainly on the
sidewalk and cars and buses co-appearing on drive surface.

Introduction
Autonomous driving has become a burgeoning field for
both research and industry, with a notable focus on achieving accurate and comprehensive perception of the 3D environment. Recently, Bird’s Eye View (BEV) based methods (Huang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022b,a) have attracted
extensive attention in 3D object detection due to their effectiveness in reducing computational costs and footprints.
The common paradigm is to take the multi-view images
as inputs to detect objects, wherein the noticeable work
BEVDet (Huang et al. 2021) serves as a strong baseline.
BEVDet first extracts image features from multi-view images using a typical backbone network such as ResNet (He
et al. 2016). The features are thereafter mapped to the BEV

space with View Transformer (Philion and Fidler 2020), followed by a convolutional network and a target detection
head. Inspired by BEVDet, following studies have integrated
additional features into this framework, such as depth supervision (Li et al. 2022a) and temporal modules (Huang and
Huang 2022).
Despite the significant improvement in localizing and
classifying specific objects, i.e., cars and pedestrians, most
existing methods (Huang et al. 2021; Huang and Huang
2022; Li et al. 2022b,a) neglect the physical context in the
environment. These contexts, such as roads, pavements and
vegetation, though out of interest for detection, still offer important cues for perceiving the 3D scenes. For example, as
shown in Figure 1, cars mostly appear on the drivable surface rather than the sidewalk. To harness such important features for object detection, we notice a recent emerging task

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7668

