The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Compositional Text-to-Image Synthesis with Attention Map Control of Diffusion
Models
Ruichen Wang1 , Zekang Chen2 * , Chen Chen1 # , Jian Ma1 , Haonan Lu1 # , Xiaodong Lin3
1

OPPO Research Institute
South China University of Technology
3
Rutgers University
wangruichen@oppo.com,chenzekang2018@163.com,{chenchen4,majian2,luhaonan}@oppo.com, lin@business.rutgers.edu
2

“A black cat and a yellow dog”

Abstract
Recent text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models show outstanding
performance in generating high-quality images conditioned on
textual prompts. However, they fail to semantically align the
generated images with the prompts due to their limited compositional capabilities, leading to attribute leakage, entity leakage, and missing entities. In this paper, we propose a novel attention mask control strategy based on predicted object boxes
to address these issues. In particular, we first train a BoxNet to
predict a box for each entity that possesses the attribute specified in the prompt. Then, depending on the predicted boxes, a
unique mask control is applied to the cross- and self-attention
maps. Our approach produces a more semantically accurate
synthesis by constraining the attention regions of each token
in the prompt to the image. In addition, the proposed method
is straightforward and effective and can be readily integrated
into existing cross-attention-based T2I generators. We compare our approach to competing methods and demonstrate
that it can faithfully convey the semantics of the original text
to the generated content and achieve high availability as a
ready-to-use plugin. Please refer to https://github.com/OPPOMente-Lab/attention-mask-control.

attribute leakage

entity leakage

missing entities

OURS

Figure 1: Example results from Stable Diffusion (first three
sets of images) and Our method (last set). Our method aims
to address three typical generation defects (attribute leakage,
entity leakage, and missing entities) and generate images that
are more semantically faithful to the image captions.

attributes (Feng et al. 2023; Han et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b;
Chefer et al. 2023; Jiménez 2023). The generation defects of
diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach
et al. 2022)fall into three categories: attribute leakage, entity
leakage, and missing entities, as shown in Fig.1. Considering
the prompt “a black cat and a yellow dog”, attribute leakage
refers to the phenomenon where the attribute of one entity is
observed in another (e.g., a black dog). Entity leakage occurs
when one entity overlays another (e.g., two cats, one black
and one yellow). Missing entities indicate that the model fails
to generate one or more of the subjects mentioned in the input
prompt (e.g., only one black cat).
We attribute the infidelity issues in T2I synthesis to inaccurate attention regions, i.e., the cross-attention regions between
text tokens and image patches, as well as the self-attention
regions within image patches themselves. Each entity and
its attribute should, ideally, correspond to a coherent image
region in order to generate multiple entities in a single image
correctly. Existing T2I diffusion models, such as SD, lack
explicit constraints on the attention regions and boundaries,
which may lead to overlapping attention activations. To address these issues, we attempt to use parsed entities with
attributes and their predicted object boxes to provide explicit
attention boundary constraints for compositional generations.
Specifically, predicted object boxes define the interest areas
on images, while entities with attributes depict the interest
text spans where each text token shares a common crossattention region. By incorporating these boundary constraints,
we achieve high-fidelity T2I synthesis while addressing the
aforementioned problems.

Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) synthesis aims to generate realistic and
diverse images conditioned on text prompts. Recently, diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art results in this
area (Rombach et al. 2022; Croitoru et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2023). Compared to previous generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020)
and variational autoencoder (VAE) (Doersch 2021), diffusion
models exhibit superior performance with respect to image
generation quality and diversity. They also enable better content control based on the input conditions such as grounding
boxes, edge maps, or reference images, while avoiding the
problems of training instability and mode collapse (Zhang,
Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Li et al. 2023).
Despite their success, diffusion-model-based synthesis
methods struggle to accurately interpret compositional text
descriptions, especially those containing multiple objects or
* The author did his work during internship at OPPO Research
Institute. # denotes corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5544

