The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HarvestNet: A Dataset for Detecting Smallholder Farming Activity Using Harvest
Piles and Remote Sensing
Jonathan Xu* 2 , Amna Elmustafa* 1 , Liya Weldegebriel1 , Emnet Negash3,4 , Richard Lee1 , Chenlin
Meng1 , Stefano Ermon1 , David Lobell1
1

Stanford University
University of Waterloo
3
Ghent University
4
Mekelle University
contact@jonathanxu.com, {amna97, liyanet}@stanford.edu, emnet.negash@ugent.be,
rjlee6@stanford.edu, {chenlin, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu, dlobell@stanford.edu
2

Abstract
Small farms contribute to a large share of the productive
land in developing countries. In regions such as sub-Saharan
Africa, where 80% of farms are small (under 2 ha in size),
the task of mapping smallholder cropland is an important
part of tracking sustainability measures such as crop productivity. However, the visually diverse and nuanced appearance of small farms has limited the effectiveness of traditional approaches to cropland mapping. Here we introduce a new approach based on the detection of harvest piles
characteristic of many smallholder systems throughout the
world. We present HarvestNet, a dataset for mapping the
presence of farms in the Ethiopian regions of Tigray and
Amhara during 2020-2023, collected using expert knowledge and satellite images, totaling 7k hand-labeled images
and 2k ground-collected labels. We also benchmark a set of
baselines, including SOTA models in remote sensing, with
our best models having around 80% classification performance on hand labelled data and 90% and 98% accuracy
on ground truth data for Tigray and Amhara, respectively.
We also perform a visual comparison with a widely used
pre-existing coverage map and show that our model detects
an extra 56,621 hectares of cropland in Tigray. We conclude that remote sensing of harvest piles can contribute to
more timely and accurate cropland assessments in food insecure regions. The dataset can be accessed through https:
//figshare.com/s/45a7b45556b90a9a11d2, while the code for
the dataset and benchmarks is publicly available at https:
//github.com/jonxuxu/harvest-piles

Figure 1: Various examples of harvest piles

are often sparse and fragmented which makes producing adequate and timely land use maps challenging, especially in
resource constrained regions. Consequently, many land use
datasets (Zanaga et al. 2022; Brown et al. 2022; Buchhorn
et al. 2020) are inaccurate and updated infrequently in such
regions, if at all.
Machine learning algorithms for remote sensing have
proved to be successful in many sustainability-related measures such as poverty mapping, vegetation and crop mapping as well as health and education measures (Yeh et al.
2021). Moreover, satellite images are now widely available
at different resolutions with global coverage at low to no cost
(Planet Labs 2023). The performance of methods for mapping croplands in smallholder systems, however, remains
limited in many cases (Zanaga et al. 2022; Brown et al.
2022).
Existing approaches to mapping croplands typically rely
on either the unique temporal pattern of vegetation growth
and senescence in crop fields compared to surrounding
vegetation, the identification of field boundaries in highresolution imagery, or some combination of both (Estes et al.
2022; Rufin et al. 2022). In non-mechanized smallholder
systems like Ethiopia, where subsistence rain-fed agriculture
predominates (Asmamaw 2017), these techniques face limitations. Weeds and wild vegetation often exhibit growth and
spectral reflectance patterns resembling cultivated crops,
causing confusion in spectral-based classification. The landscape’s heterogeneity in smallholder systems, encompassing various land uses such as crops, fallow land, and natural vegetation, also poses challenges in accurately demarcating field boundaries and distinguishing different land cover
types.

Introduction
Smallholder farming is the most common form of agriculture worldwide, supporting the livelihoods of billions of
people and producing more than half of food calories (Samberg et al. 2016; Lowder, Skoet, and Raney 2016). Cost effective and accurate mapping of farming activity can thus
aid in monitoring food security, assessing impacts of natural and human-induced hazards, and informing agriculture
extension and development policies. Yet smallholder farms
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22438

