The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Summarizing Stream Data for Memory-Constrained Online Continual Learning
Jianyang Gu1,2 , Kai Wang2 , Wei Jiang1 * , Yang You2
1

Zhejiang University
National University of Singapore
{gu jianyang, jiangwei zju}@zju.edu.cn, {kai.wang, youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Replay-based methods have proved their effectiveness on
online continual learning by rehearsing past samples from
an auxiliary memory. With many efforts made on improving training schemes based on the memory, however, the information carried by each sample in the memory remains
under-investigated. Under circumstances with restricted storage space, the informativeness of the memory becomes critical for effective replay. Although some works design specific
strategies to select representative samples, by only employing a small number of original images, the storage space is
still not well utilized. To this end, we propose to Summarize
the knowledge from the Stream Data (SSD) into more informative samples by distilling the training characteristics of
real images. Through maintaining the consistency of training
gradients and relationship to the past tasks, the summarized
samples are more representative for the stream data compared
to the original images. Extensive experiments are conducted
on multiple online continual learning benchmarks to support
that the proposed SSD method significantly enhances the replay effects. We demonstrate that with limited extra computational overhead, SSD provides more than 3% accuracy boost
for sequential CIFAR-100 under extremely restricted memory buffer. Code in https://github.com/vimar-gu/SSD.

Figure 1: Under the restricted memory size of 100, the information contained in the memory is rather limited. By integrating the information from stream data into summarized
samples, our proposed SSD largely enhances the replay effects. Experiments are conducted on the sequential CIFAR100 benchmark (10 tasks). The scatter point size represents
the GPU memory consumption at the training process.

Chakravarty, and Tuytelaars 2017; Fernando et al. 2017),
parameter updating regularization (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017;
Li and Hoiem 2017), pseudo sample generation (Shin et al.
2017) and memory-assisted replay (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato
2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017). Among them, replay-based methods maintain a small auxiliary memory containing images
from past tasks. By mixing them into the current training
process (Chaudhry et al. 2019), it provides direct accessibility to the past knowledge. Such a scheme brings stable performance improvements on relatively small computational
overhead. Many efforts have been made on improving the
training schemes to better leverage the memory (Mai et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2022). However, the informativeness of
samples in the memory remains under-investigated.
Under circumstances with restricted storage space, the information carried by each sample in the memory becomes
critical to the replay effects. There are some works devoted to selecting proper data from the stream for the memory (Aljundi et al. 2019b; Shim et al. 2021). But by only employing a small amount of original images, the storage space
is still underutilized. Efficiently condensing more informa-

Introduction
Continual learning (CL) aims to incrementally accumulate
knowledge from a sequence of tasks (Gu et al. 2022; Li
and Hoiem 2017; McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Ring 1998;
Thrun 1998). Due to the explosive data collection by modern
vision systems, storing all the images of past tasks for full
fine-tuning is impractical for both computation and storage.
Such restriction results in catastrophic forgetting, i.e., adapting the model to new tasks causes knowledge forgetting and
performance degradation of previous ones (McCloskey and
Cohen 1989). In this paper, we focus on the more challenging online class-incremental CL setting, where each task
consists of unique classes, with no task identity (Chaudhry
et al. 2018b, 2019). Inside the task, the data is passed in a
non-stationary stream, which can only be accessed once.
Recent literature addresses the forgetting problem from
the perspectives of dynamic model architectures (Aljundi,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12217

