The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RetroOOD: Understanding Out-of-Distribution
Generalization in Retrosynthesis Prediction
Yemin Yu1,5 * , Luotian Yuan2 * , Ying Wei3† , Hanyu Gao 4 , Fei Wu 2,5 , Zhihua Wang 5 , Xinhai Ye 5
1

City University of Hong Kong
2
Zhejiang University
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
yeminyu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, ying.wei@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

in a template-based manner or learning an implicit highdimensional mapping from the product to the precursors in a
template-free approach. Under the standard independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) train-test data split, both lines
of approaches have yielded promising results.
However, all retrosynthesis models exhibit a performance
discrepancy between an in-distribution (ID) and an out-ofdistribution (OOD) test set, which is a common issue when
deploying the retrosynthesis model to a real-world environment. In general, we conclude that this discrepancy can be
essentially attributed to the two different types of distributional shifts: the label shift of the retrosynthesis strategies (retro-strategy) and the covariate shift of the target
molecules. Our research is aimed to analyze this discrepancy caused by the distributional shifts under various retrosynthesis prediction baselines. By understanding the distributional shifts that occur, we hope to mitigate their effects
and gain a deeper understanding of the behaviors of various
types of retrosynthesis models under different distributional
shifts. To the best of our knowledge, no study has been conducted to investigate this topic rigorously.
To systematically analyze these two distributional shifts,
we create and conduct experiments on multi-dimensional
OOD dataset splits using various types of single-step retrosynthesis prediction baseline models. For each type of distributional shift, we propose a model-agnostic approach to
alleviate the performance degradation. Our paper contributes
to this field in three ways:
• We systematically define the distributional shifts under
the context of retrosynthesis prediction.
• We construct multi-dimensional out-of-distribution
datasets benchmarks and analyze the degree of performance discrepancies on a comprehensive set of
baselines.
• We propose model-agnostic invariant learning and concept enhancement techniques to reduce performance
degradations and provide our insights.

Machine learning-assisted retrosynthesis prediction models
have been gaining widespread adoption, though their performances oftentimes degrade significantly when deployed in
real-world applications embracing out-of-distribution (OOD)
molecules or reactions. Despite steady progress on standard benchmarks, our understanding of existing retrosynthesis prediction models under the premise of distribution
shifts remains stagnant. To this end, we first formally sort
out two types of distribution shifts in retrosynthesis prediction and construct two groups of benchmark datasets. Next,
through comprehensive experiments, we systematically compare state-of-the-art retrosynthesis prediction models on the
two groups of benchmarks, revealing the limitations of previous in-distribution evaluation and re-examining the advantages of each model. More remarkably, we are motivated by
the above empirical insights to propose two model-agnostic
techniques that can improve the OOD generalization of arbitrary off-the-shelf retrosynthesis prediction algorithms. Our
preliminary experiments show their high potential with an average performance improvement of 4.6%, and the established
benchmarks serve as a foothold for further retrosynthesis prediction research towards OOD generalization.

Introduction
Retrosynthesis is the fundamental step in the field of organic
synthesis (Corey 1991), which involves the application of
various strategies to break down a target molecule into simpler building-block molecules. One of the biggest challenges
for the pharmaceutical industry is finding reliable and effective ways to make new compounds.
Recently, there has been growing interest in computeraided synthesis planning due to its potential to reduce the
effort required for manually designing retrosynthesis strategies with chemical knowledge. Numerous machine learning
models have been developed to learn these strategies from
a fixed training dataset and to generalize this knowledge to
new molecules. The training process involves either learning an explicit set of hard-coded templates as fixed rules

Related Work

* These authors contributed equally.

Single-step retrosynthesis prediction The role of machine
learning in retrosynthesis prediction is becoming increasingly pronounced (Jiang et al. 2023), especially in the piv-

†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

374

