The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Operationalizing Essential Characteristics of Creativity
in a Computational System for Music Composition
Paul M. Bodily1 , Dan Ventura2
1
2

Department of Computer Science, Idaho State University, 921 South 8th Avenue, Pocatello, Idaho, 83209
Department of Computer Science, Brigham Young University, 3361 Talmage Building, Provo, Utah, 84604
bodipaul@isu.edu, ventura@cs.byu.edu

Abstract

derived from research on human creativity [cf. (Csikszentmihalyi 1997)]. In what follows, we examine a set of seven
such characteristics of creativity: generation, knowledge
representation, intentionality, aesthetic, domain knowledge,
autonomy and self-evaluation, and we do so in the context of
a highly-structured domain of creativity, namely structured
lyrical lead sheet generation for Western-popular music.

We address the problem of building and evaluating a computational system whose primary objective is creativity. We
illustrate seven characteristics of computational creativity in
the context of a system that autonomously composes Western lyrical music. We conduct an external evaluation of the
system in which respondents rated the system with regard to
each characteristic as well as with regard to overall creativity. Average scores for overall creativity exceeded the ratings
for any single characteristic, suggesting that creativity may
be an emergent property and that unique research opportunities exist for building CC systems whose design attempts to
comprehend all known characteristics of creativity.

We present an autonomous system for music composition
explicitly designed to be creative. The system incorporates
a variety of machine learning models aimed at achieving
(many of) the characteristics that distinguish creativity, and
other work details these models and how they address aspects of the problem of creativity (in the context of pop music composition). Here, we present the complete system for
the first time. We evaluate the system to assess the extent to
which observers perceive these characteristics individually
compared to their perception of creativity overall. Results
show that the perception of creativity overall generally exceeds the perception of any of its constituent characteristics
individually, emphasizing that creativity emerges from, and
is greater than, the sum of its parts.

Introduction
AI has been outperforming humans on certain types of narrow intelligence tasks for quite some time [e.g., (Silver et al.
2016)]; however, this is still not the case for other types of
tasks, including especially those requiring creativity, leading
researchers to characterize computational creativity (CC) as
“the final frontier” of AI (Colton and Wiggins 2012). Building systems that are computationally creative requires both
the explicit identification of and the intentional operationalization of necessary characteristics of creativity.
State-of-the-art foundation models exhibit autonomy and
generativity, producing impressive results, most notably language and image artifacts. As a result, one might be tempted
to claim such systems are creative as a side-effect of their
primary objective (e.g., next-token prediction). However,
while autonomy and generativity are certainly necessary
for creativity, they are not sufficient, particularly in highly
structured and specialized domains (Ventura 2016). Notably, current artificial neural-network-focused implementations (including highly-successful transformer and large language models) have demonstrated weakness when highlystructured or constrained generation is needed, e.g., in certain forms of poetry and music (Hadjeres and Nielsen 2018;
Glines 2022).
While the concept of creativity is likely inherently contestable, multiple characteristics have been identified as necessary for computational creativity (Colton et al. 2015; Ventura 2017; Jordanous 2014) with many, if not all, ultimately

Characteristics of Creative Systems
A high-level overview of the system—named Pop* (Pop
Star) —is shown in Figure 1. Pop* searches Twitter for a
posting that appeals to its aesthetic. This tweet serves as
an originating idea from which Pop* formulates its own
intention—a theme that the system will communicate in the
form of a novel music composition. Pop* then starts a learning phase in which lyric and sheet music databases are filtered based on relevance to Pop*’s chosen intention. Pop*
uses these filtered training sets to train Markov models for
chords, rhythm, pitch, and lyrics. Besides learning models
for local structure, Pop* also learns global structural patterns (e.g., musical motifs, verse-chorus structure, rhyme
schemes, etc.) from existing sheet music. The generative
process utilizes constrained Markov models to produce a
novel composition that is scored and filtered according to
an intention-driven self-evaluation function. Compositions
that pass the self-evaluation phase are rendered as audio and
sheet music.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

447

