The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Context-Aware Iteration Policy Network for Efficient Optical Flow Estimation
Ri Cheng, Ruian He, Xuhao Jiang, Shili Zhou, Weimin Tan* , Bo Yan*
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
rcheng22@m.fudan.edu.cn, rahe16@fudan.edu.cn, 20110240011@fudan.edu.cn, slzhou19@fudan.edu.cn,
wmtan@fudan.edu.cn, byan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing recurrent optical flow estimation networks are computationally expensive since they use a fixed large number of
iterations to update the flow field for each sample. An efficient
network should skip iterations when the flow improvement is
limited. In this paper, we develop a Context-Aware Iteration
Policy Network for efficient optical flow estimation, which
determines the optimal number of iterations per sample. The
policy network achieves this by learning contextual information to realize whether flow improvement is bottlenecked or
minimal. On the one hand, we use iteration embedding and
historical hidden cell, which include previous iterations information, to convey how flow has changed from previous iterations. On the other hand, we use the incremental loss to make
the policy network implicitly perceive the magnitude of optical flow improvement in the subsequent iteration. Furthermore, the computational complexity in our dynamic network
is controllable, allowing us to satisfy various resource preferences with a single trained model. Our policy network can be
easily integrated into state-of-the-art optical flow networks.
Extensive experiments show that our method maintains performance while reducing FLOPs by about 40%/20% for the
Sintel/KITTI datasets.

Figure 1: Efficient inference. Our policy network can skip
the iteration to determine the optimal number of iterations
depending on contextual information. Users are capable of
altering the resource preference value r to control computational complexity.

be a bottleneck in the optical flow network. A bottleneck
indicates that the flow network cannot improve the flow after some iterations due to the limited estimation ability of
the network. For example, the average Endpoint Error (EPE)
improvement of examples B and C fails to improve EPE after the 12th and 10th iterations. (2) Although EPE continues to improve, the magnitude of improvement is different
for each sample. For example, example B decreases EPE
by 5.71 from the 8th to 12th iteration, while example C
only decreases EPE by 0.04 from the 6th to 10th iteration.
Therefore, if we encounter resource constraints, we can reduce computational complexity in two ways. The first is to
skip the iteration when a bottleneck is encountered, and the
second is to skip an iteration where the sample only has a
marginal optical flow improvement.
In this paper, we propose the dynamic optical flow network with our proposed Context-Aware Iteration Policy Network, to dynamically determine optimal number of iterations for efficient optical flow estimation. We integrated
our proposed policy network into four state-of-the-art backbones. The experiment results show that our dynamic networks can maintain performance while reducing floating

Introduction
Optical flow is a fundamental task that attempts to estimate
per-pixel correspondences between video frames. Optical
flow models are widely used in applications such as video
tracking (Vihlman and Visala 2020), video super-resolution
(Chan et al. 2022), video frame interpolation (Kong et al.
2022), and autonomous driving (Capito, Ozguner, and Redmill 2020). Recently, following RAFT (Teed and Deng
2020), the recurrent networks have demonstrated superior
performance, because they can optimize the optical flow in
a iterative manner. However, they estimate optical flow with
a fixed large number of iterations, such as 32 iterations for
the Sintel dataset (Butler et al. 2012), which is restrained by
limited computational resource during inference. Therefore,
exploring efficient optical flow estimation algorithms is urgently needed for practical applications.
To address this problem, we present three representative
examples in Figure 2 with two discoveries. (1) There will
* Corresponding authors: Weimin Tan, Bo Yan.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1299

