The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Leveraging Partial Symmetry for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Xin Yu1 , Rongye Shi2 * , Pu Feng1 , Yongkai Tian1 , Simin Li1 , Shuhao Liao1 , Wenjun Wu2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{nlsdeyuxin, shirongye, fengpu, tianyk, lisiminsimon, lsh iai, wwj}@buaa.edu.cn

Perfect symmetry

Abstract

1

Imperfect symmetry

Incorporating symmetry as an inductive bias into multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) has led to improvements
in generalization, data efficiency, and physical consistency.
While prior research has succeeded in using perfect symmetry prior, the realm of partial symmetry in the multi-agent domain remains unexplored. To fill in this gap, we introduce
the partially symmetric Markov game, a new subclass of the
Markov game. We then theoretically show that the performance error introduced by utilizing symmetry in MARL is
bounded, implying that the symmetry prior can still be useful in MARL even in partial symmetry situations. Motivated
by this insight, we propose the Partial Symmetry Exploitation (PSE) framework that is able to adaptively incorporate
symmetry prior in MARL under different symmetry-breaking
conditions. Specifically, by adaptively adjusting the exploitation of symmetry, our framework is able to achieve superior
sample efficiency and overall performance of MARL algorithms. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed framework over
baselines. Finally, we implement the proposed framework in
real-world multi-robot testbed to show its superiority.

Agent

Agent

rotate

Target
Target

rotate

Agent

Agent

Target
Target

Figure 1: Illustration of symmetry disruption in a nonuniform field: despite the spatial symmetry of the multiagent system, the introduction of a non-uniform field, such
as uneven terrain or a wind field, disrupts this symmetry and
the symmetry assumption does not strictly hold everywhere.
Colors denote varying intensities of the field.

the advantage of employing permutation invariance. Permutation invariance asserts that the systemic behavior remains
unaffected by any changes in the order of agent consideration (Jianye et al. 2023). The application of permutation
invariance encourages extensive parameter sharing among
agents, thereby augmenting data efficiency. Additionally, the
most common symmetry in multi-agent systems is rotation
symmetry, as illustrated in Figure 1. In this context, rotating the global state results in a rotation of the optimal joint
policy. Some studies have ameliorated data efficiency by designing inherent network structures that satisfy this property (van der Pol et al. 2021).
Current techniques often assume the existence of perfect
permutation invariance or perfect spatial symmetry. However, such ideal conditions are rare in real-world scenarios.
For instance, again in Figure 1, multiple agents attempt to
approach a target point where each agent can sense the environment, including information about other agents, obstacles, and the target point. Such problems, conditioned on the
perfect symmetry transition function and symmetry reward
function, are defined as symmetric Markov game in (van der
Pol et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2023). Unfortunately, in the real
world, there might exist imperfections in the environment,

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is increasingly gaining attention due to its capabilities in handling
complex tasks(Li et al. 2023). Such tasks often necessitate
strategic interaction and rivalry among various entities (Yu
et al. 2021b; Feng et al. 2023). However, a notorious limitation of most MARL approaches is their substantial data
dependency, necessitating vast amounts of data to build an
efficient model. This limitation severely narrows the scope
of MARL’s practical application in real-life settings (Shi,
Steenkiste, and Veloso 2021). How to develop strategies to
improve MARL’s sample efficiency has become an important and long-standing research topic.
Strategies to augment sample efficiency often involve integrating external knowledge to accelerate MARL’s training.
Various methods incorporating extra knowledge have been
proposed in recent literature (Shi, Mo, and Di 2021; Shi et al.
2022). In the realm of MARL, prior research has highlighted
* Corresponding author: Rongye Shi.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17583

