The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Terrain Diffusion Network: Climatic-Aware Terrain Generation
with Geological Sketch Guidance
Zexin Hu1 , Kun Hu1, * , Clinton Mo1 , Lei Pan2 , Zhiyong Wang1
1

The University of Sydney
Civil Aviation Flight University of China
zehu4485@sydney.edu.au, kun.hu@sydney.edu.au, clmo6615@uni.sydney.edu.au,
leipan.cafuc@hotmail.com, zhiyong.wang@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract
Sketch-based terrain generation seeks to create realistic landscapes for virtual environments in various applications such
as computer games, animation and virtual reality. Recently,
deep learning based terrain generation has emerged, notably
the ones based on generative adversarial networks (GAN).
However, these methods often struggle to fulfill the requirements of flexible user control and maintain generative diversity for realistic terrain. Therefore, we propose a novel
diffusion-based method, namely terrain diffusion network
(TDN), which actively incorporates user guidance for enhanced controllability, taking into account terrain features
like rivers, ridges, basins, and peaks. Instead of adhering to a
conventional monolithic denoising process, which often compromises the fidelity of terrain details or the alignment with
user control, a multi-level denoising scheme is proposed to
generate more realistic terrains by taking into account finegrained details, particularly those related to climatic patterns
influenced by erosion and tectonic activities. Specifically,
three terrain synthesisers are designed for structural, intermediate, and fine-grained level denoising purposes, which allow each synthesiser concentrate on a distinct terrain aspect.
Moreover, to maximise the efficiency of our TDN, we further
introduce terrain and sketch latent spaces for the synthesizers
with pre-trained terrain autoencoders. Comprehensive experiments on a new dataset constructed from NASA Topology
Images clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, achieving the state-of-the-art performance. Our code
is available at https://github.com/TDNResearch/TDN.

Figure 1: Sample terrain generated by our Terrain Diffusion Network (TDN), which is controlled by user-provided
sketch guidance with ridges, rivers, basins and peaks.

of geologically precise fine-grained characteristics. For optimal fidelity, it requires more advanced controllable terrain
synthesis techniques that are capable of producing diverse
and intricate features with fine granularity.
Due to the success of deep learning techniques for computer vision (Wu et al. 2016; Jin et al. 2017; Siarohin et al.
2018; Zheng and Liu 2020), the potential of deep-learning
methods has been explored for high fidelity terrain generation. The majority of these studies are based on generative
adversarial networks (GAN) (Beckham and Pal 2017; spick
and walker 2019). However, GANs suffer from the trade off
between fidelity and divergence to user-provided conditions.
Recently, diffusion methods (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021)
have shown promising results in generating a wide variety of images based on user prompts. This suggests potential to overcome the challenges found in terrain generation:
they foster diversity at a fine-grained level and offer the opportunity to enable the generation of climatic morphogenesis. Nonetheless, the stochastic nature of diffusion models
presents a significant challenge for users’ capability to guide
the terrain generation process. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no existing study with the controllable diffusion architecture for fine-grained and diversified terrain generation.

Introduction
In the real world, terrains are subject to a variety of climatic
conditions, such as temperature variations, erosion from water or wind, and the presence of vegetation. When employing an automated terrain generation method, it is essential
to accurately depict such weather events and natural phenomena, while closely adhering to a user’s structural guidance for controllability to avoid unintended outcomes. Yet,
conventional controllable example-based and sketch-based
methods (Talgorn and Belhadj 2018; Guérin et al. 2017) often compromise the generation of realistic terrains in terms
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12565

