The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ANEDL: Adaptive Negative Evidential Deep Learning for Open-Set
Semi-supervised Learning
Yang Yu1,* , Danruo Deng1,* , Furui Liu2 , Qi Dou1 ,
Yueming Jin3,† , Guangyong Chen2,† , Pheng Ann Heng1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore

Abstract

Existing Open-set SSL methods (Guo et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020) generally consist of an outlier detector and a
classifier. To avoid propagating wrong label information to
outliers during SSL training of the classifier, they first detect outliers and then optimize SSL loss only for unlabeled
instances taken as inliers. To detect outliers, they aim to
estimate confidence score of a sample being an inlier (reversely, uncertainty score for outliers). For example, T2T
(Huang et al. 2021) proposes to detect outliers by crossmodal matching over binary detector. OpenMatch (Saito,
Kim, and Saenko 2021) deploys a one-vs-all (OVA) classifier (Saito and Saenko 2021) as outlier detector to output the
confidence score of considering a sample as an inlier and
reject outliers with confidence score below a threshold for
self-training in SSL. With outliers rejected, they can improve
recognition accuracy of SSL methods.

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods assume that labeled
data, unlabeled data and test data are from the same distribution. Open-set semi-supervised learning (Open-set SSL) considers a more practical scenario, where unlabeled data and
test data contain new categories (outliers) not observed in
labeled data (inliers). Most previous works focused on outlier detection via binary classifiers, which suffer from insufficient scalability and inability to distinguish different types
of uncertainty. In this paper, we propose a novel framework,
Adaptive Negative Evidential Deep Learning (ANEDL) to
tackle these limitations. Concretely, we first introduce evidential deep learning (EDL) as an outlier detector to quantify
different types of uncertainty, and design different uncertainty
metrics for self-training and inference. Furthermore, we propose a novel adaptive negative optimization strategy, making
EDL more tailored to the unlabeled dataset containing both
inliers and outliers. As demonstrated empirically, our proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods
across four datasets.

We identify two main limitations in current state-of-theart literature to tackle this task. First, most previous works
estimate confidence scores based on binary likelihoods generated from binary detectors activated by Softmax function. Such softmax-based networks only provide a point estimation of predicted class probabilities and cannot quantify
whether the uncertainty stems from the lack of knowledge
of outliers (epistemic uncertainty) or from the complexity
of the samples within the distribution (aleatoric uncertainty)
(Malinin and Gales 2018). Moreover, when we tackle a Kway classification problem with a large K, the binary detectors are less robust to identify outliers from such a complex
dataset that contains multi-class information (Carbonneau
et al. 2018). One advanced method, evidential deep learning (EDL) (Sensoy, Kaplan, and Kandemir 2018) can explicitly quantify the classification uncertainty corresponding
to the unknown class, by treating the network’s output as evidence for parameterizing the Dirichlet distribution according to subjective logic (Jøsang 2016). Compared with Softmax which only provides probabilistic comparison values
between classes, EDL models second-order probability and
uncertainty for each class. In this work, we take the first step
to introduce EDL into the outlier detector. As shown in Figure 1, EDL enables a multinomial detector to directly output
evidence for each class, which can alleviate the insufficient
scalability of existing binary detectors. Moreover, different
types of uncertainties can be distinguished by the output
vector, so we propose to design different uncertainty met-

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has recently witnessed significant progress by propagating the label information from
labeled data to unlabeled data (Berthelot et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022b; Zheng et al. 2022). Despite the
success, SSL methods are deeply rooted in the closed-set assumption that labeled data, unlabeled data and test data share
the same predefined label set. In reality (Yu et al. 2020), such
an assumption may not always hold as we can only accurately control the label set of labeled data, while unlabeled
and test data may include outliers that belong to the novel
classes that are not seen in labeled data. During self-training,
imprecisely propagating label information to these outliers
shall interfere with model learning and lead to performance
degradation. To this end, open-set semi-supervised learning
(Open-set SSL) (Yu et al. 2020) has been emerging to tackle
the problem. It first detects out-of-distribution (OOD) samples as outliers and then recognizes in-distribution (ID) samples as belonging to the classes from the predefined label set.
*Equal contribution: {yangyu, drdeng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
†Co-corresponding: ymjin@nus.edu.sg, gychen@zhejianglab.com
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16587

