The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MA-Net: Rethinking Neural Unit in the Light of Astrocytes
Mengqiao Han, Liyuan Pan† , Xiabi Liu†
Beijing Institute of Technology
{hmq, liyuan.pan, liuxiabi}@bit.edu.cn

Neurotransmitter: NeuT
NeuT optimized by GliT

N2

···
N

A1 θ

A θ

𝒰

N θ

···

N1

The artificial neuron (N-N) model-based networks have accomplished extraordinary success for various vision tasks.
However, as a simplification of the mammal neuron model,
their structure is locked during training, resulting in overfitting and over-parameters. The astrocyte, newly explored by
biologists, can adaptively modulate neuronal communication
by inserting itself between neurons. The communication, between the astrocyte and neuron, is bidirectional and shows the
potential to alleviate issues raised by unidirectional communication in the N-N model. In this paper, we first elaborate on
the artificial Multi-Astrocyte-Neuron (MA-N) model, which
enriches the functionality of the artificial neuron model. Our
MA-N model is formulated at both astrocyte- and neuronlevel that mimics the bidirectional communication with temporal and joint mechanisms. Then, we construct the MANet network with the MA-N model, whose neural connections can be continuously and adaptively modulated during
training. Experiments show that our MA-Net advances new
state-of-the-art on multiple tasks while significantly reducing
its parameters by connection optimization.

···

Abstract

Gliotransmitter: GliT

···
N

Pre-neurons

AM θ

Multi-Astrocyte

Post-neuron

Figure 1: The illustration of our bidirectional communication between neurons and astrocytes. Previous N-N model
only let pre-neurons {Ni }F
i=1 release neurotransmitters to
connect to the post-neuron N, where F is the number of preneurons. In our model, M astrocytes {Aj }M
j=1 are involved
to jointly modulate the neurotransmitters by releasing gliotransmitters. For example, astrocyte A1 is stimulated by
1
neurotransmitters released by pre-neurons {Ni }F
i=1 and produce gliotransmitters. The gliotransmitters force these preneurons to re-release neurotransmitters (Perea and Araque
2010), achieving the modulation of connections. Moreover,
we formulate the modulation iteratively both between ‘astrocyte to pre-neurons’ and ‘astrocyte to astrocyte’ (purple box). Our iteratively optimized Multi-Astrocyte-Neuron
(MA-N) model, therefore, mimics the functionality of a relatively real neuron model.

Introduction
Networks constructed with the artificial neuron (N-N) model
have achieved notable successes (Han et al. 2022; Cheng
et al. 2022; Yang, Pan, and Liu 2023). However, their network structures are fixed once the training starts, i.e., structures cannot be adjusted during training. This brings up two
problems: 1) over-fitting (Li et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2022); and
2) over-parameterization (Frankle and Carbin 2019), as the
complexity of a network can not apply to all data. Though
existences attempt to solve the mentioned issues by constraining and searching neural connections, such still lead
to unstable performance and resource consumption (Li et al.
2020; Yang, Liu, and Xu 2023).
The key culprit for the weakness of the N-N model is
the simplified unidirectional communication between neurons (McCulloch and Pitts 1943; Rosenblatt 1958; Hai et al.
2023). In previous understanding, pre-neurons release neurotransmitters to stimulate a post-neuron, which is unidirectional propagation. Neurotransmitters are formulated as

connections (weights) in a network. Indicating by the new
explorations, astrocytes assist the connections between the
pre- and post-neuron with bidirectional communication. The
bidirectional allows the neurotransmitters, i.e., network connections, to be modulated during training adaptively and iteratively (see Fig. 1)
Existing work starts from modeling a single astrocyte to
optimize the network connection, e.g., a neuronal-astrocytic
group (Hastings et al. 2023) and AstroNet (Han, Pan, and
Liu 2023). Considering the neuron activity varies from each
other (Frankle and Carbin 2018), it is difficult to fully mine
structural features for all neurons through only one astro-

†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2040

