The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NondBREM: Nondeterministic Offline Reinforcement Learning for
Large-Scale Order Dispatching
Hongbo Zhang1 * , Guang Wang2 * , Xu Wang1 , Zhengyang Zhou1 , Chen Zhang1 , Zheng Dong3 ,
Yang Wang1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Florida State University
3
Wayne State University
zhanghongbo@mail.ustc.edu.cn, guang@cs.fsu.edu, wx309@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zzy0929@ustc.edu.cn,
zhangchenzc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dong@wayne.edu, angyan@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

a plethora of works (Zhang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018; Tang
et al. 2021; Sadeghi Eshkevari et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2022;
Jiang et al. 2023; Qin, Zhu, and Ye 2021; Zhou et al. 2019;
Xi et al. 2022; Si et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a,b)have
been conducted to address this problem. Especially, with
the recent advance in deep learning and computing power,
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown great potential for sequential decision-making problems such as ridehailing order dispatching. For example, (Sadeghi Eshkevari
et al. 2022) proposed a standalone DRL-based dispatching
strategy that is equipped with multiple novel mechanisms
to ensure robust and efficient on-policy learning and inference while being adaptable for full-scale deployment. (Tang
et al. 2021) designed a value function and hierarchical DRL
to unify order dispatching and vehicle relocation problems.
(Zhou et al. 2019) developed an independent Q-learning
method to solve the communication and interaction problems among multiple agents and the vehicle distribution and
order distribution are balanced. (Sun et al. 2022) proposed
a novel multi-agent DRL framework to help drivers obtain
better orders and make repositioning decisions.

One of the most important tasks in ride-hailing is order dispatching, i.e., assigning unserved orders to available drivers.
Recent order dispatching has achieved a significant improvement due to the advance of reinforcement learning, which has
been approved to be able to effectively address sequential
decision-making problems like order dispatching. However,
most existing reinforcement learning methods require agents
to learn the optimal policy by interacting with environments
online, which is challenging or impractical for real-world deployment due to high costs or safety concerns. For example,
due to the spatiotemporally unbalanced supply and demand,
online reinforcement learning-based order dispatching may
significantly impact the revenue of the ride-hailing platform
and passenger experience during the policy learning period.
Hence, in this work, we develop an offline deep reinforcement learning framework called NondBREM for large-scale
order dispatching, which learns policy from only the accumulated logged data to avoid costly and unsafe interactions with
the environment. In NondBREM, a Nondeterministic BatchConstrained Q-learning (NondBCQ) module is developed to
reduce the algorithm extrapolation error and a Random Ensemble Mixture (REM) module that integrates multiple value
networks with multi-head networks is utilized to improve the
model generalization and robustness. Extensive experiments
on large-scale real-world ride-hailing datasets show the superiority of our design.

Although those DRL methods show great advantages in
the order dispatching problem, they require agents to interact
with the environment to collect huge data for model training,
which causes a huge challenge to put those algorithms into
practice since interacting with the environment online may
lead to serious adverse consequences including decreasing
drivers’ income, passengers’ ride experience, as well as increasing operational costs and causing dangerous actions. To
deal with these issues, offline DRL as a promising technology has been developed. Compared with traditional online
or off-policy DRL, offline DRL trains agents through the
logged datasets and does not require agents to interact with
the environment, thus avoiding adverse consequences in the
learning process. Researchers have been trying to develop
offline DRL algorithms for different domains including recommendation systems (Swaminathan et al. 2017) (Xiao and
Wang 2021) (Deffayet et al. 2023),healthcare (Fatemi et al.
2022) (Tang et al. 2022), and autonomous driving (Shi et al.
2021) (Fang et al. 2022) and have achieved satisfactory performance. A key challenge to developing offline DRL is to
obtain large-scale logged real-world data. Fortunately, due to

Introduction
Ride-hailing services (e.g., Uber, Lyft, and Didi) have grown
significantly in the last decade due to high mobility demand
and the rapid development of the mobile Internet. One of
the most important tasks in ride-hailing is real-time order
dispatching, which directly impacts passenger experience,
driver income, platform profit, and also transportation efficiency. Hence, in this paper, we focus on real-time order
dispatching for large-scale ride-hailing services.
Due to the significance of order dispatching, it has attracted lots of interest from both industry and academia, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Prof. Yang Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

401

