The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Boosting Adversarial Transferability across Model Genus by
Deformation-Constrained Warping
Qinliang Lin1 * , Cheng Luo1 * , Zenghao Niu1 , Xilin He1 , Weicheng Xie1, 2, 3†
Yuanbo Hou4 , Linlin Shen1, 2, 3 , Siyang Song5
1

Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
4
WAVES Research Group, Ghent University, Belgium
5
University of Leicester, UK.
2017192020@email.szu.edu.cn, wcxie@szu.edu.cn
Original

Abstract

Classification Accuracy (%)

Adversarial examples generated by a surrogate model typically exhibit limited transferability to unknown target systems. To address this problem, many transferability enhancement approaches (e.g., input transformation and model augmentation) have been proposed. However, they show poor
performances in attacking systems having different model
genera from the surrogate model. In this paper, we propose
a novel and generic attacking strategy, called DeformationConstrained Warping Attack (DeCoWA), that can be effectively applied to cross model genus attack. Specifically, DeCoWA firstly augments input examples via an elastic deformation, namely Deformation-Constrained Warping (DeCoW), to obtain rich local details of the augmented input. To
avoid severe distortion of global semantics led by random deformation, DeCoW further constrains the strength and direction of the warping transformation by a novel adaptive control
strategy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the transferable examples crafted by our DeCoWA on CNN surrogates
can significantly hinder the performance of Transformers
(and vice versa) on various tasks, including image classification, video action recognition, and audio recognition. Code is
made available at https://github.com/LinQinLiang/DeCoWA.

100

Patch is Blured

Patch

80

Original

Patch is Repeated

Patch
DeiT-B
ResNet-50

60
40
20
0

0%
25%
75%
Ratio(%) = # Blured Patch / # All Patches
(a)

100%
25%
8.25%
Ratio (%) = Patch Size / Original Size
(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of distinctions between CNNs and
ViTs. We test recognition accuracy by two different model
genera using (a) local detail blurred images and (b) global
structure damaged images, respectively. (a) As more local
details are blurred, the performance of ResNet-50 significantly drops while DeiT-B is still robust. (b) When an image
patch of a smaller size remains, ResNet-50 achieves higher
classification accuracy than DeiT-B. # denotes counting the
number.

Introduction
In the past decade, various deep network architectures, including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (He et al.
2016), LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), etc., have demonstrated
revolutionary performances in recognition or classification of real-world signals, including images (He et al.
2016), videos (Bertasius, Wang, and Torresani 2021), audio (Hwang et al. 2022), etc. Nevertheless, almost all these
networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples crafted by
adversaries, potentially leading to severe security threats.
To this end, investigating generic features/vulnerabilities
among different network architectures is crucial and urgent.

Some approaches aim to generate adversarial examples
with transferability to fool target systems in black-box scenarios, where network details of the target model are unknown. Most of the relevant research (Dong et al. 2018; Lin
et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2019; Wang and He 2021) lies on
adversarial transferability across CNN architectures. Meanwhile, a small part of recent studies (Wei et al. 2022a; Naseer
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Han et al. 2022) has sparked
a discussion about boosting the transferability across different Vision Transformers (ViTs). Despite the above advances,
there is still a lack of effective attacking methods that can
achieve strong transferability in a wider and more practical
setting (i.e., transferability across model genus1 ).

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
One Model Genus is defined as a set of deep neural networks
that have similar architectures. This concept was introduced in

3459

