The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Uncertainty Quantification in Heterogeneous Treatment Effect Estimation
with Gaussian-Process-Based Partially Linear Model
Shunsuke Horii1 , Yoichi Chikahara2
1

Center for Data Science, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
s.horii@waseda.jp, chikahara.yoichi@gmail.com

2

Abstract

estimation. This drawback is fatal because decision-making
under uncertainty is usual in many applications, especially
when we can only access a small amount of observational
data. An obvious example would be medical treatment planning. For example, in the US, more than half of hospitals have fewer beds than 100 (Wiens, Guttag, and Horvitz
2014), illustrating the difficulty of obtaining large-scale data
and the importance of considering the uncertainty.
To support decision-making in such critical applications,
we propose a Bayesian framework for quantifying the CATE
estimation uncertainty. To deal with a small sample size setting, we focus on a semi-parametric model called a partially
linear model (Engle et al. 1986), which is linear with respect to the treatment but is nonlinear with respect to features, thanks to the nonparametric components.
Our key idea is to place Gaussian process priors on the
nonparametric components in a partially linear model. This
idea has three advantages. First, we can analytically compute
the posterior distribution of CATE. Such analytical computation is much more computationally efficient than the approximate Bayesian inference, which is required with the
complex tree-based models (Hahn, Murray, and Carvalho
2020). Second, we can theoretically guarantee the asymptotic consistency of the posterior distribution of CATE under
some mild conditions. This theoretical guarantee also makes
a striking contrast with the tree-based models, which have no
consistency guarantee due to their model complexity. Third,
we can incorporate the prior knowledge about the CATE to
improve the estimation accuracy. To take prior knowledge
example, consider the education program evaluation, where
it is known that past academic performance is an important feature called a treatment effect modifier (Hernán and
Robins 2020, Chapter 4), which affects the effect of an education program (Yeager et al. 2019). We can utilize this
prior knowledge by designing the kernel functions used in
the Gaussian process priors. By contrast, integrating such
prior knowledge is impossible with the existing Gaussianprocess-based model (Alaa and van der Schaar 2018), which
puts the priors not on the CATE but on the outcomes. Furthermore, our method can address not only binary treatment
but also continuous-valued treatment (Hirano and Imbens
2004), which widens the scope of applications and is helpful,
for instance, in determining the appropriate drug dosage for
precision medicine (Bica, Jordon, and van der Schaar 2020).

Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects across individuals has attracted growing attention as a statistical tool for
performing critical decision-making. We propose a Bayesian
inference framework that quantifies the uncertainty in treatment effect estimation to support decision-making in a relatively small sample size setting. Our proposed model places
Gaussian process priors on the nonparametric components of
a semiparametric model called a partially linear model. This
model formulation has three advantages. First, we can analytically compute the posterior distribution of a treatment effect
without relying on the computationally demanding posterior
approximation. Second, we can guarantee that the posterior
distribution concentrates around the true one as the sample
size goes to infinity. Third, we can incorporate prior knowledge about a treatment effect into the prior distribution, improving the estimation efficiency. Our experimental results
show that even in the small sample size setting, our method
can accurately estimate the heterogeneous treatment effects
and effectively quantify its estimation uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Assessing heterogeneous treatment effects across individuals provides a key foundation for making critical decisions.
For instance, understanding how greatly medical treatment
effects are different across patients is helpful for precision
medicine, and evaluating the impact of education programs
on learning outcomes is essential for personalized learning.
A widely used treatment effect measure is a conditional
average treatment effect (CATE), which is an average treatment effect across individuals with identical feature attributes. CATE estimation is challenging when the number
of features of an individual is large. Many methods aim to
express the complex nonlinearity between treatment effects
and features, using a nonparametric regression model, such
as tree-based models (Hahn, Murray, and Carvalho 2020;
Hill 2011; Wager and Athey 2018) and neural networks (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016; Shalit, Johansson, and
Sontag 2017; Yoon, Jordon, and Van Der Schaar 2018; Wu
et al. 2023).
However, most of these methods only output a singlepoint estimate and cannot consider the uncertainty in CATE
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20420

