The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sync-NeRF: Generalizing Dynamic NeRFs to Unsynchronized Videos
Seoha Kim1 * , Jeongmin Bae1 * , Youngsik Yun1 ,
Hahyun Lee2 , Gun Bang2 , Youngjung Uh1†
1
Yonsei University
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
{hailey07, jaymin.bae, bbangsik, yj.uh}@yonsei.ac.kr, {hanilee, gbang}@etri.re.kr
2

Abstract
Recent advancements in 4D scene reconstruction using neural radiance fields (NeRF) have demonstrated the ability to
represent dynamic scenes from multi-view videos. However,
they fail to reconstruct the dynamic scenes and struggle to
fit even the training views in unsynchronized settings. It happens because they employ a single latent embedding for a
frame while the multi-view images at the same frame were
actually captured at different moments. To address this limitation, we introduce time offsets for individual unsynchronized videos and jointly optimize the offsets with NeRF. By
design, our method is applicable for various baselines and
improves them with large margins. Furthermore, finding the
offsets naturally works as synchronizing the videos without
manual effort. Experiments are conducted on the common
Plenoptic Video Dataset and a newly built Unsynchronized
Dynamic Blender Dataset to verify the performance of our
method. Project page: https://seoha-kim.github.io/sync-nerf

...

...

Camera 11
Camera 12
Camera 13
(a) Muti-view video dataset is not properly synchronized

Training

Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRF, Mildenhall et al. 2021) aim
to synthesize novel views of a scene when given its limited
number of views. As NeRF is a function that receives 3D
coordinates with viewing directions and produces color and
density, adding time as input inherently generalizes it to design dynamic NeRFs for multi-view videos. Recent works
have improved efficiency (Li et al. 2022b; Fang et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022b,a; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2023) and streamability (Li et al. 2022a; Song et al. 2023; Attal et al. 2023)
of dynamic NeRFs.
Our research is motivated by the inaccurate video synchronization in a widely used multi-view dynamic dataset
(Li et al. 2022b). Although typical synchronization approaches, such as timecode systems or audio peaks, usually
work, these processes require an additional device, cannot
be applied in noisy environments, or can be inaccurate (Li
et al. 2022b). For example, Figure 1a shows that the rightmost video is severely ahead of others in the temporal axis.
While previous dynamic NeRFs show high-fidelity reconstruction by omitting the unsynchronized video, they fail to

(b) MixVoxels

(c) MixVoxels + Ours

Figure 1: Overview. (a) The commonly used Plenoptic Video
Dataset in 4D scene reconstruction contains an unsynchronized video. Image patches are all first frames. (b) If we include this view in the training set, baselines fail to reconstruct the motion around the unsynchronized viewpoint. (c)
In the same settings, our method significantly outperforms.
reconstruct this video even in the training view if it is included (Figure 1b). If we perturb the synchronization of the
multi-view videos on purpose, all methods fail to reconstruct
movements and produce severe artifacts and ghost effects.
The above drawbacks occur because existing dynamic
NeRFs assume that the same frames in multi-view videos
are captured at the same time (Figure 2a), which is not always true. Even if the videos are assumed to be synchro-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2777

