The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Constrained Progressive Inference for 3D Hand Pose Estimation with
Dynamic Observer-Decision-Adjuster Networks
Zhehan Kan1 , Xueting Hu1 , Zihan Liao1 , Ke Yu1 , Zhihai He1,2 *
1

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{kanzh2021,huxt2022,liaozh2020,yuk2020}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, hezh@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalization is very important for pose estimation, especially for 3D pose estimation, where small changes in the 2D
images could trigger large structural changes in the 3D space.
To achieve generalization, the system needs to have the capability of detecting estimation errors by cross-validating the
projection consistency between the 3D and 2D spaces and
adapting its network inference process based on this feedback. Current pose estimation is one-time feed-forward and
lacks the capability to gather feedback and adapt the inference outcome. To address this problem, we propose to explore the concept of dynamic progressive inference based
on an observer-decision-adjuster network design, where we
train an observer to continuously detect the prediction error
based on constraints matching as well as an adjuster to refine its inference outcome based on these constraints errors.
Within the context of 3D hand pose estimation, we find that
this observer-adjuster design is relatively unstable since the
observer is operating in the 2D image domain while the adjuster is operating in the 3D domain. To address this issue,
we propose to construct two sets of observers-adjusters with
complementary constraints from different perspectives. They
operate in a dynamic, sequential manner controlled by a decision network to progressively improve the 3D pose estimation. We refer to this method as Cross-Constrained Progressive Inference (CCPI). Our extensive experimental results on
FreiHAND and HO-3D benchmark datasets demonstrate that
the proposed CCPI method is able to significantly improve
the generalization capability and performance of 3D hand
pose estimation.

Figure 1: The top row is the diagram of CCPI, Γp and Γk are
observer networks, Ψp and Ψk are adjuster networks, ΦD is
the decision network. The bottom row is one example of the
dynamic sequential process.
in hand pose estimation. For simple hand gestures, existing deep learning methods have achieved very accurate estimations of hand key points (Choi, Moon, and Lee 2020).
However, 3D hand pose estimation remains very challenging, especially for complex gestures with overlapping hands,
crossed fingers, or occluded objects.
We observe that generalization is one of the most important challenges in 3D hand pose estimation. Network models
well-learned on the training set often suffer from significant
performance degradation on test samples collected from different scenarios. For example, very accurate hand pose estimation is obtained on the training set; however, on the testing set, the hand pose edges are blurred and the hand morphology is missing. This is due to the complexity of the estimation process and the uncertainty of hand gestures in 3D
hand pose estimation, where 3D pose structures are inferred
from 2D images. Small changes in the 2D images could trigger large structural changes estimated in 3D space. Two different 3D hand poses with a large structural difference could
yield very similar 2D images during the 3D-to-2D projection process. In this case, overlapping, intersection, and occlusion of hand key points are often difficult to fully recover.
Notably, to achieve successful generalization for 3D hand
pose estimation, the system needs to have the capability of
detecting estimation errors by cross-validating the projec-

Introduction
Hand pose estimation aims to correctly detect and localize
the hand joint points from 2D images and use positional relationships to infer corresponding hand poses. It is an important task in computer vision and plays a crucial role in
various downstream applications, such as human-computer
interactions (Cheng, Yang, and Liu 2016), 3D human modeling (Zuffi et al. 2017), and contactless operations (Song
et al. 2019). Recently, with the development of deep neural network methods, remarkable progress has been made
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2697

