The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Understanding Future:
Consistency Guided Probabilistic Modeling for Action Anticipation
Zhao Xie1 , Yadong Shi1 , Kewei Wu1 * , Yaru Cheng1 , Dan Guo1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer and Information, the Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Anhui Zhonghuitong Technology Co., Ltd
xiezhao@hfut.edu.cn, hfut.shiyadong@gmail.com, wukewei@hfut.edu.cn, hfut.chengyaru@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn
Abstract
Action anticipation aims to infer the action in the unobserved
segment (future segment) with the observed segment (past
segment). Existing methods focus on learning key past semantics to predict the future, but they do not model the
temporal continuity between the past and the future. However, past actions are always highly uncertain in anticipating
the unobserved future. The absence of temporal continuity
smoothing in the video’s past-and-future segments may result in an inconsistent anticipation of future action. In this
work, we aim to smooth the global semantics changes in the
past and future segments. We propose a Consistency-guided
Probabilistic Model (CPM), which focuses on learning the
globally temporal probabilistic consistency to inhibit the unexpected temporal consistency. The CPM is deployed on
the Transformer architecture, which includes three modules
of future semantics estimation, global semantics estimation,
and global distribution estimation involving the learning of
past-to-future semantics, past-and-future semantics, and semantically probabilistic distributions. To achieve the smoothness of temporal continuity, we follow the principle of variational analysis and describe two probabilistic distributions,
i.e., a past-aware distribution and a global-aware distribution,
which help to estimate the evidence lower bound of future
anticipation. In this study, we maximize the evidence lower
bound of future semantics by reducing the distribution distance between the above two distributions for model optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the CPM
achieves state-of-the-art performance on Epic-Kitchen100,
Epic-Kitchen55, and EGTEA-GAZE.

Figure 1: Illustration of action anticipation task and pastand-future temporal consistency. (a) General Transformerbased model for action anticipation. (b) Global semantics
estimation. (c) Future semantics estimation and global distribution estimation.

avoid anticipating undesired actions, action prediction models need to capture the temporal consistency of the global
segment (including all the past-future segments). Existing
methods learn the temporal semantics with RNN (Furnari
and Farinella 2019; Guo et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018),
which uses the memory mechanism to select key semantics
in the past segment. Some methods learn the temporal semantics with context model (Guo et al. 2019; Li, Guo, and
Wang 2021; Guo, Wang, and Wang 2022; Song et al. 2023a),
and Transformer (Girdhar and Grauman 2021; Xu, Li, and
Lu 2022; Song et al. 2023b), which enhances the semantics by learning the temporal relation between frames in the
global segment. The above methods learn relations between
segments, and neglect temporal consistency of the semantics
changes from the past to the future. Action anticipation may
predict unexpected actions under the temporal inconsistent
semantics. Therefore, it is a challenging task to smooth the
temporal consistency in the global segment for action anticipation.
Figure 1 shows that action anticipation can be influenced
by different semantics in the global (past-and-future) seg-

Introduction
Action anticipation aims to infer the action in the unobserved segment (future segment), which happens after the
observed segment (past segment). Action anticipation is
an important task in computer vision applications, such as
human-robot collaboration (Dessalene et al. 2021), assistive robotics (Liu et al. 2020), smart houses (Damen et al.
2022, 2018), and autonomous vehicle (Zhang et al. 2022).
In human activities, action semantics in multiple consecutive segments usually satisfy temporal consistency, i.e., having smooth action variations along the timeline. In order to
* Corresponding author: Kewei Wu, Dan Guo
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6243

