The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeRDaVa: Deletion-Robust Data Valuation for Machine Learning
Xiao Tian1,2 , Rachael Hwee Ling Sim1 , Jue Fan1,2 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
{xiao.tian, rachael.sim, jue.fan}@u.nus.edu, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Data valuation is concerned with determining a fair valuation
of data from data sources to compensate them or to identify
training examples that are the most or least useful for predictions. With the rising interest in personal data ownership and
data protection regulations, model owners will likely have to
fulfil more data deletion requests. This raises issues that have
not been addressed by existing works: Are the data valuation
scores still fair with deletions? Must the scores be expensively
recomputed? The answer is no. To avoid recomputations, we
propose using our data valuation framework DeRDaVa upfront for valuing each data source’s contribution to preserving
robust model performance after anticipated data deletions.
DeRDaVa can be efficiently approximated and will assign
higher values to data that are more useful or less likely to be
deleted. We further generalize DeRDaVa to Risk-DeRDaVa
to cater to risk-averse/seeking model owners who are concerned with the worst/best-cases model utility. We also empirically demonstrate the practicality of our solutions.

1

Figure 1: Comparison of Data Shapley vs. the deletionrobustified DeRDaVa and Risk-DeRDaVa scores with Shapley prior for a game with 2 interchangeable sources. ⋆ and
■ stay with probability 1 and .7 respectively. ⋆ and ■ have
equal Data Shapley score but ⋆ has higher DeRDaVa and
Risk-averse DeRDaVa scores. This is because Data Shapley
(Eq. (1)) considers only the initial support set {⋆, ■} while
DeRDaVa (Eq. (8)) and Risk-averse DeRDaVa (Eq. (10))
also consider the worst-case support set {⋆}. Further explanation is included in App. A.1.

Introduction

Data is essential to building machine learning (ML) models
with high predictive performance and model utility. Model
owners source for data directly from their customers or from
collaborators in collaborative machine learning (Nguyen
et al. 2022a). For example, a credit card company can train
an accurate ML model to predict the probability of default
based on consumers’ income and payment history data (Tsai
and Chen 2010). As another example, a healthcare firm can
train an ML model to predict the progression of diabetes
based on patients’ health data (TCFOD 2019). As the quality of data contributed by multiple data sources may vary
widely, several works (Fan et al. 2022; Tay et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2021) have recognized the importance of data valuation to help model owners compensate data sources fairly, or
identify data that are most or least useful for predictions.
Data valuation studies how much data is worth and proposes how rewards associated with the ML model can be
fairly allocated to each data source (Sim, Xu, and Low
2022). Several existing data valuation techniques (Ghorbani
and Zou 2019; Jia et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019) have adopted

the use of semivalues from cooperative game theory. Recent works (Sim et al. 2020; Tay et al. 2022; Zhang, Wu,
and Pan 2021) have also developed various reward allocation schemes based on semivalues. The core intuition behind
semivalues is that a data source should be fairly valued relative to other data sources (i.e., based on the averaged model
utility improvement it contributes to each sub-coalition of
other data sources). Moreover, these works have justified the
use of semivalues by fairness axioms such as Interchangeability — assigning the same valuation score to two data
sources di and dj with the same model utility improvement
to every sub-coalition (e.g., ⋆ and ■ in Fig. 1).
Data deletion refers to the deletion of data and their impact from trained ML models. Due to the recent introduction
of data protection legislation, such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the European Union and California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the United States, data
deletions are expected to occur more frequently. These laws
legally assert that data are properties of their owners and data
owners have the right to be forgotten (Shastri, Wasserman,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15373

