The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Use the Metropolis Algorithm for Multi-Objective Optimization?
Weijie Zheng1 , Mingfeng Li1 , Renzhong Deng1 , Benjamin Doerr2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, International Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), École Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
zhengweijie@hit.edu.cn, lastname@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract

et al. (2023) for a recent tightening of this result) proved that
the Metropolis algorithm with suitable parameters solves the
O NE M AX benchmark in an expected time O(n log n) fitness evaluation, a runtime many other randomized search
heuristics have as well on this problem (Droste, Jansen, and
Wegener 2002; Jansen, Jong, and Wegener 2005; Witt 2006;
Sudholt and Witt 2019; Doerr and Krejca 2020; Antipov and
Doerr 2021).
The Metropolis algorithm can cope with local optima by
accepting inferior solutions with suitably small probability. Jansen and Wegener (2007) proved that the Metropolis algorithm solves the G ENTLE N EGATIVE S LOPE problem in polynomial time, whereas the (1 + 1) EA needs
at least exponential time; that also the move acceptance
hyper-heuristic need super-polynomial time, was recently
shown by Lissovoi, Oliveto, and Warwicker (2023). Oliveto
et al. (2018) proved that the Metropolis algorithm solves
their VALLEY function (which is different from the VALLEY
problem defined in (Droste, Jansen, and Wegener 2000))
more efficiently than simple evolutionary algorithms (EAs).
Wang, Zheng, and Doerr (2024) showed that the Metropolis
algorithm solves the D ECEPTIVE L EADING B LOCKS (DLB)
function in expected time of O(n2 ), while all (1+1)-elitist
unary unbiased black-box algorithms have an expected runtime of Ω(n3 ).
We note that the known runtime results for the Metropolis algorithm are all for single optimization. In this paper,
we take several steps towards theoretically analyzing multiobjective Metropolis algorithms. Since an advantage of the
Metropolis algorithm was proven for the single-objective
DLB function (Wang, Zheng, and Doerr 2024), we construct
a bi-objective counterpart of the DLB problem following a
general construction method from (Laumanns, Thiele, and
Zitzler 2004). We call our new benchmark DLTB, for deceptive leading blocks for ones and deceptive trailing blocks
for zeros. DLTB is the first bi-objective multimodal function for theoretical analysis where not all local optima are
Pareto optimal. It is also the first bi-objective function in
the theory community where the maximum size of a set of
mutually non-dominating objective values is larger than the
Pareto front size.
The original Metropolis algorithm uses two operators,
one-bit mutation as variation operator and the selection
mechanism that allows also the inferior offspring to enter

The Metropolis algorithm can cope with local optima by
accepting inferior solutions with suitably small probability.
That this can work well was not only observed in empirical research, but also via mathematical runtime analyses on
single-objective benchmarks. This paper takes several steps
towards understanding, again via theoretical means, whether
such advantages can also be obtained in multi-objective optimization.
The original Metropolis algorithm has two components, onebit mutation and the acceptance strategy, which allows accepting inferior solutions. When adjusting the acceptance
strategy to multi-objective optimization in the way that an
inferior solution that is accepted replaces its parent, then
the Metropolis algorithm is not very efficient on our multiobjective version of the multimodal DLB benchmark called
DLTB. With one-bit mutation, this multi-objective Metropolis algorithm cannot optimize the DLTB problem, with standard bit-wise mutation it needs at least Ω(n5 ) time to
cover the full Pareto front. In contrast, we show that many
other multi-objective optimizers, namely the GSEMO, SMSEMOA, and NSGA-II, only need time O(n4 ).
When keeping the parent when an inferior point is accepted,
the multi-objective Metropolis algorithm both with one-bit
or standard bit-wise mutation solves the DLTB problem efficiently, with one-bit mutation experimentally leading to better results than several other algorithms.
Overall, our work suggests that the general mechanism of
the Metropolis algorithm can be interesting in multi-objective
optimization, but that the implementation details can have a
huge impact on the performance.

Introduction
Simulated annealing is widely applied in both single- and
multi-objective optimization problems, see (Suman and Kumar 2006). The Metropolis algorithm (Metropolis et al.
1953) is a special case of simulated annealing with a fixed
temperature. The runtime analysis of the Metropolis algorithm for single-objective optimization started in 1988, when
Sasaki and Hajek (1988) proved that good approximations
for the maximum matching problem can be computed in
polynomial time. Jansen and Wegener (2007) (see Doerr
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20883

