The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TagFog: Textual Anchor Guidance and Fake Outlier Generation for Visual
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jiankang Chen1,3 , Tong Zhang2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3 , Ruixuan Wang1,2,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE, Guangzhou, China
chenjk36@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangt02@pcl.ac.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, wangruix5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial in many realworld applications. However, intelligent models are often
trained solely on in-distribution (ID) data, leading to overconfidence when misclassifying OOD data as ID classes. In
this study, we propose a new learning framework which leverage simple Jigsaw-based fake OOD data and rich semantic
embeddings (‘anchors’) from the ChatGPT description of ID
knowledge to help guide the training of the image encoder.
The learning framework can be flexibly combined with existing post-hoc approaches to OOD detection, and extensive empirical evaluations on multiple OOD detection benchmarks
demonstrate that rich textual representation of ID knowledge
and fake OOD knowledge can well help train a visual encoder
for OOD detection. With the learning framework, new stateof-the-art performance was achieved on all the benchmarks.
The code is available at https://github.com/Cverchen/TagFog.

Figure 1: OOD detection performance of different methods
on the CIFAR100 and ImageNet100-I benchmarks.

Introduction

If certain OOD samples are available during training, the
model will gain knowledge of data that are characterized differently from the ID data. This would help the model better identify OOD data later. However, obtaining OOD data
in certain real-world applications is often time-consuming
or costly. Based on above considerations, researchers have
proposed various strategies to generate fake OOD data from
available ID training data. One way is to use generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) for generating fake OOD samples based on available ID data (Ge,
Demyanov, and Garnavi 2017; Schlegl et al. 2017; Pidhorskyi, Almohsen, and Doretto 2018; Kong and Ramanan
2021). However, it is often challenging for GANs to generate expected OOD samples due to the unstable training
and difficulty in generating realistic OOD samples based on
only ID samples (Sabokrou et al. 2018; Neal et al. 2018). Instead of generating fake OOD data in the input space as by
GANs, OOD knowledge may also be gained from the feature
space. For example, VOS (Du et al. 2021) synthesizes virtual
OOD features from the low likelihood regions of ID data
in the high-level feature space to help improve OOD detection. This method assumes a strict Gaussian distribution for
ID data, which is often unrealistic. Different from directly
generating OOD data to gain OOD knowledge, the pretrained large vision-language model CLIP (Radford et al.
2021) has recently been used to help OOD detection consid-

When deploying well-trained AI models in real-world applications, AI models often encounter samples which are
different from the distributions of training data (Kuan
and Mueller 2022; Salehi et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2021).
Such out-of-distribution (OOD) samples are often from unknown classes which did not appear during model training.
Mis-classifying OOD samples into previously learned indistribution (ID) classes could lead to serious consequences
such as in the autonomous driving and the intelligent healthcare applications. Therefore, it is a desired ability for the AI
model to accurately detect whether a new data is an OOD
sample or from one of previously learned classes.
Various approaches have been developed for solving the
OOD detection problem. Most approaches train a decent
classifier on ID data, then use the feature output of the
penultimate layer, logits output of the classifier, or the softmax probability vector output to design a score function
(Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016; Lee et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2022). The defined score is typically lower
for OOD data compared to ID data. However, training only
on ID data can cause overconfidence, with models assigning
high confidence to unseen OOD data (Wei et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1100

