The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Privacy Amplification by Iteration for ADMM with (Strongly) Convex Objective
Functions
T-H. Hubert Chan* , Hao Xie* , Mengshi Zhao*
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
hubert@cs.hku.hk, hxie@connect.hku.hk, zmsxsl@connect.hku.hk

Abstract

the function. Secondly, in a distributed learning setting, the
function f refers to the loss functions from various users
which can be optimized in parallel, while the function g
refers to a regularizer term that can typically be optimized
by a central server.
In ADMM, a dual variable λ keeps track of how much
the linear constraint is violated. The method is an iterative procedure that minimizes some Lagrangian function
L(x, y, λ), which is defined in terms of f and g. In each iteration, the three variables x, y and λ are updated in sequential order. While the primal variables x and y are each updated (while keeping other variables constant) to minimize
L, the dual variable λ is updated to encourage the feasibility of the linear constraint. The alternating nature of variable
updates makes the method widely adaptable in large-scale
distributed contexts (Boyd et al. 2011).
In this paper, we focus on a stochastic version of ADMM
proposed by (Ouyang et al. 2013), in which the function f
can be viewed as an expectation of functions sampled from
some distribution D. Each iteration t is associated with some
user, whose (private) data is some function ft sampled from
D. Instead of directly accessing f, each iteration t only has
access to the corresponding user’s function ft . While the sequence f1 , f2 , . . . , fT of sampled functions arises from user
data, the function g is publicly known. In one ADMM iteration, ft is only needed for updating the x variable. In the
proximal variant, the whole function ft is used in some optimization step to update x. Instead, we will focus on the more
computationally efficient gradient variant that uses the first
order approximation of ft (Ouyang et al. 2015; Li and Lin
2019), where only one access to the gradient oracle ∇ft (·)
is sufficient.
All variants of differential privacy (Dwork 2006; Bun and
Steinke 2016; Mironov 2017) are based on the principle
that a mechanism or procedure achieves its privacy guarantee through the incorporation of randomness. Private variants of ADMM have been considered by adding noises to
the variables (Zhang and Zhu 2016). To apply this privacy
framework to ADMM, the function ft is considered as the
private input of the user in iteration t. Hence, one possible
way (Shang et al. 2021) to achieve local privacy (against an
adversary that can observe the variables after each iteration)
for the user t is to sample some noise Nt , which is added
to the result of the gradient oracle oracle ∇ft (·). A popu-

We examine a private ADMM variant for (strongly) convex
objectives which is a primal-dual iterative method. Each iteration has a user with a private function used to update the
primal variable, masked by Gaussian noise for local privacy,
without directly adding noise to the dual variable. Privacy amplification by iteration explores if noises from later iterations
can enhance the privacy guarantee when releasing final variables after the last iteration.
Cyffers et al. explored privacy amplification by iteration for
the proximal ADMM variant, where a user’s entire private
function is accessed and noise is added to the primal variable.
In contrast, we examine a private ADMM variant requiring
just one gradient access to a user’s function, but both primal
and dual variables must be passed between successive iterations.
To apply Balle et al.’s coupling framework to the gradient
ADMM variant, we tackle technical challenges with novel
ideas. First, we address the non-expansive mapping issue in
ADMM iterations by using a customized norm. Second, because the dual variables are not masked with any noise directly, their privacy guarantees are achieved by treating two
consecutive noisy ADMM iterations as a Markov operator.
Our main result is that the privacy guarantee for the gradient
ADMM variant can be amplified proportionally to the number of iterations. For strongly convex objective functions, this
amplification exponentially increases with the number of iterations. These amplification results align with the previously
studied special case of stochastic gradient descent.

1

Introduction

Alternating direction method of multipliers (Gabay and
Mercier 1976) (ADMM) has been designed for convex programs whose objective functions can be decomposed as the
sum f(x) + g(y) of two convex functions1 , where the primal
variables x and y are restricted by some linear constraint
Ax + By = c.
Decomposing the objective function into the sum of two
convex functions offers several advantages. Firstly, different optimization algorithms can be applied to each part of
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
It will be clear soon why we use a different font for f.

11204

