The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Abstract Action Scheduling for Optimal Temporal Planning via OMT
Stefan Panjkovic1, 2 , Andrea Micheli1
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
2
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
{spanjkovic, amicheli}@fbk.eu

Abstract

PLATINUM (Umbrico et al. 2018) and FAPE (Dvorak et al.
2014)) and reduction to satisfiability (e.g. ITSAT (Rankooh
and Ghassem-Sani 2015), LCP (Bit-Monnot 2018) and the
encodings of Shin and Davis (Shin and Davis 2005a) and
Rintanen (Rintanen 2017)).
Optimal Temporal Planning (OTP) is the problem of finding a valid plan that optimizes an objective function. Common objective functions that have been considered in the
literature are makespan minimization, consisting in finding
the plan of minimum duration, and action cost minimization, which amounts to associate a cost to each action and
find the plan of minimum cumulated cost. The planning
approaches mentioned above are focused on quickly finding good-quality plans without offering formal guarantees
of eventually finding optimal plans and proving their optimality1 . Very few papers tackle the OTP problem and all of
them focus on very specific cost functions. Some authors
(Vidal 2011; Haslum 2006) address a special sub-case of
OTP called ”conservative planning” (Smith and Weld 1999),
which is significantly simpler than the general OTP case because actions having conflicting preconditions or effects are
forbidden to overlap in time. For general OTP, only some
admissible heuristics for makespan minimization have been
designed (Haslum 2009; Brandao et al. 2022). Recently,
Panjkovic and Micheli presented an approach for solving
an expressive class of OTP problems (2023); the technique
exploits Optimization Modulo Theory (OMT) (Sebastiani
and Tomasi 2015), a generalization of Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) (Barrett et al. 2009) with cost functions.
The basic idea of the approach (reported in Section 3) is to
reduce the OTP problem to a series of queries to an OMT
solver. Each query encodes a bounded version of the problem, with an additional abstract step representing an overapproximation of states that are reachable beyond the bound.
If there is an optimal model of the formula that does not use
abstract elements, then a provably optimal plan can be extracted from such a model. Conceptually, the abstract step
of the OMT encoding is the symbolic analogous to an admissible heuristic, providing an under-estimation of the true
minimal cost to the goal.
In this paper, we tackle a very general (and non-

Given the model of a system with explicit temporal constraints, optimal temporal planning is the problem of finding
a schedule of actions that achieves a certain goal while optimizing an objective function. Recent approaches for optimal
planning reduce the problem to a series of queries to an Optimization Modulo Theory (OMT) solver: each query encodes
a bounded version of the problem, with additional abstract
actions representing an over-approximation of the plans beyond the bound. This technique suffers from performance issues, mainly due to the looseness of the over-approximation,
which can include many non-executable plans.
In this paper, we propose a refined abstraction for solving
optimal temporal planning via OMT by introducing abstract
scheduling constraints, which have a double purpose. First,
they enforce a partial ordering of abstract actions based on
mutual dependencies between them, which leads to a better
makespan estimation and allows to prove optimality sooner.
Second, they implicitly forbid circular self-enabling of abstract actions, which is a common cause of spurious models
that severely affects performance in existing approaches. We
prove the soundness and completeness of the resulting approach and empirically demonstrate its superiority with respect to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Automated temporal planning is the problem of finding a
course of actions achieving a desired goal condition starting from a known initial state, for a system involving actions with durations and subject to temporal constraints. This
problem mixes classical automated planning and scheduling (generalizing both problems) and is relevant in all the
domains where time is an important dimension and parallelism between activities is possible. Example applications are flexible manufacturing (Ruml, Do, and Fromherz
2005) and robotics (Ingrand and Ghallab 2017). Several
approaches to tackle temporal planning have been devised
over the years, using either heuristic search (e.g. TFD (Eyerich, Mattmüller, and Röger 2012), OPTIC (Benton, Coles,
and Coles 2012) and TAMER (Valentini, Micheli, and
Cimatti 2020)), partial-order planning (e.g. EUROPA (Frank
and Jónsson 2003), VHPOP (Younes and Simmons 2003),

1
An exception is the minimization of plan length, for which
satisfiability reductions are optimal and admissible heuristics exist.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20222

