The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Select and Augment: Enhanced Dense Retrieval Knowledge Graph Augmentation
(Abstract Reprint)
Micheal Abaho1 , Yousef H. Alfaifi2
1

2

University of Liverpool, United Kingdom
Faculty of Computers and Information Technology, University of Tabuk, Tabuk, Saudi Arabia

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Abaho and Alfaifi (2023).

Abstract
Injecting textual information into knowledge graph (KG)
entity representations has been a worthwhile expedition in
terms of improving performance in KG oriented tasks within
the NLP community. External knowledge often adopted to
enhance KG embeddings ranges from semantically rich lexical dependency parsed features to a set of relevant key
words to entire text descriptions supplied from an external corpus such as wikipedia and many more. Despite the
gains this innovation (Text-enhanced KG embeddings) has
made, the proposal in this work suggests that it can be improved even further. Instead of using a single text description (which would not sufficiently represent an entity because of the inherent lexical ambiguity of text), we propose
a multi-task framework that jointly selects a set of text descriptions relevant to KG entities as well as align or augment KG embeddings with text descriptions. Different from
prior work that plugs formal entity descriptions declared in
knowledge bases, this framework leverages a retriever model
to selectively identify richer or highly relevant text descriptions to use in augmenting entities. Furthermore, the framework treats the number of descriptions to use in augmentation process as a parameter, which allows the flexibility
of enumerating across several numbers before identifying
an appropriate number. Experiment results for Link Prediction demonstrate a 5.5% and 3.5% percentage increase in
the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) and Hits@10 scores respectively, in comparison to text-enhanced knowledge graph
augmentation methods using traditional CNNs.

References
Abaho, M.; and Alfaifi, Y. H. 2023. Select and Augment:
Enhanced Dense Retrieval Knowledge Graph Augmentation. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 78: 269–
285.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22690

