The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Training Sequence Design: Efficient and Generalizable Agent
Training
Wenjun Li, Pradeep Varakantham
Singapore Management University
wjli.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
To train generalizable Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents,
researchers recently proposed the Unsupervised Environment
Design (UED) framework, in which a teacher agent creates
a very large number of training environments and a student agent trains on the experiences in these environments
to be robust against unseen testing scenarios. For example,
to train a student to master the “stepping over stumps” task,
the teacher will create numerous training environments with
varying stump heights and shapes. In this paper, we argue that
UED neglects training efficiency and its need for a very large
number of environments (henceforth referred to as infinite
horizon training) makes it less suitable for training robots and
non-expert humans. In real-world applications where either
creating new training scenarios is expensive or training efficiency is of critical importance, we want to maximize both the
learning efficiency and learning outcome of the student. To
achieve efficient finite horizon training, we propose a novel
Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation for the teacher
agent, referred to as Unsupervised Training Sequence Design
(UTSD). Specifically, we encode salient information from the
student policy (e.g., behaviors and learning progress) into the
teacher’s state space, enabling the teacher to closely track
the student’s learning progress and consequently discover
the optimal training sequences with finite lengths. Additionally, we explore the teacher’s efficient adaptation to unseen
students at test time by employing the context-based metalearning approach, which leverages the teacher’s past experiences with various students. Finally, we empirically demonstrate our teacher’s capability to design efficient and effective
training sequences for students with varying capabilities.

Figure 1: A high-level overview of UED and USTD.
2023)) formulates a training framework between a teacher
agent and a student agent, where the teacher creates a very
large number of training environments (e.g., mazes with different positions of obstacles and car-racing games with various track designs) to improve the student’s generalization
ability such that it is robust to “out-of-distribution” (OOD)
scenarios. UED algorithms have been empirically shown to
help RL agents achieve state-of-the-art generalization performance.
The existing UED algorithms seek to generate an infinite
number of environments and open-endedly train the student
based on the regret notion (we will introduce regret in detail
in Section 2). For example, to help the student generalize
to a variety of mazes, the state-of-the-art algorithm (ParkerHolder et al. 2022) creates hundreds of thousands of training
mazes, but such a massive amount of training is usually lowefficient and the student cannot learn anything in most of the
mazes. Consequently, such infinite training is less applicable
to real-world tasks where training efficiency is critical. On
top of achieving well-generalizing agents, we also want to
maximize the agent training efficiency with as few environments or tasks as possible in real-world tasks. For example,
to train a robot to climb stairs, we cannot afford to create tens
of thousands of real stairs with various heights and slopes in
the laboratory. Instead, it is desirable for the robot to generalize well to a variety of stairs with just a few training

Introduction
In order to train generalizable Reinforcement Learning (RL)
agents that are robust to various challenges and unseen scenarios, researchers have proposed Distributional RL (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017; Brunke et al. 2022), modelbased RL (Kaiser et al. 2019; Moerland et al. 2023) and
adversarial RL (Pinto et al. 2017; He et al. 2022). Recently, Unsupervised Environment Design (Dennis et al.
2020; Jiang, Grefenstette, and Rocktäschel 2021; Jiang et al.
2021; Parker-Holder et al. 2022; Li, Varakantham, and Li
2023; Li, Li, and Varakantham 2023; Tio and Varakantham
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13637

