The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Approximate Skolem Function Counter*
Arijit Shaw1,2 , Brendan Juba3 , Kuldeep S. Meel4
1

Chennai Mathematical Institute, India
2
IAI, TCG-CREST, Kolkata, India
3
Washington University in St. Louis, USA
4
University of Toronto, Canada

natural analog of #SAT for Skolem functions, yet to our
knowledge, it has not been previously studied.
More precisely, recall that given two sets X =
{x1 , . . . , xn } and Y = {y1 , . . . , ym } of variables and a
Boolean formula F (X, Y ) over X ∪ Y , the problem of
Boolean functional synthesis is to compute a vector Ψ =
⟨ψ1 , . . . , ψm ⟩ of Boolean functions ψi , often called Skolem
functions, such that ∃Y F (X, Y ) ≡ F (X, Ψ(X)). Informally, given a specification between inputs and outputs, the
task is to synthesize a function vector Ψ that maps each assignment of the inputs to an assignment of the outputs so that
the combined assignment meets the specification (whenever
such an assignment exists). Skolem synthesis is a fundamental problem in formal methods and has been investigated by
theoreticians and practitioners alike over the past few decades.
The past few years have witnessed the development of techniques that showcase the promise of scalability in their ability
to handle challenging specifications (Jiang, Lin, and Hung
2009; Tabajara and Vardi 2017; Rabe et al. 2018; Akshay
et al. 2019; Golia et al. 2021).
The scalability of today’s Skolem synthesis engines is
reminiscent of the scalability of SAT solvers in the early
2000s. Motivated by the scalability of SAT solvers (Froleyks
et al. 2021), researchers sought algorithmic frameworks for
problems beyond satisfiability, such as MaxSAT (Ansótegui,
Bonet, and Levy 2013; Li and Manya 2021), model counting (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2021; Chakraborty,
Meel, and Vardi 2021), sampling (Chakraborty, Meel, and
Vardi 2014), and the like. The development of scalable techniques for these problems also helped usher in new applications, even though the initial investigation had not envisioned
many of them. In a similar vein, motivated in part by this
development of scalable techniques for functional synthesis,
we investigate the Skolem counting problem. We observe in
Section 1.2 that algorithms for such tasks also have potential
applications in security and the engineering of specifications.
Being a natural problem, we will see that our study also naturally leads to deep technical connections between counting
functions and counting propositional models and the development of new techniques, which is of independent interest.
Counting Skolem functions indeed raises new technical
challenges. The existing techniques developed in the context
of propositional model counting either construct (implicitly
or explicitly) a representation of the space of all models (Thur-

Abstract
One approach to probabilistic inference involves counting
the number of models of a given Boolean formula. Here, we
are interested in inferences involving higher-order objects,
i.e., functions. We study the following task: Given a Boolean
specification between a set of inputs and outputs, count the
number of functions of inputs such that the specification is
met. Such functions are called Skolem functions.
We are motivated by the recent development of scalable approaches to Boolean function synthesis. This stands in relation to our problem analogously to the relationship between
Boolean satisfiability and the model counting problem. Yet,
counting Skolem functions poses considerable new challenges.
From the complexity-theoretic standpoint, counting Skolem
functions is not only #P -hard; it is quite unlikely to have
an FPRAS (Fully Polynomial Randomized Approximation
Scheme) as the problem of synthesizing a Skolem function
remains challenging, even given access to an NP oracle.
The primary contribution of this work is the first algorithm,
SkolemFC, that computes an estimate of the number of
Skolem functions. SkolemFC relies on technical connections
between counting functions and propositional model counting:
our algorithm makes a linear number of calls to an approximate model counter and computes an estimate of the number
of Skolem functions with theoretical guarantees. Moreover, we
show that Skolem function count can be approximated through
a polynomial number of calls to a SAT oracle. Our prototype
displays impressive scalability, handling benchmarks comparably to state-of-the-art Skolem function synthesis engines,
even though counting all such functions ostensibly poses a
greater challenge than synthesizing a single function.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic inference problems arise throughout AI and are
tackled algorithmically by casting them as problems such
as model counting (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2021;
Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2021). In this work, we are
interested in approaching inference questions for higher-order
objects, specifically Skolem functions: that is, we wish to
compute the number of possible Skolem functions for a given
specification F (X, Y ). Counting Skolem functions is the
* The full version of the paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12026
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8108

