The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QPEN: Quantum Projection and Quantum Entanglement Enhanced Network for
Cross-Lingual Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis
Xingqiang Zhao,Hai Wan∗ ,Kunxun Qi
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
zhaoxq23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, qikx@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

of user in different languages, requiring high-quality multilingual systems for the sentiment analysis. Therefore, the
cross-lingual ABSA, which aims to train a ABSA model primarily on the data in one language and then apply it to other languages, has become an essential ingredient in multilingual sentiment analysis systems.
In recent years, cross-lingual pre-trained language models such as the multilingual BERT (m-BERT) model (Devlin
et al. 2019) and the XLM-Roberta (XLM-R) model (Conneau
et al. 2020) have become a prevalent paradigm for tackling
cross-lingual ABSA. Thanks to the multilingual knowledge
learned in the pre-training stage (Wu and Dredze 2019),
these pre-trained models are able to be fine-tuned on labeled
data in source language (usually English) and then be directly applied to the data in target language. To further investigate the transfer of language-specific knowledge in solving
the cross-lingual ABSA problem, an aspect code-switching
mechanism with knowledge distillation (Zhang et al. 2021)
has been proposed to enhance the cross-lingual alignment
for pre-trained cross-lingual language models.
However, it is still challenging to adopt the cross-lingual
pre-trained language models to tackle the cross-lingual ABSA task since the low-resource languages might be underrepresented during the pre-training phase (Conneau et al.
2020; Pfeiffer et al. 2020). Making use of the translated target language data with projected labels is a plausible way
to transfer language-specific knowledge (Li et al. 2020),
whereas the performance of such translation-based methods heavily relies on the quality of the translation and label
projection. In practice, the task-specific knowledge in the
translated data would also be limited if the quality of the
projected label is unsatisfactory.
To tackle these challenges, we investigate the problem
of cross-lingual ABSA by introducing quantum modules to
pre-trained cross-lingual language models, based on the observation that quantum entanglement can correlate multiple
single systems in quantum systems. Specifically, we propose
a novel quantum cross-lingual ABSA model named QPEN
(short for quantum projection and quantum entanglement
enhanced network). It is equipped with a quantum projection module and a quantum entanglement module, as shown
in Figure 1. Given a review context, QPEN first encodes
the context to contextualized representation by applying a
pre-trained cross-lingual language model such as mBERT or

Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) has attracted much
attention due to its wide application scenarios. Most previous studies have focused solely on monolingual ABSA, posing a formidable challenge when extending ABSA applications to multilingual scenarios. In this paper, we study upgrading monolingual ABSA to cross-lingual ABSA. Existing
methods usually exploit pre-trained cross-lingual language
to model cross-lingual ABSA, and enhance the model with
translation data. However, the low-resource languages might
be under-represented during the pre-training phase, and the
translation-enhanced methods heavily rely on the quality of
the translation and label projection. Inspired by the observation that quantum entanglement can correlate multiple single
systems, we map the monolingual expression to the quantum Hilbert space as a single quantum system, and then utilize quantum entanglement and quantum measurement to
achieve cross-lingual ABSA. Specifically, we propose a novel quantum neural model named QPEN (short for quantum
projection and quantum entanglement enhanced network).
It is equipped with a proposed quantum projection module
that projects aspects as quantum superposition on a complexvalued Hilbert space. Furthermore, a quantum entanglement
module is proposed in QPEN to share language-specific features between different languages without transmission. We
conducted simulation experiments on the classical computer,
and experimental results on SemEval-2016 dataset demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
in terms of F1-scores for five languages.

Introduction
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) is a fine-grained
task for sentiment analysis. It aims at inferring the sentiment polarities over specific aspects in a sentence (Liu 2012;
Hu et al. 2019). With the development of the product reviews and the social media, ABSA has been widely applied
in many real-world applications.
However, most existing methods focus merely on the
monolingual ABSA task, and can hardly be directly applied
to the multi-lingual scenario. In practice, the real-world applications such as E-commerce systems accept the reviews
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19670

