The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Semantic Graph Transformer for Multi-View 3D Human Pose Estimation
Lijun Zhang1, 2 , Kangkang Zhou1, 2 , Feng Lu3, 4 , Xiang-Dong Zhou1, 2 , Yu Shi1, 2
1

Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing, China
2
Chongqing School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing, China
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhanglijun, zhouxiangdong, shiyu}@cigit.ac.cn, zhoukangkang21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, lf22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

is the current mainstream. CNNs commonly concatenate the
2D joint coordinates directly as input features in the 2D-3D
lifting approaches, ignoring the original spatial arrangement
of human body joints. Since Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) have good performance when processing irregular
graph data, researchers have introduced GCNs into 3D HPE
and gained some achievements.
GCN-based 3D HPE methods are currently employed primarily in single-view 3D HPE (Cai et al. 2019; Zhao et al.
2019; Xu and Takano 2021; Zhang et al. 2022b), where
graph features are commonly generated based on adjacency
matrices of connected 2D joints. However, there is an inherent depth ambiguity problem with single-view 3D HPE, as
a 2D pose may project multiple 3D poses. The utilization
of multi-view information can mitigate the depth ambiguity
problem, while few graph-based multi-view 3D HPE methods have evolved, hence this paper covers this direction.
Most GCN-based 3D HPE approaches (Pavllo et al. 2019;
Zhao et al. 2019; Xu and Takano 2021; Liu et al. 2021)
only consider the connections between joint points, without
taking into account the original position and skeletal edge
information of human joints, as well as their effective fusion. Additionally, the GCN has a limited receptive field,
resulting in inadequate feature representation. Some work
(Cai et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Zeng et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2022b) incorporated temporal information to enhance
the feature and alleviate depth uncertainty, while it is difficult to build long-time dependencies. Transformer has addressed this issue and has been employed in several 3D HPE
methods with decent results (Zheng et al. 2021; Shuai, Wu,
and Liu 2022; Zhao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023). However,
these works directly transform and concatenate the coordinates of 2D points into input feature tokens, with no regard
for node spatial structural information such as graphs. Only
a few methods (Zhao, Wang, and Tian 2022; Ionescu et al.
2023) incorporated graph features into transformer, while
they have limited model performance.
To address the above problems, we propose a multi-view
3D HPE method based on a deep semantic graph transformer. The network can dynamically learn deep semantic
features and their correlations involving the position, spatial
structure, and skeletal edge of all human joints. It progressively fuses significant spatial-temporal information across
multiple viewpoints and successfully models the long-time

Most Graph Convolutional Networks based 3D human pose
estimation (HPE) methods were involved in single-view 3D
HPE and utilized certain spatial graphs, existing key problems such as depth ambiguity, insufficient feature representation, or limited receptive fields. To address these issues, we
propose a multi-view 3D HPE framework based on deep semantic graph transformer, which adaptively learns and fuses
multi-view significant semantic features of human nodes to
improve 3D HPE performance. First, we propose a deep semantic graph transformer encoder to enrich spatial feature
information. It deeply mines the position, spatial structure,
and skeletal edge knowledge of joints and dynamically learns
their correlations. Then, we build a progressive multi-view
spatial-temporal feature fusion framework to mitigate joint
depth uncertainty. To enhance the pose spatial representation, deep spatial semantic feature are interacted and fused
across different viewpoints during monocular feature extraction. Furthermore, long-time relevant temporal dependencies
are modeled and spatial-temporal information from all viewpoints is fused to intermediately supervise the depth. Extensive experiments on three 3D HPE benchmarks show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art results. It can effectively enhance pose features, mitigate depth ambiguity in single-view
3D HPE, and improve 3D HPE performance without providing camera parameters. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/z0911k/SGraFormer.

Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) is a popular research topic
in computer vision. It is a crucial tool for analyzing human
behavior since it is able to estimate human pose by predicting the locations of main human body joints in 3D space. As
a result, it is the foundational technology for many humanassisted vision tasks, such as robotics, action recognition,
pedestrian re-identification, and virtual/augmented reality.
With the advancement of deep learning techniques, 3D
HPE methods based on Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have risen to prominence. They are broadly characterized as direct estimation methods (Pavlakos et al. 2017;
Luvizon, Tabia, and Picard 2019) and 2D-3D lifting methods
(Tekin et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2019). The latter performs better due to the intermediate supervision of 2D poses, which
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7205

