The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Domain Incremental Learning for Face Presentation Attack Detection
Keyao Wang* 1 , Guosheng Zhang* 1 , Haixiao Yue* 1 , Ajian Liu†2 , Gang Zhang1 ,
Haocheng Feng1 , Junyu Han1 , Errui Ding1 , Jingdong Wang1
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc
CBSR&MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
{wangkeyao, zhangguosheng, yuehaixiao, zhanggang03, fenghaocheng, hanjunyu, dingerrui}@baidu.com,
ajianliu92@gmail.com, wangjingdong@outlook.com
2

Abstract

Target Domain
without label

Source Domain

Previous face Presentation Attack Detection (PAD) methods
aim to improve the effectiveness of cross-domain tasks. However, in real-world scenarios, the original training data of the
pre-trained model is not available due to data privacy or other
reasons. Under these constraints, general methods for finetuning single-target domain data may lose previously learned
knowledge, leading to the issue of catastrophic forgetting. To
address these issues, we propose a Multi-Domain Incremental Learning (MDIL) method for PAD, which not only learns
knowledge well from the new domain but also maintains the
performance of previous domains stably. To this end, we propose an Adaptive Domain-specific Experts (ADE) framework
based on the vision transformer to preserve the discriminability of previous domains. Moreover, we present an asymmetric
classifier to keep the output distribution of different classifiers
consistent, thereby improving the generalization ability. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared to prior methods of incremental learning. Excitingly, under more stringent setting
conditions, our method approximates or even outperforms
DA/DG-based methods.

Train

Test

Source Domain1

Source Domain2

FE

FE

Target Domain

Target Domain

DA

DG

Domain1

Domain2

FE

Domain1

Domain2

MDIL

Figure 1: The comparison of different methods. DA-based
methods align the unlabeled target domain with source domains. DG-based methods eliminate dependency on the target domain and test directly on the unseen target domain.
MDIL-based methods aim to obtain satisfactory results from
previous domain data without revisiting old domain data.

igate this problem of domain shift, recent studies introduce
domain adaptation (DA) (Jia et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2019)
and domain generalization (DG) (Zhou et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2021) into the field of PAD. As shown in Figure 1, DAbased methods focus on transferring performance on the unlabeled target domain, but they may affect the performance
of the source domain. In contrast, DG-based methods aim
to achieve out-of-distribution generalization by using multisource domain data for model learning simultaneously.
In general, DA/DG-based methods address the domain
transfer problem. But in most practical scenarios, part or
all of the data in the source domain cannot be accessed
by data privacy. MDIL-based methods solve the problem
of mitigating the catastrophic forgetting of the original domain data information when only using the target domain
data for training. As shown in the third column in Figure 1, MDIL aims to train a single model on sequential nonstationary domains without revisiting the previous domain
data. In practical PAD application, since an initially trained
model fails to identify novel attack types from unknown domains, a straightforward way to solve this problem is to retrain the model from scratch on both old and new domain
data. However, model retraining is computationally costly
because it requires storing large amounts of previous domain

Introduction
In recent years, face recognition (FR) techniques have been
widely exploited in different application scenarios, such as
smartphone login, financial payment, access control, etc.
While FR systems may suffer from various presentation
attacks (PAs), e.g., printed photos, video replay, and 3D
masks, which seriously threaten the credibility of facial information and bring great challenges to public security management. To address these issues, various PAD methods
have been proposed, including the hand-crafted methods
(Freitas Pereira et al. 2012; Patel, Han, and Jain 2016) and
the deep learning methods based on auxiliary supervision
(Atoum et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019).
Although these methods have achieved promising results
under intra-dataset scenarios, they neglect domain discrepancy across different domains and may encounter performance degradation when adapting to new domains. To mit* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5499

