The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Object-Aware Domain Generalization for Object Detection
Wooju Lee* , Dasol Hong* , Hyungtae Lim† , Hyun Myung†
Urban Robotics Lab, School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{dnwn24, ds.hong, shapelim, hmyung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Single-domain generalization (S-DG) aims to generalize a
model to unseen environments with a single-source domain.
However, most S-DG approaches have been conducted in
the field of classification. When these approaches are applied to object detection, the semantic features of some objects can be damaged, which can lead to imprecise object localization and misclassification. To address these problems,
we propose an object-aware domain generalization (OA-DG)
method for single-domain generalization in object detection.
Our method consists of data augmentation and training strategy, which are called OA-Mix and OA-Loss, respectively.
OA-Mix generates multi-domain data with multi-level transformation and object-aware mixing strategy. OA-Loss enables models to learn domain-invariant representations for
objects and backgrounds from the original and OA-Mixed
images. Our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art
works on standard benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/WoojuLee24/OA-DG.

(a) AugMix (2019)

(b) OA-Mix

Introduction
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
human-level performances in various applications such as
image classification and object detection (He et al. 2016;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Carion et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2015).
However, DNNs are vulnerable to various types of domain
shifts, which have not been seen in the source domain (Dan
and Thomas 2019; Lee and Myung 2022; Michaelis et al.
2019; Wu and Deng 2022). Even a small change in the domain can have disastrous results in real-world scenarios such
as autonomous driving (Michaelis et al. 2019; Wu and Deng
2022). Thus, DNNs should be robust against the domain
shifts to be applied in real-world applications.
Domain generalization (DG) aims to generalize a model
to unseen target domains by using only the source domain (Hendrycks et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2021; Yao et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2022). However, most DG methods rely on
multiple source domains and domain annotations, which are
generally unavailable (Kim et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2021; Yao

(c) SupCon (2020)

(d) FSCE (2021)

(e) OA-Loss

Figure 1. (a) Existing data augmentation methods can damage the semantic features of objects. (b) OA-Mix generates
multiple domains while preserving semantic features. (c)(e) The dotted line, arrow, circle, triangle, and star mean
pull, push, car, person, and background, respectively. (c)
The background contains different semantics (red and orange stars), but these are treated identically and pulled. (d)
The method ignores semantic relationships between background instances. (e) OA-Loss considers semantic relations
of background instances from multi-domain.

et al. 2022). Single-domain generalization (S-DG) achieves
DG without any additional knowledge about multiple domains (Wan et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021b).
Data augmentation has been successfully applied for SDG in image classification (Hendrycks et al. 2019; Modas
et al. 2022). The methods can be used to generate multisource domains from a single-source domain. However,
object detection addresses multiple objects in an image.
When data augmentation methods for S-DG are applied

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding authors: Dr. Hyungtae Lim and Prof. Hyun
Myung
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2947

