The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task-Adaptive Prompted Transformer for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Jiamin Wu1 , Xin Liu1 , Xiaotian Yin1 , Tianzhu Zhang1∗ , Yongdong Zhang1
1

Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
{jiaminwu, attcb63442, xiaotianyin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

To address this challenge, recent works (Guo et al. 2020;
Li, Liu, and Bilen 2022; Requeima et al. 2019) are shifting their interest to Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL), where the meta-train set and meta-test set are composed of different sets of datasets. To bridge the large domain gap, recent methods (Requeima et al. 2019; Bateni
et al. 2020; Triantafillou et al. 2021) learn a set of taskconditioned parameters to adapt the task-agnostic model to
the current task. Generally, a set of independent generators
are utilized to generate the task-conditioned parameters from
the task description gathered from the small support set. For
example, as shown in Figure 1 (a), CNAPs (Requeima et al.
2019) and SimpleCNAPs (Bateni et al. 2020) average the
support features xs to obtain a task embedding et and send it
into convolutional generators [θg1 , θg2 , · · · , θgi ] to estimate
the parameters [p1 , p2 , · · · , pi ] of FiLM layers (i.e., the scale
and shift parameters for feature modulation). Each time we
need to generate an additional parameter pi+1 , a new generator θgi+1 would be required, which would increase generator
parameters.
By studying the previous FSL methods based on parameter generation (Requeima et al. 2019; Bateni et al. 2020;
Oreshkin, Rodrı́guez López, and Lacoste 2018), we sum up
two fundamental points for resolving the substantial domain
gap for CD-FSL. (i) Reliable task description. To obtain
task description as generation conditions, the previous methods directly average the support features xs into et (see Figure 1 (a)). However, the relations between samples from different classes are ignored, which are essential for characterizing the task. Besides, treating the non-representative samples equally as the others may bring noises into the task description, which may further hamper the expressiveness of
the generated parameters. (ii) Flexible parameter generation mechanism. In the previous methods, the parameters
[p1 , · · · , pi ] are always independently predicted by their corresponding generators [θg1 , · · · , θgi ], respectively (see Figure 1 (a)). Thus the scale of generators will increase linearly
with the number of generated parameters. This causes inflexibility when requiring abundant task-conditioned parameters, as it may cause overfitting to the few-shot data.
Inspired by the above discussion, we propose
MetaPrompt, a Task-adaptive Prompted Transformer
model for CD-FSL, by jointly exploiting the prompt
learning and the task-conditioned parameter generation

Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL) aims at recognizing samples in novel classes from unseen domains that
are vastly different from training classes, with few labeled
samples. However, the large domain gap between training
and novel classes makes previous FSL methods perform
poorly. To address this issue, we propose MetaPrompt, a
Task-adaptive Prompted Transformer model for CD-FSL, by
jointly exploiting prompt learning and the parameter generation framework. The proposed MetaPrompt enjoys several
merits. First, a task-conditioned prompt generator is established upon attention mechanisms. It can flexibly produce a
task-adaptive prompt with arbitrary length for unseen tasks,
by selectively gathering task characteristics from the contextualized support embeddings. Second, the task-adaptive
prompt is attached to Vision Transformer to facilitate fast
task adaptation, steering the task-agnostic representation to
incorporate task knowledge. To our best knowledge, this is
the first work to exploit a prompt-based parameter generation mechanism for CD-FSL. Extensive experimental results
on the Meta-Dataset benchmark demonstrate that our method
achieves superior results against state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017;
Lee et al. 2019; Lifchitz et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2022) aims
at building a model that can generalize to unseen novel
classes based on only a few labeled examples. The standard few-shot learning paradigm is composed of (i) a metatraining stage where a model is learned from a large training set, and (ii) a meta-test stage where the learned model
is adapted to novel classes from a tiny support set. In earlier FSL works (Zhang et al. 2020; Tian et al. 2020), the
meta-train and meta-test examples share the same data distribution (i.e., sampling from the same dataset like miniImageNet (Vinyals et al. 2016)). Thus the learned model fails
to generalize to a more practical setting, where the metatest and meta-train classes are sampled from vastly different
datasets/domains (Dvornik, Schmid, and Mairal 2020; Liu
et al. 2021b). The large domain gap in this cross-domain
setting poses a new challenge for few-shot learning (Li, Liu,
and Bilen 2022).
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6012

