The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semi-supervised Class-Agnostic Motion Prediction with Pseudo Label
Regeneration and BEVMix
Kewei Wang1,2 , Yizheng Wu1,2 , Zhiyu Pan1 , Xingyi Li1,2 , Ke Xian2 , Zhe Wang3 , Zhiguo Cao1 ,
Guosheng Lin2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education School of Artificial Intelligence and
Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
SenseTime Research
{wangkewei, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn, gslin@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

and predict the future displacements for each Bird’s Eye
View (BEV) cell. Although fully-supervised methods have
achieved significant success, they often require substantial
amounts of annotated point cloud data, which can be both
costly and time-consuming to acquire. To overcome this limitation, self-supervised and weakly supervised approaches
have been proposed (Luo, Yang, and Yuille 2021; Li et al.
2023). However, noticeable performance gaps still exist
between the best results obtained from these annotationefficient methods and those achieved by fully-supervised
methods. These annotation-efficient methods generate supervision by matching source points with target points, in
which handling fast motions becomes challenging (Li et al.
2023). Therefore, we delve into exploiting the use of limited, accurate motion labels to generate supervision for easily accessible unlabeled data, i.e., the semi-supervised motion prediction.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) seeks to largely alleviate the need for labeled data by leveraging unlabeled
data (Berthelot et al. 2019b; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017;
Sohn et al. 2020a,b; Zhou et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021). In this
study, we adopt one of the most widely used SSL paradigms,
consistency-based self-training (Sohn et al. 2020a). The key
idea is to first generate reliable pseudo labels for the unlabeled data (pseudo-labeling), and then train the model to
predict the pseudo label when feeding the unlabeled data
with perturbation (consistency regularization). Specifically,
for the motion prediction task, we specially design two novel
data augmentations for consistency regularization and the
motion select and re-generate module (MSRM) for pseudolabeling.
Pseudo-labeling (Lee et al. 2013) plays a role in enhancing semi-supervised learning performance by selecting reliable pseudo-labels while discarding unreliable ones. However, unlike in image classification and object detection,
there is currently no appropriate metric like the confidence
score to evaluate the reliability of predicted motion. Given
that motion represents the displacement from the current cell
to the corresponding future cell, an accurate motion would
ideally lead the current cell to overlap precisely with the corresponding cell after warping. Based on this fact, we design
the motion select and re-generate module (MSRM) to select reliable predicted motions by measuring the distance be-

Class-agnostic motion prediction methods aim to comprehend motion within open-world scenarios, holding significance for autonomous driving systems. However, training
a high-performance model in a fully-supervised manner always requires substantial amounts of manually annotated
data, which can be both expensive and time-consuming to
obtain. To address this challenge, our study explores the potential of semi-supervised learning (SSL) for class-agnostic
motion prediction. Our SSL framework adopts a consistencybased self-training paradigm, enabling the model to learn
from unlabeled data by generating pseudo labels through testtime inference. To improve the quality of pseudo labels, we
propose a novel motion selection and re-generation module.
This module effectively selects reliable pseudo labels and regenerates unreliable ones. Furthermore, we propose two data
augmentation strategies: temporal sampling and BEVMix.
These strategies facilitate consistency regularization in SSL.
Experiments conducted on nuScenes demonstrate that our
SSL method can surpass the self-supervised approach by a
large margin by utilizing only a tiny fraction of labeled data.
Furthermore, our method exhibits comparable performance
to weakly and some fully supervised methods. These results
highlight the ability of our method to strike a favorable balance between annotation costs and performance. Code will be
available at https://github.com/kwwcv/SSMP.

Introduction
Understanding the motion behavior within dynamic environments is crucial for a variety of autonomous systems. Traditional methods approach motion perception through trajectory prediction (Chai et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2019; Fang
et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2020). However, these approaches
may face challenges when handling categories that have
not been seen in the training set, mainly due to their reliance on object detection (Wu, Chen, and Metaxas 2020).
To address this challenge, class-agnostic motion prediction
task (Schreiber, Hoermann, and Dietmayer 2019; Wu, Chen,
and Metaxas 2020; Wang et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2022)
is proposed to provide complementary information. These
methods take a sequence of previous point clouds as input
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5490

