The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Content-Enhanced Mask Transformer for Domain Generalized
Urban-Scene Segmentation
Qi Bi, Shaodi You, Theo Gevers
Computer Vision Research Group, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
{q.bi, s.you, th.gevers}@uva.nl

CityScapes

Abstract
Domain-generalized urban-scene semantic segmentation
(USSS) aims to learn generalized semantic predictions across
diverse urban-scene styles. Unlike generic domain gap challenges, USSS is unique in that the semantic categories are
often similar in different urban scenes, while the styles
can vary significantly due to changes in urban landscapes,
weather conditions, lighting, and other factors. Existing approaches typically rely on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to learn the content of urban scenes. In this paper,
we propose a Content-enhanced Mask TransFormer (CMFormer) for domain-generalized USSS. The main idea is to
enhance the focus of the fundamental component, the mask
attention mechanism, in Transformer segmentation models
on content information. We have observed through empirical analysis that a mask representation effectively captures
pixel segments, albeit with reduced robustness to style variations. Conversely, its lower-resolution counterpart exhibits
greater ability to accommodate style variations, while being less proficient in representing pixel segments. To harness the synergistic attributes of these two approaches, we
introduce a novel content-enhanced mask attention mechanism. It learns mask queries from both the image feature and its down-sampled counterpart, aiming to simultaneously encapsulate the content and address stylistic variations. These features are fused into a Transformer decoder and integrated into a multi-resolution content-enhanced
mask attention learning scheme. Extensive experiments conducted on various domain-generalized urban-scene segmentation datasets demonstrate that the proposed CMFormer significantly outperforms existing CNN-based methods by up
to 14.0% mIoU and the contemporary HGFormer by up to
1.7% mIoU. The source code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/BiQiWHU/CMFormer.

BDD

Mapillary

GTAV

SYNTHIA

(a) style variation of urban-scenes

(b) generalization on unseen domains

HGFormer* 61.5%
Ours
62.6%
+ 1.1%

72.1%
73.6%
+1.5%

59.4%
60.7%
+1.3%

41.3%
43.0%
+1.7%

Figure 1: (a) In domain generalized USSS, the domain gap is
mainly from the extremely-varied styles. (b) A segmentation
model is supposed to show good generalization on unseen
target domains.

all urban scenes across the globe. As a result, the segmentation model is prone to encountering unfamiliar urban scenes
during the inference stage. Hence, domain generalization
is essential for robust USSS (Pan et al. 2018; Huang et al.
2019a; Choi et al. 2021), where a segmentation model can
effectively extrapolate its performance to urban scenes that
it hasn’t encountered before (Fig. 1). In contrast to common domain generalization, domain generalized USSS requires special attention because the domain gap is mainly
caused by large style variations whereas changes in semantics largely remain consistent (example in Fig. 2).
Existing approaches can be divided into two groups. One
group focuses on the style de-coupling. This is usually
achieved by a normalization (Pan et al. 2018; Huang et al.
2019a; Peng et al. 2022) or whitening (Pan et al. 2019; Choi
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2022) transformation. However, the de-coupling methodology falls short as
the content is not learnt in a robust way. The other group
is based on adverse domain training (Zhao et al. 2022; Lee
et al. 2022; Zhong et al. 2022). However, these methods usually do not particularly focus on urban styles and therefore
their performance is limited.
Recent work has shown that mask-level segmentation

Introduction
Urban-scene semantic segmentation (USSS) is a challenging
problem because of the large scene variations due to changing landscape, weather, and lighting conditions (Sakaridis,
Dai, and Van Gool 2021; Mirza et al. 2022; Bi, You, and
Gevers 2023; Chen et al. 2022). Unreliable USSS can pose
a significant risk to road users. Nevertheless, a segmentation model trained on a specific dataset cannot encompass
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

819

