The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Risk-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning: A Generalized Approach for Adapting
to Varying Risk Measures
Gwangpyo Yoo1 , Jinwoo Park2 , Honguk Woo1 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
necrocathy@skku.edu, pjw971022@skku.edu, hwoo@skku.edu

Abstract
In application domains requiring mission-critical decisionmaking, such as finance and robotics, the optimal policy derived by reinforcement learning (RL) often hinges on a preference for risk management. Yet, the dynamic nature of risk
measures poses considerable challenges to achieving generalization and adaptation of risk-sensitive policies in the context
of RL. In this paper, we propose a risk-conditioned RL framework that enables rapid policy adaptation to varying risk measures via a unified risk representation, Weighted Value-at-Risk
(WV@R). To sample risk measures that avoid undue optimism,
we construct a risk proposal network employing a conditional
adversarial auto-encoder and a normalizing flow. This network
establishes coherent representations for risk measures, ensuring the monotonicity of the quantile representations of risk
measures. Through experiments with locomotion, finance, and
self-driving scenarios, we show that our framework is capable
of adapting to a range of risk measures, achieving comparable performance to the baselines individually trained for
each measure. The framework often outperforms the baselines,
especially in the cases when exploration is required during
training but risk-aversion is favored during evaluation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a promising approach
to various sequential decision-making problems found in
real-world applications, including robotics, finance, and autonomous driving. This is achieved by maximizing the rewards obtained from these environments. Many of these tasks
inherently possess uncertainty, and the behavior of RL agents
varies depending on the evaluation criteria used to measure
this uncertainty. We refer to this (aleatoric) uncertainty as risk
and to the evaluation criteria that consider this uncertainty as
risk measures. We also refer to the risk measure’s degree of
optimism as risk preference. For example, conditional value
at risk (CV@R) with confidence α ∈ [0, 1] is a risk measure
calculated by taking the average from the most pessimistic
return to the α-th quantile.
The choice of an appropriate risk measure is crucial in that
it influences the agent’s behavior, which can lead to undesired outcomes such as physical harm. However, determining
* Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16513

the appropriate risk measure is challenging because a universal solution may not exist. Moreover, optimal risk measures
can vary significantly across different applications or among
individual users. For instance, in the area of autonomous driving, the selection of risk measures should take into account
various factors such as time constraints, fuel levels, and the
specific needs of passengers. A self-driving agent for delivery
service might prioritize a risk measure that emphasizes time
constraints, whereas a family-oriented service, especially one
transporting young children, might place a premium on safety
above all else. In the realm of finance, risk measures should
be chosen according to interest rates, prevailing market conditions, and a client’s unique risk preferences (Acerbi, Nordio,
and Sirtori 2001; Acerbi and Simonetti 2002; Adam, Houkari,
and Laurent 2008; He, Jin, and Zhou 2015; BCBS 2009). For
example, when the base rate increases, individuals tend to be
risk-averse and vice versa.
For an RL agent to adapt to varying risk measures, it should
be conditioned based on varying risk measures rather than
being optimized for a single specific risk measure. Choi et al.
(2021) proposed RCDSAC, a risk-conditioned RL framework,
which adapts to specific ranges of risk measures, defined by
simple parameters. However, the ranges of risk measures that
RCDSAC can accommodate are relatively specific, thereby
limiting its applicability. For example, CV@R and median
are considered essential risk measures in both finance and
non-finance areas (Zhang et al. 2018; Pruzzo, Cantet, and
Fioretti 2003; Jabr 2005; Rahimi and Ghezavati 2018; BCBS
2009), but RCDSAC is not designed to handle these risk
measures simultaneously.
Our goal is to expand the range of risk measures for
risk-conditioned RL agents, based on the weighted value
at risks (WV@R). WV@R represents a comprehensive set
of risk measures with varying degrees of importance from
the most pessimistic to the most optimistic returns. It is defined as the weighted integral over the quantile function of
returns (He, Jin, and Zhou 2015). This universality allows
risk-conditioned agents to simultaneously handle diverse risk
measures.
To train a risk-conditioned agent using WV@R within the
context of RL, it is crucial to appropriately represent risk
measures as inputs to the agent’s neural network. To access
the RL loss with respect to these risk measures, it is also
required to conditionally sample risk measures from WV@R

