The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Racing Control Variable Genetic Programming for Symbolic Regression
Nan Jiang, Yexiang Xue
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA
{jiang631, yexiang}@purdue.edu

Abstract

1

Experiment Schedules

Symbolic regression, as one of the most crucial tasks in AI
for science, discovers governing equations from experimental data. Popular approaches based on genetic programming,
Monte Carlo tree search, or deep reinforcement learning learn
symbolic regression from a fixed dataset. These methods require massive datasets and long training time especially when
learning complex equations involving many variables. Recently, Control Variable Genetic Programming (CVGP) has
been introduced which accelerates the regression process by
discovering equations from designed control variable experiments. However, the set of experiments is fixed a-priori in
CVGP and we observe that sub-optimal selection of experiment schedules delay the discovery process significantly. To
overcome this limitation, we propose Racing Control Variable Genetic Programming (Racing-CVGP), which carries
out multiple experiment schedules simultaneously. A selection scheme similar to that used in selecting good symbolic
equations in genetic programming is implemented to ensure
that promising experiment schedules eventually win over the
average ones. The unfavorable schedules are terminated early
to save time for the promising ones. We evaluate RacingCVGP on several synthetic and real-world datasets corresponding to true physics laws. We demonstrate that RacingCVGP outperforms CVGP and a series of symbolic regressors which discover equations from fixed datasets.

π1
π2
π3
π4
π5
π6
π7
π8
π9
π10
π11
π12
π13
π14
π15
π16
π17
π18
π19
π20
π21
π22
π23
π24

default schedule ⇒
⇐best alternative schedule

10−3

10−2
10−1
Normalized Mean Square Error

100

Figure 1: Impact of experiment schedules (noted as π) on
learning performance of control variable genetic programming. For the discovery of expression with 4 variables,
there exists a better experiment schedule (i.e., π4 ) among
all schedules than the default one (i.e., π1 ), in terms of normalized mean square error (more examples in Appendix D).

Introduction

Despite remarkable achievements, the current state-ofthe-art approaches are still limited to learning relatively simple expressions, typically involving only a few independent
variables. The real challenge lies in symbolic regression involving multiple independent variables. The aforementioned
approaches learn symbolic equations from a fixed dataset.
As a result, these methods require massive datasets and extensive training time to discover complex equations.
Recently, a novel approach called Control Variable Genetic Programming (CVGP) (Jiang and Xue 2023) is introduced to accelerate symbolic regression. Instead of learning from fixed datasets collected a-priori, CVGP carries out
symbolic regression using customized control variable experiments. As a motivating example, to learn the ideal gas
law pV = nRT , one can hold n (gas amount) and T (temperature) as constants. It is relatively easy to learn p (pressure) is inversely proportional to V (volume). Indeed, CVGP

Automatically discovering scientific laws from experimental
data has been a long-standing aspiration of Artificial Intelligence. Its success holds the promise of significantly accelerating scientific discovery. A crucial step towards achieving this ambitious goal is symbolic regression, which involves learning explicit expressions from the experimental
data. Recent advancements in this field have shown exciting
progress, including works on genetic programming, Monte
Carlo tree search, deep reinforcement learning and their
combinations (Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Virgolin, Alderliesten, and Bosman 2019; Guimerà et al. 2020; Petersen et al.
2021; Mundhenk et al. 2021; Petersen et al. 2021; Razavi
and Gamazon 2022; He et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2023; Tohme,
Liu, and Youcef-Toumi 2023).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12901

