The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mutual-Modality Adversarial Attack with Semantic Perturbation
Jingwen Ye, Ruonan Yu, Songhua Liu, Xinchao Wang †

Main Idea

National University of Singapore
jingweny@nus.edu.sg, {ruonan,songhua.liu}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Feature Space

Abstract
‘A bad photo
of a horse’

Adversarial attacks constitute a notable threat to machine
learning systems, given their potential to induce erroneous
predictions and classifications. However, within real-world
contexts, the essential specifics of the deployed model are
frequently treated as a black box, consequently mitigating
the vulnerability to such attacks. Thus, enhancing the transferability of the adversarial samples has become a crucial
area of research, which heavily relies on selecting appropriate surrogate models. To address this challenge, we propose a novel approach that generates adversarial attacks in
a mutual-modality optimization scheme. Our approach is
accomplished by leveraging the pre-trained CLIP model.
Firstly, we conduct a visual attack on the clean image that
causes semantic perturbations on the aligned embedding
space with the other textual modality. Then, we apply the
corresponding defense on the textual modality by updating
the prompts, which forces the re-matching on the perturbed
embedding space. Finally, to enhance the attack transferability, we utilize the iterative training strategy on the visual attack and the textual defense, where the two processes optimize from each other. We evaluate our approach on several
benchmark datasets and demonstrate that our mutual-modal
attack strategy can effectively produce high-transferable attacks, which are stable regardless of the target networks. Our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art attack methods and can
be readily deployed as a plug-and-play solution.

Defend

Textual
Encoder

‘A photo of
a horse’
Semantic Alignment

Attack

Visual
Encoder
Transfers Better

Figure 1: Joint attack and defense framework in the visual
and textual modalities. The visual features are attacked to
push away from the original one, while the textual features
defend to pull back this similarity gap.

As a crucial assessment of the strength and security of
DNNs, various attack algorithms (Hayes and Danezis 2017;
Liu et al. 2019) have been proposed, achieving relatively
high fooling rates. However, the effectiveness of these attacks is largely affected by different conditions, with the
black-box setting being the most challenging yet realistic
scenario. In the black-box setting, attackers cannot access
the model’s parameters and structure, leading to the need
for improving the transferability of attacks to arbitrary target networks (Cheng et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2018). The corresponding methods include ensemble-model attacks (Liu
et al. 2016), momentum-based attacks (Dong et al. 2018),
input transformation-based attacks (Xie et al. 2019), and
model-specific attacks (Wu et al. 2019). Such methods aim
to enhance the transferability of attacks by either exploiting
the inherent weaknesses of the target model or exploring the
common vulnerabilities of a group of models.
The majority of current techniques striving to amplify the
transferability of adversarial attacks predominantly hinge on
the selection of surrogate models. However, these surrogate
models often prove to be unstable and profoundly influenced
by the architectural similarities between the surrogate model

Introductions
With the milestone performances of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in numerous computer vision tasks, the efficiency (Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023a; Fang et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022) and reliability (Ye, Liu, and
Wang 2023; Ye et al. 2022a,b) of these techniques become
equally important when deployed in the real world. However, recent researches (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014) have found that such DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples. This is, through only a small norm of perturbation applied on the original input, the maliciously crafted
adversarial samples could cause misclassification or unexpected behavior to machine learning models.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6657

