The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relational Programming with Foundation Models
Ziyang Li, Jiani Huang, Jason Liu, Felix Zhu, Eric Zhao, William Dodds, Neelay Velingker,
Rajeev Alur, Mayur Naik
University of Pennsylvania
liby99@seas.upenn.edu, jianih@seas.upenn.edu, jasonhl@seas.upenn.edu, zhufelix@seas.upenn.edu,
zhaoer@seas.upenn.edu, wdodds@sas.upenn.edu, neelay@seas.upenn.edu, alur@seas.upenn.edu, mhnaik@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

@gpt("The height of {{x}} is {{y}} in meters")
type height(bound x: String, y: i32)

Foundation models have vast potential to enable diverse AI
applications. The powerful yet incomplete nature of these
models has spurred a wide range of mechanisms to augment
them with capabilities such as in-context learning, information retrieval, and code interpreting. We propose V IEIRA,
a declarative framework that unifies these mechanisms in a
general solution for programming with foundation models.
V IEIRA follows a probabilistic relational paradigm and treats
foundation models as stateless functions with relational inputs and outputs. It supports neuro-symbolic applications by
enabling the seamless combination of such models with logic
programs, as well as complex, multi-modal applications by
streamlining the composition of diverse sub-models. We implement V IEIRA by extending the S CALLOP compiler with a
foreign interface that supports foundation models as plugins.
We implement plugins for 12 foundation models including
GPT, CLIP, and SAM. We evaluate V IEIRA on 9 challenging tasks that span language, vision, and structured and vector
databases. Our evaluation shows that programs in V IEIRA are
concise, can incorporate modern foundation models, and have
comparable or better accuracy than competitive baselines.

// Retrieving height of mountains
rel mount_height(m, h) = mountain(m) and height(m, h)

(a) Program P1: Extracting knowledge using GPT.
@clip(["cat", "dog"])
type classify(bound img: Tensor, label: String)
// Classify each image as cat or dog
rel cat_or_dog(i, l) = image(i, m) and classify(m, l)

(b) Program P2: Classifying images using CLIP.
mountain

name

height

Everest

8848

Fuji

3776

K2

K2

8611

Mt.Blanc

Mt.Blanc

4808

Everest
Fuji

image

mount_height

name

P1

id
1

2

cat_or_dog
prob id label

img

P2

0.02

1

cat

0.98

1

dog

0.99

2

cat

0.01

2

dog

(c) Example input-output relations of the programs.

Figure 1: Programs in V IEIRA using foundation models.

Introduction

Various mechanisms have been proposed to augment
foundation models to overcome these limitations. For example, PAL (Gao et al. 2023), WebGPT (Nakano et al. 2021),
and Toolformer (Schick et al. 2023) connect LMs with
search engines and external tools, expanding their information retrieval and structural reasoning capabilities. LMQL
(Beurer-Kellner, Fischer, and Vechev 2022) generalizes pure
text prompting in LMs to incorporate scripting. In the domain of computer vision (CV), neuro-symbolic visual reasoning frameworks such as V IS P ROG (Gupta and Kembhavi
2022) compose diverse vision models with LMs and image
processing subroutines. Despite these advances, programmers lack a general solution that systematically incorporates
these methods into a single unified framework.
In this paper, we propose V IEIRA, a declarative framework for programming with foundation models. V IEIRA follows a (probabilistic) relational paradigm due to its theoretical and practical versatility. Structured data is commonly
stored in relational databases. Relations can also represent
structures such as scene graphs in vision and abstract syntax
trees in natural and formal languages. Moreover, extensions

Foundation models are deep neural models that are trained
on a very large corpus of data and can be adapted to a wide
range of downstream tasks (Bommasani et al. 2021). Exemplars of foundation models include language models (LMs)
like GPT (Bubeck et al. 2023), vision models like Segment
Anything (Kirillov et al. 2023), and multi-modal models like
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021). While foundation models are
a fundamental building block, they are inadequate for programming AI applications end-to-end. For example, LMs
hallucinate and produce nonfactual claims or incorrect reasoning chains (McKenna et al. 2023). Furthermore, they lack
the ability to reliably incorporate structured data, which is
the dominant form of data in modern databases. Finally,
composing different data modalities in custom or complex
patterns remains an open problem, despite the advent of
multi-modal foundation models such as ViLT (Radford et al.
2021) for visual question answering.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10635

