The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepCalliFont: Few-Shot Chinese Calligraphy Font Synthesis by Integrating
Dual-Modality Generative Models
Yitian Liu, Zhouhui Lian*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
{lsflyt, lianzhouhui}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot font generation, especially for Chinese calligraphy
fonts, is a challenging and ongoing problem. With the help
of prior knowledge that is mainly based on glyph consistency
assumptions, some recently proposed methods can synthesize
high-quality Chinese glyph images. However, glyphs in calligraphy font styles often do not meet these assumptions. To
address this problem, we propose a novel model, DeepCalliFont, for few-shot Chinese calligraphy font synthesis by integrating dual-modality generative models. Specifically, the
proposed model consists of image synthesis and sequence
generation branches, generating consistent results via a dualmodality representation learning strategy. The two modalities
(i.e., glyph images and writing sequences) are properly integrated using a feature recombination module and a rasterization loss function. Furthermore, a new pre-training strategy
is adopted to improve the performance by exploiting large
amounts of uni-modality data. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the superiority of our method to other state-of-the-art approaches
in the task of few-shot Chinese calligraphy font synthesis.
The source code can be found at https://github.com/lsflytpku/DeepCalliFont.

☑

☒

☑

☒

Regular Font

Calligraphy Font

Regular Font

Calligraphy Font

(a) Assumption 1: the same
characters in different fonts
have the same components and
stroke order.

(b) Assumption 2: the same
components in different characters but the same font should be
identical or similar.

Figure 1: Two assumptions of Chinese character prior
knowledge. Regular Chinese fonts satisfy these assumptions, but calligraphy fonts don’t.

exist some works on this task, like EMD (Zhang, Zhang, and
Cai 2018), AGIS-Net (Gao et al. 2019), etc., which concentrate on extracting and integrating features via well-designed
loss functions or modules. Meanwhile, there also exist other
methods that utilize prior knowledge of Chinese characters
to extract structure-aware style representations (Park et al.
2020, 2021; Liu et al. 2022) or encode prior knowledge
into content labels (Sun et al. 2017; Wu, Yang, and Hsu
2020; Huang et al. 2020). In this manner, prior knowledge
guided methods significantly improve the generation quality of most fonts and keep the fine-grained style consistency.
Fig. 1 shows two implicit consistency assumptions of such
prior knowledge: 1) the same characters in different font
styles have the same components and stroke order; 2) the
same components in different characters but the same font
style should be identical or similar. However, these methods often fail to satisfactorily handle calligraphy fonts with
connected strokes. This is mainly due to the fact that calligraphy font designers tend to change the stroke order or
simplify some strokes for better visual aesthetics, leading to
calligraphy fonts conflicting with the component and stroke
consistency. It can be observed from Fig. 1 that glyphs in
calligraphy styles are far more complex and hard to synthesize than those in regular font styles.
Compared to the prior knowledge, a writing trajectory
(the sequence of key points) owns closer relationship and
better consistency with the corresponding glyph image.

Introduction
Manually designing a Chinese font is time-consuming and
costly, mainly because there exist huge amounts of Chinese characters. For example, the latest official character
set GB18030-2022 contains 87,887 Chinese glyphs, most of
which possess delicate shapes and complex structures. In the
last decade, large numbers of font synthesis methods (Tian
2017; Jiang et al. 2017; Lian et al. 2018) have been proposed
aiming to automatically generate the complete Chinese font
library from a small set of glyphs written or designed by a
user. However, existing approaches still have the following
two main drawbacks: 1) the number of characters required
for training is still large; 2) the quality of machine-generated
Chinese fonts is still unsatisfactory for many special font
styles, especially cursive Calligraphy styles.
As mentioned above, the task of few-shot Chinese font
generation is challenging but of great practical value. There
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3774

