The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Market-GAN: Adding Control to Financial Market Data Generation with
Semantic Context
Haochong Xia, Shuo Sun, Xinrun Wang* , Bo An*
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{haochong001, shuo003}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {xinrun.wang, boan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

market features. On the other hand, the existing research
indicates that there is a non-stationary context in the market (Michael and Johnson 2003; Hens and Schenk-Hoppé
2009). Leveraging the semantic context as control, the market simulation could be more explainable, controllable, and
diverse, benefiting downstream applications (Purkayastha,
Manolova, and Edelman 2012). This further leads to the
need for a context-aligned, high-fidelity market feature generator. However, existing simulators focus on generating
Limit Order Book with agent-based model (Samanidou et al.
2007; Axtell and Farmer 2022) and generative model (Takahashi, Chen, and Tanaka-Ishii 2019). While ensemble methods, for example, a multi-expert system can be combined
with time-series generative models (Mogren 2016; Yoon,
Jarrett, and Van der Schaar 2019; Ni et al. 2020) to generate
aligned market feature data, this solution could be complex
and inefficient (Mienye and Sun 2022).
To address the problem, we proposed Market-GAN, a
controllable generator with semantic context for financial
simulation of the market features. Our key contributions are:
i) we construct the Contextual Market Dataset with the stock
ticker, history state, and market dynamics extracted by a
market dynamics modeling algorithm as semantic context,
addressing the absence of a financial dataset with context; ii)
we propose Market-GAN, an innovative hybrid architecture
which is the first contextual generative model for financial
market features; iii) we design a two-stage training scheme
of pre-training and adversarial training for a better initialization of the generator, to address the mode collapse (Wiatrak,
Albrecht, and Nystrom 2019) observed in training complex
GAN networks; iv) with a discussion of the evaluation for
financial market simulation, we conduct comprehensive experiments on the generated data with the metrics from the
perspective of context alignment, fidelity, data usability, and
market facts. Market-GAN showcases superior performance
compared with 4 benchmark methods.

Financial simulators play an important role in enhancing
forecasting accuracy, managing risks, and fostering strategic financial decision-making. Despite the development of
financial market simulation methodologies, existing frameworks often struggle with adapting to specialized simulation
context. We pinpoint the challenges as i) current financial
datasets do not contain context labels; ii) current techniques
are not designed to generate financial data with context as
control, which demands greater precision compared to other
modalities; iii) the inherent difficulties in generating contextaligned, high-fidelity data given the non-stationary, noisy nature of financial data. To address these challenges, our contributions are: i) we proposed the Contextual Market Dataset
with market dynamics, stock ticker, and history state as context, leveraging a market dynamics modeling method that
combines linear regression and clustering to extract market
dynamics; ii) we present Market-GAN, a novel architecture
incorporating a Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) for
the controllable generation with context, an autoencoder for
learning low-dimension features, and supervisors for knowledge transfer; iii) we introduce a two-stage training scheme to
ensure that Market-GAN captures the intrinsic market distribution with multiple objectives. In the pertaining stage, with
the use of the autoencoder and supervisors, we prepare the
generator with a better initialization for the adversarial training stage. We propose a set of holistic evaluation metrics that
consider alignment, fidelity, data usability on downstream
tasks, and market facts. We evaluate Market-GAN with the
Dow Jones Industrial Average data from 2000 to 2023 and
showcase superior performance in comparison to 4 state-ofthe-art time-series generative models.

Introduction
Financial simulations play a pivotal role in navigating the
complexities of the economic landscape, enabling stakeholders to anticipate market fluctuations, manage risks,
and optimize investment strategies (Staum 2002; Chan and
Wong 2015; Lopez-Rojas and Axelsson 2016). The growing trend of applying machine learning on price feature data
in financial research (Rundo et al. 2019) leads to the need
for a simulator that can generate the data with high-fidelity

Background and Related Works
Financial Market Simulator. Over the years, simulators
have emerged as a valuable tool for studying the behavior
of financial markets in a controlled environment. Agentbased model methods are widely applied to simulate the
Limit Order Book of financial markets (Samanidou et al.
2007; Axtell and Farmer 2022). Recent progress has com-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15996

