The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

IPRemover: A Generative Model Inversion Attack against
Deep Neural Network Fingerprinting and Watermarking
Wei Zong1 , Yang-Wai Chow1 , Willy Susilo1 , Joonsang Baek1 , Jongkil Kim2 , Seyit Camtepe3
Institute of Cybersecurity and Cryptology (iC2 ), University of Wollongong, Australia
2
Ewha Womans University, South Korea
3
CSIRO Data61, Australia
wzong@uow.edu.au, caseyc@uow.edu.au, wsusilo@uow.edu.au, baek@uow.edu.au, Jongkil@ewha.ac.kr,
Seyit.Camtepe@data61.csiro.au
1

Abstract

Therefore, it is crucial for model owners to be able to protect the Intellectual Property (IP) of DNN models trained
using valuable data.
Researchers have recently proposed DNN IP protection
techniques that identify the unique characteristics, i.e., the
fingerprints, of a model (Lukas, Zhang, and Kerschbaum
2021; Peng et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022). This direction
of work is attracting more and more attention in the research
community because fingerprinting techniques do not alter a
model’s weights, so the performance of the model is preserved. The key to fingerprinting is to find unique properties
that only exist in a victim model because if these properties
appear in another model, that model is determined to be a
stolen model. As an example, Adversarial Examples (AEs)
have been used for this purpose. AEs generated by a victim
model can be used to uniquely represent a model’s decision
boundaries (Chen et al. 2022). A stolen model will also be
fooled by the same AEs because its decision boundaries will
resemble the decision boundaries of the victim model.
However, the robustness of existing fingerprinting techniques has only been evaluated using general attacks, such as
fine-tuning all layers of a DNN, adversarial training (Shafahi
et al. 2019), and model extraction attacks (Orekondy,
Schiele, and Fritz 2019). Although fingerprinting techniques
were shown to be robust against these attacks, such attacks
were not specifically designed to defeat fingerprint detection. In other words, the robustness of state-of-the-art fingerprinting techniques has not been thoroughly verified.
In addition to DNN fingerprinting, researchers have also
explored the embedding of watermarks in DNNs for IP protection (Jia et al. 2021). Ownership can be claimed if a similar watermark can be extracted from a suspect model. For instance, model owners can use a backdoor technique to make
their model output a predefined label whenever a special
trigger is stamped on its input (Adi et al. 2018).
Although researchers have systematically studied the vulnerabilities of existing watermarking schemes (Lukas et al.
2022), most of the watermark removal attacks, such as transfer learning and adversarial training, have been shown to be
ineffective against fingerprinting (Chen et al. 2022). In practice, an effective attack must bypass both DNN fingerprinting and watermarking without prior knowledge of their defenses. This is challenging because DNN watermarking and
fingerprinting techniques vary significantly because they are

Training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) can be expensive
when data is difficult to obtain or labeling them requires significant domain expertise. Hence, it is crucial that the Intellectual Property (IP) of DNNs trained on valuable data be
protected against IP infringement. DNN fingerprinting and
watermarking are two lines of work in DNN IP protection.
Recently proposed DNN fingerprinting techniques are able to
detect IP infringement while preserving model performance
by relying on the key assumption that the decision boundaries of independently trained models are intrinsically different from one another. In contrast, DNN watermarking embeds a watermark in a model and verifies IP infringement if
an identical or similar watermark is extracted from a suspect
model. The techniques deployed in fingerprinting and watermarking vary significantly because their underlying mechanisms are different. From an adversary’s perspective, a successful IP removal attack should defeat both fingerprinting
and watermarking. However, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no work on such attacks in the literature yet. In this
paper, we fill this gap by presenting an IP removal attack that
can defeat both fingerprinting and watermarking. We consider the challenging data-free scenario whereby all data is
inverted from the victim model. Under this setting, a stolen
model only depends on the victim model. Experimental results demonstrate the success of our attack in defeating stateof-the-art DNN fingerprinting and watermarking techniques.
This work reveals a novel attack surface that exploits generative model inversion attacks to bypass DNN IP defenses.
This threat must be addressed by future defenses for reliable
IP protection.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in many domains, such as computer vision (Carion et al.
2020; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017), Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR) (Hannun et al. 2014; Amodei
et al. 2016), Natural Language Process (NLP) (Chowdhary
2020), and so on. Successful training of DNNs requires large
volumes of labeled data in the specific domain. Acquiring
such data can be costly when they are difficult to collect or
significant domain expertise is required for labeling them.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7837

