The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Closer Look at Curriculum Adversarial Training:
From an Online Perspective
Lianghe Shi, Weiwei Liu*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
{shilianghe007, liuweiwei863}@gmail.com
Abstract

Song 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Kinfu
and Vidal 2022), called curriculum adversarial training, have
demonstrated that gradually increasing the hardness of adversarial examples can help to improve the performance of
the trained model. These methods have a similar min-max
optimization framework with conventional adversarial training, and control the hardness of the generated adversarial examples in different ways. Empirically, the advantages of curriculum adversarial training to improve the robustness and to
alleviate the trade-off between clean accuracy and adversarial accuracy have been verified in prior works (Zhang et al.
2020; Cheng et al. 2022). However, the theoretical motivation of curriculum adversarial training remains unclear.
Remarkable theoretical advances (Chen and Liu 2023;
Khim and Loh 2018; Attias, Kontorovich, and Mansour
2019; Montasser, Hanneke, and Srebro 2019; Yin, Ramchandran, and Bartlett 2019; Gao and Wang 2021; Xiao
et al. 2022a,c; Xing, Song, and Cheng 2021a; Xu and Liu
2022) have been achieved in adversarial training. Despite
this fact, these existing theories focus solely on the fully
trained model while ignoring the intermediate objects, such
as the adversarial examples generated in each iteration of the
training process. Thus, we cannot directly use these existing
theoretical results to explain the effectiveness of curriculum
adversarial training.
In this paper, we delve deeper into the adversarial training process from an online perspective and propose a novel
generalization error bound through the lens of Rademacher
complexity. We further introduce the time series prediction
framework to propose an improved error bound. Our theoretical results show that the expected adversarial error can
be upper-bounded by the average of the optimization objectives of each intermediate iteration, which provides theoretical support for the effectiveness of the two-player iterative
training algorithm. Moreover, the error bound contains the
distance between the generated adversarial examples of different iterations. We further investigate this term and convert it into an optimizable form that can explain the efficacy
of curriculum adversarial training. This paper makes a first
step toward a deeper understanding of curriculum adversarial training. Extensive numerical experiments on CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, Hinton et al. 2009) datasets
verify our theoretical bounds and the explanation we provide regarding curriculum adversarial training.

Curriculum adversarial training empirically finds that gradually increasing the hardness of adversarial examples can further improve the adversarial robustness of the trained model
compared to conventional adversarial training. However, theoretical understanding of this strategy remains limited. In an
attempt to bridge this gap, we analyze the adversarial training process from an online perspective. Specifically, we treat
adversarial examples in different iterations as samples from
different adversarial distributions. We then introduce the time
series prediction framework and deduce novel generalization
error bounds. Our theoretical results not only demonstrate
the effectiveness of the conventional adversarial training algorithm but also explain why curriculum adversarial training
methods can further improve adversarial generalization. We
conduct comprehensive experiments to support our theory.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks are very effective in classifying natural inputs, Szegedy et al. (2014) show that an adversary is often able to perturb the input with an imperceptible
change so that the model produces an incorrect output. This
phenomenon has received particular attention in the context
of deep neural networks, and there is now a sizable body of
work devoting to improving the adversarial robustness of the
trained neural network models (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and
Bengio 2017; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019; Rebuffi et al. 2021; Gowal et al. 2021;
Pang et al. 2022; Shi and Liu 2023). Adversarial robustness
refers to the invariance of a model to small perturbations of
its input (Salman et al. 2020).
Adversarial training is one of the most popular and effective defense techniques used to train an adversarially robust model. The objective of adversarial training is to solve a
min-max problem (Madry et al. 2018). In practice, adversarial training first generates adversarial examples based on the
model under investigation, then uses these examples to train
a new model that is robust against these attacks. Therefore,
the quality of the generated adversarial examples directly
affects the adversarial generalization of the model (Zhang
et al. 2020). Interestingly, a series of works (Cai, Liu, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14973

