The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Delivering Inflated Explanations
Yacine Izza1 , Alexey Ignatiev2 , Peter J. Stuckey2,3 , Joao Marques-Silva4
1

CREATE, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
OPTIMA ARC Industrial Training and Transformation Centre, Melbourne, Australia
4
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
izza@comp.nus.edu.sg, alexey.ignatiev@monash.edu, peter.stuckey@monash.edu, joao.marques-silva@irit.fr
Abstract

et al. 2015; Samek and Müller 2019; Samek et al. 2019,
2021), but also proposals of intrinsic interpretability (Rudin
2019; Molnar 2020; Rudin et al. 2022). In recent years, comprehensive evidence has been gathered that attests to the
lack of rigor of these (non-formal) XAI approaches (Ignatiev
2020; Izza, Ignatiev, and Marques-Silva 2022; Yu, Ignatiev,
and Stuckey 2023b).
The alternative to non-formal explainability is formal
XAI. Formal XAI proposes definitions of explanations, and
algorithms for their computation, that ensure the rigor of
computed explanations (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019; Marques-Silva
and Ignatiev 2022). Despite its promise, formal XAI also exhibits a number of important limitations, which include lack
of scalability for some ML models, and the computation of
explanations which human decision makers may fail to relate with. This paper targets mechanisms for improving the
clarity of computed explanations.
An abductive explanation (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche
2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019) is a
subset-minimal set of features which correspond to a rule
of the form: if a conjunction of literals is true, then the prediction is the expected one. The literals associated with that
rule are of the form xi = vi , i.e. a feature is tested for a
concrete value in its domain. For categorical features with
large domains, and more importantly for real-value features,
specifying a literal that tests a single value will provide little insight. For example, in the case of an ordinal feature,
stating that the height of a patient is 1.825m is less insightful that stating that the height of a patient is between 1.75m
and 1.84m. Similarly, in the case of a categorical feature,
an explanation that indicates that the vehicle color is one of
{Red, Blue, Green, Silver} (e.g. with colors {Black, White}
excluded), is more insightful that stating that the color must
be Blue. For an explanations involving several features, the
use of more expressive literals will allow a human decision maker to relate the explanation with several different
instances.
This paper proposes inflated formal explanations. In an
inflated formal explanation the literals of the form xi = vi
are replaced by literals of the form xi ∈ Ei , where Ei is
a subset of the feature’s domain. Furthermore, each Ei is
maximally large, i.e. no proper superset of Ei guarantees
sufficiency for the prediction. Inflated explanations can be

In the quest for Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) one
of the questions that frequently arises given a decision made
by an AI system is, “why was the decision made in this way?”
Formal approaches to explainability build a formal model of
the AI system and use this to reason about the properties of
the system. Given a set of feature values for an instance to
be explained, and a resulting decision, a formal abductive explanation is a set of features, such that if they take the given
values, will always lead to the same decision. This explanation is useful, it shows that only some features were used in
making the final decision. But it is narrow, it only shows that
if the selected features take their given values the decision
is unchanged. It is possible that some features may change
values and still lead to the same decision. In this paper we
formally define inflated explanations, which is a set of features and for each feature a set of values (always including
the value of the instance being explained), such that the decision will remain unchanged, for any of the values allowed
for any of the features in the (inflated) abductive explanation.
Inflated formal explanations are more informative than common abductive explanations since e.g. they allow us to see if
the exact value of a feature is important, or it could be any
nearby value. Overall they allow us to better understand the
role of each feature in the decision. We show that we can compute inflated explanations for not that much greater cost than
abductive explanations, and that we can extend duality results
for abductive explanations also to inflated explanations.

Introduction
The purpose of eXplainable AI (XAI) is to help human decision makers in understanding the decisions made by AI
systems. It is generally accepted that XAI is fundamental
to deliver trustworthy AI (Ignatiev 2020; Marques-Silva and
Ignatiev 2022). In addition, explainability is also at the core
of recent proposals for the verification of Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems (Seshia, Sadigh, and Sastry 2022). Nevertheless, most of the work on XAI offers no formal guarantees of rigor (and so will be referred to as non-formal XAI
in this paper). Examples of non-formal XAI include modelagnostic methods (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018),
heuristic learning of saliency maps (and their variants) (Bach
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12744

