The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Building Variable-Sized Models via Learngene Pool
Boyu Shi, Shiyu Xia, Xu Yang* , Haokun Chen, Zhiqiang Kou, Xin Geng†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
{shiboyu, shiyu xia, 101013120, chenhaokun, zhiqiang kou, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

typically involve manual crafting of specific model sizes for
each resource constraint (Li et al. 2022b,a; Mehta and Rastegari 2021; Li et al. 2020), necessitating training from scratch
(Figure 1 (a)) or compressing the huge models into smaller
models (Fang et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022; Hameed et al.
2021; LI et al. 2023; JI et al. 2023; LI et al. 2020). However, these approaches are time-consuming and impractical
for generating differently scaled models.
To address this issue, a novel method called Stitchable
Neural Network (SN-Net) (Pan, Cai, and Zhuang 2023)
has been proposed. Unlike the conventional approach of
training individual scale-specific models, SN-Net (Pan, Cai,
and Zhuang 2023) leverages pretrained models to construct
variable-sized models, resulting in significant time savings.
Specifically, SN-Net (Pan, Cai, and Zhuang 2023) selects
pretrained varying-size models, referred to as anchors, from
a model family (e.g., DeiT-Ti/S/B (Touvron et al. 2021)),
and performs stitching operations among these anchors (Figure 1 (b)). The stitching is accomplished by introducing a
1 × 1 convolution layer, termed a stitch layer, to establish a
new forward propagation path between the two adjacent anchors. By stitching varied-sized blocks of various anchors,
SN-Net (Pan, Cai, and Zhuang 2023) can generate models
of varying sizes.
However, SN-Net (Pan, Cai, and Zhuang 2023) still possesses several limitations. Firstly, SN-Net (Pan, Cai, and
Zhuang 2023) performs stitching operations among two or
more independently-trained anchors (Figure 1 (b)), resulting in substantial consumption of storage resources. Additionally, the minimum scale of the model stitched by SNNet (Pan, Cai, and Zhuang 2023) depends on the selected
smallest anchor. If the parameters of the smallest anchor are
not sufficiently small, SN-Net (Pan, Cai, and Zhuang 2023)
is unable to generate smaller models. For example, when
stitching between DeiT-Ti/S/B (Touvron et al. 2021), the
size of the stitched model is greater than or equal to that of
DeiT-Tiny (5.7M) (Touvron et al. 2021). Given a smartwatch
with a target resource constraint under 5M, SN-Net cannot
build a model to satisfy this constraint, as shown in figure 1
(b), Finally, SN-Net computes the parameters of stitch layers by employing the least squares method from the feature
maps of the anchors’ outputs: min ∥FIj (x)W − FIj+1 (x)∥,
where FIj (x) and FIj+1 (x) are the output feature maps of
two anchors, W means the transformation matrix and x is

Recently, Stitchable Neural Networks (SN-Net) is proposed
to stitch some pre-trained networks for quickly building numerous networks with different complexity and performance
trade-offs. In this way, the burdens of designing or training
the variable-sized networks, which can be used in application
scenarios with diverse resource constraints, are alleviated.
However, SN-Net still faces a few challenges. 1) Stitching
from multiple independently pre-trained anchors introduces
high storage resource consumption. 2) SN-Net faces challenges to build smaller models for low resource constraints.
3). SN-Net uses an unlearned initialization method for stitch
layers, limiting the final performance. To overcome these
challenges, motivated by the recently proposed Learngene
framework, we propose a novel method called Learngene
Pool. Briefly, Learngene distills the critical knowledge from
a large pre-trained model into a small part (termed as learngene) and then expands this small part into a few variablesized models. In our proposed method, we distill one pretrained large model into multiple small models whose network blocks are used as learngene instances to construct
the learngene pool. Since only one large model is used, we
do not need to store more large models as SN-Net and after
distilling, smaller learngene instances can be created to build
small models to satisfy low resource constraints. We also insert learnable transformation matrices between the instances
to stitch them into variable-sized models to improve the performance of these models. Exhaustive experiments have been
implemented and the results validate the effectiveness of the
proposed Learngene Pool compared with SN-Net.

Introduction
Deep learning models (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015;
Dehghani et al. 2023) have demonstrated their applicability
and significance in various fields, being deployed on diverse
devices like watches, smartphones, PCs, etc (Gholami et al.
2018; Howard et al. 2017). However, the diverse resource
constraints of these devices lead to variations in the scale
of deep learning models (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). To design models
with different scales, conventional deep learning approaches
* Co corresponding author.
†

Co corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14946

