The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MCSSME: Multi-Task Contrastive Learning for Semi-supervised Singing Melody
Extraction from Polyphonic Music
Shuai Yu
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Donghua University, China

Abstract

traction models can be utilized as an audio feature of musical information to enhance the performance of these downstream tasks.
With the trend of artificial intelligence, deep learning
models play an important role in the development of singing
melody extraction techniques. A number of deep learning
based methods (Su 2018; Hsieh, Su, and Yang 2019; Yu
et al. 2021a; Yu, Chen, and Li 2022) have been proposed
for supervised singing melody extraction. Despite the remarkable successes, the existing models are facing two major limitations: firstly, most of existing singing melody extraction models have formulated this task as a pixel-level
prediction task. Therefore, large amounts of pixel-level labeled data is needed by the supervised models. Obviously,
the labeling process is time-consuming and laborious. The
lack of labeling data has limited the model for further improvements. Secondly, it has been claimed by prior works
(Su 2018; Yu et al. 2021b), music genres can largely affect
the performance of singing melody extraction. For example,
if one model is trained on a dataset with all of popular songs,
and evaluated on a dataset with all of classic songs, the results will not be satisfied.
In an attempt to solve the problem of data insufficiency,
semi-supervised learning melody extraction methods have
become a cutting-edge direction. A pioneer work (Kum et al.
2020) adopts the teacher-student model to use unlabeled music tracks as training data for the singing melody extraction
task, seeking to improve the melody extraction performance.
However, this work did not include a data selection process,
which many pseudo-labels are wrongly predicted and corrupts the whole training dataset.
The straight-forward solution is to directly apply more
advanced semi-supervised models in the field of machine
learning to this task. However, it is not practical due to two
reasons: firstly, since singing melody extraction is a pixellevel prediction task (that predicts whether a pixel is on
a melody contour or not), the neural network (NN) based
model is very sensitive to the data disturbance. A small disturbance to the input spectrogram will result in a large decrease in results. We have directly applied Mean Teachers
(Tarvainen and Valpola 2017), MixMatch (Berthelot et al.
2019) to this task, the performances are not ideal. Secondly,
since the sensitive characteristic of this task, traditional
consistency regularization cannot bring improvements. The

Singing melody extraction is an important task in the field of
music information retrieval (MIR). The development of datadriven models for this task have achieved great successes.
However, the existing models have two major limitations:
firstly, most of the existing singing melody extraction models have formulated this task as a pixel-level prediction task.
The lack of labeling data has limited the model for further
improvements. Secondly, the generalization of the existing
models are prone to be disturbed by the music genres. To
address the issues mentioned above, in this paper, we propose a multi-task contrastive learning framework for semisupervised singing melody extraction, termed as MCSSME.
Specifically, to deal with data scarcity limitation, we propose
a self-consistency regularization (SCR) method to train the
model on the unlabeled data. Transformations are applied to
the raw signal of polyphonic music, which makes the network
to improve its representation capability via recognizing the
transformations. We further propose a novel multi-task learning (MTL) approach to jointly learn singing melody extraction and classification of transformed data. To deal with generalization limitation, we also propose a contrastive embedding learning, which strengthens the intra-class compactness
and inter-class separability. To improve the generalization on
different music genres, we also propose a domain classification method to learn task-dependent features by mapping data
from different music genres to shared subspace. MCSSME
evaluates on a set of well-known public melody extraction
datasets with promising performances. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the MCSSME framework for singing melody extraction from polyphonic music
using very limited labeled data scenarios.

Introduction
Singing melody extraction is a challenging task in the field
of MIR. It aims to extract the fundamental frequency contour from polyphonic music. Recently it has become an active research topic with a lot of downstream applications,
such as cover song identification (Yu et al. 2019; Serra,
Gómez, and Herrera 2010), query-by-humming (Wang and
Jang 2015), singing voice separation (Ikemiya, Yoshii, and
Itoyama 2015), and music recommendation (Knees and
Schedl 2015). Singing melody contour obtained from exCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

365

