The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Irrelevance of Influencers: Information Diffusion with Re-Activation and
Immunity Lasts Exponentially Long on Social Network Models
Tobias Friedrich1 , Andreas Göbel1 , Nicolas Klodt1 , Martin S. Krejca2 , Marcus Pappik1
1

Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam,
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), CNRS, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
{tobias.friedrich, andreas.goebel, nicolas.klodt, marcus.pappik}@hpi.de, martin.krejca@polytechnique.edu
2

Abstract
Information diffusion models on networks are at the forefront
of AI research. The dynamics of such models typically follow stochastic models from epidemiology, used to model not
only infections but various phenomena, including the behavior
of computer viruses and viral marketing campaigns. A core
question in this setting is how to efficiently detect the most
influential vertices in the host graph such that the infection survives the longest. In processes that incorporate re-infection of
the vertices, such as the SIS process, theoretical studies identify parameter thresholds where the survival time of the process rapidly transitions from logarithmic to super-polynomial.
These results contradict the intuition that the starting configuration is relevant, since the process will always either die
out fast or survive almost indefinitely. A shortcoming of these
results is that models incorporating short-term immunity (or
creative advertisement fatigue) have not been subjected to
such a theoretical analysis so far.
We reduce this gap in the literature by studying the SIRS
process, a more realistic model, which besides re-infection
additionally incorporates short-term immunity. On complex
network models, we identify parameter regimes for which
the process survives exponentially long, and we get a tight
threshold for random graphs. Underlying these results is our
main technical contribution, showing a threshold behavior for
the survival time of the SIRS process on graphs with large
expander subgraphs, such as social network models.

Introduction
Various phenomena at the forefront of AI research focus on
information diffusion models on graphs, e.g, (Sun, Cautis,
and Maniu 2023; Jiang, Ren, and Ferrara 2023; Liu et al.
2023; Sun et al. 2022; Razaque et al. 2022; Sharma et al.
2021). The underlying graph processes come from a plethora
of contexts, such as, spread of infections (Pastor-Satorras
et al. 2015; Leskovec et al. 2007a) and computer viruses
(Berger et al. 2005; Borgs et al. 2010), social influence and
the spread of ideas (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003),
and viral marketing campaigns (Agarwal and Liu 2008). A
central question in this area is to find influential vertices, the
ones that maximize the spread of the process (Babay et al.
2022; Ohsaka et al. 2014; Kimura, Saito, and Motoda 2009).

The foundation for analyzing such processes goes back
to epidemiology (see (Pastor-Satorras et al. 2015) for an
extensive survey). Epidemiology models each vertex of the
host network to be in one of various states, such as infected or
susceptible, and transitions between these states occur based
on certain events.
The underlying epidemic models considered in AI research are diverse. A large portion of research is based on
the stochastic models where each vertex gets infected only
once in this process (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003;
Leskovec et al. 2007a; Babay et al. 2022). However, as argued by Kimura, Saito, and Motoda (2009) there exist situations where individuals get re-infected. This can happen
for example with diseases that do not grant immunity such
as tuberculosis and gonorrhea (Newman 2003) or with bloggers who can post repeated messages about the same topic
(Leskovec et al. 2007b).
Phenomena with re-infection are captured well by the SIS
epidemic model—a fundamental model in epidemiology. The
SIS process is a continuous-time Markov chain where each
vertex is either susceptible or infected. Each infected vertex
becomes susceptible at a normalized rate of 1 and infects each
of its susceptible neighbors independently at an infection
rate λ (see left-hand side of Figure 1). Note that this is a
model of endemic disease and, therefore, it can happen that
the infection will survive for an extremely long time for some
parameter regimes with respect to the host graph G and λ.
Thus, one of the most basic questions one can ask about the
SIS process is how long it takes until the infection dies out,
known as the survival time (sometimes also referred to as the
extinction time).
Due to its importance and its nice mathematical properties,
the SIS process is well understood from a mathematical point
of view on many relevant networks. On Erdős–Rényi graphs,
Nam, Nguyen, and Sly (2022) show that the survival time
of the SIS process exhibits a threshold behavior (from logarithmic to super-polynomial) with respect to λ. This is also
the case for scale-free networks1 (Berger et al. 2005; Borgs
et al. 2010). More generally, Ganesh, Massoulié, and Towsley
(2005) connect the survival time to the spectral radius and the
isoperimetric constant of the host graph, which immediately
1
Generated by the preferential-attachment model (Barabasi and
Albert 1999).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17389

