The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge-Aware Explainable Reciprocal Recommendation
Kai-Huang Lai1 , Zhe-Rui Yang1 , Pei-Yuan Lai2 , Chang-Dong Wang1 * , Mohsen Guizani3 ,
Min Chen4,5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
South China Technology Commercialization Center, Guangzhou, China
3
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
laikh6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yangzhr9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, lpy@sctcc.cn, changdongwang@hotmail.com,
mohsen.guizani@mbzuai.ac.ae, minchen@ieee.org
Abstract

major issue is the sparsity of interaction data. For example, in job recommendation, once a job seeker accepts an
offer, the interaction between the job seeker and the recruiter becomes inactive until the job seeker looks for new
jobs. Meanwhile, as the job position gets filled, the recruiter
will stop interacting with candidates for that position. Such
bidirectional inactivation after a successful matching leads
to significantly fewer historical interaction signals for accurately modeling the preferences of both sides, compared
to the abundant user-item interactions in traditional recommender systems.
To alleviate the data sparsity issue, existing works (Akehurst et al. 2011; Luo et al. 2020) have explored leveraging
side information such as resumes and job postings. However,
they rely on textual data with inconsistent formats from both
sides. The free-form nature of such user-generated content
makes it difficult to precisely extract and match preferences.
In addition, they treat the information in a unified view without distinguishing between the two parties involved. However, the two sides often have distinct intentions and preferences when evaluating the same content. The inability to
capture such dual perspectives from inconsistent data formats limits the accuracy and interpretability of existing models.
These limitations highlight the need for modeling dual
perspectives in reciprocal recommendation. For instance, in
job matching scenarios, a candidate and recruiter may align
on certain dimensions like skills and industry, but have mismatches in other dimensions like location and education
preferences due to their different focuses. Capturing such
nuanced differences in intentions and motivations is crucial
for improving the accuracy of matches.
To address the limitations of existing methods, in this paper, we propose a Knowledge-Aware Explainable Reciprocal Recommender System (KAERR) that incorporates side
information from both parties involved in the recommendation process in a knowledge graph. By extracting metapaths
between the two parties, KAERR can explicitly capture their
distinct preferences and intentions. We encode the metapaths
from dual perspectives using a bidirectional LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1996) and fuse them with an attention

Reciprocal recommender systems (RRS) have been widely
used in online platforms such as online dating and recruitment. They can simultaneously fulfill the needs of both parties involved in the recommendation process. Due to the
inherent nature of the task, interaction data is relatively
sparse compared to other recommendation tasks. Existing
works mainly address this issue through content-based recommendation methods. However, these methods often implicitly model textual information from a unified perspective,
making it challenging to capture the distinct intentions held
by each party, which further leads to limited performance
and the lack of interpretability. In this paper, we propose
a Knowledge-Aware Explainable Reciprocal Recommender
System (KAERR), which models metapaths between two
parties independently, considering their respective perspectives and requirements. Various metapaths are fused using an
attention-based mechanism, where the attention weights unveil dual-perspective preferences and provide recommendation explanations for both parties. Extensive experiments on
two real-world datasets from diverse scenarios demonstrate
that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, while also delivering compelling reasons for recommendations to both parties.

Introduction
Reciprocal recommender systems (RRS) (Pizzato et al.
2010) have become increasingly popular in various online
platforms such as online dating (Neve and Palomares 2019;
Xia et al. 2016) and job recruitment (Jiang et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2022). Unlike traditional recommender systems that
make uni-directional recommendations to users, RRS aims
to fulfill the bilateral needs between two parties by making reciprocal recommendations (e.g. recommending satisfactory date partners to each other, matching job seekers and
recruiters, etc.).
However, building an effective RRS faces unique challenges compared to traditional recommender systems. One
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8636

