The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge Graph Prompting for Multi-Document Question Answering
Yu Wang,1 Nedim Lipka,2 Ryan A. Rossi,2 Alexa Siu,2 Ruiyi Zhang,2 Tyler Derr1
1

Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA
yu.wang.1@vanderbilt.edu, {lipka, ryrossi, asiu, ruizhang}@adobe.com, tyler.derr@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
The ‘pre-train, prompt, predict’ paradigm of large language
models (LLMs) has achieved remarkable success in opendomain question answering (OD-QA). However, few works
explore this paradigm in multi-document question answering (MD-QA), a task demanding a thorough understanding
of the logical associations among the contents and structures
of documents. To fill this crucial gap, we propose a Knowledge Graph Prompting (KGP) method to formulate the right
context in prompting LLMs for MD-QA, which consists of
a graph construction module and a graph traversal module.
For graph construction, we create a knowledge graph (KG)
over multiple documents with nodes symbolizing passages or
document structures (e.g., pages/tables), and edges denoting
the semantic/lexical similarity between passages or document
structural relations. For graph traversal, we design an LLMbased graph traversal agent that navigates across nodes and
gathers supporting passages assisting LLMs in MD-QA. The
constructed graph serves as the global ruler that regulates the
transitional space among passages and reduces retrieval latency. Concurrently, the graph traversal agent acts as a local
navigator that gathers pertinent context to progressively approach the question and guarantee retrieval quality. Extensive
experiments underscore the efficacy of KGP for MD-QA, signifying the potential of leveraging graphs in enhancing the
prompt design and retrieval augmented generation for LLMs.
Our code: https://github.com/YuWVandy/KG-LLM-MDQA.

Figure 1: MD-QA performance when prompting ChatGPT
with the context retrieved using different strategies.

To investigate the capability of LLMs for MD-QA,
we randomly sample multi-document questions from the
development set of 2WikiMQA (Ho et al. 2020) and
MuSiQue (Trivedi et al. 2022b), and then prompt LLMs in
four different strategies for the answer1 . Successfully answering these questions requires knowledge from multiple
Wikipedia documents. As shown in Figure 1, on 2WikiMQA
and MuSiQue, directly prompting LLMs without providing any context, i.e., None, performs far worse than when
prompting with supporting facts 2 provided as contexts, i.e.,
the Golden one. This demonstrates the limitation of fulfilling MD-QA using solely the knowledge encoded in LLMs.
One common solution to overcome this limitation in conventional OD-QA and single document question-answering (DQA) (Xu et al. 2020; Mathew, Karatzas, and Jawahar 2021)
is to retrieve grounding contexts and derive faithful answers
from the contexts, i.e., retrieve-and-read (Zhu et al. 2021; Ju
et al. 2022). However, unlike OD-QA and D-QA, the primary challenge of MD-QA roots in its demands for alternatively retrieving and reasoning knowledge across different
documents (Pereira et al. 2023; Caciularu et al. 2023). For
example, successfully answering questions in Figure 2(a)(b) requires reasoning over distinct passages from two different documents (i.e., Wikipedia pages). Moreover, each
document is a compilation of multi-modality structured data
(e.g., pages, sections, paragraphs, tables, and figures) and
some questions may specifically ask for the content in cer-

Introduction
Due to the emergence of large language models (LLMs),
the ‘pre-train, prompt, and predict’ paradigm has revolutionized natural language processing (NLP) in real-world applications, such as open-domain question answering, factchecking, and arithmetic reasoning (Chen et al. 2017;
Thorne et al. 2018; Asai et al. 2019; Karpukhin et al. 2020;
Aly et al. 2021; Qin et al. 2023; Zou and Caragea 2023;
Liu, Dong, and Zhang 2023). However, no significant efforts have investigated this framework in the scenario of
multi-documental question answering (MD-QA), which enjoys practical usage in academic research, customer support,
and financial/legal inquiries that require deriving insightful
analysis from multiple documents (Tessuto 2011; Bolino,
Long, and Turnley 2016).

1

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

19206

Detailed experimental setting is presented in Section 13.
Supporting facts: passages assumed to contain the answer.

