The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Collaborative Synthesis of Patient Records through
Multi-Visit Health State Inference
Hongda Sun1 * , Hongzhan Lin1 * , Rui Yan12†
1

2

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, Ministry of Education
{sunhongda98, linhongzhan, ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Electronic health records (EHRs) have become the foundation of machine learning applications in healthcare, while
the utility of real patient records is often limited by privacy and security concerns. Synthetic EHR generation provides an additional perspective to compensate for this limitation. Most existing methods synthesize new records based
on real EHR data, without consideration of different types of
events in EHR data, which cannot control the event combinations in line with medical common sense. In this paper, we
propose MSIC, a Multi-visit health Status Inference model
for Collaborative EHR synthesis to address these limitations.
First, we formulate the synthetic EHR generation process as
a probabilistic graphical model and tightly connect different
types of events by modeling the latent health states. Then,
we derive a health state inference method tailored for the
multi-visit scenario to effectively utilize previous records to
synthesize current and future records. Furthermore, we propose to generate medical reports to add textual descriptions
for each medical event, providing broader applications for
synthesized EHR data. For generating different paragraphs
in each visit, we incorporate a multi-generator deliberation
framework to collaborate the message passing of multiple
generators and employ a two-phase decoding strategy to generate high-quality reports. Our extensive experiments on the
widely used benchmarks, MIMIC-III and MIMIC-IV, demonstrate that MSIC advances state-of-the-art results on the quality of synthetic data while maintaining low privacy risks.

Symptoms

Chief complaint

Heart pain,
Fatigue,
…

Worsening fatigue and heart pain
for a long time…

Diagnoses

Present illness

Old myocardial infarction,
Chronic ischemic,
…
Medications
Carvedilol,
Aspirin,
Acetaminophen,
…

This is a patient with ischemic
cardiomyopathy. He noticed
progressive fatigue and lack of
energy …

Prescription
1) Carvedilol 12.5 mg: Take two
tablets twice a day.
2) Aspirin 81 mg: Take one
delayed-release tablet once daily
…

Figure 1: An example of a single-visit EHR data.

Therefore, synthetic EHR generation is a safer alternative
for privacy protection (Cui et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021).
With the promising development of deep generative models (Xu, Li, and Zhou 2015; Salakhutdinov 2015), generative
adversarial networks (GANs) and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) are widely used for synthetic EHR generation (Li
et al. 2021; Rashidian et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020). These
methods learn from the real EHR data to synthesize a series of new records. However, longitudinal EHR data has a
patient-visit-event hierarchical structure: (1) each patient has
sequential records for multiple visits; (2) each patient visit
contains various types of medical events including symptoms, diagnoses, and medications. Previous EHR synthesis
methods usually fail to model the logical associations between different types of events. Instead, they generate symptoms, diagnoses, and medications symmetrically, which cannot ensure that their combination conforms to medical common sense, affecting the quality and reliability of synthesized data. For multi-visit synthetic scenarios, how to use
previous records to accurately generate current events is also
a key challenge for this task. Furthermore, original EHR
synthesis methods only focus on generating discrete labels
for each medical event, and this limited medical information
directly affects their application scope.

Introduction
Electronic health records (EHRs) have received extensive attention in research and applications in the AI-empowered
healthcare field. Mainstream healthcare-related tasks such as
medical named entity recognition (Gligic et al. 2020; Gorinski et al. 2019; Quimbaya et al. 2016) and drug recommendation (Sun et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021; Shang et al. 2019)
can be carried out based on EHR datasets. However, EHR
data sharing is generally limited by privacy/policy regulations, resulting in real records being insufficient for requirements (Neamatullah et al. 2008; El Emam et al. 2011; Benitez and Malin 2010; El Emam, Rodgers, and Malin 2015).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19044

