The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ContactGen: Contact-Guided Interactive 3D Human Generation for Partners
Dongjun Gu, Jaehyeok Shim, Jaehoon Jang, Changwoo Kang, Kyungdon Joo*
Artifcial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
{djku1020, jh.shim, erick1997, kangchangwoo, kyungdon}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Among various interactions between humans, such as eye
contact and gestures, physical interactions by contact can
act as an essential moment in understanding human behaviors. Inspired by this fact, given a 3D partner human with
the desired interaction label, we introduce a new task of
3D human generation in terms of physical contact. Unlike
previous works of interacting with static objects or scenes,
a given partner human can have diverse poses and different contact regions according to the type of interaction.
To handle this challenge, we propose a novel method of
generating interactive 3D humans for a given partner human based on a guided diffusion framework (ContactGen
in short). Specifically, we newly present a contact prediction module that adaptively estimates potential contact
regions between two input humans according to the interaction label. Using the estimated potential contact regions as complementary guidances, we dynamically enforce
ContactGen to generate interactive 3D humans for a
given partner human within a guided diffusion model. We
demonstrate ContactGen on the CHI3D dataset, where
our method generates physically plausible and diverse poses
compared to comparison methods. Source code is available at
https://dongjunku.github.io/contactgen.

1

Push

Kick

Holding Hands

Hit

Partner Human

Grab

Hug

Handshake

Posing

Figure 1: Examples of generated 3D interactive humans
using the proposed ContactGen. Given a partner human
(red-colored human) and interaction label as conditions,
ContactGen generates various interactive 3D humans
(blue-colored human) through a guided DDM, where we focus on physical interaction by contact.

Introduction

Can you imagine a scenario where a human doing any action
without interacting with others? Human actions, instead of
being solely independent actions like walking and running,
often stem from various interactions. For instance, we constantly interact with diverse objects in our surroundings and
engage in daily communication with others (Yi et al. 2023;
Hassan et al. 2023; Yi et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2020). Particularly, interactions among humans are vital for establishing
social relationships, exchanging information, sharing emotions, and fulfilling various other aspects of life (Suvilehto
et al. 2015; Rudovic et al. 2017; Leclère et al. 2017).
Interactions among humans take on diverse forms, ranging from eye contact or gestures during conversations to
physical contact. Among various human interactions, physical contact is common and serves as a crucial communication tool, conveying unambiguous meanings. Even a brief

moment of physical contact can provide valuable insights
into the nature of the interaction (see Fig. 1). Furthermore,
it can act as a significant anchor posture for predicting human motion, as demonstrated in (Wu et al. 2022). Despite
the potential of interaction-based approaches, most research
works in 3D human generation have concentrated on generating humans from sound (Zhu et al. 2023), scene (Kim
et al. 2023), text (Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022; Kim,
Kim, and Choi 2023) and prior movement inputs (Lee,
Gyeongsik, and Mu 2023), overlooking the aspect of the interaction between humans. Instead, physical interactions are
primarily addressed in hand-object interaction (Grady et al.
2021; Karunratanakul et al. 2020) and scene-based interaction studies (Zhang et al. 2020; Hassan et al. 2021).

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1923

