The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Persistent Community Structures in Dynamic Networks
via Topological Data Analysis
Dexu Kong, Anping Zhang, Yang Li*
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
kdx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zap21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yangli@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

+

Dynamic community detection methods often lack effective mechanisms to ensure temporal consistency, hindering
the analysis of network evolution. In this paper, we propose a novel deep graph clustering framework with temporal consistency regularization on inter-community structures, inspired by the concept of minimal network topological changes within short intervals. Specifically, to address
the representation collapse problem, we first introduce MFC,
a matrix factorization-based deep graph clustering algorithm
that preserves node embedding. Based on static clustering
results, we construct probabilistic community networks and
compute their persistence homology, a robust topological
measure, to assess structural similarity between them. Moreover, a novel neural network regularization TopoReg is introduced to ensure the preservation of topological similarity between inter-community structures over time intervals.
Our approach enhances temporal consistency and clustering
accuracy on real-world datasets with both fixed and varying numbers of communities. It is also a pioneer application of TDA in temporally persistent community detection,
offering an insightful contribution to field of network analysis. Code and data are available at the public git repository:
https://github.com/kundtx/MFC-TopoReg.

Figure 1: Inconsistent inter-community structure in dynamic
community detection. The top row shows three snapshots of
a dynamic graph constructed at the vertex level, undergoing a transient perturbation; Different node colors represent
their true community labels. The inconsistent communities
are outlined by rectangles. The second row shows the corresponding community-level networks, which exhibit a falsely
detected merge.

dynamic community detection algorithms apply improved
static algorithms on each snapshot of the network (Javed
et al. 2018). Nevertheless, these methods focus on snapshot
optimal solutions and their results lack consistency in time.
In many dynamic community detection scenarios, it
is reasonable to assume that changes in the relationship between communities occur smoothly and the intercommunity structure remains relatively stable over time. Research has shown that the structure of the network itself does
not change significantly over a short period of time (Corne,
Handl, and Knowles 2010). Moreover, the lack of temporal consistency in dynamic community detection makes it
difficult to distinguish real community evolution from network perturbation, posing challenges for subsequent matching and analysis. For example, Fig. 1 illustrates an inconsistent community detection results in a simple network with
three true communities, e.g. social groups. In the second
time step, some perturbations, such as temporary changes
in membership or interactions, would cause algorithms to
incorrectly infer a merging event between two communities even though they return to being relatively independent

Introduction
Community detection on dynamic networks is crucial for
graph analysis. The formation of social ties, economic transactions, the unfolding of human mobility and communication, such real-world events all lie in the identification of
meaningful substructures and their evolution hidden in the
temporal complex system. Static community detection algorithms are well-researched and developed, such as the Louvain method (Blondel et al. 2008), submodularity (Liu et al.
2013), and spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001).
As graph neural networks have shown super capabilities in
fields such as node classification and link prediction, deep
graph clustering methods have come to the fore (Zhou et al.
2022) and been gradually adopted in static community detection (Su et al. 2022). However, dynamic community detection methods are still slow to develop due to the lack of a
clear definition of communities in dynamic networks. Some
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8617

