The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fact-Driven Logical Reasoning for Machine Reading Comprehension
Siru Ouyang1 * , Zhuosheng Zhang2† , Hai Zhao2,3,4†
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
siruo2@illinois.edu, zhangzs@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

a concern (Sugawara et al. 2020). A recent trend is to decompose comprehension ability into a collection of skills,
such as span extraction, numerical reasoning, commonsense
reasoning, and logical reasoning. Among these tasks, logical
reasoning MRC has shown to be particularly challenging. It
requires the machine to examine, analyze and critically evaluate arguments based on the relationships of facts that occur
in ordinary languages, instead of simple pattern matching as
focused in earlier studies (Lai et al. 2021). ReClor (Yu et al.
2020) and LogiQA (Liu et al. 2020) are two representative
datasets introduced to promote the development of logical
reasoning in MRC, where their questions (Figure 1) are selected from standardized exams such as GMAT and LSAT1 .
Recent studies typically exploit a pre-trained language
model (PLM) as a key encoder for effective contextualized
representation. However, according to diagnostic tests (Ettinger 2020; Rogers, Kovaleva, and Rumshisky 2020), PLMs
like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), despite encoding syntactic
and semantic information through large-scale pre-training,
they tend to struggle with understanding role reversal and
pragmatic inference, as well as role-based event knowledge.
Therefore, studies show that PLMs perform poorly in logical reasoning MRC tasks (Yu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020),
as the supervision required for these tasks is rarely available
during pre-training.
Following the research trend of previous reasoning tasks
such as commonsense reasoning, a natural interest is to
model the entity-aware relationships (e.g., isA or hasA predicates) in the passages using graph networks (Yasunaga et al.
2021; Ren and Leskovec 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Krishna,
Summers, and Wies 2020; Lv et al. 2020). However, for
tasks like logical reasoning of text that involve deductive/inductive/abductive reasoning (Reichertz 2004), the text usually contains hypothetical conditions that cannot be represented solely by commonsense knowledge. Therefore, these
methods may insufficiently capture necessary logical units
for inducing answers, since they paay little attention to nonentity, non-commonsense clues (Zhong et al. 2021). Referring to example 2 in Figure 1, previous methods may
only consider commonsense knowledge such as “Earth is a
planet”, without considering the temporary fact2 like “comet

Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in training machines with reasoning ability, which deeply relies on
accurately and clearly presented clue forms. The clues are
usually modeled as entity-aware knowledge in existing studies. However, those entity-aware clues are primarily focused
on commonsense, making them insufficient for tasks that require knowledge of temporary facts or events, particularly
in logical reasoning for reading comprehension. To address
this challenge, we are motivated to cover both commonsense
and temporary knowledge clues hierarchically. Specifically,
we propose a general formalism of knowledge units by extracting backbone constituents of the sentence, such as the
subject-verb-object formed “facts”. We then construct a supergraph on top of the fact units, allowing for the benefit of
sentence-level (relations among fact groups) and entity-level
interactions (concepts or actions inside a fact). Experimental
results on logical reasoning benchmarks and dialogue modeling datasets show that our approach improves the baselines
substantially, and it is general across backbone models. Code
is available at https://github.com/ozyyshr/FocalReasoner.

Introduction
Training machines to understand human languages is a longstanding goal of artificial intelligence (Hermann et al. 2015),
with a wide range of application scenarios such as questionanswering and dialogue systems. As a well-established task,
machine reading comprehension (MRC) has attracted research interest for a long time. MRC challenges machines
to answer questions based on a referenced passage. (Chen,
Bolton, and Manning 2016a; Sachan and Xing 2016; Seo
et al. 2017; Dhingra et al. 2017; Cui et al. 2017; Song et al.
2018; Hu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Back et al. 2020;
Zhang, Yang, and Zhao 2020). There has been remarkable
progress in MRC, with human-parity benchmark results reported in examination-style MRC datasets like SQuAD (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018) and RACE (Lai et al. 2017).
However, the extent to which systems have grasped the required knowledge and reading comprehension skills remains
* Work done while at SJTU.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

18851

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law School Admission Test
A fact can be seen as an observed event (Peterson 1997).

