The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mixup-Induced Domain Extrapolation for Domain Generalization
Meng Cao1,2 , Songcan Chen1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{meng.cao, s.chen}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to learn a well-performed classifier on multiple source domains for unseen target domains
under domain shift. Domain-invariant representation (DIR)
is an intuitive approach and has been of great concern. In
practice, since the targets are variant and agnostic, only a
few sources are not sufficient to reflect the entire domain
population, leading to biased DIR. Derived from PAC-Bayes
framework, we provide a novel generalization bound involving the number of domains sampled from the environment
(N ) and the radius of the Wasserstein ball centred on the target (r), which have rarely been considered before. Herein,
we can obtain two natural and significant findings: when N
increases, 1) the gap between the source and target sampling
environments can be gradually mitigated; 2) the target can
be better approximated within the Wasserstein ball. These
findings prompt us to collect adequate domains against domain shift. For seeking convenience, we design a novel yet
simple Extrapolation Domain strategy induced by the Mixup
scheme, namely EDM. Through a reverse Mixup scheme to
generate the extrapolated domains, combined with the interpolated domains, we expand the interpolation space spanned
by the sources, providing more abundant domains to increase
sampling intersections to shorten r. Moreover, EDM is easy
to implement and be plugged-and-played. In experiments,
EDM has been plugged into several methods in both closed
and open set settings, achieving up to 5.73% improvement.

Figure 1: The illustration of biased DIR on PACS dataset,
where (P) denotes Photo, (C) denotes Cartoon, (A) denotes
Art, and (S) denotes Sketch. The representations provided
from each domain are listed roughly in corresponding box.

widely studied, which can be divided into the following categories: causal inference (Arjovsky et al. 2019), information bottleneck (Li et al. 2022), adversarial learning (Ganin
et al. 2016), and others (Ding et al. 2022). These approaches
aim to remove the impurity representations, that is domain
dependent representations, and to find common representations depending on the downstream task as much as possible. It seems reliable. In practice, since the target domains
are variant and agnostic, it is difficult to extract unbiased
DIR among domains from limited sample domains that are
insufficient to reflect the entire domain population. Taking
PACS dataset as a sample, shown in Fig. 1, we can observe
that the required representations are inconsistent between
the source and target domains. If the sketch domain is selected as the target domain, shape and color will be provided
from the source domains, but only the shape is required. In
this case, the color is redundant on the entire domain population, which may lead to poor generalization ability. What’s
more, (Zhu et al. 2022) has discovered that the domains cannot be mixed and can be obviously observed within each
class. This phenomenon indicates that the impurity representations remain to some extent and the discrepancy cannot be completely eliminated, which further implies biased
DIR with limited domain sampling. Herein, a question arises
spontaneously: will the generalization ability be improved
as domain sampling increases? Going one step further, what
are the factors that influence the generalization ability?

Introduction
In conventional classification, the training set and test set
generally follow independent identical distribution (i.i.d.)
assumption. However, it is impractical in real-world applications due to domain shift (Li et al. 2022), including changing background, style, color, etc. To alleviate this issue, a
learning paradigm, namely Domain Generalization (DG),
has been presented and received increasing attention. DG
aims to induce a well-performed (meta-)classifier from a set
of given source domains so that it can generalize to unseen
but related target domains.
Up to now, abundant methods have been proposed for DG
(Wang et al. 2022). Domain-invariant representation (DIR)
(Lu et al. 2022), as one of the dominant approaches, has been
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11168

