The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generative Model Perception Rectification Algorithm for Trade-Off between
Diversity and Quality
Guipeng Lan* , Shuai Xiao† * , Jiachen Yang, Jiabao Wen
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin China
{lgp, xs611, yangjiachen, Wen Jiabao}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Data is a crucial component for generative models to be
involved in training, inference, and evaluation processes.
Generally, the obtained data is unbalanced. The presence
of the minor group samples is a common issue in unbalanced data. The minor group samples are located in lowdensity areas in the data distribution. The aforementioned
issue causes the model to exhibit ”fuzziness” while recognizing low-density regions, resulting in abnormal perception
and a decrease in the quality of the generated outcomes. To
ensure the quality of generation, the prior researches can
be categorized into two approaches: preprocessing-based
methods (Turner et al. 2019; DeVries, Drozdzal, and Taylor 2020) and post-processing-based methods (Azadi et al.
2018; Grover et al. 2019). Preprocessing-based methods
involve evaluating the dataset prior to network training
and eliminating abnormal samples to maintain data balance. Post-processing methods entail evaluating the generated data from well-trained models and removing lowquality portions. While these two approaches can enhance
the quality of the generated data, they inadvertently decrease
diversity due to incomplete data perception. Hence, determining the balance between diversity and generation quality
has emerged as significant research areas.
This paper proposes a method called DMPRA. The aim
of DMPRA is to identify and explore low-density regions
within the perception space of generative models, and assign
informative weights to improve the models’ perception of
data through multiple training iterations. DMPRA is guided
by the principle that samples from the minor groups possess
higher information value and, thus, require greater attention.
To achieve this, we employ extended neighborhood sampling to measure feature density and locate samples within
low-density regions. This sampling technique helps mitigate
the problem of density confusion in local areas, which arises
due to the aggregation of some samples that deviate from the
main distribution. Additionally, we propose a mechanism to
generate informative weights that assess the fine-grained attention required for samples in low-density regions, further
enhancing the generative model’s perception. Finally, DMPRA dynamically adjusts the sampling weight through multiple training iterations in order to strike a balance between
the diversity and the quality of the generated results.
Our contributions We summarize the contributions of
this work. Algorithm We firstly propose a general dynamic

How to balance the diversity and quality of results from generative models through perception rectification poses a significant challenge. Abnormal perception in generative models
is typically caused by two factors: inadequate model structure and imbalanced data distribution. In response to this
issue, we propose the dynamic model perception rectification algorithm (DMPRA) for generalized generative models. The core idea is to gain a comprehensive perception of
the data by appropriately highlighting the low-density samples in the perception space, also known as the minor group
samples. The entire process can be summarized as ”searchevaluation-adjustment”. To identify low-density regions in
the data manifold within the perception space of generative
models, we introduce a filtering method based on extended
neighborhood sampling. Based on the informational value of
samples from low-density regions, our proposed mechanism
generates informative weights to assess the significance of
these samples in correcting the models’ perception. By using dynamic adjustment, DMPRA ensures simultaneous enhancement of diversity and quality in the presence of imbalanced data distribution. Experimental results indicate that the
algorithm has effectively improved Generative Adversarial
Nets (GANs), Normalizing Flows (Flows), Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs), and Diffusion Models (Diffusion).

Introduction
The latest advancements in generative models have led to
their widespread use in image generation (Karras et al.
2020b), image editing (Wang et al. 2008), and other related
tasks (Patashnik et al. 2021). These models encompass various techniques, such as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Karras, Laine, and Aila
2019), Flows (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2014; Kingma and
Dhariwal 2018), Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Dai and
Wipf 2019; Razavi, Van den Oord, and Vinyals 2019), and
Diffusions (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Nichol and Dhariwal
2021). A common characteristic of these generative models
is the superior limit of diversity depends on the models’ perception of data.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13328

