The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Tackling Vision Language Tasks through Learning Inner Monologues
Diji Yang1 , Kezhen Chen2 , Jinmeng Rao2 ,
Xiaoyuan Guo2 , Yawen Zhang2 , Jie Yang2 , Yi Zhang1
1

University of California, Santa Cruz
2
Mineral
{dyang39,yiz}@ucsc.edu
{kezhenchen, jinmengrao, xiaoyuanguo, yawenz, yangjie}@mineral.ai
Abstract
Visual language tasks such as Visual Question Answering
(VQA) or Visual Entailment (VE) require AI models to comprehend and reason with both visual and textual content.
Driven by the power of Large Language Models (LLMs),
two prominent methods have emerged: (1) the hybrid integration between LLMs and Vision-Language Models (VLMs),
where visual inputs are firstly converted into language descriptions by VLMs, serving as inputs for LLMs to generate final answer(s); (2) visual feature alignment in language
space, where visual inputs are encoded as embeddings and
projected to LLMs’ language space via further supervised
fine-tuning. The first approach provides light training costs
and interpretability but is hard to be optimized in an endto-end fashion. The second approach presents decent performance, but feature alignment usually requires large amounts
of training data and lacks interpretability.
To tackle this dilemma, we propose a novel approach,
Inner Monologue Multi-Modal Optimization (IMMO), to
solve complex vision language problems by simulating Inner
Monologue, a cognitive process in which an individual engages in silent verbal communication with themselves. More
specifically, we enable LLMs and VLMs to interact through
natural language conversation (i.e., Inner Monologue) and
propose to use a two-stage training process to learn how to do
Inner Monologue (self-asking questions and answering questions). IMMO is evaluated on two popular tasks and achieves
competitive performance with less training data when compared with state-of-the-art models while concurrently keeping the interpretability. The results suggest that by emulating
the cognitive phenomenon of internal dialogue, our approach
can enhance reasoning and explanation abilities, contributing
to the more effective fusion of vision and language models.
More importantly, instead of using predefined human-crafted
monologues, IMMO learns this process within the deep learning models, broadening its potential applications across various AI challenges beyond vision and language tasks.

1

Q: What is the cat doing on
the bench?
Inner Monologue:
Q1: Is this cat lying down or
standing up?
A1: Lying down
Q2: How are the cat’s eyes
positioned?
A2: Closed
A: Sleeping

Q: Why are the horses hitched
together?
Inner Monologue:
Q1: Are the horses working on
the farm or on the road?
A1: Working on a farm.
Q2: Are they working with the
farming equipment?
A2: Yes, pulling to farm.
A: To plow

Figure 1: Examples of multi-modal Inner Monologue. Q, A,
and Image are from a visual question-answer sample. The
Inner Monologue part in brown consists of questions (Q1,
Q2) from the Reasoner module and answers (A1, A2) from
the Observer module.

Zhang et al. 2023). Recently, large language models (LLMs)
have achieved substantial advancements. Notable models
like PaLM (Chowdhery et al. 2022), InstructGPT (Ouyang
et al. 2022), and LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023) showcase
their immense potential in the field of natural language processing and commonsense reasoning. Many researchers explore using natural language as the intermediate representation to bridge multiple modalities. For instance, various
modalities, including the vision modality, can be first projected to the natural language space, and then LLMs are utilized to perform multi-modality understanding via language
processing. Two research directions to add visual inputs into
language space have been actively studied recently. The first
direction is the hybrid integration between vision-language
models (VLMs) and LLMs (Yang et al. 2022; Salaberria
et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023a). Hybrid integration approaches
aim to enable LLMs to utilize VLMs in a zero-shot or fewshot manner, i.e., LLMs act as central reasoners or planners
and VLMs serve as tools or sensors. These models do not
require heavy training costs and provide interpretability as

Introduction

Evidence shows that explicitly using natural language as
the intermediate representation of reasoning is effective and
essential for human cognition (Goldin-Meadow and Gentner 2003; Forbus, Liang, and Rabkina 2017; Crouse, McFate, and Forbus 2018; Chen et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2019;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19350

