Multilingual Commonsense Knowledge Retrieval

The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)
窗户

玻璃

通风

Improving Open-Domain Dialoguefenster
Response Generation with Multi-Source
Multilingual Commonsense Knowledge
belüften

1,2

belichtung

finestratura

davanzale

1,2

Sixing Wu , Jiong Yu , Jiahao Chen1,2 , Xiaofan Deng1,2 , Wei Zhou1,2 *
finestra
National Pilot School of Software, Yunnan University, Kunming,
China
Engineering Research Center of Cyberspace, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
{wusixing, zwei}@ynu.edu.cn

1

2

Dialogue Context:
窗子被野狐狸打碎了。

Abstract
Knowledge-grounded Dialogue Response Generation (KRG)
can facilitate informative and fidelity dialogues using external knowledge. Prior monolingual works can only use the
knowledge of the corresponding native language. Thus, due
to the prohibitive costs of collecting and constructing external knowledge bases, the limited scale of accessible external knowledge always constrains the ability of KRG, especially in low-resource language scenarios. To this end, we
propose a new task, Multi-Source Multilingual KnowledgeGrounded Response Generation (MMKRG), which simultaneously uses multiple knowledge sources of different languages. We notice that simply combining knowledge of different languages is inefficient due to the Cross-Conflict issue and Cross-Repetition issue. Thus, we propose a novel
approach MMK-BART, which uses a simple but elegant
Estimate-Cluster-Penalize mechanism to overcome the mentioned issues and adopts the multilingual language model
mBART as the backbone. Meanwhile, based on the recent
multilingual corpus XDailyDialog, we propose an MMKRG
dataset MMK-DailyDialog, which has been aligned to the
large-scale multilingual commonsense knowledge base ConceptNet and supports four languages (English, Chinese, German, and Italian). Extensive experiments have verified the
effectiveness of our dataset and approach in monolingual,
cross-lingual, and multilingual scenarios.

Multilingual
Translation

Multilingual Dialogue Context:
English: Windows are broken by wild foxes.
Chinese: 窗子被野狐狸打碎了。
German: Fenster werden von wilden Füchsen zerbrochen.
Italian: Le finestre sono rotte da volpi selvatiche.
Multilingual Knowledge Sources
English

English

Germany

Italian

Multilingual
Retrieval

Retrieved Multiple Multilingual Knowledge (with English translations)
Windows
窗户
Fenster
Finestra
Windows
Windows
Windows
Windows
Microsoft
Microsoft

Ventilate
Ventilate

玻璃
窗台
Glass Windowsill

Belüften
Ventilate

Davanzale
Windowsill

Figure 1: An example of multilingual knowledge retrieval.
Cross-Repetition issue: it can be the repetition (Windows −
→
Ventilate/Windowsill) across languages. Cross-Conflict issue: (Windows −
→ Microsoft) is conflicted with the context.

The scale of accessible knowledge is crucial for KRG to
handle complex topics (Wu et al. 2022). When there is no
available knowledge to retrieve from the given knowledge
base, KRG will fall back into traditional RG. However, most
prior works are monolingual, and the available knowledge is
often limited to a single native language source (Kann et al.
2022), which presents three challenges: 1) Limited Knowledge Coverage: A single knowledge source suffers from insufficient knowledge coverage. Many conversation contexts
may not match any knowledge in practice; 2) Low-resource
Dilemma: There are significant differences in the abundance
of knowledge resources across different languages. For example, there are many knowledge resources in high-resource
languages such as Chinese and English but only very few
bases in low-resource languages such as Indonesian and Icelandic. Consequently, prior monolingual KRG works are
challenging to deploy in many low-resource scenarios; 3)
Transfer Barrier: Even if efforts are invested in transferring knowledge from one language to another to address the

Introduction
Open-domain dialogue systems allow users to initiate conversations on any topic of their choice (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014; Yan 2018). Nevertheless, current dialogue response generation (RG) approaches are susceptible to generating uninformative responses (Li et al. 2016) and hallucinatory information (Shuster et al. 2021). The aforementioned issues can be partly attributed to the inadequate
knowledge acquired by the model (Yu et al. 2020). Therefore, knowledge-grounded response generation (KRG) approaches have emerged from recent studies as they are capable of retrieving informative knowledge from external
sources and substantially improving the generation quality
of dialogue responses (Zhou et al. 2018; Qin et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2020).
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19252

