The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Comprehensive View Embedding Learning for Single-Cell Multimodal Integration
Zhenchao Tang1 , Jiehui Huang1 , Guanxing Chen1 , Calvin Yu-Chian Chen1,2,3,4,5 *
1

School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
AI for Science (AI4S) - Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
4
Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital
5
Department of Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University
2

Abstract

single-cell multimodal (multi-omics) data often consists of
unpaired cells with mismatched features across modalities
(see Figure 1), making single-cell multimodal data analysis a
huge challenge.

Motivation: Advances in single-cell measurement techniques
provide rich multimodal data, which helps us to explore the
life state of cells more deeply. However, multimodal integration, or, learning joint embeddings from multimodal data
remains a current challenge. The difficulty in integrating unpaired single-cell multimodal data is that different modalities
have different feature spaces, which easily leads to information
loss in joint embedding. Besides, few existing methods have
fully exploited and fused the information in single-cell multimodal data. Result: In this study, we propose CoVEL, a deep
learning method for unsupervised integration of single-cell
multimodal data. CoVEL learns single-cell representations
from a comprehensive view, including regulatory relationships
between modalities, fine-grained representations of cells, and
relationships between different cells. The comprehensive view
embedding enables CoVEL to remove the gap between modalities while protecting biological heterogeneity. Experimental
results on multiple public datasets show that CoVEL is accurate and robust to single-cell multimodal integration. Data
availability: https://github.com/shapsider/scintegration.

Introduction
Single-cell measurement technology can measure the abundance of molecules at the cellular level, which allows us to
understand the life state of organisms more clearly and screen
drugs to target diseases (Lartigue et al. 2007; Lv et al. 2023;
Tang et al. 2023). Single-cell measurement technology has
developed rapidly in the past 10 years. For example, Eberwine et al. measured RNA content at the single-cell level for
the first time (Eberwine et al. 1992). Tang et al. further introduced single-cell transcriptome sequencing (Tang et al. 2009).
Klein et al. and Macosko et al. used droplet technology to expand the measurement scale (Klein et al. 2015; Macosko et al.
2015), CITE-seq simultaneously measures RNA expression
and cell surface protein abundance (Stoeckius et al. 2017),
sci-CAR and SNARE-seq can jointly measure RNA expression and chromatin accessibility (Cao et al. 2018; Chen, Lake,
and Zhang 2019). Joint measurement methods can provide
single-cell multimodal data and bring valuable insights into
the overall understanding of biological systems. However,
* Corresponding author, cy@pku.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15292

Figure 1: The goal of multimodal integration is to eliminate
gaps (enhance batch remove metric) and preserve biological
heterogeneity (cluster cells of the same type together, enhance
biology conservation metric).
In Figure 1, the problem description of single-cell multimodal integration is: single-cell data is stored in a matrix,
rows represent cells (i.e. samples), and columns represent
features. Different modalities correspond to different feature
spaces, and there is no one-to-one correspondence between
samples in different modalities (the same cell does not exist
in modal 1 and modal 2, but cells of the same type may exist
in modal 1 and modal 2). For the same type of cells with
different modalities, since the feature spaces of two modalities are completely different, there is a significant gap in the
embeddings after direct dimensionality reduction. The goal
of multimodal integration is to eliminate gaps (enhance batch
remove metric) and preserve biological heterogeneity (cluster
cells of the same type together, enhance biology conservation
metric).
A major obstacle faced when integrating unpaired singlecell multimodal data is that different modalities have different
feature spaces, such as accessible chromatin regions in the
ATAC modality and genes in the RNA modality. A common

