The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Latent Space Editing in Transformer-Based Flow Matching
Vincent Tao Hu1 , Wei Zhang1 , Meng Tang2 , Pascal Mettes1 , Deli Zhao3 , Cees Snoek1
1

2

University of Amsterdam
University of California Merced
3
Alibaba Group

Abstract

Flow Matching (Lipman et al. 2023; Liu, Gong, and Liu
2022; Neklyudov, Severo, and Makhzani 2022; Lee, Kim,
and Ye 2023) and improved transformer backbones (Bao
et al. 2023).
Flow Matching (Lipman et al. 2023) has positioned Continuous Normalizing Flow (CNF) as a strong contender to
diffusion models for image synthesis. Flow Matching allows for simulation-free training of CNFs and offers improved efficiency compared to standard diffusion training
and sampling techniques. Flow Matching has been quickly
integrated in the field, with applications in image generation (Lipman et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2023a), video prediction (Davtyan, Sameni, and Favaro 2022), human motion
generation (Hu et al. 2023b), point cloud generation (Wu
et al. 2022), and manifold data (Chen and Lipman 2023).
Orthogonally, recent works have proposed enhancements to
the traditional UNet architecture (Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Brox 2015) used in diffusion models, with the transformerbased U-ViT (Bao et al. 2023) demonstrating superior scaling performance. Since Flow Matching and U-ViT provide
two new pieces of the puzzle towards better generative learning, a natural next step is to discover how images can be
manipulated and edited via those techniques.
As a foundation for editing in transformer-based Flow
Matching, we seek to uncover whether such an approach has
semantic directions that can be manipulated. We take inspiration from investigations in GANs (Shen et al. 2020b; Song
et al. 2023) and diffusion models (Kwon, Jeong, and Uh
2023; Jeong, Kwon, and Uh 2023; Haas et al. 2023), which
have revealed there exists a latent space in such networks
with semantic directions that can be adjusted and composed.
We investigate whether transformer-based Flow Matching
also induces a semantic space, that allows us to perform editing in a controllable, accumulative, and composable manner.
Furthermore, to fix the misalignment between the forward
and backward process in Flow Matching, we propose semantic direction interpolating during the sampling process
to reach a more exact and adaptive control over the semantic
generation. To make latent space editing viable in practice,
manipulation should be done at the input or prompt level.
While early work generates new images from scratch based
on updated prompts (Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al.
2022), prompt-to-prompt (Hertz et al. 2022) allows for editing images locally while keeping the unedited part similar.

This paper strives for image editing via generative models.
Flow Matching is an emerging generative modeling technique
that offers the advantage of simple and efficient training. Simultaneously, a new transformer-based U-ViT has recently
been proposed to replace the commonly used UNet for better
scalability and performance in generative modeling. Hence,
Flow Matching with a transformer backbone offers the potential for scalable and high-quality generative modeling, but
their latent structure and editing ability are as of yet unknown. Hence, we adopt this setting and explore how to edit
images through latent space manipulation. We introduce an
editing space, which we call u-space, that can be manipulated in a controllable, accumulative, and composable manner. Additionally, we propose a tailored sampling solution
to enable sampling with the more efficient adaptive step-size
ODE solvers. Lastly, we put forth a straightforward yet powerful method for achieving fine-grained and nuanced editing
using text prompts. Our framework is simple and efficient,
all while being highly effective at editing images while preserving the essence of the original content. Our code will be
publicly available at https://taohu.me/lfm/

Introduction
The amazing realism demonstrated by large-scale text-toimage generative models (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia
et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2021, 2022) has garnered significant attention in the research community and beyond, leading to the development of various applications catering to
non-expert users. For image editing, such models can be directly used in zero-shot fashion (Meng et al. 2021), enabling
users to manipulate images without specific training on editing tasks (Bansal et al. 2023). The progress made in diffusion models (Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Hu
et al. 2023c) has played a significant role in driving these
advancements, prompting further investigations into the understanding of the learned latent space and its potential use
for image editing tasks. While current works perform latent
space editing on the original latent diffusion model setting
and architecture (Kwon, Jeong, and Uh 2023; Haas et al.
2023), not much is known about the structure of the latent
space in the most recent advances in the field, specifically
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2247

