The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Sequentially Fair Mechanism
for Multiple Sensitive Attributes
François Hu1 , Philipp Ratz2 , Arthur Charpentier2
1

Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada
francois.hu@umontreal.ca, ratz.philipp@courrier.uqam.ca, charpentier.arthur@uqam.ca
2

Abstract

as fairness gerrymandering (Kearns et al. 2018) and it occurs “when we only look for unfairness over a small number
of pre-defined groups” that are arbitrarily selected. Scholars in the field of algorithmic fairness have devised a range
of methods to counter unfairness in predictions, for both regression (Chzhen et al. 2020a,b; Gouic, Loubes, and Rigollet 2020) and classification (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016;
Agarwal, Dudik, and Wu 2019; Chiappa et al. 2020; Denis et al. 2021). However, these approaches consider fairness w.r.t. a single feature, making them susceptible to the
criticism from above. As an example, (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018) underscored this intersectional bias in Machine
Learning (ML). They discovered that major face recognition algorithms exhibited reduced accuracy for women with
darker skin tones, thereby exposing both gender and racial
discrimination.
A naive solution to this problem would be to create a
single discrete feature that groups a set of sensitive variables. However, this approach has several drawbacks: i) this
methodology assigns similar weights to all attributes, hindering approximate fairness which allows the user to adjust the fairness constraint; ii) further, this method complicates tracking procedure effects, as disentangling them from
a combined variable is complex and also lacks prioritization across attributes; (iii) in applications, some sensitive
feature might need more attention, like bias due to gender
over age (Macnicol 2006; Charpentier, Hu, and Ratz 2023).
This prioritization bridges the gap between a status-quo of
(unfair) predictions and a goal of fair predictions w.r.t a
set of sensitive features. Fairness considerations often leads
to reduced predictive performance (Menon and Williamson
2018; Chen, Johansson, and Sontag 2018), making adoption challenging. Presetting a level of unfairness could potentially facilitate its acceptance and adoption.

In the standard use case of Algorithmic Fairness, the goal
is to eliminate the relationship between a sensitive variable
and a corresponding score. Throughout recent years, the scientific community has developed a host of definitions and
tools to solve this task, which work well in many practical applications. However, the applicability and effectivity
of these tools and definitions becomes less straightfoward in
the case of multiple sensitive attributes. To tackle this issue,
we propose a sequential framework, which allows to progressively achieve fairness across a set of sensitive features.
We accomplish this by leveraging multi-marginal Wasserstein
barycenters, which extends the standard notion of Strong Demographic Parity to the case with multiple sensitive characteristics. This method also provides a closed-form solution
for the optimal, sequentially fair predictor, permitting a clear
interpretation of inter-sensitive feature correlations. Our approach seamlessly extends to approximate fairness, enveloping a framework accommodating the trade-off between risk
and unfairness. This extension permits a targeted prioritization of fairness improvements for a specific attribute within a
set of sensitive attributes, allowing for a case specific adaptation. A data-driven estimation procedure for the derived solution is developed, and comprehensive numerical experiments
are conducted on both synthetic and real datasets. Our empirical findings decisively underscore the practical efficacy of our
post-processing approach in fostering fair decision-making.

Introduction
Recent media coverage has put the spotlight anew on a
question that preoccupies the field of (algorithmic) fairness,
namely what constitutes fairness and how to achieve it. We
center our focus on group fairness, particularly on the concept of Demographic Parity fairness (Calders, Kamiran, and
Pechenizkiy 2009), with the objective of achieving independence between attributes and predictions while bypassing the use of labels. A point raised frequently is that only
considering a single (binary or discrete) attribute is insufficient to determine whether a system is truly fair (Kong
2022). Indeed studies emphasize that when a model considers only a single attribute, it overlooks subgroups defined
by intersecting attributes. This notion is commonly referred

Main Contributions
This highlights the need for a more holistic approach to consider fairness. In this article, we propose a methodology that
is adaptable for optimal fair predictions involving Multiple
Sensitive Attributes (MSA). More specifically:
• We address the learning problem under the Demographic
Parity constraint, involving MSA, by constructing multimarginal 2-Wasserstein barycenters. Our method offers a
closed-form solution, allowing us to develop an empirical

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12502

