The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Envy-Free House Allocation under Uncertain Preferences
Haris Aziz1 , Isaiah Iliffe1 , Bo Li2 , Angus Ritossa1 , Ankang Sun2 , Mashbat Suzuki1
1
UNSW Sydney
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au, i.iliffe@student.unsw.edu.au, bo.li@polyu.edu.hk, a.ritossa@student.unsw.edu.au,
ankang.sun@polyu.edu.hk, mashbat.suzuki@unsw.edu.au
2

Abstract

represent a group of agents with a composition of preferences. Various types of uncertain preferences have been examined in the literature (see, e.g, (Hazon et al. 2012; Aziz
et al. 2019, 2020, 2022)), including the lottery Model, the
joint probability model, and the compact indifference model.
All the models are well motivated and some real-world applications can be found in, for example, (Aziz et al. 2020).
Given an instance in which agents’ uncertain preferences
are given as input, the central problem that we consider
is M AX -P ROB EF which concerns computing an allocation
with the highest probability of being EF. Such an allocation
can be viewed as being robustly fair under uncertain information. En route, we consider two related problems: E X ISTS P OSSIBLY EF (i.e., does there exist an allocation that is
EF with non-zero probability?) and E XISTS C ERTAINLY EF
(i.e., does there exist an allocation that is EF with probability one?). Our work aims to present a comprehensive study
of the computation complexity for all these problems under
various uncertainty models.

Envy-freeness is one of the most important fairness concerns
when allocating resources. We study the envy-free house allocation problem when agents have uncertain preferences
over items and consider several well-studied preference uncertainty models. The central problem that we focus on is
computing an allocation that has the highest probability of
being envy-free. We show that each model leads to a distinct
set of algorithmic and complexity results, including detailed
results on (in-)approximability. En route, we consider two related problems of checking whether there exists an allocation
that is possibly or necessarily envy-free. We give a complete
picture of the computational complexity of these two problems for all the uncertainty models we consider.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent resource allocation is one of the fundamental issues at the intersection of computer science and economics. We consider a fundamental allocation problem in
which agents have preferences over items or houses and
each agent is allocated one house while taking into account
their preferences. The problem has been referred to as the
house allocation or assignment problem. When agents have
deterministic preferences over items, the problem is very
well-understood. For example, there are characterizations
of Pareto optimal allocations (see, e.g. (Abdulkadiroğlu and
Sönmez 1998)) and polynomial-time algorithms for computing envy-free allocations (see, e.g. (Gan, Suksompong, and
Voudouris 2019)).
In this paper, we focus on fairly allocating items in the
house allocation problem. The central fairness concept we
consider is envy-freeness (EF) which is considered one of
the gold-standard for capturing fairness. An allocation is EF
if every agent gets her favorite house among all the houses
assigned to the agents. While the structure of EF allocations
under deterministic preferences is well-understood, there is
little prior work on the complexity of computing EF house
allocations under uncertain preferences. Uncertain preferences are important to model when agents’ preferences may
not be completely known, and the central planner may have
to make decisions based on limited information. The uncertainty model can also capture the situation when the agents

Problems

Lottery

Compact
indifference

Joint
Prob

E XISTS P OSSIBLY EF

NP-c

in P

in P

E XISTS C ERTAINLY EF

NP-c

in P

NP-c

M AX -P ROB EF

NP-h
♣

NP-h
♠†

NP-h
♦

Table 1: Summary of the main results. The symbol ♣ indicates that the problem admits no bounded multiplicative approximation, assuming P6=NP. The symbol ♠ indicates that
the problem admits no polynomially-bounded multiplicative
approximation, assuming P6=NP. The symbol ♦ indicates
that there is no polynomial-time algorithm with better than
6
5 -approximation ratio, assuming P6=NP. The symbol † indicates the problem admits a polynomial-time algorithm that
either solves M AX -P ROB EF exactly or certifies that every
allocation has a small probability of being EF.
Contributions In this work, we consider three natural
and well-motivated uncertain preference models, namely,
the lottery model, the compact indifference model, and the
joint probability model. In the lottery model, each agent has

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9477

