The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sampling for Beyond-Worst-Case Online Ranking*
Qingyun Chen1 , Sungjin Im1 , Benjamin Moseley2 , Chenyang Xu3 , Ruilong Zhang4
1

Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Merced
2
Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo
qchen41@ucmerced.edu, sim3@ucmerced.edu, moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu, cyxu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, ruilongz@buffalo.edu
Abstract

is an edge between each pair of nodes that are directed, in
which (u, v) implies v is better than u. The goal is to rank
(i.e. order) the nodes in V so that the fewest number of edges
are directed backward in the ordering. Equivalently, the goal
is to reverse the direction of the smallest number of edges
so that the graph has no directed cycles and thus admits a
topological sort.
A large number of applications of FAS have led to it
being well-studied theoretically and empirically. The problem is NP-Hard (Alon 2006; Charbit, Thomassé, and Yeo
2007), and prior work has focused on approximation and
heuristic algorithm design. Several constant approximation
algorithms are known (Ailon, Charikar, and Newman 2008;
Coppersmith, Fleischer, and Rudra 2006). Moreover, several scalable algorithmic approaches have been introduced
for large data sets (Baweja, Jia, and Woodruff 2022; Im
and Montazer Qaem 2020; Simpson, Srinivasan, and Thomo
2016a).
While Feedback Arc Set is well understood offline and
enjoys several good heuristic approaches, few results are
known when items arrive over time. When items arrive over
time, two possible models are the streaming and online settings. In the streaming setting, items come one at a time,
and, using limited memory, the algorithm needs to construct a global ordering of the elements. The ordering can
be changed as elements arrive; the challenge is that not all
edges of the graph can be stored in memory. There has been
a recent surge of interest in streaming algorithms (Baweja,
Jia, and Woodruff 2022; Chen et al. 2021).
In the online model, nodes arrive sequentially, revealing
the directed edges connected to the nodes that have appeared
earlier. The objective in this model is to continually provide
a reliable approximation of the nodes that have surfaced so
far. To delineate the model’s goals more explicitly, the following criteria must be met: (1) At every moment, an ordered list of the nodes that have arrived thus far should be
maintained. (2) The relative order of any subset of nodes
should remain unchanged throughout the process. (3) The
model should ensure an outcome of high quality when compared to the optimal offline solution.
While this setting is natural; unfortunately, there is a Ω(n)
lower bound on the competitive ratio; the proof is omitted in
this version) in the worst-case online arrival model.
In the worst-case model, the problem is too difficult to

The feedback arc set problem is one of the most fundamental
and well-studied ranking problems where n objects are to be
ordered based on their pairwise comparison. The problem enjoys several efficient approximation algorithms in the offline
setting. Unfortunately, online there are strong lower bounds
on the competitive ratio establishing that no algorithm can
perform well in the worst case. This paper introduces a new
beyond-worst-case model for online feedback arc set. In the
model, a sample of the input is given to the algorithm offline
before the remaining instance is revealed online. This models
the case in practice where yesterday’s data is available and
is similar to today’s online instance. This sample is drawn
from a known distribution which may not be uniform. We design an online algorithm with strong theoretical guarantees.
The algorithm has a small constant competitive ratio when
the sample is uniform—if not, we show we can recover the
same result by adding a provably minimal sample. Empirical
results validate the theory and show that such algorithms can
be used on temporal data to obtain strong results.

1

Introduction

Finding a global ranking of items is a common problem
faced in social network analysis, Bayesian learning, information aggregation, and game design (Bar-Yehuda et al.
1994; Baweja, Jia, and Woodruff 2022). The case where
pairwise preference relationships are available for constructing the global ranking is referred to as Kemeny-Young Rank
Aggregation (Kenyon-Mathieu and Schudy 2007a). For example, consider users that are playing an online game. Given
the features of a user’s playing history, it is possible to decide a preference on which of the two users should be ranked
higher. However, the ranking may be inconsistent on three
users due to the numerous features. The goal is to construct
a global ranking that corresponds to a ranking of all users
adhering to as many of the pairwise preferences.
One of the oldest and most well-studied approaches for
ranking is the Feedback Arc Set (FAS) problem in tournaments. In the FAS problem, there is a directed graph
G = (V, E). Nodes represent objects to be ranked. There
* All authors (ordered alphabetically) have equal contributions
and are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20649

