The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BLIVA: A Simple Multimodal LLM for Better Handling of Text-Rich Visual
Questions
Wenbo Hu* 1 , Yifan Xu* 2 , Yi Li1 Weiyue Li1 Zeyuan Chen1 Zhuowen Tu1
1

University of California, San Diego
2
Coinbase Global, Inc.
{w1hu, yil115, wel019, zec016, ztu}@ucsd.edu, yifan.xu@coinbase.com

Abstract

et al. 2023) which improves generalization to unseen tasks
by framing various tasks into instructions. Vision Language Models (VLMs) such as OpenAI’s GPT-4 (OpenAI
2023), which incorporates LLM with visual understanding
capability, have demonstrated significant advancements in
addressing open-ended visual question-answering (VQA)
tasks. Several approaches have been proposed for employing LLMs on vision-related tasks by directly aligning with
a visual encoder’s patch feature (Liu et al. 2023a) or extracting image information through a fixed number of query
embeddings. (Li et al. 2023b; Zhu et al. 2023).
However, despite exhibiting considerable abilities for
image-based human-agent interactions, these models struggle with interpreting text within images. Images with text are
pervasive in our daily lives, and comprehending such content
is essential for human visual perception. Previous works utilized an abstraction module with queried embeddings, limiting their capabilities in textual details within images (Li
et al. 2023b; Awadalla et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023).
In our work, we employ learned query embeddings with
additional visual assistant branches, utilizing encoded patch
embeddings. This approach addresses the constraint image
information typically provided to language models, leading
to improved text-image visual perception and understanding. Empirically, we report the results of our model in general (not particularly text-rich) VQA benchmarks following
the evaluation datasets of (Dai et al. 2023) and text-rich image evaluation protocol from (Liu et al. 2023b). Our model
is initialized from a pre-trained InstructBLIP and an encoded patch projection layer trained from scratch. Following
(Zhu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a), we further demonstrate
a two-stage training paradigm. We begin by pre-training the
patch embeddings projection layer. Subsequently, with the
instruction tuning data, we fine-tune both the Q-former and
the patch embeddings projection layer. During this phase,
we maintain both the image encoder and LLM in a frozen
state. We adopt this approach based on two findings from
our experiments: firstly, unfreezing the vision encoder results in catastrophic forgetting of prior knowledge; secondly,
training the LLM concurrently didn’t bring improvement but
brought significant training complexity.
In summary, our study consists of the following highlights:

Vision Language Models (VLMs), which extend Large Language Models (LLM) by incorporating visual understanding
capability, have demonstrated significant advancements in addressing open-ended visual question-answering (VQA) tasks.
However, these models cannot accurately interpret images
infused with text, a common occurrence in real-world scenarios. Standard procedures for extracting information from
images often involve learning a fixed set of query embeddings. These embeddings are designed to encapsulate image contexts and are later used as soft prompt inputs in
LLMs. Yet, this process is limited to the token count, potentially curtailing the recognition of scenes with text-rich
context. To improve upon them, the present study introduces
BLIVA: an augmented version of InstructBLIP with Visual
Assistant. BLIVA incorporates the query embeddings from
InstructBLIP and also directly projects encoded patch embeddings into the LLM, a technique inspired by LLaVA. This
approach assists the model to capture intricate details potentially missed during the query decoding process. Empirical evidence demonstrates that our model, BLIVA, significantly enhances performance in processing text-rich VQA
benchmarks (up to 17.76% in OCR-VQA benchmark) and in
undertaking general (not particularly text-rich) VQA benchmarks (up to 7.9% in Visual Spatial Reasoning benchmark),
and achieved 17.72% overall improvement in a comprehensive multimodal LLM benchmark (MME), comparing to our
baseline InstructBLIP. BLIVA demonstrates significant capability in decoding real-world images, irrespective of text presence. To demonstrate the broad industry applications enabled
by BLIVA, we evaluate the model using a new dataset comprising YouTube thumbnails paired with question-answer sets
across 11 diverse categories. For researchers interested in further exploration, our code and models are freely accessible at
https://github.com/mlpc-ucsd/BLIVA.

Introduction
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed the field of natural language understanding, exhibiting impressive capabilities in generalizing across a broad array of tasks, both in zero-shot and few-shot settings. This
success is mainly contributed by instruction tuning (Wu
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We present BLIVA, which leverages both learned query

2256

