The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semi-Supervised Blind Image Quality Assessment through Knowledge Distillation
and Incremental Learning
†

Wensheng Pan1 * , Timin Gao1 * , Yan Zhang1 , Xiawu Zheng1,2 , Yunhang Shen3 , Ke Li 3 ,
Runze Hu4 , Yutao Liu5 , Pingyang Dai1
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai 200233, China
4
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100086, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
bzhy986@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Supervised Method (100% labeling)

Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) aims to simulate
human assessment of image quality. It has a great demand
for labeled data, which is often insufficient in practice. Some
researchers employ unsupervised methods to address this issue, which is challenging to emulate the human subjective
system. To this end, we introduce a unified framework that
combines semi-supervised and incremental learning to address the mentioned issue. Specifically, when training data
is limited, semi-supervised learning is necessary to infer extensive unlabeled data. To facilitate semi-supervised learning, we use knowledge distillation to assign pseudo-labels
to unlabeled data, preserving analytical capability. To gradually improve the quality of pseudo labels, we introduce incremental learning. However, incremental learning can lead
to catastrophic forgetting. We employ Experience Replay by
selecting representative samples during multiple rounds of
semi-supervised learning, to alleviate forgetting and ensure
model stability. Experimental results show that the proposed
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance across various benchmark datasets. After being trained on the LIVE
dataset, our method can be directly transferred to the CSIQ
dataset. Compared with other methods, it significantly outperforms unsupervised methods on the CSIQ dataset with a
marginal performance drop (−0.002) on the LIVE dataset. In
conclusion, our proposed method demonstrates its potential
to tackle the challenges in real-world production processes.

Labeled

Labeled
Fine-tune
LIVE : 0.923 ( 0.046)
CSIQ : 0.928

LIVE : 0.969

Ours (47% labeling )
Labeled

Unlabeled
Pseudo-labels

LIVE : 0.982

LIVE : 0.980 ( 0.002)
CSIQ : 0.964

Figure 1: Comparison between the supervised method (HyperIQA) and the proposed method on the labeled data volume and performance in the LIVE → CSIQ task. “47%
labeling” means that labeled data accounts for 47% of all
training data. HyperIQA pre-trains on DA and then finetunes on DB resulting in a performance drop on DA and
poor performance on DB . Our method involves pre-training
on DA and fine-tuning directly on UNLABELED DB . As a
result, the performance on DA has been nearly maintained
and surpassed HyperIQA’s performance on DB .

Introduction
Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) aims to mimic human subjective systems of image quality. It is widely used
as evaluation metrics (Wang et al. 2004) and loss functions
(Huynh-Thu and Ghanbari 2008) for computer vision tasks.
However, there is a great demand for labeled data. Due to
the different subjective evaluation systems among observers
and the different settings of the environment in each experiment. When the insufficient data problem arises, it is hard

to make up for the problem in practice. To solve this problem, some researchers consider the BIQA task as an unsupervised problem (Mittal, Soundararajan, and Bovik 2012;
Wu, Wang, and Li 2015; Venkatanath et al. 2015; Wu et al.
2020; Yang et al. 2021).
For example, Wu et al. (Wu, Wang, and Li 2015) proposed a novel unsupervised method by selecting statistical
features named Local Pattern Statistics Index extracted from
binary patterns of local image structures to evaluate image
quality. Liu et al. (Liu et al. 2019) quantified the image quality degradation by measuring the structure, naturalness, and

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4388

