The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SelfPromer: Self-Prompt Dehazing Transformers with Depth-Consistency
Cong Wang1 * , Jinshan Pan2 , Wanyu Lin1 , Jiangxin Dong2 , Wei Wang3 , Xiao-Ming Wu1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2

Abstract

the pixel index, and the transmission map T is usually modeled as T(x) = e−βd(x) with the scene depth d(x), and the
scattering coefficient β reflects the haze density.
Most existing works develop various variations of deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for image dehazing (Liu et al. 2019a; Dong et al. 2020; Dong and Pan 2020;
Chen et al. 2021; Jin et al. 2022, 2023; Wang et al. 2023).
They typically compute a sequence of features from the hazy
input images and directly reconstruct the clear ones based on
the features, which have achieved state-of-the-art results on
benchmarks (Li et al. 2019) in terms of PSNRs and SSIMs.
However, as dehazing is ill-posed, very small errors in the
estimated features may degrade the performance. Existing
works propose to use deep CNNs as image priors and then
restore the clear images iteratively. However, they cannot
effectively correct the errors or remove the haze residuals
in the dehazed images as these models are fixed in the iterative process (Liu et al. 2019b). It is noteworthy that the
human visual system generally possesses an intrinsic correction mechanism that aids in ensuring optimal results for
a task. This phenomenon has been a key inspiration behind
the development of a novel dehazing approach incorporating a correction mechanism that guides deep models toward
better haze-free results generation.
Specifically, if a dehazed result exists haze residuals, a
correction mechanism can localize these regions and guide
the relevant task toward removing them. Notably, NLPbased text prompt learning has shown promise in guiding the
models by correcting the predictions (Liu et al. 2023). However, text-based prompts may not be appropriate for tasks
that require solely visual inputs without accompanying text.
Recent works (Herzig et al. 2022; Gan et al. 2023) attempted
to address this issue by introducing text-free prompts into
vision tasks. For instance, PromptonomyViT (Herzig et al.
2022) evaluates the adaptation of multi-task prompts such
as depth, normal, and segmentation to improve the performance of the video Transformers. Nevertheless, these
prompts may not be suitable for image dehazing tasks, as
they could not capture the haze-related content.
To better guide the deep model for better image dehazing, this work develops an effective self-prompt dehazing
Transformer. Specifically, it explores the depth consistency
of hazy images and their corresponding clear ones as a
prompt. In particular, our study is motivated by the substan-

This work presents an effective depth-consistency SelfPrompt Transformer, terms as SelfPromer, for image dehazing. It is motivated by an observation that the estimated
depths of an image with haze residuals and its clear counterpart vary. Enforcing the depth consistency of dehazed images
with clear ones, therefore, is essential for dehazing. For this
purpose, we develop a prompt based on the features of depth
differences between the hazy input images and corresponding clear counterparts that can guide dehazing models for
better restoration. Specifically, we first apply deep features
extracted from the input images to the depth difference features for generating the prompt that contains the haze residual information in the input. Then we propose a prompt embedding module that is designed to perceive the haze residuals, by linearly adding the prompt to the deep features. Further, we develop an effective prompt attention module to pay
more attention to haze residuals for better removal. By incorporating the prompt, prompt embedding, and prompt attention into an encoder-decoder network based on VQGAN,
we can achieve better perception quality. As the depths of
clear images are not available at inference, and the dehazed
images with one-time feed-forward execution may still contain a portion of haze residuals, we propose a new continuous
self-prompt inference that can iteratively correct the dehazing
model towards better haze-free image generation. Extensive
experiments show that our SelfPromer performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art approaches on both synthetic and
real-world datasets in terms of perception metrics including
NIQE, PI, and PIQE. The source codes will be made available at https://github.com/supersupercong/SelfPromer.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed advanced progress in image
dehazing due to the development of deep dehazing models.
Mathematically, the haze process is usually modeled by an
atmospheric light scattering model (He, Sun, and Tang 2011)
formulated as:
I(x) = J(x)T(x) + (1 − T(x))A,

(1)

where I and J denote a hazy and haze-free image, respectively, and A denotes the global atmospheric light, x denotes
* supercong94@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5327

