The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Block Image Compressive Sensing with Local and Global Information Interaction
Xiaoyu Kong1 , Yongyong Chen1∗ , Feng Zheng2 , Zhenyu He1 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
Southern University of Science and Technology
{xiaoykong15,YongyongChen.cn, zfeng02}@gmail.com, zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn
2

Blocking

Abstract

Initialization

Reconstruction

Recovery

Reconstruction

Block image compressive sensing methods, which divide a
single image into small blocks for efficient sampling and
reconstruction, have achieved significant success. However,
these methods process each block locally and thus disregard
the global communication among different blocks in the reconstruction step. Existing methods have attempted to address this issue with local filters or by directly reconstructing the entire image, but they have only achieved insufficient
communication among adjacent pixels or bypassed the problem. To directly confront the communication problem among
blocks and effectively resolve it, we propose a novel approach
called Block Reconstruction with Blocks’ Communication
Network (BRBCN). BRBCN focuses on both local and global
information, while further taking their interactions into account. Specifically, BRBCN comprises dual CNN and Transformer architectures, in which CNN is used to reconstruct
each block for powerful local processing and Transformer
is used to calculate the global communication among all
the blocks. Moreover, we propose a global-to-local module
(G2L) and a local-to-global module (L2G) to effectively integrate the representations of CNN and Transformer, with
which our BRBCN network realizes the bidirectional interaction between local and global information. Extensive experiments show our BRBCN method outperforms existing stateof-the-art methods by a large margin. The code is available at
https://github.com/XYkong-CS/BRBCN

Measurement

(a) Block-based
w/o Filtering

(b) Block-based
w/ Filtering

Block
measurement

(c) Image-based
Inner-block
concern

(d) Ours

Inter-block
concern

Figure 1: The procedure of block CSI. The whole image is
split into non-overlapping blocks and is reconstructed with
different strategies. (a): Block-based reconstruction without interaction among blocks. (b): Block-based reconstruction with local filtering operations, lacking sufficient blocks
communication. (c): Image-based reconstruction with global
concern, lacking inner-block concern. (d): Block-based reconstruction with local and global interaction.

Introduction

constructs each block independently (Gan 2007) as shown
in Fig. 1. Traditional CSI methods (Dong et al. 2014; Gao
et al. 2015) imported different priors and reconstructed
the original image by non-linear iterative algorithms (Boyd
et al. 2011; Donoho, Maleki, and Montanari 2009). Moreover, some researchers extended these traditional methods
into deep learning, referred to deep unfolding networks
(DUNs) (Fan, Lian, and Quan 2022; Yang et al. 2018; Zhang
and Ghanem 2018; Zhang, Zhao, and Gao 2020). However,
as depicted in Fig. 1(a), these algorithms reconstruct each
block separately, thereby only focusing on local information.
To involve global information, there are two popular solutions: block-based methods with post-processing of local
filters and image-based methods. The former added a local filter acting on the whole image after block reconstruction (Gan 2007; Zhang et al. 2020) as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Meanwhile, image-based methods (Shi et al. 2019; Song,

Compressive Sensing (CS) (Donoho 2006) is a signal processing technique capable of recovering high-dimensional
signals from limited measurements with high probability. Demonstrating the potential for enhancing sampling
speed and reducing storage and transmission costs, CS has
aroused significant interest in various applications like medical imaging (Michailovich, Rathi, and Dolui 2011), singlepixel imaging (Duarte et al. 2008), image encryption (Li,
Zhang, and Xie 2019), and snapshot compressive imaging (Meng et al. 2021; Wu, Zhang, and Mou 2021).
To handle arbitrary image resolution with fast processing,
block compressive sensing imaging (CSI) divides the image into small non-overlapping blocks and samples and re* These authors are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2822

