The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PMAC: Personalized Multi-Agent Communication
Xiangrui Meng1,2 , Ying Tan1,2,3,4 *
1
2

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
Key Laboratory of Machine Perceptron (MOE), Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
mxxxr@stu.pku.edu.cn, ytan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Communication plays a crucial role in information sharing
within the field of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL).
However, how to transmit information that meets individual
needs remains a long-standing challenge. Some existing work
focus on using a common channel for information transfer,
which limits the capability for local communication. Meanwhile, other work attempt to establish peer-to-peer communication topologies but suffer from quadratic complexity. In this
paper, we propose Personalized Multi-Agent Communication
(PMAC), which enables the formation of peer-to-peer communication topologies, personalized message sending, and
personalized message receiving. All these modules in PMAC
are performed using only multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) with
linear computational complexity. Empirically, we show the
strength of personalized communication in a variety of cooperative scenarios. Our approach exhibits competitive performance compared to existing methods while maintaining
notable computational efficiency.

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Busoniu,
Babuska, and De Schutter 2008) has emerged as a powerful
paradigm for modeling and solving complex problems in various domains, such as robotics, autonomous systems (Zhou
et al. 2020), game AI (Berner et al. 2019), and social networks
(Leibo et al. 2017). But coordination among agents is always
challenging, especially when it lacks access to the environment state or other useful information. As communication
serves as a common mechanism for sharing information, recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning with communication (Comm-MARL) has been receiving increasing attention.
Previous work (Foerster et al. 2016; Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and
Fergus 2016; Peng et al. 2017) focus on differential communication channels for agents to exchange information during
both training and execution. However, these work equally
value all agents and overlook the potential benefits of personalized communication.
Just as there are no two identical leaves in the world, human cooperation often involves personalized communication
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17505

in which each one plays a distinct role. Typically, we send different messages to different receivers based on their specific
needs, and we process messages differently depending on
where they come from. Moreover, not everyone needs to participate in every communication, as some information may
be irrelevant to certain individuals. Therefore, the consideration of personalized communication is of great practical
significance.
In terms of communication messages, to the best of our
knowledge, there has been no specific discussion on how to
send different messages to meet the needs of the receivers.
On the contrary, various approaches have been proposed to
get weights of received messages, assigning the contributions of different senders. For example, TarMAC (Das et al.
2019) employs message signatures and utilizes soft attention
(Vaswani et al. 2017) to assign weights to incoming messages. Similarly, DGN (Jiang et al. 2020) and MAGIC (Niu,
Paleja, and Gombolay 2021) employ multi-head attention
(Vaswani et al. 2017) and graph attention (Veličković et al.
2017), respectively, for communication message aggregation.
However, these methods primarily focus on personalized message aggregation at the receiving end. Furthermore, the use
of attention introduces computational complexity of O(n2 ),
which is unbearable when dealing with a large number of
agents.
In terms of communication topology, (Jiang and Lu 2018;
Jiang et al. 2020; Ding, Huang, and Lu 2020) predefine communication range based on the observation field. However,
nearby agents often have similar observations, which limits
the information gain from communication. Moreover, this approach may not be suitable for certain environments with limited observation fields or where agents are not included in the
observation definition. Considering building adaptive communication topologies through learning methods, IC3NET
(Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2018) and Gated-ACML (Mao
et al. 2020) employ gating networks to determine whether
an agent needs to send messages to others at a given time
step. DC2Net (Meng and Tan 2023) employs an independent
group channel for information integration. SchedNet (Kim
et al. 2019) trains a scheduler using DDPG (Lillicrap et al.
2015) to select the top-K most relevant agents for communication. These approaches use a public channel to receive
messages, but they do not establish peer-to-peer communication topologies between agents, missing out on the potential

