The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

B-spine: Learning B-spline Curve Representation for Robust and Interpretable
Spinal Curvature Estimation
Hao Wang1 , Qiang Song2 , Ruofeng Yin2 * , Rui Ma1,3 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
2
China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University
3
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China
{whao22, songqiang20}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {yrf wind, ruim}@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract
Spinal curvature estimation is important to the diagnosis and
treatment of the scoliosis. Existing methods face several issues such as the need of expensive annotations on the vertebral landmarks and being sensitive to the image quality. It
is challenging to achieve robust estimation and obtain interpretable results, especially for low-quality images which are
blurry and hazy. In this paper, we propose B-Spine, a novel
deep learning pipeline to learn B-spline curve representation
of the spine and estimate the Cobb angles for spinal curvature estimation from low-quality X-ray images. Given a lowquality input, a novel SegRefine network which employs the
unpaired image-to-image translation is proposed to generate
a high quality spine mask from the initial segmentation result. Next, a novel mask-based B-spline prediction model is
proposed to predict the B-spline curve for the spine centerline. Finally, the Cobb angles are estimated by a hybrid approach which combines the curve slope analysis and a curvebased regression model. We conduct quantitative and qualitative comparisons with the representative and SOTA learningbased methods on the public AASCE2019 dataset and our
new proposed JLU-CJUH dataset which contains more challenging low-quality images. The superior performance on
both datasets shows our method can achieve both robustness
and interpretability for spinal curvature estimation.

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Given a low-quality X-ray image, our method can
robustly learn a B-spline curve representation for the spine
centerline and estimate the Cobb angles in an interpretable
manner. (a) Input X-ray image and the initial spine mask
obtained by an existing segmentation network; (b) Refined
mask and the learned B-spline (note the blue points are the
predicted control points); (c) Estimated location of endplates
for computing the Cobb angles (MT, PT, TL).

while the process is time-consuming and may lead to subjective errors due to high inter- and intra-observer variability
(Gstoettner et al. 2007).
In recent years, computer-aided spinal curvature or Cobb
angle estimation has been widely studied. Early methods
such as (Zhang et al. 2010; Samuvel et al. 2012; Shaw et al.
2012; Prabhu et al. 2012; Akbar et al. 2013; Wu et al. 2014)
employ traditional image processing techniques to identify
the upper and lower end vertebra for computing the Cobb angles. These methods mainly have limited accuracy and may
be affected by subjective errors. With the development of
machine learning and deep learning, data-driven approaches
have achieved promising results by learning Cobb angle estimation based on annotated datasets such as AASCE2019 (Li
and Wang 2019). Existing learning-based methods mainly
predict the Cobb angles based on certain intermediate representations of the spine including spine segmentation mask,
vertebral landmarks and the centerline of the spine. Despite relatively accurate estimation can be obtained by these
learning-based methods, they are still limited in the robustness or may lack the interpretability of the results.
For example, methods like (Wang, Huang, and Wang
2020; Lin et al. 2021) which directly regress the Cobb angles from the segmentation mask cannot explain where the

Introduction

Scoliosis is a condition of spinal deformity which can lead
to a side-to-side spine curve. Serious scoliosis can affect
the breathing and movement of the patients and may even
cause the disability if they are not treated in time. A quantitative measurement of the spinal curvature is important to
diagnose the scoliosis and provide the guidance for proper
treatment. Conventionally, the spinal curvature estimation
is operated as the Cobb angle measurement in the clinical
practice. Given an AP view X-ray spine image of a person
in standing position, the Cobb angles, main thoracic (MT),
proximal thoracic (PT) and thoracolumbar/lumbar (TL), can
be measured by identifying the most tilted vertebra and computing the angles between the lines drawn from the endplates of involved vertebra. However, manual measurement
of Cobb angles requires skills from a professional clinician,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5381

