The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multiple Hypothesis Dropout: Estimating the Parameters
of Multi-Modal Output Distributions
David D. Nguyen1,2,3 , David Liebowitz1,4 , Salil S. Kanhere1,3 , Surya Nepal2,3
1

UNSW Sydney
CSIRO Data61
3
Cybersecurity CRC
4
Penten
david.nguyen@data61.csiro.au, david.liebowitz@penten.com, salil.kanhere@unsw.edu.au, surya.nepal@data61.csiro.au,
2

Abstract

(Guzman-Rivera, Batra, and Kohli 2012). The objective of
the single-output function f ω : X 7→ Y is to learn a mapping from a single input in input-space to single output in
output-space using a set of parameters ω. It seeks to minimizes a loss function L : Y × Y 7→ R+ that computes the
distance between its predictions ŷn and targets yn .
A multiple-output function F : X 7→ Y M can learn
a mapping from input space to an M -tuple of outputs
Ŷn = {ŷn1 , . . . , ŷnM |ŷnM ∈ Y}. Multiple-output functions
based on neural networks (NNs) can be categorized into two
main types: those that produce multiple point estimates and
those that produce multi-modal distributions. An effective
class of algorithms that fall into the first group is based
on multiple-choice learning (MCL) (Guzman-Rivera, Batra, and Kohli 2012; Guzman-Rivera et al. 2014; Lee et al.
2016, 2017; Firman et al. 2018). This class of algorithms
construct an ensemble of M single-output functions that
each produce single point estimates and are trained using
a winner-take-all (WTA) loss function. MCL techniques are
well-known for being stable and have been demonstrated on
high-dimensional datasets such as images (Guzman-Rivera
et al. 2014; Firman et al. 2018). However, a common criticism of MCL algorithms is that it requires the practitioner
to arbitrarily choose the hyper-parameter M , which also assumes an equal number of predictors and targets for any
given input. These models are also challenging to scale as
increasing the number of single-output functions in the ensemble can be expensive from a computational and parameterization perspective.
The second approach to multiple-output prediction represents different modes of yn with the same input value xn
as separate distributions. This is advantageous over pointestimate approaches because it provides an estimation of uncertainty through the covariance. Mixture density networks
(MDN) (Bishop 1994) use the outputs of a neural network
(NN) to predict the parameters of a mixture of Gaussians.
A part of the outputs is used to predict mixture coefficients,
while the remainder is used to parameterize each individual
mixture component. MDNs at higher dimensions, however,
are difficult to optimize with stochastic gradient descent due
to numerical instability and mode collapse and require special initialization schemes (Rupprecht et al. 2017; Cui et al.
2019; Makansi et al. 2019; Zhou, Gao, and Asfour 2020;
Prokudin, Gehler, and Nowozin 2018).

In many real-world applications, from robotics to pedestrian trajectory prediction, there is a need to predict multiple real-valued outputs to represent several potential scenarios. Current deep learning techniques to address multipleoutput problems are based on two main methodologies: (1)
mixture density networks, which suffer from poor stability
at high dimensions, or (2) multiple choice learning (MCL),
an approach that uses M single-output functions, each only
producing a point estimate hypothesis. This paper presents a
Mixture of Multiple-Output functions (MoM) approach using
a novel variant of dropout, Multiple Hypothesis Dropout. Unlike traditional MCL-based approaches, each multiple-output
function not only estimates the mean but also the variance
for its hypothesis. This is achieved through a novel stochastic
winner-take-all loss which allows each multiple-output function to estimate variance through the spread of its subnetwork
predictions. Experiments on supervised learning problems illustrate that our approach outperforms existing solutions for
reconstructing multimodal output distributions. Additional
studies on unsupervised learning problems show that estimating the parameters of latent posterior distributions within
a discrete autoencoder significantly improves codebook efficiency, sample quality, precision and recall.

Introduction
Multiple-output prediction is the task of generating a variety
of real-valued outputs given the same input, a powerful tool
in scenarios that require a comprehensive understanding of
multiple potential possibilities. This approach has demonstrated an extensive ability to capture diversity, creativity
and uncertainty across many domains including generative
modelling (Graves 2013; Ha and Eck 2017; Nguyen, Nepal,
and Kanhere 2021), computer vision (Guzman-Rivera et al.
2014; Firman et al. 2018), pedestrian trajectory prediction (Makansi et al. 2019), spectral analysis (Bishop 1994),
robotic movement (Zhou, Gao, and Asfour 2020) and reinforcement learning (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018).
Multiple-output prediction is a generalization of traditional single-output prediction. In the supervised learning
context, a single-output function is given a dataset of inputoutput pairs {(xn , yn ) | n ∈ {1, . . . , N }, xn ∈ X , yn ∈ Y}
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14440

