The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EarthVQA: Towards Queryable Earth via Relational Reasoning-Based Remote
Sensing Visual Question Answering
Junjue Wang1 , Zhuo Zheng2 , Zihang Chen1 , Ailong Ma1 , Yanfei Zhong1∗
1

LIESMARS, Wuhan University, 430074, China
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
{kingdrone, chenzihang, maailong007, zhongyanfei}@whu.edu.cn, zhuozheng@cs.stanford.edu
2

Abstract

gap between information and comprehensive knowledge (Li
and Krishna 2022).
Visual question answering (VQA) aims to answer customized questions by searching for visual clues in the provided image. Since linguistic questions determine the task
properties, the algorithms are flexible and can be developed
for reasoning required answers. Recently, preliminary VQA
datasets and methods have emerged in the remote sensing
field (Lobry et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Rahnemoonfar
et al. 2021). However, most of these researches have the following drawbacks: 1) As for most datasets, QA pairs are
automatically labelled based on existing data, such as Open
Street Map (OSM) and classification datasets. Most tasks are
simple counting and judging questions with no relational
reasoning required. The automatic QA pairs do not match
actual needs, limiting their practicalities. 2) The development of the remote sensing VQA model lags, and most research directly fuses the global visual and language features
to predict the final answers. They ignore the local semantics
and relations, which are unsuitable for the complex reasoning of multiple geospatial objects. To this end, we propose a
multi-modal multi-task VQA dataset and a semantic object
awareness framework to advance complex remote sensing
VQA tasks. Main contributions are as follows:

Earth vision research typically focuses on extracting geospatial object locations and categories but neglects the exploration of relations between objects and comprehensive reasoning. Based on city planning needs, we develop a multimodal multi-task VQA dataset (EarthVQA) to advance relational reasoning-based judging, counting, and comprehensive
analysis. The EarthVQA dataset contains 6000 images, corresponding semantic masks, and 208,593 QA pairs with urban and rural governance requirements embedded. As objects
are the basis for complex relational reasoning, we propose a
Semantic OBject Awareness framework (SOBA) to advance
VQA in an object-centric way. To preserve refined spatial locations and semantics, SOBA leverages a segmentation network for object semantics generation. The object-guided attention aggregates object interior features via pseudo masks,
and bidirectional cross-attention further models object external relations hierarchically. To optimize object counting, we
propose a numerical difference loss that dynamically adds
difference penalties, unifying the classification and regression tasks. Experimental results show that SOBA outperforms
both advanced general and remote sensing methods. We believe this dataset and framework provide a strong benchmark
for Earth vision’s complex analysis. The project page is at
https://Junjue-Wang.github.io/homepage/EarthVQA.

1

1) We propose the EarthVQA dataset with triplet samples
(image-mask-QA pairs). The 208,593 QA pairs encompass six main categories1 . EarthVQA features diverse
tasks from easy basic judging to complex relation reasoning and even more challenging comprehensive analysis. Specifically, the residential environments, traffic situations, and renovation needs of waters and unsurfaced
roads are explicitly embedded in various questions.
2) To achieve relational reasoning-based VQA, we propose
a semantic object awareness framework (SOBA). SOBA
utilizes segmentation visual features and pseudo masks
to generae pixel-level features with accurate locations.
The object awareness-based hybrid attention models the
relations for object-guided semantics and bidirectionally
aggregates multi-modal features for answering.
3) To add distance sensitivity for regression questions, we

Introduction

High-spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing images
can assist us in quickly obtaining essential information
(Zvonkov et al. 2023; Xiao et al. 2023). Most research focuses on the perception of object categories and locations,
deriving related tasks such as semantic segmentation (Liu
et al. 2023), species detection (Zhao et al. 2022), and urban
understanding (Shi et al. 2023). However, the existing methods and datasets ignore the relations between the geospatial
objects, thus limiting their ability to knowledge reasoning in
complex scenarios. Especially in city planning (Bai, Shi, and
Liu 2014), the relations between the transportation hubs and
schools, water situations around the farmland, and greenery distributions in residential areas are also significant and
urgent to be analyzed. Hence, it is necessary to go beyond
object perception and explore object relations, bridging the

1

∗

basic judging, basic counting, relational-based judging,
relational-based counting, object situation analysis, and comprehensive analysis.

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5481

