The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Variational Autoencoder for Neural Temporal Point Processes with Dynamic
Latent Graphs
Sikun Yang1, 2, 3 , Hongyuan Zha4, 5
1

School of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University, 523000 Dongguan, China
2
Great Bay Institute for Advanced Study, Great Bay University
3
Dongguan Key Laboratory for Data Science and Intelligent Medicine, Great Bay University
4
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
sikunyang@gbu.edu.cn, zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

Continuously-observed event occurrences, often exhibit selfand mutually-exciting effects, which can be well modeled using temporal point processes. Beyond that, these event dynamics may also change over time, with certain periodic
trends. We propose a novel variational auto-encoder to capture such a mixture of temporal dynamics. More specifically,
the whole time interval of the input sequence is partitioned
into a set of sub-intervals. The event dynamics are assumed
to be stationary within each sub-interval, but could be changing across those sub-intervals. In particular, we use a sequential latent variable model to learn a dependency graph between the observed dimensions, for each sub-interval. The
model predicts the future event times, by using the learned
dependency graph to remove the non-contributing influences
of past events. By doing so, the proposed model demonstrates
its higher accuracy in predicting inter-event times and event
types for several real-world event sequences, compared with
existing state of the art neural point processes.

A -> B

B -> A

A -> B

B -> A

A -> B

B -> A

A -> J

J -> A

A -> J

J -> A

A -> J

J -> A

A -> B
B -> A
A -> J
J -> A
7:00 pm
5:00 pm
6:00 pm
4:00 pm
3rd sub-interval
2nd sub-interval
1st sub-interval

Figure 1: An example illustrates the email interactions between three individuals, Alice (A), Bob (B), Jane (J). During
working time, Alice sends emails (black sticks) frequently
with Bob, while they interact less frequently, during nonworking time. We treat the sequence of emails from one individual to another as an observed dimension, corresponding
to a vertex of the dependency graph. The dynamic graph between the four dimensions, aligned with three subintervals,
are shown on the top.

capture the latent state-transition dynamics. Recently, neural temporal point processes (neural TPPs) demonstrate a
strong capability in capturing long-range dependencies in
event sequences using neural networks (Du et al. 2016; Xiao
et al. 2017, 2019; Omi, Ueda, and Aihara 2019), attention
mechanisms (Zhang et al. 2020; Zuo et al. 2020) and neural
density estimation (Shchur, Bilos, and Günnemann 2019).
These neural TPPs often use all the past events to predict
a future event’s occurring time, and thus cannot remove the
disturbances of the non-contributing events. To mitigate this
defect, some recent works (Zhang, Lipani, and Yilmaz 2021;
Lin et al. 2021) formulate the neural temporal point processes by learning a static graph to explicitly capture dependencies among event types. They hence can improve the
accuracy in predicting future event time, by removing the
non-contributing influences of past events via the learned
graph. Nonetheless, the dependencies between event types,
may also change over time. Using a static graph, the neural
TPPs will retrieve a dependency graph averaged over time.
To fill the gap, some main contributions are made in this paper: (i) We propose to learn a dynamic graph between the
event types of an input sequence, from a novel variational
auto-encoder (VAE) perspective (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014). More specifically,
we use regularly-spaced intervals to capture the different

Introduction
There has been growing interests in modeling and understanding temporal dynamics in event occurrences. For instance, modeling customer behaviors and interactions, is
crucial for recommendation systems and online social media, to improve the resource allocation and customer experience (Farajtabar et al. 2014, 2016). These event occurrences usually demonstrate heterogeneous dynamics. On
one aspect, individuals usually reciprocate in their interactions with each other (reciprocity). For example, if Alice
sends an email to Bob, then Bob is more likely to send an
email to Alice soon afterwards. On the other aspect, long
event sequences often exhibit a certain amount of periodic
trends. For instance, during working time, individuals are
more likely to reciprocate in the email interactions with their
colleagues, but such mutually exciting effects will become
weaker during non-working time, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Temporal point processes (TPPs), such as Hawkes processes
(HPs) (Hawkes 1971), are in particular well-fitted to capture the reciprocal and clustering effects in event dynamics. Nonetheless, the conventional HPs cannot adequately
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16343

