The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sample-Constrained Black Box Optimization for Audio Personalization
Rajalaxmi Rajagopalan, Yu-Lin Wei, Romit Roy Choudhury
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{rr30,yulinlw2,croy}@illinois.edu

Abstract

optimization (BBO) has been proposed for such settings,
where one queries user-satisfaction scores for carefully chosen filters hi . Using a budget of B such queries, BBO expects to estimate ĥ∗ that is close to the true h∗ . Of course,
reducing the query budget B is of interest, and the effects of
lowering B have been studied extensively.

We consider the problem of personalizing audio to maximize
user experience. Briefly, we aim to find a filter h∗ , which applied to any music or speech, will maximize the user’s satisfaction. This is a black-box optimization problem since the
user’s satisfaction function is unknown. Substantive work has
been done on this topic where the key idea is to play audio
samples to the user, each shaped by a different filter hi , and
query the user for their satisfaction scores f (hi ). A family of
“surrogate” functions is then designed to fit these scores and
the optimization method gradually refines these functions to
arrive at the filter ĥ∗ that maximizes satisfaction.
In certain applications, we observe that a second type of
querying is possible where users can tell us the individual
elements h∗ [j] of the optimal filter h∗ . Consider an analogy
from cooking where the goal is to cook a recipe that maximizes user satisfaction. A user can be asked to score various
cooked recipes (e.g., tofu fried rice) or to score individual ingredients (say, salt, sugar, rice, chicken, etc.). Given a budget
of B queries, where a query can be of either type, our goal is
to find the recipe that will maximize this user’s satisfaction.
Our proposal builds on Sparse Gaussian Process Regression
(GPR) and shows how a hybrid approach can outperform any
one type of querying. Our results are validated through simulations and real world experiments, where volunteers gave
feedback on music/speech audio and were able to achieve
high satisfaction levels. We believe this idea of hybrid querying opens new problems in black-box optimization and solutions can benefit other applications beyond audio personalization.

The above problem can be called “filter querying” because
the user is queried using different filters hi ∈ RN . In
this paper, we discuss an extension to this problem where
a second type of querying is possible, called “dimension
querying”. With dimension querying, it is possible to query
the user for each dimension of the optimal filter, namely
h∗ [1], h∗ [2], . . . , h∗ [N ]. In audio personalization, for example, the optimal h∗ is the hearing profile of a user in the frequency domain; if we accurately estimate the hearing profile, we can maximize their satisfaction. With dimension
querying, a user can listen to sound at each individual frequency j ∈ {1, N } and tell us the best score h∗ [j]. The only
problem is that N can be very large, say 8000 Hz, hence it
is prohibitive to query the user thousands of times.
To summarize, a filter query offers the advantage of understanding user satisfaction for a complete filter, while a dimension query gives optimal information for only one dimension at a time. In our analogy from cooking, filter querying gives us the user satisfaction for a fully prepared recipe
(e.g., tofu fried rice), while dimension querying gives us
the user’s optimal liking for individual dimensions, like salt,
sugar, etc. This paper asks, for a given query budget B, can
the combination of two types of querying lead to higher user
satisfaction compared to a single type of querying? How
much is the gain from the combination, and how does the
gain vary against various application parameters?

Introduction
Consider the problem of personalizing content to a user’s
taste. Content could be audio signals in a hearing aid, a
salad cooked for the user, a personalized vacation package
designed by an AI agent, etc. Given the content c, we intend
to adjust the content with a linear filter h. Our goal is to find
the optimal filter h∗ that will maximize the user’s personal
satisfaction f (h).

Our solution builds on past work that uses Gaussian Process
Regression (GPR). Conventional GPR begins with a family
of surrogate functions for f (h) and estimates a posterior on
these functions, based on how well they satisfy the user’s
scores. Over time, GPR iterates through a two-step process,
first picking an optimal filter hi to query the user, and based
on the score f (hi ), updates the posterior distribution. The
goal is to query and update the posterior until a desired criteria is met. Once met, the mean of this posterior fˆ(h) is
declared as the surrogate for f (h) and ĥ∗ = argmax fˆ(h) is

Finding h∗ is difficult because the user’s satisfaction function f (h) is unknown; it is embedded somewhere inside the
perceptual regions of the brain. Hence, gradient descent is
not possible since gradients cannot be computed. Black box
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10164

