The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combining Graph Transformers Based Multi-Label Active Learning and
Informative Data Augmentation for Chest Xray Classification
Dwarikanath Mahapatra1 , Behzad Bozorgtabar2 , Zongyuan Ge3 , Mauricio Reyes4 ,
Jean-Philippe Thiran2
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
EPFL, Switzerland
3
Monash University, Australia
4
University of Bern, Switzerland.

Abstract

Combining data augmentation and active learning can
leverage both approaches’ advantages. (Tran et al. 2019)
select informative samples by an acquisition function and
generate augmented samples from them. However, the acquisition function does not evaluate the potential information gain from augmented samples and the generated data
does not guarantee informativeness. Kim et al. in (Kim et al.
2021) propose Look Ahead Data Augmentation (LADA),
that evaluates the informativeness of potential augmentations and generates informative samples. Thus, augmented
samples provide qualitatively different information from the
base samples. However, LADA is not equally effective for
the multi-label setting. Chest xrays (CXRs) have multiple
disease labels making informative sample selection a challenge since one needs to consider the mutual influence and
similarity of all potential class labels,. Additionally, augmenting such informative samples should ensure appropriate informativeness of the new samples. In this paper we
propose a novel method for multi-label active learning combined with informative sample data augmentation.

Informative sample selection in active learning (AL) helps a
machine learning system attain optimum performance with
minimum labeled samples, thus improving human-in-theloop computer-aided diagnosis systems with limited labeled
data. Data augmentation is highly effective for enlarging
datasets with less labeled data. Combining informative sample selection and data augmentation should leverage their respective advantages and improve performance of AL systems.
We propose a novel approach to combine informative sample
selection and data augmentation for multi-label active learning. Conventional informative sample selection approaches
have mostly focused on the single-label case which do not
perform optimally in the multi-label setting. We improve
upon state-of-the-art multi-label active learning techniques
by representing disease labels as graph nodes, use graph attention transformers (GAT) to learn more effective inter-label
relationships and identify most informative samples. We generate transformations of these informative samples which are
also informative. Experiments on public chest xray datasets
show improved results over state-of-the-art multi-label AL
techniques in terms of classification performance, learning
rates, and robustness. We also perform qualitative analysis to
determine the realism of generated images.

Prior Work
Active Sample Selection: Different informative sample
selection approaches for deep learning based medical image analysis include sample entropy (Zhu and Bento 2017),
model uncertainty (Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani 2017),
Fisher information (Sourati et al. 2019), and clusteringbased sample selection (Zheng et al. 2019). Sample entropy
quantifies it’s difficulty in classification, with higher entropy
characterizing higher sample informativeness. (Wang et al.
2017a) use sample entropy, a least-confidence component,
and margin sampling to select informative samples. (Zhou
et al. 2016) use GANs to synthesize samples close to the
decision boundary, which are then annotated by human experts. (Mayer and Timofte 2018) generate high entropy samples, which are used as a proxy to find the most similar
samples from a pool of real sample candidates to be annotated by experts. The state-of-the-art in active learning is
mostly dominated by methods relying on uncertainty estimations. Uncertainty-based methods identify the most informative samples for which a model is most uncertain. (Yang
et al. 2017) propose a two-step sample selection approach
based on uncertainty estimation, followed by a second selection step based on a maximum set coverage similarity met-

Introduction
Annotating medical images is necessary for state-of-the-art
(SOTA) supervised learning methods, but poses challenges
due to the high expertise and costs involved. Active Learning
(AL) allows an expert to label informative samples which
enable a model to have high performance with minimal labeled samples (i.e., high learning rates). Data augmentation is also effective with few labeled samples and synthetic data is used to improve model generalization (Perez
and Wang 2017). Despite increasing dataset size, conventional data augmentation (flipping, rotating, etc.) does not
add new informative samples to the training set. Recent
works for data augmentation use Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), Spatial Transform Networks (STN) (Jaderberg et al. 2015), Variational
Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013), and Mixup
(Zhang et al. 2017) for synthetic feature generation.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21378

