The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Ghost Noise for Regularizing Deep Neural Networks
Atli Kosson, Dongyang Fan, Martin Jaggi
EPFL, Switzerland
atli.kosson@epfl.ch, dongyang.fan@epfl.ch, martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) is widely used to stabilize the optimization process and improve the test performance of deep
neural networks. The regularization effect of BN depends on
the batch size and explicitly using smaller batch sizes with
Batch Normalization, a method known as Ghost Batch Normalization (GBN), has been found to improve generalization
in many settings. We investigate the effectiveness of GBN by
disentangling the induced “Ghost Noise” from normalization
and quantitatively analyzing the distribution of noise as well
as its impact on model performance. Inspired by our analysis,
we propose a new regularization technique called Ghost Noise
Injection (GNI) that imitates the noise in GBN without incurring the detrimental train-test discrepancy effects of small
batch training. We experimentally show that GNI can provide
a greater generalization benefit than GBN. Ghost Noise Injection can also be beneficial in otherwise non-noisy settings such
as layer-normalized networks, providing additional evidence
of the usefulness of Ghost Noise in Batch Normalization as a
regularizer.

1

Figure 1: Impact of ghost batch size on ResNet-18 accuracy
on CIFAR-100. Mean (solid) and std (shaded) for 3 runs.

Introduction

The adoption of normalization techniques has been a prevailing trend in the field of deep learning (Ioffe and Szegedy
2015; Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016; Wu and He 2018), notably
following the seminal introduction of Batch Normalization
(BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) in 2015. Batch Normalization operates on each feature independently, normalizing it
by subtracting its mean and dividing by its standard deviation.
The mean µ and standard deviation (std) with elements
corresponding to the different features in the input tensor.
During training, these statistics are computed over the batch
dimension, causing the network output for a given sample
to depend on the others in the batch. This cross-sample dependency is undesirable at inference time, as data can arrive
in small correlated batches or even one sample at a time.
Consequently, we utilize population-level statistics during
inference, instead of computing the mean and variance for
individual batches. The population statistics are typically approximated by an exponential moving average of the mean
and variance values observed during the training phase.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13274

The use of different forms of statistics in training and inference can lead to a detrimental train-test discrepancy resulting
in lower test performance. One major difference is that during
training each sample contributes to its normalization statistics,
biasing the result. The smaller the batch size, the greater the
impact of each sample on the statistics, thus a larger bias. We
refer to this effect as the self-dependency of batch normalization. The population statistics used during inference are
identical for all samples and therefore not biased in the same
way. The distribution of normalized activations during testing
can therefore be significantly different than during training,
leading to worse generalization performance. This effect is
studied by Singh and Shrivastava (2019) and Summers and
Dinneen (2020) which propose modifying inference to reduce the train-test discrepancy. The use of correlated samples
in a batch can similarly lead to a bias causing a different form
of train-test discrepancy (Wu and Johnson 2021).
Several alternative methods such as Layer Normalization (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016), Instance Normalization (Huang and Belongie 2017), Group Normalization (Wu
and He 2018), Online Normalization (Chiley et al. 2019),
Batch Renormalization (Ioffe 2017) and Weight Normalization (Salimans and Kingma 2016) have been proposed
to overcome some of the issues with Batch Normalization.
These methods either normalize across other dimensions of
the tensor X, apply normalization to the weights instead of
activations, or make use of the history over prior batches to
augment the effective size of the batch.
Aside from the train-test discrepancy, the dependency of
the batch normalization statistics on the elements in the batch

