The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unifying Decision and Function Queries in Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability
Yu-Wei Fan1 , Jie-Hong R. Jiang1,2
1

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{r11943096, jhjiang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

enforces a single outermost threshold quantification on an
SSAT formula, limiting its expressive power. Inspired by
the counting quantifier in the Counting Hierarchy (Wagner
1986), we introduce a new formalism SSAT(Θ), which enriches SSAT with the threshold quantifier. We prove that
SSAT(Θ) is in the PSPACE complexity class. Remarkably,
while remaining in the same complexity class, the new
formalism subsumes both SSAT and the languages in the
Counting Hierarchy. Therefore, SSAT(Θ) can be powerful
in encoding problems not succinctly expressible before.
To demonstrate its practical applications, we develop an
SSAT(Θ) solver ClauSSat(Θ), based on the state-of-theart SSAT solver ClauSSat (Chen, Huang, and Jiang 2021).
We further provide SSAT(Θ) encodings for probabilistic
model checking and its extension specified in bounded probabilistic computation tree logic (BPCTL). To evaluate the
SSAT(Θ) solver, experiments were conducted to study the
applicability in solving application benchmarks and to investigate the effect of the threshold quantifier on solving
efficiency. We note that since SSAT(Θ) subsumes the languages in the Counting Hierarchy, ClauSSat(Θ) is the
first solver to tackle general counting formulas, while previous work has primarily concentrated on certain restricted
fragments, such as counting formulas with only one (Chou
et al. 2016) or two (Oztok, Choi, and Darwiche 2016) counting quantifiers.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. After
the preliminary background is first provided, we introduce
the new formalism SSAT(Θ) and discuss its properties and
complexity results. Then the extension of ClauSSat for
SSAT(Θ) solving is to be elaborated. The encodings of the
model-checking problem specified in BPCTL and the parameter synthesis problems are further detailed. We then investigate the efficiency of the solver on application benchmarks and the effect of threshold quantifiers on general
SSAT(Θ) instances. Finally, we conclude this work and outline future work.

Stochastic Boolean satisfiability (SSAT) is a natural formalism for optimization under uncertainty. Its decision version implicitly imposes a final threshold quantification on an
SSAT formula. However, the single threshold quantification
restricts the expressive power of SSAT. In this work, we enrich SSAT with an additional threshold quantifier, resulting
in a new formalism SSAT(Θ). The increased expressiveness
allows SSAT(Θ), which remains in the PSPACE complexity
class, to subsume and encode the languages in the counting hierarchy. An SSAT(Θ) solver, ClauSSat(Θ), is developed. Experiments show the applicability of the solver in
uniquely solving complex SSAT(Θ) instances of parameter
synthesis and SSAT extension.

Introduction
Stochastic Boolean satisfiability (SSAT) is a logical formalism, enabling natural characterization for optimizing
decisions under uncertainty (Papadimitriou 1985). Due to
its powerful expressiveness, recent endeavors have been
made in both its efficient solving and potential applications.
There are recent developments of specialized solvers (Lee,
Wang, and Jiang 2017, 2018) designed for specific fragments of SSAT, and general solvers (Majercik and Boots
2005; Chen, Huang, and Jiang 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Fan
and Jiang 2023) that place no restrictions on the SSAT formula. Regarding applications, SSAT has been used in encoding problems, such as contingent planning (Majercik
and Littman 2003), partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs) (Salmon and Poupart 2020), the fairness analysis of machine learning models (Ghosh, Basu, and
Meel 2021), and probabilistic graphical models (Hsieh and
Jiang 2022).
Despite its expressiveness and broad applications, certain limitations are inherent to SSAT. For instance, SSAT
implicitly imposes a linear ordering upon the dependency
sets of existential variables according to the prefix. In (Lee
and Jiang 2021), dependency stochastic Boolean satisfiability (DSSAT) (Lee and Jiang 2021) is formulated to allow
explicit representation of dependency sets of existential variables. In this work, we tackle the limitations of SSAT from
another aspect. Specifically, the decision version of SSAT

Preliminaries
In the sequel, the symbols “⊤” and “⊥” represent Boolean
values TRUE and FALSE, respectively. Boolean connectives
“¬,” “∨,” “∧,” “→,” and “↔” are associated with their conventional meanings. For simplicity, a conjunction ∧ may be
omitted in a Boolean formula. A literal, associated with a

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7995

