The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

IGAMT: Privacy-Preserving Electronic Health Record Synthesization with
Heterogeneity and Irregularity
Wenjie Wang* 1 Pengfei Tang3 , Jian Lou∗2 , Yuanming Shao1 ,
Lance Waller3 , Yi-an Ko3 , Li Xiong3
1
ShanghaiTech University
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
3
Emory University
wangwj1@shanghaitech.edu.cn, pengfei.tang@microsoft.com, jian.lou@zju.edu.cn,
shaoym1@shanghaitech.edu.cn, lwaller@emory.edu, yi-an.ko@emory.edu, lxiong@emory.edu
2

Abstract
Utilizing electronic health records (EHR) for machine
learning-driven clinical research has great potential to enhance outcome predictions and treatment personalization.
Nonetheless, due to privacy and security concerns, the secondary use of EHR data is regulated, constraining researchers’ access to EHR data. Generating synthetic EHR
data with deep learning methods is a viable and promising
approach to mitigate privacy concerns, offering not only a
supplementary resource for downstream applications but also
sidestepping the privacy risks associated with real patient
data. While prior efforts have concentrated on EHR data synthesis, significant challenges persist: addressing the heterogeneity of features including temporal and non-temporal features, structurally missing values, and irregularity of the temporal measures, and ensuring rigorous privacy of the real data
used for model training. Existing works in this domain only
focused on solving one or two aforementioned challenges. In
this work, we propose IGAMT, an innovative framework to
generate privacy-preserved synthetic EHR data that not only
maintains high quality with heterogeneous features, missing
values, and irregular measures but also achieves differential
privacy with enhanced privacy-utility trade-off. Extensive experiments prove that IGAMT significantly outperforms baseline and state-of-the-art models in terms of resemblance to
real data and performance of downstream applications. Ablation studies also prove the effectiveness of the techniques
applied in IGAMT.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of EHR raw data
this goal, synthetic EHR data need to retain the sophisticated
characteristics of the real data because these attributes can
substantially impact the usage of the synthetic data in the
downstream tasks. The specific characteristics of EHR data
are shown in Figure 1 and summarized below:
1. Heterogeneity of features: Each record has both temporal and non-temporal features. Some features are timerelated (blue blocks) such as heart rate, which will be
recorded at each visit. For temporal features, each record
can be viewed as a matrix consisting of multiple visits
(time steps) and each visit contains multi-dimensional
features (Shickel et al. 2017). Some features are nontemporal (not related to time) such as demographic features including gender and race (green blocks).
2. Missing values: EHRs may contain structurally missing
data that correspond to specific clinical scenarios. That
is, certain events or measurements are intentionally omitted or not recorded by clinicians. For example, additional
tests (e.g., glucose levels) will not be measured (i.e., become missing values) if the patient’s vital signs (e.g.,
blood pressure) are normal during a clinical visit. The
illustration of such missing value is represented as “/” in
Figure 1) (Bang, Wang, and Yang 2020).
3. Irregularity of features: The temporal features may be
measured in different frequencies, for instance, some features are measured on an hourly time scale while others
are on a monthly time scale (Shickel et al. 2017; Bang,
Wang, and Yang 2020).

Introduction

The availability of electronic health records (EHR) not only
improves patient care but also boosts the advancement of
medical research. However, due to privacy and security concerns, secondary use of EHR data for research purposes is
always regulated, thus constraining researchers’ access to
EHR data (Choi et al. 2017).
A practical and promising solution to mitigate the privacy
concern is to generate synthetic EHR data that are realistic
for machine learning tasks, offering not only a supplementary resource for downstream applications but also avoiding
the privacy risks associated with real patient data. To achieve
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15634

