The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TTTS: Tree Test Time Simulation for Enhancing Decision Tree Robustness against
Adversarial Examples
Seffi Cohen, Ofir Arbili, Yisroel Mirsky, Lior Rokach
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
seffi@post.bgu.ac.il, arbili@post.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

all of these solutions modify the model or the training process. This is a disadvantage for several reasons: (1) changing model parameters or the values of the node’s threshold
in case of DT, often harm a model’s performance on clean
data (Andriushchenko and Hein 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Vos
and Verwer 2021), (2) these defences cannot be applied to
deployed models, and (3) some of these methods cannot be
applied to every kind of DT which limits a developer’s options. This holds particular significance for mission-critical
systems. For example, during the Covid-19 pandemic, a DTbased model called pangoLEARN (Turakhia et al. 2021),
was used by healthcare professionals and policymakers for
timely and accurate lineage assignment of SARS-CoV-2
genomes. A decision tree was chosen due to its competitive
predictive performance and hierarchical structure, closely
resembling a phylogenetic tree. Nonetheless, employing a
DT-based model introduces a plausible cyber-bioterrorism
vulnerability (Muthuppalaniappan and Stevenson 2021). In
this scenario, we would like to make the model robust to potential cyber-bioterrorism attacks while preserving its structure and parameters. The latter ensures the model maintains
its competitive predictive performance and explainability.
Existing methods that revise the model can lead to inaccurate lineage assignment of SARS-CoV-2 genomes, which
may have severe consequences for healthcare professionals
and policymakers.
In this work, we introduce a novel method, termed Tree
Test Time Simulation (TTTS), targeted at enhancing the robustness of trained models without necessitating any alterations to the input data or the values of the node’s threshold
in the tree. TTTS exhibits the capacity to augment both the
robustness and performance of DT on adversarial examples
as well as on clean data, all the while preserving the model’s
inherent structure and training.
TTTS fundamentally integrates Monte Carlo Simulations
into DT to effectively enhance test data, thereby improving
the accuracy of predictions. For each test instance, the algorithm predominantly adheres to the correct branch, but intermittently deviates to an alternate branch based on a probabilistic measure. This probabilistic measure is determined
by one of five unique strategies we propose, each catering to
specific challenges intrinsic to DT predictions. By embedding simple statistical measures, TTTS ensures a minimal
degree of plausibility between the decision at each level of

Decision trees are widely used for addressing learning tasks
involving tabular data. Yet, they are susceptible to adversarial attacks. In this paper, we present Tree Test Time Simulation (TTTS), a novel inference-time methodology that incorporates Monte Carlo simulations into decision trees to enhance their robustness. TTTS introduces a probabilistic modification to the decision path, without altering the underlying
tree structure. Our comprehensive empirical analysis of 50
datasets yields promising results. Without the presence of any
attacks, TTTS has successfully improved model performance
from an AUC of 0.714 to 0.773. Under the challenging conditions of white-box attacks, TTTS demonstrated its robustness
by boosting performance from an AUC of 0.337 to 0.680.
Even when subjected to black-box attacks, TTTS maintains
high accuracy and enhances the model’s performance from an
AUC of 0.628 to 0.719. Compared to defenses such as Feature Squeezing, TTTS proves to be much more effective. We
also found that TTTS exhibits similar robustness in decision
forest settings across different attacks.

Introduction
Decision Tree (DT) models play a crucial role in various
fields due to their transparency, interpretability, and ability
to handle complex decision-making processes (Costa and
Pedreira 2022). They provide intuitive insights into how
a model arrives at its conclusions, making them valuable
for both analysis and application. However, DT models are
susceptible to adversarial examples (Vos and Verwer 2021;
Chen et al. 2019), where small, carefully crafted perturbations can lead to significant misclassifications. Moreover,
DT models can be exploited in both white-box and blackbox settings where the attacker either has full knowledge or
no knowledge of the models parameters (Chen et al. 2019).
These attacks compromise the performance and reliability of
the models, posing substantial risks (Karchmer 2023), underscoring the need for enhanced robustness techniques to
ensure their reliable performance in real-world scenarios.
Although many works have suggested ways for making
DT models robust against adversarial attacks (Vos and Verwer 2022b; Ranzato and Zanella 2021; Calzavara et al. 2020;
Yang et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2022; Vos and Verwer 2022a)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20993

