The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Exercise in Tournament Design: When Some Matches Must Be Scheduled
Sushmita Gupta1 , Ramanujan Sridharan2 , Peter Strulo2
1

The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, HBNI, India
2
University of Warwick, UK
sushmita.gupta@gmail.com, r.maadapuzhi-sridharan@warwick.ac.uk, peter.strulo@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract

and Shoham 2009) where each “match” is a comparison of
votes of two candidates and the candidate with more votes
wins and moves on.
A major question in the study of SE tournament design
is the T OURNAMENT F IXING Problem (TF): Can a designer
efficiently find a bracket that maximizes the likelihood (or
ensures, in the case of the deterministic model) that a player
of their choice wins the tournament? However, there are
other natural objectives around SE tournament design besides favoring a particular player and that is the focus of this
paper. Great rivalries generate great entertainment. Imagine
a sports tournament that features marquee matches marked
by factors such as historic rivalries, contemporaneous news
events, geographic proximity or even personal rivalries between members of the opposing teams. These are some of
the most widely known and talked about rivalries in the
world of sports that greatly enhanced the notoriety and visibility of the sport and thereby achieved great financial success, publicity and relevancy for all the stake holders, be
it the organizers, the sponsors, not to mention the participants. From the competition design perspective, that considerations such as revenue, viewer engagement, and relevance
should be at the forefront is straightforward.
Thus, scheduling especially attractive matches is a rational tournament design imperative, motivating our algorithmic study of finding a bracket that aims to ensure that a given
set of demand matches are played in the SE tournament. One
can view our model of scheduling a set of demanded games
in this setting to be a special case of revenue maximization
with unit revenue given to each demand match and zero to
all others. Setting the target revenue to be equal to the number of demand matches implies that achieving the target revenue is the same as scheduling all the demand matches. A
more general problem was studied by (Lang et al. 2007),
in the context of sequential majority voting along binary
trees, except they allow arbitrary costs for the edges and
the goal is to achieve minimum possible cost in the final
SE tournament. They showed this problem to be NP-hard.
We also note that our paper is naturally aligned with investigations into the relationship between round-robin and SE
tournaments, e.g., (Stanton and Vassilevska Williams 2011).
Specifically, while every demand match obviously occurs in
a round-robin tournament, how efficiently could one ensure
the same in an SE tournament? This is our focus.

Single-elimination (SE) tournaments are a popular format
used in competitive environments and decision making. Algorithms for SE tournament manipulation have been an active
topic of research in recent years. In this paper, we initiate the
algorithmic study of a novel variant of SE tournament manipulation that aims to model the fact that certain matchups
are highly desired in a sporting context, incentivizing an organizer to manipulate the bracket to make such matchups
take place. We obtain both hardness and tractability results.
We show that while the problem of computing a bracket enforcing a given set of matches in an SE tournament is NPhard, there are natural restrictions that lead to polynomialtime solvability. In particular, we show polynomial-time solvability if there is a linear ordering on the ability of players
with only a constant number of exceptions where a player
with lower ability beats a player with higher ability.

Introduction
There is a rich history of work on the algorithmics of designing Single Elimination (SE) or knockout tournaments as
they are a format of competition employed in varied scenarios such as sports, elections and different forms of decision
making (Tullock 1980; Horen and Riezman 1985; Rosen
1986; Laslier 1997; Connolly and Rendleman 2011). Based
on an initial bracket (a permutation of the players, also called
a seeding), it proceeds in multiple rounds, culminating in a
single winner. In each round, all players that have not yet lost
a match are paired up to play the next set of matches. Losers
exit and winners proceed to the next round, until only one
remains, the winner of the tournament. In general, the tournament designer is assumed to be given probabilities pij expressing the likelihood that player i beats player j. In this
paper, we focus on the deterministic model, i.e., when these
probabilities are 0 or 1. This model has already been the subject of numerous papers in the last few years. Besides being
independently interesting from a structural and algorithmic
perspective as shown by (Vassilevska Williams 2010; Aziz
et al. 2014; Ramanujan and Szeider 2017; Gupta et al. 2018,
2019; Manurangsi and Suksompong 2023; Zehavi 2023), the
deterministic model naturally captures sequential majority
elections along binary trees (Lang et al. 2007; Vu, Altman,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9749

