The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NaMa: Neighbor-Aware Multi-Modal Adaptive Learning for Prostate Tumor
Segmentation on Anisotropic MR Images
Runqi Meng1 , Xiao Zhang2,1 , Shijie Huang1 , Yuning Gu1 , Guiqin Liu5 , Guangyu Wu5 , Nizhuan
Wang1 , Kaicong Sun1 , Dinggang Shen1,3,4 *
1

School of Biomedical Engineering & State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices, ShanghaiTech
University
2
School of Information Science and Technology, Northwest University
3
Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd.
4
Shanghai Clinical Research and Trial Center
5
Department of Radiology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Abstract
Accurate segmentation of prostate tumors from multimodal magnetic resonance (MR) images is crucial for
diagnosis and treatment of prostate cancer. However,
the robustness of existing segmentation methods is limited, mainly because these methods 1) fail to adaptively
assess subject-specific information of each MR modality for accurate tumor delineation, and 2) lack effective
utilization of inter-slice information across thick slices
in MR images to segment tumor as a whole 3D volume. In this work, we propose a two-stage neighboraware multi-modal adaptive learning network (NaMa)
for accurate prostate tumor segmentation from multimodal anisotropic MR images. In particular, in the
first stage, we apply subject-specific multi-modal fusion in each slice by developing a novel modalityinformativeness adaptive learning (MIAL) module for
selecting and adaptively fusing informative representation of each modality based on inter-modality correlations. In the second stage, we exploit inter-slice feature correlations to derive volumetric tumor segmentation. Specifically, we first use a Unet variant with sequence layers to coarsely capture slice relationship at a
global scale, and further generate an activation map for
each slice. Then, we introduce an activation mapping
guidance (AMG) module to refine slice-wise representation (via information from adjacent slices) for consistent tumor segmentation across neighboring slices. Besides, during the network training, we further apply a
random mask strategy to each MR modality to improve
feature representation efficiency. Experiments on both
in-house and public (PICAI) multi-modal prostate tumor datasets show that our proposed NaMa performs
better than state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Characteristics of the multi-modal MR images
used for prostate tumor segmentation. The red contours and
masks represent the ground truth of the prostate tumor. (a)
Some modalities may provide ineffective features, i.e., DWI
image of one case has inhomogeneous intensities within the
tumor (indicated by the blue arrow), which causes the undersegmentation issue (shown by yellow contour). (b) The MR
images have high in-plane image resolution (axial view) and
low through-plane resolution (vertical axis in sagittal and
coronal views). (c) The locat ions of tumor across adjacent
slices are inter-related.

intervention (Velonas et al. 2013; Boettcher et al. 2019).
Clinical screening of PCa often uses multi-modal magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), including T2-weighted images
(T2WIs), diffusion-weighted images (DWIs), and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps (derived from DWIs)
(Tanimoto et al. 2007; Cornud et al. 2012). If a tumor is detected in the multi-modal MR images, its segmentation from
surrounding normal tissues is required for cancer classification and treatment planning.
However, manual segmentation of tumors is timeconsuming, and segmentation results are highly dependent
on the expertise of the radiologists. Therefore, great amount

Introduction
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the leading cause of cancer-related
death in men worldwide, and early detection of PCa is crucial for enhancing survival rates and providing appropriate
* Corresponding author: Dinggang Shen (Dinggang.Shen@
gmail.com).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4198

