The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedNS: A Fast Sketching Newton-Type Algorithm for Federated Learning
Jian Li1 , Yong Liu2 * , Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
lijian9026@iie.ac.cn, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn, wangweiping@iie.ac.cn
2

slow, i.e., a sublinear converge rate O(1/t), where t is the
communication rounds.
In the traditional centralized learning, with some mild
conditions, second-order optimal algorithms (Boyd, Boyd,
and Vandenberghe 2004; Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2018),
for example (quasi) Newton’s methods, can achieve at least
a linear convergence rate. The compute of inverse Hessian is time consuming, and thus many classic approximate Newton’s methods are proposed, including BFGS
(Broyden 1970), L-BFGS (Liu and Nocedal 1989), inexact Newton (Dembo, Eisenstat, and Steihaug 1982), GaussNewton (Schraudolph 2002) and Newton sketch (Pilanci and
Wainwright 2017). However, if we directly apply Newton’s
method to federated learning, the communication complexity of sharing local Hessian matrices is overwhelming.
Indeed, first-order algorithms characterize low communication burdens but slow convergence rates, while Newton’s methods lead to fast convergence rates but with high
communication complexity. To take advantage of both firstorder and second-order algorithms, we propose a federated Newton sketch method, named FedNS, which shares
both first-order and second-order information across devices, i.e., local gradients and sketched square-root Hessian. Using line search strategy and adaptive learning rates,
we devise a dimension-efficient approach FedNDES. We
then study the convergence properties for the proposed algorithms. We conclude with experiments on publicly available
datasets that complement our theoretical results, exhibiting
both computational and statistical benefits. We leave proofs
in the appendix1 . We summarize our contributions as below:
1) On the algorithmic front. We propose two fast
second-order federated algorithms, which improve the approximation of the centralized Newton’s method while the
communication costs are favorable due to the small sketch
size. Specifically, using line search and adaptive step-sizes
in Algorithm 2, the sketch size can be reduced to the effective dimension of the Hessian matrix.
2) On the statistical front. Drawing upon the established
outcomes from the centralized sketching Newton literature
(Pilanci and Wainwright 2017; Lacotte, Wang, and Pilanci
2021), we furnish convergence analysis for two federated

Abstract
Recent Newton-type federated learning algorithms have
demonstrated linear convergence with respect to the communication rounds. However, communicating Hessian matrices is often unfeasible due to their quadratic communication complexity. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to tackle this issue while still achieving fast convergence rates. Our proposed method, named as Federated Newton Sketch methods (FedNS), approximates the centralized
Newton’s method by communicating the sketched squareroot Hessian instead of the exact Hessian. To enhance communication efficiency, we reduce the sketch size to match the
effective dimension of the Hessian matrix. We provide convergence analysis based on statistical learning for the federated Newton sketch approaches. Specifically, our approaches
reach super-linear convergence rates w.r.t. the communication
rounds for the first time. We validate the effectiveness of our
algorithms through various experiments, which coincide with
our theoretical findings.

Introduction
Due to the huge potential in terms of privacy protection
and reducing computational costs, Federated Learning (FL)
(Konečnỳ et al. 2016; McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020a;
Wei et al. 2021, 2022; Li, Liu, and Wang 2024) becomes a
promising framework for handling large-scale tasks. In federated learning, a key problem is to achieve a tradeoff between the convergence rate and the communication burdens.
First-order optimization algorithms have achieved great
success in federated learning, including FedAvg (LocalSGD) (McMahan et al. 2017) and FedProx (Li et al.
2020a). These methods communicate the first-order information rather than the data across local machines, which
protect the privacy training data and allow the data heterogeneity to some extent. Despite recent efforts and progress
on the convergence analysis (Li et al. 2020b,c; Karimireddy
et al. 2020; Pathak and Wainwright 2020; Glasgow, Yuan,
and Ma 2022) and the generalization analysis (Mohri, Sivek,
and Suresh 2019; Li, Liu, and Wang 2023b,a; Su, Xu, and
Yang 2021; Yuan et al. 2022) of FedAvg and FedProx, the
convergence rate of first-order federated algorithms is still
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Full version: https://lijian.ac.cn/files/2024/FedNS.pdf
Code: https://github.com/superlj666/FedNS

13509

