The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Intrinsic Phase-Preserving Networks for Depth Super Resolution
Xuanhong Chen1,2 * , Hang Wang3∗ , Jialiang Chen1,2 , Kairui Feng4 , Jinfan Liu1 , Xiaohang Wang1 ,
Weimin Zhang1,2 , Bingbing Ni1,2 †
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
USC-SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry
3
Huawei
4
National Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems, Tongji University
{chen19910528, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn
Intrinsic Phase

Abstract

Depth GT

RGB Guidance

Depth map super-resolution (DSR) plays an indispensable
role in 3D vision. We discover an non-trivial spectral phenomenon: the components of high-resolution (HR) and lowresolution (LR) depth maps manifest the same intrinsic phase,
and the spectral phase of RGB is a superset of them, which
suggests that a phase-aware filter can assist in the precise
use of RGB cues. Motivated by this, we propose an intrinsic phase-preserving DSR paradigm, named IPPNet, to fully
exploit inter-modality collaboration in a mutually guided
way. In a nutshell, a novel Phase-Preserving Filtering Module (PPFM) is developed to generate dynamic phase-aware
filters according to the LR depth flow to filter out erroneous noisy components contained in RGB and then conduct depth enhancement via the modulation of the phasepreserved RGB signal. By stacking multiple PPFM blocks,
the proposed IPPNet is capable of reaching a highly competitive restoration performance. Extensive experiments on
various benchmark datasets, e.g., NYU v2, RGB-D-D, reach
SOTA performance and also well demonstrate the validity of
the proposed phase-preserving scheme. Code: https://github.
com/neuralchen/IPPNet/.

Unwanted Phase

0°

Depth LR

90°

45° 90°

135°

180°

0°
180°
270°

Image space

Magnitude spectrum

Power spectrum

Figure 1: Observing the spectrum maps, we find that depth
maps discard specific-phase signals in RGB images that correspond to texture patterns with specific gradients. Thus, direct utilization of RGB information to guide the depth map
upsampling will bring undesirable artifacts. Inspired by this,
we propose a phase preserving filtering scheme to selectively preserve desired geometric patterns while pruning erroneous components.

Introduction
As a necessary means of environmental perception, depth
sensors are widely equipped in edge devices (e.g., mobile
phones, VR/AR glasses), enabling new applications such as
visual SLAM and gesture recognition. Constrained by cost
and sensor capability, the acquired depth map is usually of
low-resolution (LR) (e.g., Apple: 24 × 24, Huawei: 240 ×
180), seriously hindering its application. As such, DSR has
been extensively studied (Li et al. 2018; Xie, Feris, and Sun
2016; Riegler, Rüther, and Bischof 2016; Song, Dai, and Qin
2019; Sun et al. 2021) as one of the promising solutions.
Generally, the depth map is usually associated with a highresolution (HR) color image (typically, 1920 × 1080) with
nearly-aligned content, motivating the usage of RGB images
for recovering the HR depth map, i.e., RGB guided DSR (Li
et al. 2019; Kim, Ponce, and Ham 2021; Tang, Chen, and
Zeng 2021; He et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023b) .

From the perspective of information utilization, existing
DSR frameworks can be classified into two categories: single depth map super-resolution (SDSR) and RGB-guided
depth map super-resolution (GDSR). Insufficient available
information (i.e., depth map only) makes SDSR lag behind in performance, which results in SDSR being rarely
adopted. In contrast, GDSR methods focus on exploring the
full utilization of the corresponding RGB images, including two types of cooperative guidance schemes, i.e., joint
filtering (Su et al. 2019; Kim, Ponce, and Ham 2021), and
progressive feature aggregation (He et al. 2021; Zhong et al.
2022; Ye et al. 2020). These approaches usually use RGB information to strengthen the features of depth map unidirectionally and obtain promising performance gain; however,
unrestricted RGB information often brings over-texture arti-

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1210

