The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Shuffled Deep Regression
Masahiro Kohjima
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation
1-1 Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847, Japan
masahiro.kohjima.ev@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

that iteratively updates latent variables and the parameters
of neural networks, based on the EM algorithm (Dempster,
Laird, and Rubin 1977). SSEM adopts sparse EM (Neal
and Hinton 1998) and online EM (Cappé and Moulines
2009)-like approaches to naturally handle the huge spaces
of discrete latent variables and supports combination with
stochastic gradient algorithms (such as Adam) to update
neural network parameters. We also show that SSEM is related to the iterative reweighted least squares (IRLS) (Rubin
2004; Bishop 2006). Experiments conducted on benchmark
datasets confirm the effectiveness of the proposals.
The contributions of this paper are summarized below:

Shuffled regression is the problem of learning regression
models from shuffled data that consists of a set of input features and a set of target outputs where the correspondence between the input and output is unknown. This study proposes
a new deep learning method for shuffled regression called
Shuffled Deep Regression (SDR). We derive the sparse and
stochastic variant of the Expectation-Maximization algorithm
for SDR that iteratively updates discrete latent variables and
the parameters of neural networks. The effectiveness of the
proposal is confirmed by benchmark data experiments.

Introduction

• We propose a new deep learning-based method for shuffled regression called shuffled deep regression (SDR).
• We develop the sparse and stochastic variant of EM algorithm (SSEM) that can naturally handle the huge space
of discrete latent variables and can support the use of
stochastic gradient-based algorithms.
• We confirm the effectiveness of the proposed method by
numerical experiments on benchmark data.

Due to the difficulties of comprehensive data collection
such as privacy-aware or non-centralized data collection, the
data to be analyzed are often given by the form of shuffled
data where the correspondence between input (feature vector) and output (target value) is unknown (Carpentier and
Schlüter 2016; Hsu, Shi, and Sun 2017; Pananjady, Wainwright, and Courtade 2017; Abid and Zou 2018). Since the
true target value for each input is unknown, shuffled data
can be collected even if the outputs represent sensitive information such as annual income while protecting privacy.
To learn regression models from shuffled data, it is impossible to apply standard regression methods using paired data
whose correspondence between input and output is known.
Shuffled regression (SR) is the problem of estimating a
model from shuffled data and arises in domains such as data
integration, computer vision, and sensor networks, see e.g.,
(Pananjady, Wainwright, and Courtade 2017). In the literature of SR, existing studies focus on the learning of linear
models (Carpentier and Schlüter 2016; Hsu, Shi, and Sun
2017; Abid and Zou 2018; Fang and Li 2023), and the learning of deep models has not been well investigated. Considering the known benefits of deep learning (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016), the use of deep learning must contribute to improving the performance of solving SR.
This study proposes a new deep learning-based method
for shuffled regression called Shuffled Deep Regression (SDR). We derive a sparse stochastic expectationmaximization (SSEM) algorithm for parameter estimation

Related Work
Shuffled regression (SR) (Pananjady, Wainwright, and Courtade 2017; Abid and Zou 2018) which is also called
“regression without correspondence” (Hsu, Shi, and Sun
2017), “uncoupled regression” (Xu et al. 2019), and “unlabeled sensing” (Unnikrishnan, Haghighatshoar, and Vetterli 2018), arises in e.g., the pose and correspondence estimation (David et al. 2004), flow cytometry for measuring
chemical characteristics of cells (Abid and Zou 2018), and
linkage of health records (Shi, Li, and Cai 2021). So SR has
been actively studied both theoretically and for application.
Theoretical studies have clarified various difficulties of
SR. For instance, recovering the correspondence between
input and output is NP-hard in general (Pananjady, Wainwright, and Courtade 2017). (Unnikrishnan, Haghighatshoar, and Vetterli 2018) also explored the conditions for
obtaining unique solutions. Developing parameter estimation algorithms is a notable topic as well; (Abid and Zou
2018) developed an expectation-maximization (EM) based
algorithm similar to our study, while (Slawski, Rahmani,
and Li 2020) elucidated the connection to robust subspace
recovery problem. However, these existing studies mainly

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13238

