The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Choice of Noninformative Priors for Thompson Sampling
in Multiparameter Bandit Models
Jongyeong Lee1, 2 * , Chao-Kai Chiang1 , Masashi Sugiyama2, 1
1

The University of Tokyo
2
RIKEN AIP
lee@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, chaokai@edu.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

on the history of their choices and corresponding rewards.
Therefore, the MAB problem is one of the elementary models that exemplify the tradeoff between the exploration to
learn parameters and the exploitation of knowledge to accumulate rewards.
For this problem, we can evaluate the performance of an
agent’s policy by the regret defined as the difference between maximum rewards and the rewards obtained from the
policy since minimizing the expected regret is equivalent to
maximizing expected rewards. Lai and Robbins (1985) provided an asymptotic problem-dependent lower bound on the
expected regret that captures the optimal problem-dependent
performance, which was generalized by Burnetas and Katehakis (1996). Note that their regret bounds are on the frequentist’s view, where the parameters are regarded as fixed
quantities, and we say a policy matching this lower bound to
be asymptotically optimal.
Out of the various policies in the bandit literature, this
paper focuses on the asymptotic optimality of Thompson sampling (TS) due to its outstanding empirical performance (Chapelle and Li 2011). TS is a randomized Bayesian
policy that maintains a posterior distribution over the unknown parameters (Thompson 1933). Therefore, the choice
of the priors would be important since TS plays an arm according to the posterior probability of being the best arm.
When there is no prior knowledge of the parameters, it is reasonable to utilize noninformative priors based on the interpretation initially proposed by Kass and Wasserman (1996)
and subsequently discussed by Robert (2007, Section 3.5):
Noninformative priors should be taken as default priors, upon which everyone could fall back when the
prior information is missing.
In this study, we translate this description to the usefulness of TS with noninformative priors as a starting point
for bandit problems where no prior knowledge is available.
One naive choice would be the uniform prior that assigns
equal probability to all possible values over the parameter
space (Laplace 1820), which obviously represents the ignorance of the parameters and can be defined for any model.
However, as pointed out in literature (Datta and Ghosh
1996), uniform priors can vary depending on the parameterization of the distribution, which means that when the same
distribution is modeled by different parameters, the resulting
posterior distributions may also be different. Robert (2007)

Thompson sampling (TS) has been known for its outstanding empirical performance supported by theoretical guarantees across various reward models in the classical stochastic
multi-armed bandit problems. Nonetheless, its optimality is
often restricted to specific priors due to the common observation that TS is fairly insensitive to the choice of the prior
when it comes to asymptotic regret bounds. However, when
the model contains multiple parameters, the optimality of TS
highly depends on the choice of priors, which casts doubt on
the generalizability of previous findings to other models. To
address this gap, this study explores the impact of selecting
noninformative priors, offering insights into the performance
of TS when dealing with new models that lack theoretical
understanding. We first extend the regret analysis of TS to
the model of uniform distributions with unknown supports,
which would be the simplest non-regular model. Our findings
reveal that changing noninformative priors can significantly
affect the expected regret, aligning with previously known
results in other multiparameter bandit models. Although the
uniform prior is shown to be optimal, we highlight the inherent limitation of its optimality, which is limited to specific parameterizations and emphasizes the significance of the invariance property of priors. In light of this limitation, we propose
a slightly modified TS-based policy, called TS with Truncation (TS-T), which can achieve the asymptotic optimality for
the Gaussian models and the uniform models by using the
reference prior and the Jeffreys prior that are invariant under
one-to-one reparameterizations. This policy provides an alternative approach to achieving optimality by employing finetuned truncation, which would be much easier than hunting
for optimal priors in practice.

Introduction
In the classical parametric stochastic multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problems, an agent plays an arm at every round.
In each round, the agent observes a reward generated from
the distribution associated with the played arm, whose functional form is known, but the specific values of parameters
are unknown. Since the agent observes a reward only from
the played arm and is not aware of the true parameters, they
have to choose an arm carefully to maximize rewards based
* JL is now affiliated with Seoul National University
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13383

