The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continuous-Time Graph Representation with Sequential Survival Process
Abdulkadir Çelikkanat, Nikolaos Nakis, Morten Mørup
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
abce@dtu.dk, nnak@dtu.dk, mmor@dtu.dk

Abstract

et al. 2020). However, their primary emphasis has been
on static networks. The early works relied either on random walks (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Grover and
Leskovec 2016; Tang et al. 2015) or matrix factorization
techniques (Qiu et al. 2018, 2019). In recent years, Graph
Neural Network (GNN) architectures have become a prominent way to address network embedding problems (Wu et al.
2021), and a plethora of methods have also been developed
to address a variety of network types, such as signed networks (Li et al. 2020; Nakis et al. 2023) and knowledge
graphs (Dai et al. 2020), or to serve diverse purposes like
encoding the hierarchical structure of networks in learning
node embeddings (Bhowmick et al. 2020; Nakis et al. 2022).

Over the past two decades, there has been a tremendous increase in the growth of representation learning methods for
graphs, with numerous applications across various fields, including bioinformatics, chemistry, and the social sciences.
However, current dynamic network approaches focus on
discrete-time networks or treat links in continuous-time networks as instantaneous events. Therefore, these approaches
have limitations in capturing the persistence or absence of
links that continuously emerge and disappear over time for
particular durations. To address this, we propose a novel
stochastic process relying on survival functions to model the
durations of links and their absences over time. This forms
a generic new likelihood specification explicitly accounting
for intermittent edge-persistent networks, namely G RA S2 P:
Graph Representation with Sequential Survival Process. We
apply the developed framework to a recent continuous time
dynamic latent distance model characterizing network dynamics in terms of a sequence of piecewise linear movements of nodes in latent space. We quantitatively assess the
developed framework in various downstream tasks, such as
link prediction and network completion, demonstrating that
the developed modeling framework accounting for link persistence and absence well tracks the intrinsic trajectories of
nodes in a latent space and captures the underlying characteristics of evolving network structure.

1

Lately, there has been a growing interest in modeling and
learning latent representations of temporal networks, encompassing the transient nature of node interactions (Xue
et al. 2022). The evolving focus seeks to unveil a richer understanding of node interactions throughout time, accounting for relationships’ complex and evolving dynamics. Importantly, dynamic network modeling can thereby reveal
intricate patterns within network structures that static approaches cannot adequately address. Initially, these dynamic
modeling approaches focused on discrete time networks
(Sarkar and Moore 2006; Ishiguro et al. 2010; Heaukulani and Ghahramani 2013; Herlau, Mørup, and Schmidt
2013; Yang et al. 2021). However, in recent years, substantial attention has also been devoted to the modeling of
continuous-time networks. Prominent works have utilized
Poisson (Fan et al. 2021; Trivedi et al. 2019; Celikkanat,
Nakis, and Mørup 2022) and Hawkes processes (Hawkes
1971b,a; Blundell, Beck, and Heller 2012; Arastuie, Paul,
and Xu 2020; Delattre, Fournier, and Hoffmann 2016; Zuo
et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2022; Yang, Rao, and
Neville 2017) in order to define principled learning procedures under continuous-time network likelihoods of eventbased data. Contrary to the previous studies, which work on
a network block level, the HTNE (Zuo et al. 2018) extends
the Hawkes process modeling to account for node-level embeddings. Furthermore, the GNN extensions for continuoustime dynamic networks, TGN (Rossi et al. 2020), and the
temporal-point process of M2 DNE (Lu et al. 2019) use
a case-control approach optimizing a binary cross-entropy
loss. In particular, M2 DNE takes into account both pairwise
interactions at the micro level and broader network-wide dy-

Introduction

In diverse fields spanning physical and social sciences, entities ranging from minuscule scales like microorganisms and
proteins to larger scales such as humans to scales of celestial
objects like planets and galaxies always exert influence upon
and interact with one another. These evolving and intricate
interconnections inherently translate into networks, providing a versatile framework to encapsulate the subtle interplay
of relationships. In this regard, networks (or graphs) have
become essential for investigating and comprehending the
intricate dynamics of these complex systems evolving over
time (Newman 2003).
Representation learning models on graphs have gained
popularity due to their ability to effectively extract knowledge from networks and achieve various objectives like predicting linkage and node properties (Hamilton 2020; Zhang
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11177

