The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning by Erasing: Conditional Entropy Based Transferable
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Meng Xing1,3 , Zhiyong Feng1 , Yong Su2 , Changjae Oh3
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Tianjin Normal University
3
Centre for Intelligent Sensing, Queen Mary University of London
{xingmeng, zyfeng, suyong}@tju.edu.cn, c.oh@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
Detecting Out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs is crucial to deploying machine learning models to the real world safely.
However, existing OOD detection methods require an indistribution (ID) dataset to retrain the models. In this paper, we propose a Deep Generative Models (DGMs) based
transferable OOD detection that does not require retraining on the new ID dataset. We first establish and substantiate two hypotheses on DGMs: DGMs are prone to learn
low-level features rather than high-level semantic information; the lower bound of DGM’s log-likelihoods is tied to the
conditional entropy between the model input and target output. Drawing on the aforementioned hypotheses, we present
an innovative image-erasing strategy, which is designed to
create distinct conditional entropy distributions for each ID
dataset. By training a DGM on a complex dataset with the
proposed image-erasing strategy, the DGM could capture the
discrepancy of conditional entropy distribution for varying
ID datasets, without re-training. We validate the proposed
method on the five datasets and show that, without retraining,
our method achieves comparable performance to the stateof-the-art group-based OOD detection methods. The project
codes will be open-sourced on our project website.

CI→SV (0.85 / 24dB)

SV→CI (0.23 / 10dB)

Fa→MN (0.63 / 16dB)

MN→Fa (0.26 / 9dB)

Figure 1: Original images (top row) and their reconstruction results (bottom row) by a pre-trained DGM. The model
pre-trained on CI (CIFAR10) / Fa (FashionMNIST) can reconstruct SV (SVHN) / MN (MNIST) samples well, but not
vice versa. Reconstruction performances on the test set of
the target datasets are evaluated with (SSIM↑ / PSNR↑).
2018; Huang and Li 2021), and metric learning (Lee et al.
2018b; Zaeemzadeh et al. 2021; Ming et al. 2023). Since
it is time-consuming and laborious to obtain labeled data
in real scenarios, as an alternative, Deep Generative Models (DGMs) have been used to capture the sample distribution of In-Distribution (ID) datasets (Serrà et al. 2020).
However, most DGMs-based methods focus on elaborating
architectures (Ren et al. 2019; Serrà et al. 2020), designing
loss functions (Xiao, Yan, and Amit 2020) or statistical models (Zhang et al. 2020; Jiang, Sun, and Yu 2022), targeting
the specific feature representation or data distribution of ID
samples (Sun et al. 2023), i.e., need retraining to adapt to
the normal pattern of the new ID datasets. This motivates
the following unexplored question: How can we make OOD
detection transferable across new ID datasets?
In this paper, we aim to achieve transferable OOD detection based on the following two key hypotheses: 1)
The DGMs are prone to learn low-level features, rather
than semantic information (Kirichenko, Izmailov, and Wilson 2020). Following the experimental setup in (Xiao, Yan,
and Amit 2020), we use the Variational Auto-Encoder to reconstruct the input image and show some results comparisons in Figure 1. Figure 1 demonstrates that a DGM pretrained on a complex dataset, which includes diverse semantic categories and a complex image texture, can cap-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their potential in solving various safety-related computer vision
tasks (Wang, Shi, and Yeung 2016), such as autonomous
driving (Casas, Sadat, and Urtasun 2021) and healthcare
(Kim et al. 2021). However, DNNs tend to yield confident
but incorrect predictions for the distribution-mismatched examples (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Sensoy, Kaplan,
and Kandemir 2018; Shekhovtsov and Flach 2019), and results in serious consequences, e.g., accidents by autonomous
vehicles (Times 2018) and incorrect diagnosis in healthcare
(BBC 2020). Therefore, determining whether inputs are outof-distribution (OOD) is an important task to safely deploy
machine learning models to the real world.
OOD detection can be performed using labeled data by
utilizing output characteristics (Hsu et al. 2020), training
dynamics (Huang et al. 2021), adversarial training (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Bevandic et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6261

