The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VLN-VIDEO: Utilizing Driving Videos for Outdoor Vision-and-Language
Navigation
Jialu Li1,2 * , Aishwarya Padmakumar2 , Gaurav Sukhatme2 , Mohit Bansal1
1

University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
2
Amazon Alexa AI
{jialuli, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu, {padmakua, sukhatme}@amazon.com

Abstract

ity. This annotation process is expensive and time consuming, which makes it hard to collect a large dataset for VLN.
Many methods have been proposed to solve the data
scarcity problem in VLN. For indoor VLN, several works
leverage pre-trained multi-modal representations from large
datasets such as BookCorpus (Zhu et al. 2015) for natural language and Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al. 2018)
for images, and further enhance the agent with specific domain knowledge by pre-training on an in-domain navigation
dataset (Hao et al. 2020; Majumdar et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021; Qiao et al. 2022), sometimes enhanced with additional
out of domain images (Guhur et al. 2021; Li, Tan, and Bansal
2022; Liu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b). Other works perform multimodal augmentation by training a speaker model
to generate synthetic navigation instructions for unlabeled
trajectories (Hao et al. 2020; He et al. 2021; Dou and Peng
2022; Fried et al. 2018; Tan, Yu, and Bansal 2019). Such
augmentation methods can result in promising performance
gains but prior results have focused primarily on indoor environments, in contrast to our focus on outdoor VLN. Additionally, most of these approaches do not introduce new
training environments to improve generalization to unseen
environments. Some add out of domain images (Guhur et al.
2021) but they lack the temporal information that could help
an agent learn causality between actions and consequent observations. To address these problems, we propose to utilize large video datasets that have diverse new environments
and both spatial and temporal information for pre-training to
further enhance the ability of trained agents to reason. Additionally, if we can effectively utilize video for pretraining
VLN agents, there exist a number of other video datasets
(Chen et al. 2018; Grauman et al. 2022; Pirsiavash and Ramanan 2012; Fabian Caba Heilbron and Niebles 2015; AbuEl-Haija et al. 2016) that could be potentially useful for indoor or outdoor VLN tasks.
In this work, we propose VLN-V IDEO, a new data augmentation method that enhances outdoor VLN by learning
from driving videos (Figure 1). We process driving videos
from the BDD100k dataset (Chen et al. 2018) to obtain pretraining data for the Touchdown dataset (Chen et al. 2019).
To utilize driving videos for pre-training, we need to generate language navigation instructions for each video and predict navigation actions - move forward, turn left or turn right
- between each pair of consecutive frames. Learning the in-

Outdoor Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an
agent to navigate through realistic 3D outdoor environments
based on natural language instructions. The performance of
existing VLN methods is limited by insufficient diversity in
navigation environments and limited training data. To address
these issues, we propose VLN-V IDEO, which utilizes the diverse outdoor environments present in driving videos in multiple cities in the U.S. augmented with automatically generated navigation instructions and actions to improve outdoor
VLN performance. VLN-V IDEO combines the best of intuitive classical approaches and modern deep learning techniques, using template infilling to generate grounded navigation instructions, combined with an image rotation similarity based navigation action predictor to obtain VLN style
data from driving videos for pretraining deep learning VLN
models. We pre-train the model on the Touchdown dataset
and our video-augmented dataset created from driving videos
with three proxy tasks: Masked Language Modeling, Instruction and Trajectory Matching, and Next Action Prediction,
so as to learn temporally-aware and visually-aligned instruction representations. The learned instruction representation
is adapted to the state-of-the-art navigator when fine-tuning
on the Touchdown dataset. Empirical results demonstrate that
VLN-V IDEO significantly outperforms previous state-of-theart models by 2.1% in task completion rate, achieving a new
state-of-the-art on the Touchdown dataset.

Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an agent
to navigate through 3D environments based on natural language instructions (Mirowski et al. 2018; Anderson et al.
2018; Misra et al. 2018; Thomason et al. 2019; Nguyen and
Daumé III 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Shridhar et al. 2020; Qi
et al. 2020; Ku et al. 2020; Mehta et al. 2020). A critical
bottleneck in improving models for VLN tasks is the limited availability of training data. Training data for VLN are
usually collected with human annotation, where multiple annotators write instructions for a sampled trajectory in the
environment. Additional annotators read these instructions
and navigate accordingly to evaluate their quality and clar* Work done during an internship at Amazon.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18517

