The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

United We Stand: Accelerating Privacy-Preserving Neural Inference by
Conjunctive Optimization with Interleaved Nexus
Qiao Zhang1 , Tao Xiang1 , Chunsheng Xin2 , Hongyi Wu3
1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, 23529, USA
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85721, USA
qiaozhang@cqu.edu.cn, txiang@cqu.edu.cn, cxin@odu.edu, mhwu@arizona.edu
2

Abstract

wish to obtain the model output without any other parties
know their input. In fact, regulations have been in place to
prohibit the disclosure of private data in various domains,
e.g., the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) (Assistance 2003) for medical information and
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Goddard
2017) for business records. On the other hand, S seeks to
maintain the confidentiality of model parameters to safeguard its intellectual property, and only provide the model
output in response to the client’s inference query.
Privacy-preserving MLaaS offers a promising solution
to reconcile MLaaS with data protection. It integrates
cryptographic primitives (e.g., Homomorphic Encryption
(HE) (Brakerski 2012; Fan and Vercauteren 2012; Cheon
et al. 2017) and Multi-Party Computation techniques (MPC)
such as Garbled Circuits (GC) (Bellare, Hoang, and Rogaway 2012; Yao 1986) and Oblivious Transfer (OT) (Brassard, Crépeau, and Robert 1986)) into function computation of neural networks such that the server is oblivious to
the client’s private input while the client gains no access to
the server’s proprietary model parameters beyond necessary
inference output, e.g., the predicted class (Gilad-Bachrach
et al. 2016). However, computation efficiency acts as a
fundamental challenge to make privacy-preserving MLaaS
practical, since large-size circuits and/or function approximations are needed to apply cryptographic primitives to
compute all functions, which may result in much high computation complexity and/or degraded prediction accuracy.
A series of recent works have made encouraging progress
towards improving system efficiency of privacy-preserving
MLaaS (Demmler, Schneider, and Zohner 2015; Liu et al.
2017; Mohassel and Zhang 2017; Juvekar, Vaikuntanathan,
and Chandrakasan 2018; Riazi et al. 2018; Rouhani, Riazi, and Koushanfar 2018; Mohassel and Rindal 2018; Riazi
et al. 2019; Mishra et al. 2020; Rathee et al. 2020; Boemer
et al. 2020; Zhang, Xin, and Wu 2021; Patra et al. 2021; Tan
et al. 2021; Hussain et al. 2021; Ng et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2022). Among them, the mixed-primitive frameworks which
utilize HE to compute linear functions (e.g., convolution and
fully connection) while adopt MPC for nonlinear functions
(e.g., ReLU) have demonstrated additional efficiency advantages (Liu et al. 2017; Juvekar, Vaikuntanathan, and Chandrakasan 2018; Rathee et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2022) and it
is noteworthy that the inference speed has been improved

Privacy-preserving Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
enables the powerful cloud server to run its well-trained
neural model upon the input from resource-limited client,
with both of server’s model parameters and client’s input
data protected. While computation efficiency is critical for
the practical implementation of privacy-preserving MLaaS
and it is inspiring to witness recent advances towards efficiency improvement, there still exists a significant performance gap to real-world applications. In general, state-of-theart frameworks perform function-wise efficiency optimization based on specific cryptographic primitives. Although it
is logical, such independent optimization for each function
makes noticeable amount of expensive operations unremovable and misses the opportunity to further accelerate the performance by jointly considering privacy-preserving computation among adjacent functions. As such, we propose COIN:
Conjunctive Optimization with Interleaved Nexus, which remodels mainstream computation for each function to conjunctive counterpart for composite function, with a series
of united optimization strategies. Specifically, COIN jointly
computes a pair of consecutive nonlinear-linear functions in
the neural model by reconstructing the intermediates throughout the whole procedure, which not only eliminates the most
expensive crypto operations without invoking extra encryption enabler, but also makes the online crypto complexity independent of filter size. Experimentally, COIN demonstrates
11.2× to 29.6× speedup over various function dimensions
from modern networks, and 6.4× to 12× speedup on the total computation time when applied in networks with model
input from small-scale CIFAR10 to large-scale ImageNet.

Introduction
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) establishes a kind
of service pattern where the client C uploads her input to a
cloud server S which runs its well-trained neural network
and returns inference output to C. Such mode relives the
awkward requirement, to the clients, for substantial training data and powerful computational resources to train and
apply DL models for their specific needs (Najafabadi et al.
2015). However, data privacy arises as a critical challenge in
the practical implementation of MLaaS, as C needs to transmit her private data to S. On the one hand, clients naturally
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16794

