The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Epistemic-Doxastic Planning with Observation and Revision
Thorsten Engesser1 , Andreas Herzig2 , Elise Perrotin3
1
IRIT, Toulouse, France
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
3
CRIL, CNRS, Lens, France
thorsten.engesser@irit.fr, andreas.herzig@irit.fr, perrotin@cril.fr
2

Abstract

Static epistemic reasoning is actually already difficult: deciding satisfiability for epistemic formulas is PS PACE-hard
if there is more than one agent, and E XP T IME-complete if
the language contains the common knowledge operator (Fagin et al. 1995). Several authors have proposed lightweight
fragments of the epistemic language, most prominently in
terms of epistemic literals and proper epistemic knowledge
bases (Lakemeyer and Lespérance 2012). These fragments
forbid conjunctions and disjunctions in the scope of the epistemic operators. Formulas are therefore boolean combinations of what may be called epistemic literals: sequences
of ‘knowing-that’ operators Ki and b
Ki followed by a propositional variable or its negation. Static epistemic reasoning
then typically reduces to propositional reasoning, and epistemic planning to classical planning (Muise et al. 2022). The
reduction considers epistemic literals as arbitrary propositional literals without any structure. This requires an axiomatisation of their interaction. For example, the conjunction Ki p ∧ Ki ¬p is unsatisfiable in epistemic logic but is
propositionally satisfiable: one has to add its negation as an
axiom in order to obtain propositional unsatisfiability.
An alternative route was proposed by Herzig, Lorini, and
Maffre (2018) and Cooper et al. (2021) in terms of the
‘knowing whether’ (or ‘knowledge about’) operator KAi .
There, an epistemic atom is a sequence of KAi operators
followed by a propositional variable. An advantage over
‘knowledge that’ literals is that less interactions have to be
axiomatised. If the epistemic logic is S5, then the epistemic
atoms KAi KAi p are tautologous; more generally, this is the
case for epistemic atoms with repetitions which have the
form · · · KAi KAi · · · p. Luckily, this is the only axiom to be
taken into account: if we restrict all atoms to be repetitionfree, then all atoms are logically independent and epistemic
reasoning reduces to propositional reasoning.
We here generalise the ‘knowledge about’ approach by
adding belief. Our epistemic-doxastic atoms consist of sequences of modal operators TBAi and MBAi , followed by a
propositional variable, where TBAi φ reads “i has a true belief about φ” and MBAi φ reads “i has a mere belief about
φ”. We prove that reasoning with boolean combinations
of repetition-free epistemic-doxastic atoms can be directly
done in propositional logic. In that lightweight fragment we
define laws for ontic and epistemic actions. The latter are of
two kinds: starting and ceasing to observe an atom, where

Epistemic planning is useful in situations where multiple
agents have different knowledge and beliefs about the world,
such as in robot-human interaction. One aspect that has been
largely neglected in the literature is planning with observations in the presence of false beliefs. This is a particularly
challenging problem because it requires belief revision. We
introduce a simple specification language for reasoning about
actions with knowledge and belief. We demonstrate our approach on well-known false-belief tasks such as the SallyAnne Task and compare it to other action languages. Our
logic leads to an epistemic planning formalism that is expressive enough to model second-order false-belief tasks, yet has
the same computational complexity as classical planning.

1

Introduction

The ability to perform theory of mind reasoning is a valuable
skill for autonomous agents. For example, planning from the
perspective of other agents can facilitate coordination between agents (Engesser et al. 2017; Bolander et al. 2018).
It is also fundamental in robot-human interaction scenarios
where the robot has to account for (and potentially adjust) a
human’s false beliefs (Dissing and Bolander 2020).
Most epistemic planning approaches in the literature use
either knowledge or belief, but not both. An exception is the
work of Andersen, Bolander, and Jensen (2015), which however does not focus on false beliefs but rather on the plausibility of action outcomes. We argue that the distinction between knowledge and belief is relevant to the applications
mentioned above: basing decisions on knowledge provides
more guarantees than basing them on belief.
Another problem shared by many existing epistemic planning formalisms is their complexity. In particular, planning
based on Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) is undecidable
(Bolander and Andersen 2011; Aucher and Bolander 2013).
Some useful PS PACE-complete fragments of DEL-based
planning were identified (Kominis and Geffner 2015; Engesser and Miller 2020; Bolander et al. 2020), but they typically disallow actions increasing the agents’ uncertainty.
Among other things, this makes it impossible to model most
false-belief tasks from the literature.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10501

