The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Cross-Domain Image Retrieval via Prototypical Optimal Transport
Bin Li1 , Ye Shi1 , Qian Yu2 , Jingya Wang1 *
1

ShanghaiTech University
2
Beihang University
{libin3, shiye, wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn; qianyu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval (UCIR) aims to
retrieve images sharing the same category across diverse domains without relying on labeled data. Prior approaches have
typically decomposed the UCIR problem into two distinct
tasks: intra-domain representation learning and cross-domain
feature alignment. However, these segregated strategies overlook the potential synergies between these tasks. This paper
introduces ProtoOT, a novel Optimal Transport formulation
explicitly tailored for UCIR, which integrates intra-domain
feature representation learning and cross-domain alignment
into a unified framework. ProtoOT leverages the strengths
of the K-means clustering method to effectively manage
distribution imbalances inherent in UCIR. By utilizing Kmeans for generating initial prototypes and approximating
class marginal distributions, we modify the constraints in Optimal Transport accordingly, significantly enhancing its performance in UCIR scenarios. Furthermore, we incorporate
contrastive learning into the ProtoOT framework to further
improve representation learning. This encourages local semantic consistency among features with similar semantics,
while also explicitly enforcing separation between features
and unmatched prototypes, thereby enhancing global discriminativeness. ProtoOT surpasses existing state-of-the-art
methods by a notable margin across benchmark datasets. Notably, on DomainNet, ProtoOT achieves an average P@200
enhancement of 24.44%, and on Office-Home, it demonstrates a P@15 improvement of 12.12%. Code is available
at https://github.com/HCVLAB/ProtoOT.

standard OT

ProtoOT

Sample of class 1

Prototype of class 1

Sample of class 2

Prototype of class 2

Figure 1: Comparison between the standard OT and our proposed ProtoOT to deal with distribution imbalance. Different colors represent different categories, and the dashed lines
indicate that the samples are matched to related prototypes.

To address this challenge, recent studies (Hu and Lee
2022; Wang et al. 2023) have explored unsupervised crossdomain image retrieval (UCIR) without depending on labeled information. However, the performance of these UCIR
methods tends to be suboptimal due to the intricate nature
of domain-specific clustering representation learning and
the complexities involved in accommodating noise-tolerant
cross-domain associations. Moreover, these studies tend to
treat UCIR as two distinct tasks: intra-domain representation
learning and cross-domain feature alignment. Regrettably,
this segregated approach overlooks the underlying correlations and potential synergies between these tasks, resulting
in subpar performance.
In this paper, we investigate the UCIR problem by seamlessly integrating the intra-domain feature representation
learning and cross-domain alignment. In particular, the former provides representative features for the alignment procedure in the latter, while the latter further enhances the
representation in the former by integrating cross-domain
knowledge. Notably, the core of both intra-domain representation learning and cross-domain alignment lies in minimizing the distance between the sample distribution and
prototype distribution in order to obtain features that are
both intra-class coherent and inter-class distinctive. Recent
years have seen great success in applying Optimal Trans-

Introduction
Cross-domain image retrieval (CIR) aims at utilizing imagery data from one domain as queries to retrieve relevant
samples from distinct domains. While significant progress
has been made in supervised CIR studies (Huang et al. 2015;
Ji et al. 2017), these advancements are constrained by the requirement for annotated labels. Unfortunately, this reliance
on manual labels hampers the practical scalability of supervised CIR methods, due to the considerable costs associated
with label acquisition in real-world scenarios. As a result,
the usability of existing supervised CIR techniques becomes
limited.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3009

