The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Protein 3D Graph Structure Learning for Robust Structure-Based
Protein Property Prediction
Yufei Huang1,2 , Siyuan Li 1,2 , Lirong Wu1,2 , Jin Su1,2 , Haitao Lin1,2 ,
Odin Zhang1 , Zihan Liu1,2 , Zhangyang Gao1,2 , Jiangbin Zheng1,2 , Stan Z. Li2 *
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
huangyufei, lisiyuan, sujin, wulirong, linhaitao, zhengjiangbin, Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn, haotianzhang@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Property
Predictor

Protein structure-based property prediction has emerged as
a promising approach for various biological tasks, such as
protein function prediction and sub-cellular location estimation. The existing methods highly rely on experimental protein structure data and fail in scenarios where these data are
unavailable. Predicted protein structures from AI tools (e.g.,
AlphaFold2) were utilized as alternatives. However, we observed that current practices, which simply employ accurately predicted structures during inference, suffer from notable degradation in prediction accuracy. While similar phenomena have been extensively studied in general fields (e.g.,
Computer Vision) as model robustness, their impact on protein property prediction remains unexplored. In this paper,
we first investigate the reason behind the performance decrease when utilizing predicted structures, attributing it to
the structure embedding bias from the perspective of structure representation learning. To study this problem, we identify a Protein 3D Graph Structure Learning Problem for Robust Protein Property Prediction (PGSL-RP3), collect benchmark datasets, and present a protein Structure embedding
Alignment Optimization framework (SAO) to mitigate the
problem of structure embedding bias between the predicted
and experimental protein structures. Extensive experiments
have shown that our framework is model-agnostic and effective in improving the property prediction of both predicted
structures and experimental structures.

Exp. Struct.
Avg.
Why did it drop so much? Perf. Drop:
-0.172
TM-Score:
0.929
Property
F1-score:
Predictor
0.584

F1-score:
0.756

Pred. Struct.

Protein Sequence
AlphaFold

Figure 1: Performance drop on EC task. TM-score is a
widely used metric for structure prediction accuracy.

The existing methods’ reliance on experimental protein
structures poses a challenge when such structures are unavailable. Predicted protein structures from tools like AlphaFold2 have been utilized as alternatives. However, for
various structure-based protein property prediction methods, even if these predicted structures are accurate, using
them during inference also results in a notable decrease in
property prediction accuracy. (as illustrated in Fig.1). This
suggests that there is a deeper factor behind the accuracy
of predicted structures that misleads structure-based predictors. Similar phenomena also occur in other fields where new
samples with small and hidden differences from the original ones can easily fool networks in making predictions
for downstream tasks. In Computer Vision, when we apply
small and invisible perturbations to a panda picture, the neural network misclassifies it to gibbon (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015). Graph Neural Network is also known to
be vulnerable to small perturbations like adding or deleting a
few edges (Jin et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021, 2022c). While developing robust algorithms(e.g., Graph Structure Learning,
GSL (Liu et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2020)) to resist permutations
has been well studied in general domains, model robustness
in structure-based property predictions remains unexplored.
Therefore, in this paper, we investigate the decrease in
prediction accuracy when using accurately predicted protein
structures. It is attributed to the structure embedding bias of
predictors from the perspective of structure representation
learning, i.e., a distribution gap between embedding of accurately predicted structure and that of experimental struc-

Introduction
Proteins are workhorses of the cell, involved in various biological processes, such as immune response and DNA replication. Understanding the properties of proteins is important
for deciphering the mystery of life (Degn et al. 2023; Hu
et al. 2022) and treating various diseases (Rossi Sebastiano
et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2023). As most protein properties
are governed by their folded structures, protein structurebased property prediction has emerged as a promising approach for various biological tasks, such as protein function
prediction (Huang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023), sub-cellular
location estimation (Zhang et al. 2022), and structure-based
drug design (Lin et al. 2022a, 2023a).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12662

