The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generative Multi-Modal Knowledge Retrieval with Large Language Models
Xinwei Long* 1 , Jiali Zeng2 , Fandong Meng2 , Zhiyuan Ma1 , Kaiyan Zhang1 ,
Bowen Zhou†1 , Jie Zhou2
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
longxw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhoubowen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge retrieval with multi-modal queries plays a crucial
role in supporting knowledge-intensive multi-modal applications. However, existing methods face challenges in terms of
their effectiveness and training efficiency, especially when it
comes to training and integrating multiple retrievers to handle multi-modal queries. In this paper, we propose an innovative end-to-end generative framework for multi-modal knowledge retrieval. Our framework takes advantage of the fact that
large language models (LLMs) can effectively serve as virtual knowledge bases, even when trained with limited data.
We retrieve knowledge via a two-step process: 1) generating
knowledge clues related to the queries, and 2) obtaining the
relevant document by searching databases using the knowledge clue. In particular, we first introduce an object-aware
prefix-tuning technique to guide multi-grained visual learning. Then, we align multi-grained visual features into the textual feature space of the LLM, employing the LLM to capture
cross-modal interactions. Subsequently, we construct instruction data with a unified format for model training. Finally, we
propose the knowledge-guided generation strategy to impose
prior constraints in the decoding steps, thereby promoting the
generation of distinctive knowledge clues. Through experiments conducted on three benchmarks, we demonstrate significant improvements ranging from 3.0% to 14.6% across all
evaluation metrics when compared to strong baselines.

Text Query: What style of
motorcycles are pictured
here?

Image Query
Multi-Modal Queries

Text
Retriever

the yamaha raider really straddles two the
power cruiser and the custom chopper...

Multimodal
Retriever

A motorcycle (motorbike, or trike (if threewheeled)) is a two motor vehicle steered....
Q34493

Entity
Retriever

road
vehiclet

Our
Model

Doc: 69046: Motorcycles come in various
styles, such as cruiser, adventure, and ..

Motorcycle

single-track
vehicle

Figure 1: Multi-Modal Knowledge Retrieval. Prior studies
use multiple retrievers for separate purposes, while we retrieve knowledge through an end-to-end generative model.

persist in terms of effectiveness and training efficiency when
applying these methods to multi-modal scenes. Existing
methods (Luo et al. 2021a; Gao et al. 2022) handle multimodal queries by utilizing individual text-to-text and imageto-text retrievers, which struggle to capture cross-modal interactions and require abundant data to train each module
in the pipelines. The question arises: Can we develop a retriever that effectively handles multi-modal queries while
avoiding the redundant pipeline?
Recently, there has been a promising development in the
field of Ad-hoc retrieval called generative retrieval (Wang
et al. 2022; Bevilacqua et al. 2022). This approach aims to
simplify the retrieval pipeline by generating relevant document identifiers instead of retrieving them from a large-scale
corpus. Instead of retrieving actual documents, these methods directly generate identifiers such as document titles or
URLs that are relevant to the query.
Nevertheless, these generative retrieval methods have not
been applied to multi-modal knowledge retrieval for two reasons. Firstly, knowledge-aware documents, which contain
information from multiple aspects, cannot be effectively represented by static identifiers, such as numeric IDs (Tay et al.
2022) and titles (Chen et al. 2022b). This is because queries
from different modalities attend to different aspects of documents. For example, as depicted in Fig. 1, the text query
attends to keywords that are present in both query and document (e.g. “motorcycles”), whereas the image query concen-

Introduction
Knowledge Retrieval (KR) is crucial in supporting
knowledge-intensive multi-modal applications, such as visual question answering (VQA) (Ma et al. 2023), multimodal entity linking (Huang et al. 2022) and multi-modal
dialogue (Ma et al. 2022). In these applications, the information available within the multi-modal contexts may be
insufficient, necessitating the acquisition of external knowledge. As illustrated in Fig. 1, knowledge retrievers offer key
evidence to assist VQA systems in identifying the motorcycle’s style as a “chopper”. In recent years, information retrieval (Chen et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2023)
has achieved remarkable success. However, challenges still
* The work was done when Xinwei Long worked as intern at

Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18733

