The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recurrent Partial Kernel Network for Efficient Optical Flow Estimation
Henrique Morimitsu1 , Xiaobin Zhu1 * , Xiangyang Ji2 , Xu-Cheng Yin1
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
{hmori, zhuxiaobin, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

continuing to increase the model complexity may end up impacting the generalization capabilities of future models.
One of the main reasons for the substantial increase in optical flow model sizes is the adoption of more complex feature encoder networks. Some recent methods such as FlowFormer (Huang et al. 2022), MatchFlow (Dong, Cao, and Fu
2023), and CroCo (Weinzaepfel et al. 2022) finetune Transformer networks with up to hundreds of millions of parameters. Although these models perform well when finetuned
and tested on the same datasets, their generalization capabilities are less evident. For example, testing FlowFormer
without finetuning on the newer Spring benchmark (Mehl
et al. 2023) shows a significant gap in performance to other
top-performing methods.
In this paper, we go against the recent trend and propose a
smaller, more efficient optical flow model. We design a new
spatial recurrent encoder network that shares layers across
multiple scales to improve feature representation with significantly fewer parameters. Unlike standard recurrent networks, we equip our encoder with a generalization of convolution layers, which we call Partial Kernel Convolution
(PKConv). PKConv offers two main advantages: (1) process
features with a variable number of channels with a single
shared network, and (2) allow different parts of the convolution kernel to focus on features from specific levels. We
also design a Separable Large Kernel (SLK) module that efficiently captures large context information using only 1D
convolution layers to improve the model efficiency.
We incorporate our recurrent encoder into RPKNet (Recurrent Partial Kernel Network), a novel method that employs a fully recurrent encoder-decoder network to produce accurate optical flow estimations at reduced computational costs. Our spatial recurrent encoder produces multiscale feature pyramids and then iteratively refines the optical flow prediction. We conduct extensive tests on public
benchmarks and demonstrate that our method achieves topperforming generalization results while requiring a fraction
of the parameters and computational cost of other state-ofthe-art methods (Figure 1).
Our contributions can be summarized as three-folded:

Optical flow estimation is a challenging task consisting of
predicting per-pixel motion vectors between images. Recent
methods have employed larger and more complex models to
improve the estimation accuracy. However, this impacts the
widespread adoption of optical flow methods and makes it
harder to train more general models since the optical flow
data is hard to obtain. This paper proposes a small and efficient model for optical flow estimation. We design a new
spatial recurrent encoder that extracts discriminative features at a significantly reduced size. Unlike standard recurrent units, we utilize Partial Kernel Convolution (PKConv)
layers to produce variable multi-scale features with a single shared block. We also design efficient Separable Large
Kernels (SLK) to capture large context information with low
computational cost. Experiments on public benchmarks show
that we achieve state-of-the-art generalization performance
while requiring significantly fewer parameters and memory
than competing methods. Our model ranks first in the Spring
benchmark without finetuning, improving the results by over
10% while requiring an order of magnitude fewer FLOPs and
over four times less memory than the following published
method without finetuning. The code is available at github.
com/hmorimitsu/ptlflow/tree/main/ptlflow/models/rpknet.

Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a fundamental computer vision
problem and consists of computing the 2D motion vectors
between all pixels of a pair of consecutive video frames. It
has applications in multiple fields, such as action recognition, object tracking, video interpolation, and autonomous
navigation.
Recent optical flow methods have been showing outstanding progress but at the cost of increasing the size and complexity of the models. On the one hand, the rise in computational cost hinders the applications of newer methods to
situations with restricted computational resources. However,
even more importantly, it has been shown that the generalization capacity of CNNs is directly impacted by the model
size and number of training samples (Zhou and Feng 2018).
Since it is not trivial to generate diverse optical flow training
samples (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Menze and Geiger 2015),

1. We propose a spatial recurrent encoder with Partial Kernel Convolution (PKConv) layers that can efficiently extract discriminative multi-scale features with a single
shared block.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4278

