The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ExpCLIP: Bridging Text and Facial Expressions via Semantic Alignment
Yicheng Zhong* , Huawei Wei* , Peiji Yang* , Zhisheng Wang
1

Tencent Technology (Shenzhen) Co.Ltd
{ajaxzhong, huaweiwei, peijiyang, plorywang}@tencent.com

Abstract

erence facial expressions as style guidance. However, they
either have limited flexibility in expressing diverse emotions or necessitate searching for a reference image or video,
which may be impractical for users.
In this study, we propose to adopt natural language as
the style prompt for emotional facial animation generation, which offers both flexibility and user-friendliness. A
straightforward approach is to collect animation data with
paired text prompts and train a text-guided animation generator. However, the scarcity of such data and the high cost
of annotation make this approach infeasible. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel CLIP-based model called ExpCLIP in this paper. ExpCLIP is designed to learn an embedding space where the representations of text and facial
expressions are semantically aligned. By leveraging the capabilities of ExpCLIP, we can train the animation generator
by specifying representative facial expressions as prompts,
which can be easily extracted from animations, and utilize
text prompts for inference purposes.
To train ExpCLIP, a large-scale text-expression dataset is
required. However, currently available datasets (Wang et al.
2020; Kollias 2022) only have limited tag-level emotion labels. To address this issue, we propose a novel automated
annotation method to construct a Text-Expression Aligned
Dataset (TEAD). Specifically, we leverage the visual understanding capability of ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023) to accomplish the annotation task. We find that LLMs are capable of
describing the facial expressions corresponding to an emotional text. By harnessing the power of ChatGPT, we collect
a rich emotional corpus and use meticulously engineered
prompts to ask the ChatGPT to output the corresponding description of facial expressions. Here, we use activated facial
Action Units (AUs) to describe facial expressions.
Building upon ExpCLIP, which is trained on TEAD, we
propose an emotion-controllable facial animation generator.
During the training phase of the generator, we employ a
self-attention module to extract the expression prompt from
an animation clip. Subsequently, the expression prompt is
fed into ExpCLIP to obtain the emotion embedding, which
is then fused with the input speech to generate the target
facial animation. During the inference stage, we can use
text prompts to achieve the desired style control, which is
attributed to the alignment of facial expressions and text
embeddings achieved by ExpCLIP. We show several exam-

The objective of stylized speech-driven facial animation is
to create animations that encapsulate specific emotional expressions. Existing methods often depend on pre-established
emotional labels or facial expression templates, which may
limit the necessary flexibility for accurately conveying user
intent. In this research, we introduce a technique that enables
the control of arbitrary styles by leveraging natural language
as emotion prompts. This technique presents benefits in terms
of both flexibility and user-friendliness. To realize this objective, we initially construct a Text-Expression Alignment
Dataset (TEAD), wherein each facial expression is paired
with several prompt-like descriptions. We propose an innovative automatic annotation method, supported by ChatGPT,
to expedite the dataset construction, thereby eliminating the
substantial expense of manual annotation. Following this, we
utilize TEAD to train a CLIP-based model, termed ExpCLIP,
which encodes text and facial expressions into semantically
aligned style embeddings. The embeddings are subsequently
integrated into the facial animation generator to yield expressive and controllable facial animations. Given the limited diversity of facial emotions in existing speech-driven facial animation training data, we further introduce an effective Expression Prompt Augmentation (EPA) mechanism to enable
the animation generator to support unprecedented richness in
style control. Comprehensive experiments illustrate that our
method accomplishes expressive facial animation generation
and offers enhanced flexibility in effectively conveying the
desired style.

Introduction
In recent years, speech-driven facial animation has gained
importance due to its widespread applications in diverse
fields such as gaming, virtual reality, and film production
(Zhen et al. 2023). Currently, most research focuses on improving the synchronization between lip movements and
speech (Cudeiro et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2022; Xing et al. 2023). This emphasis only allows for conveying speech content, not style, resulting in a lack of emotional expressions in generated facial animations. A few
works (Karras et al. 2017; Daněček et al. 2023) have attempted to integrate emotions into facial animation by providing the model with specific emotional labels or use refCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7614

