The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Computational Complexity of Plan Verification, (Bounded)
Plan-Optimality Verification, and Bounded Plan Existence
Songtuan Lin1 , Conny Olz2 , Malte Helmert3 , Pascal Bercher1
1

School of Computing, The Australian National University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Ulm University
3
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel
{songtuan.lin, pascal.bercher}@anu.edu.au, conny.olz@uni-ulm.de, malte.helmert@unibas.ch
Abstract

problem. Our discussion will start with the plan verification
problem, which serves as the basis for the investigation of
the bounded plan existence problem, and ends up with the
plan optimality verification problem and its extension, the
bounded plan optimality verification problem. Plan optimality verification is to verify whether a plan is an optimal solution to a planning problem, and its bounded version is to
check whether the length of a given plan is not far away from
the length of an optimal one by some bound.
We will investigate some general properties of these problems and discuss their complexity results in the specific context of classical planning (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004)
and Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning (Bercher,
Alford, and Höller 2019), which is the most commonly used
hierarchical planning (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004;
Bercher, Alford, and Höller 2019) formalism. One important reason for discussing all these results, which are summarized in Tab. 1, is that they can serve as a reference for
future research endeavors in related disciplines.
Concretely, for plan verification, although the complexity
is well-developed for classical planning and grounded HTN
planning (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2015), no investigations have been done for lifted HTN planning. Here, we will
present a lower and an upper bound of the complexity of
lifted HTN plan verification, which turns out to be significantly harder compared to its grounded counterpart.
For the bounded plan existence problem, we will discuss
its complexity in terms of both the encoding size and the
magnitude of the bound. For this, we follow the methodology by Bäckström and Jonsson (2011) which encodes the
bound in binary and in unary, respectively. Lastly, we will
discuss the connection between the bounded plan existence
problem and the plan optimality verification problem and
present the complexity results for the latter.

In this paper we study the computational complexity of several reasoning tasks centered around the bounded plan existence problem. We do this for standard classical planning
and hierarchical task network (HTN) planning and each for a
grounded and a lifted representation. Whereas bounded plan
existence complexity is known for classical planning, it has
not yet been studied for HTN planning. For plan verification,
results were available for both formalisms except for the lifted
HTN planning. We will present lower and upper bounds of
the complexity of plan verification in lifted HTN planning
and provide some new insights into its grounded counterpart,
in which we show that verification is not just NP-complete in
the general case, but already for a severely restricted special
case. Finally, we show the complexity concerning verifying
the optimality of a given plan and discuss its connection to
the bounded plan existence problem.

Introduction
Automated planning is the task of finding a course of actions
called a plan which achieves a certain goal. An immense effort has been devoted to studying the computational complexity of the plan existence problem in the context of both
non-hierarchical (classical) planning (Erol, Nau, and Subrahmanian 1991; Bylander 1994; Helmert 2006; Bäckström
and Jonsson 2011) and hierarchical planning (Erol, Hendler,
and Nau 1996; Geier and Bercher 2011; Alford et al. 2014;
Alford, Bercher, and Aha 2015a,b; Bercher, Lin, and Alford
2022) which is to decide whether a planning problem has a
solution. In contrast, the number of research endeavors on
the complexity of deciding whether there exists a plan up to
a certain length (the bounded plan existence problem) is relatively small which is a standard way to frame the problem
of finding an optimal plan as a decision problem. In particular, the complexity results only exist in the classical setting
but not in the hierarchical one, despite that many approaches
related to this problem have been developed for both formalisms (Karpas and Domshlak 2009; Pommerening et al.
2014; Bercher et al. 2017; Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2019;
Behnke and Speck 2021).
We will discuss in this paper the complexity results of several problems centered around the bounded plan existence

Background
We first present the notations which will be used throughout
the paper and the planning formalisms on which the complexity results are developed.
Size of Objects Given an arbitrary object x, e.g., x can be
a number, a problem instance, etc., we say that the size of x,
written ∥x∥, is the length of a binary string which encodes
the object x. When studying the complexity of a problem,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20203

