The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Entropy Induced Pruning Framework for Convolutional Neural Networks
Yiheng Lu, Ziyu Guan, Yaming Yang, Wei Zhao* , Maoguo Gong, Cai Xu
Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Ministry of Education,
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
lyhxdu@gmail.com, zyguan@xidian.edu.cn, yym@xidian.edu.cn, ywzhao@mail.xidian.edu.cn, gong@ieee.org,
cxu@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Generally, there are two categories of pruning strategies,
i.e., structured pruning (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Luo, Wu,
and Lin 2017; Molchanov et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017) and
unstructured pruning (LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1990; Hassibi et al. 1993; Jonathan and Michael 2019). Structured
pruning is to remove the whole filters from each model layer.
Unstructured pruning is to prune partial parameters from the
original model. Structured pruning has been proved more efficient than unstructured pruning because structured pruning
can eliminate the number of feature maps, which can reduce
the consumption of FLOPs apparently (Liu et al. 2019b).
Therefore, in this work, we mainly focus on structured pruning methods.
Structured pruning methods can be further classified into
Layers-Importance-Supported (LIS) methods and FiltersImportance-Supported (FIS) methods. LIS methods aim to
evaluate the layer importance at first, and then remove filters according to the layer importance. For example, (Chin,
Zhang, and Marculescu 2018; Suau et al. 2018; Li et al.
2017) utilize different weight-oriented strategies to evaluate
the importance of each convolutional layer based on fullytrained models. Differently, FIS methods focus on evaluating the importance of each filter straightly. For example,
(Molchanov et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017; Ye et al. 2018) evaluate the importance of each filter by the gradient information
and BatchNorm neurons, which can achieve global pruning
automatically.
However, both LIS methods and FIS methods above need
the original model to be fully trained, to obtain enough
meaningful parameters. This makes the pruning operation
time-consuming and resource-inefficient. Moreover, these
pruning methods’ effectiveness depends on the degree of
the model optimization. They may easily yield degenerated
pruning results if the original model is not fully trained.
To address the above issue, in this paper, we propose the
metric Average Filter Information Entropy (AFIE), which
can compute a reliable evaluation score for each filter even
when the original model is trained with only several epochs.
In practice, AFIE can even yield the same evaluation of
filters for a fully-trained model and a one-epoch-trained
model.
As shown in Figure 1, the overall procedure consists of
three steps. First, we decompose the weight matrix e
M of a
specified convolutional layer into a low-rank space. Then,

Structured pruning techniques have achieved great compression performance on convolutional neural networks for image
classification tasks. However, the majority of existing methods are sensitive with respect to the model parameters, and
their pruning results may be unsatisfactory when the original
model is trained poorly. That is, they need the original model
to be fully trained, to obtain useful weight information. This
is time-consuming, and makes the effectiveness of the pruning results dependent on the degree of model optimization.
To address the above issue, we propose a novel metric named
Average Filter Information Entropy (AFIE). It decomposes
the weight matrix of each layer into a low-rank space, and
quantifies the filter importance based on the distribution of
the normalized eigenvalues. Intuitively, the eigenvalues capture the covariance among filters, and therefore could be a
good guide for pruning. Since the distribution of eigenvalues is robust to the updating of parameters, AFIE can yield
a stable evaluation for the importance of each filter no matter whether the original model is trained fully. We implement our AFIE-based pruning method for three popular CNN
models of AlexNet, VGG-16, and ResNet-50, and test them
on three widely-used image datasets MNIST, CIFAR-10, and
ImageNet, respectively. The experimental results are encouraging. We surprisingly observe that for our methods, even
when the original model is trained with only one epoch, the
AFIE score of each filter keeps identical to the results when
the model is fully-trained. This fully indicates the effectiveness of the proposed pruning method.

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved impressive success on image classification with large model
size (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Szegedy
et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zissermann 2015; He et al. 2016).
However, their growing scale imposes huge pressure on
computational resources, and may easily lead to the overfitting issue due to the redundancy across the whole network.
Therefore, network pruning techniques are studied comprehensively by researchers, to cut off redundant computation
branches from original models.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3918

