The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fluctuation-Based Adaptive Structured Pruning for Large Language Models
Yongqi An1, 2 , Xu Zhao1, 4, * , Tao Yu1, 2 , Ming Tang1, 2 , Jinqiao Wang1, 2, 3, 4
1

Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of artificial intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan, China
4
Objecteye Inc., Beijing, China
{yongqi.an, xu.zhao, tangm, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yutao2022@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

are no longer feasible for LLMs. Model compression methods for LLMs to date focus on model quantization (Dettmers
et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2023; Frantar et al. 2023; Dettmers
et al. 2023) and unstructured pruning (Sun et al. 2023; Frantar and Alistarh 2023).
Structured pruning (He and Xiao 2023), which prunes entire rows or columns of weights, offers a promising solution
to the deployment challenges of LLMs. Unlike unstructured
pruning, structured pruning reduces both parameters and inference time without relying on specific hardware, making
it more widely applicable (Anwar, Hwang, and Sung 2017).
For effective structured pruning, it’s crucial to have a metric
that captures the collective significance of an entire row or
column. However, current unstructured pruning techniques
for LLMs, as seen in methods like (Sun et al. 2023; Frantar and Alistarh 2023), primarily focus on the importance of
individual elements of each row in isolation. This absence
of structured metrics that evaluate entire rows or columns
makes them less suitable for structured pruning. The recent
LLM-Pruner (Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023) attempted structured pruning for LLMs, but its dependence on LoRA finetuning (Hu et al. 2021) creates a tough trade-off between
high computation and effective pruning, limiting its use in
larger models.
Pruning essentially involves two key aspects: discovering redundancy and recovering performance. For an effective structured pruning method tailored to LLMs, three fundamental criteria must be satisfied: a) a structured importance metric to discover structured redundancy; b) a mechanism for adaptively searching the optimal global compression model structure; and c) a compensation strategy to minimize performance degradation.
In response to these three essential criteria, we introduce
FLAP (FLuctuation-based Adaptive Structured Pruning), a
novel structured pruning framework. We find that certain
channels of hidden state features exhibit structured sample
stability. This observation enables us to compensate for bias
within the model using baseline values. Specifically, we design a structured pruning metric that estimates the fluctuation of each input feature relative to the baseline value,
utilizing a set of calibration samples. This metric assists in
determining whether the output feature map can be recovered when a column of the weight matrix is removed. We
then standardize these fluctuation metric scores across lay-

Network Pruning is a promising way to address the huge
computing resource demands of the deployment and inference of Large Language Models (LLMs). Retraining-free
is important for LLMs’ pruning methods. However, almost
all of the existing retraining-free pruning approaches for
LLMs focus on unstructured pruning, which requires specific hardware support for acceleration. In this paper, we
propose a novel retraining-free structured pruning framework for LLMs, named FLAP (FLuctuation-based Adaptive
Structured Pruning). It is hardware-friendly by effectively
reducing storage and enhancing inference speed. For effective structured pruning of LLMs, we highlight three critical elements that demand the utmost attention: formulating structured importance metrics, adaptively searching the
global compressed model, and implementing compensation
mechanisms to mitigate performance loss. First, FLAP determines whether the output feature map is easily recoverable
when a column of weight is removed, based on the fluctuation
pruning metric. Then it standardizes the importance scores to
adaptively determine the global compressed model structure.
At last, FLAP adds additional bias terms to recover the output
feature maps using the baseline values. We thoroughly evaluate our approach on a variety of language benchmarks. Without any retraining, our method significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods, including LLM-Pruner and the extension of Wanda in structured pruning. The code is released
at https://github.com/CASIA-IVA-Lab/FLAP.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022; Scao et al. 2022) have
recently achieved outstanding performance across various
language benchmarks in NLP (Bommarito and Katz 2022;
Bubeck et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2022), spurring a large number of open-source applications (Taori et al. 2023; Anand
et al. 2023; Richards 2023). These remarkable capabilities
typically come with a huge-scale model size with high inference costs. This makes it harder for more people to benefit
from LLMs. Due to the computational resource constraints,
most of the model compression methods in the pre-LLM era
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10865

