The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mitigating Label Bias in Machine Learning: Fairness through Confident Learning
Yixuan Zhang1 , Boyu Li2 , Zenan Ling3 , Feng Zhou4 *
1

China-Austria Belt and Road Joint Laboratory on AI and AM, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
2
Data Science Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
4
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China, China
yixuan.zhang@hdu.edu.cn, boyu.li@student.uts.edu.au, lingzenan@hust.edu.cn, feng.zhou@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

can incorporate fairness constraints into the learning objectives (Bilal Zafar et al. 2015; Cotter, Jiang, and Sridharan
2019; Donini et al. 2018; Rezaei et al. 2020; Roh et al.
2020), or modify the model’s predictions using threshold
adjustments and calibration to align them with fairness constraints (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Kim, Ghorbani, and
Zou 2019; Lohia et al. 2019; Petersen et al. 2021), or use
data manipulation or representation learning methods before
model training (Calmon et al. 2017; Choi et al. 2020; Jiang
and Nachum 2020; Kamiran and Calders 2012). Nonetheless, the aforementioned methods primarily focus on modifying the machine learning model to tackle the bias problem. There has been limited effort, as indicated by Jiang and
Nachum (2020), in directly addressing the biased data itself,
despite the fact that often the training data itself exhibits biased features and corresponding labels.
To combat the influence of label bias, numerous approaches have been proposed. For instance, Jiang and
Nachum (2020) addressed the biased data problem by formulating the label bias as a constrained optimization framework and using a re-weighting method to learn an equivalent
unbiased labeling function. On the other hand, Wang, Liu,
and Levy (2021) established fairness constraints by linking
ground truth distribution and observed biased distribution.
In this paper, we present another effective method that focuses on data selection. Intuitively, if we can select examples with labels less influenced by sensitive information, the
network learned from such data will be more robust, leading
to a fairer decision-making process.
The previous works aimed at mitigating label bias within
the data itself using confidence scores generally encompass
two phases (Northcutt, Jiang, and Chuang 2021; Cordeiro
et al. 2023). In the first phase, these approaches obtain confidence scores from the trained model and subsequently eliminate erroneous instances through a probabilistic threshold.
The second phase involves model retraining using the remaining clean examples from the previous step to enhance
model robustness. Nevertheless, when utilizing probability
thresholds to determine the true labels, such methods heavily rely on self-confidence, of which instances with low selfconfidence scores are often considered to contain label errors. However, this assumption does not always hold, particularly in scenarios of imbalanced data within the protected
group. In these cases, individuals often face disadvantages

Discrimination can occur when the underlying unbiased labels are overwritten by an agent with potential bias, resulting
in biased datasets that unfairly harm specific groups and cause
classifiers to inherit these biases. In this paper, we demonstrate that despite only having access to the biased labels, it
is possible to eliminate bias by filtering the fairest instances
within the framework of confident learning. In the context
of confident learning, low self-confidence usually indicates
potential label errors; however, this is not always the case.
Instances, particularly those from underrepresented groups,
might exhibit low confidence scores for reasons other than
labeling errors. To address this limitation, our approach employs truncation of the confidence score and extends the confidence interval of the probabilistic threshold. Additionally,
we incorporate with co-teaching paradigm for providing a
more robust and reliable selection of fair instances and effectively mitigating the adverse effects of biased labels. Through
extensive experimentation and evaluation of various datasets,
we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in promoting
fairness and reducing the impact of label bias in machine
learning models.

Introduction
In recent decades, we have observed a shift towards an AIdriven society, where machine learning techniques have profoundly affected various aspects of our lives, including finance (Khandani, Kim, and Lo 2010), recruitment (Faliagka
et al. 2012) and law (Dressel and Farid 2018). When algorithmic decisions have a significant impact on our lives, it is
crucial for decision-makers or regulators to have confidence
in the algorithm’s performance. While deep neural networks
possess the capability to learn complex patterns from input
data, they encounter a fundamental challenge in the data
they learn from: the labels can be influenced by sensitive
information, causing the neural networks to capture and reproduce these undesirable associations. Therefore, to ensure
fairness in decision-making, it becomes essential to mitigate
the impact of such undesirable relationships.
Research on training fair machine learning models has
then received a lot of attention. To achieve fairness, one
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16917

