The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Learning of PDEs via Taylor Expansion and Sparse Decomposition into
Value and Fourier Domains
Md Nasim , Yexiang Xue
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
mnasim@purdue.edu, yexiang@purdue.edu

Δcv in value
domain

Abstract
Accelerating the learning of Partial Differential Equations
(PDEs) from experimental data will speed up the pace of
scientific discovery. Previous randomized algorithms exploit
sparsity in PDE updates for acceleration. However such methods are applicable to a limited class of decomposable PDEs,
which have sparse features in the value domain. We propose
R EEL, which accelerates the learning of PDEs via random
projection and has much broader applicability. R EEL exploits
the sparsity by decomposing dense updates into sparse ones
in both the value and frequency domains. This decomposition
enables efficient learning when the source of the updates consists of gradually changing terms across large areas (sparse in
the frequency domain) in addition to a few rapid updates concentrated in a small set of “interfacial” regions (sparse in the
value domain). Random projection is then applied to compress the sparse signals for learning. To expand the model
applicability, Taylor series expansion is used in R EEL to approximate the nonlinear PDE updates with polynomials in the
decomposable form. Theoretically, we derive a constant factor approximation between the projected loss function and
the original one with poly-logarithmic number of projected
dimensions. Experimentally, we provide empirical evidence
that our proposed R EEL can lead to faster learning of PDE
models (70%-98% reduction in training time when the data is
compressed to 1% of its original size) with comparable quality as the non-compressed models.

1

Decomposed
signals in
value
domain
FT

FT

FT = Fourier Transform

Decomposed
signals in
frequency
domain

Sparse

Frequency Domain Decomposition
|ℱ(𝑠)| > β

Discrete Fourier
Transform

Inverse
Discrete
Fourier
Transform

ℱ(𝑠)

β = threshold

|ℱ(𝑠)| ≤ β

ℱ -1 (|ℱ(𝑠)| ≤ β)

Compression

Small
dimension,
compact
signals

Sparse signals

Sparse signals
Sparse
frequency
component
Sparse
value
component
Faster
Learning
of
Physics
Models

Figure 1: High-level idea of our R EEL algorithm. R EEL decomposes spatial and temporal updates into sparse signals
in the value and the frequency domains. Random projection
compresses these sparse signals for accelerated learning of
PDEs. This example uses the decomposition of the vacancy
concentration cv in learning the nanovoid evolution in materials under extreme conditions.

Introduction

Physics models encoded in Partial Differential Equations
(PDE) are crucial in the understanding of many natural phenomena such as sound, heat, elasticity, fluid dynamics, quantum mechanics etc. Learning these physics models from
data is essential to enhance our understanding of the world,
accelerate scientific discovery, and design new technologies. Deep neural networks (e.g., physics-informed neural
nets (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019b), Hamiltonian neural nets (Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019))
have been successfully deployed in this domain. In these approaches, the spatial and temporal updates of a PDE model
are matched with ground truth experimental observations.
A loss function is defined based on the mismatch between
the simulation and the ground truth, and then the physics

model is learned by back-propagation of error gradients of
the loss function (Xue et al. 2021a; Raissi, Perdikaris, and
Karniadakis 2019b). Nevertheless, such learning processes
are expensive because of the need to back-propagate gradients over spatial and temporal simulations involving millions of mutually interacting elements.
One line of successful approaches to accelerate the learning of PDE models exploits the sparsity nature of system
changes over time. For example, during the microstructure

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14422

