The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relational Distant Supervision for Image Captioning without Image-Text Pairs
Yayun Qi1 , Wentian Zhao1 , Xinxiao Wu1,2 *
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science & Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
{qiyayun,wentian zhao,wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised image captioning aims to generate descriptions
of images without relying on any image-sentence pairs for
training. Most existing works use detected visual objects or
concepts as bridge to connect images and texts. Considering
that the relationship between objects carries more information, we use the object relationship as a more accurate connection between images and texts. In this paper, we adapt
the idea of distant supervision that extracts the knowledge
about object relationships from an external corpus and imparts them to images to facilitate inferring visual object relationships, without introducing any extra pre-trained relationship detectors. Based on these learned informative relationships, we construct pseudo image-sentence pairs for captioning model training. Specifically, our method consists of
three modules: (i) a relationship learning module that learns
to infer relationships from images under the distant supervision; (ii) a relationship-to-sentence module that transforms
the inferred relationships into sentences to generate pseudo
image-sentence pairs; (iii) an image captioning module that is
trained by using the generated image-sentence pairs. Promising results on three datasets show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods of unsupervised image
captioning.

Figure 1: Illustration of using objects (a) and their relationships (b) as the bridge to connect images and texts in the
unsupervised image captioning task.

shared elements to connect images and sentences as illustrated in Figure 1(a), such as guiding the reconstruction
between two modalities (Feng et al. 2019) or constraining
the learned manifolds (Laina, Rupprecht, and Navab 2019).
Several other methods use the detected objects as representations of visual content, in the form of labels (Guo et al.
2020) or regions (Meng et al. 2022).
Since objects are not independent and their relationships
carry more important contextual information, we address the
unsupervised image captioning task by introducing object
relationships to bridge images and sentences, as illustrated
in Figure 1(b). An intuitive solution is to apply an off-theshelf relationship detector to detect the object relationships
from images. However, this solution suffers from a semantic gap between the relationships detected from images and
those expressed in sentences. For example, many possessive
or geometric relationships between objects, like hdog, have,
headi and hman, wear, shoesi, are easily detected from images, but they are seldom described in sentences.
In this paper, we exploit knowledge about object relationships extracted from external corpus to infer visual object
relationships in images. To enable the knowledge imparting from texts to images, we propose a novel relational distant supervision method, which first infers visual object relationships through scene-level alignment between images

Introduction
Unsupervised image captioning has aroused growing interest from researchers in recent years, as it does not require large-scale high-quality paired images and sentences
for training. In existing settings (Feng et al. 2019; Laina,
Rupprecht, and Navab 2019; Guo et al. 2020; Meng et al.
2022), only image data, sentence corpus, and an off-theshelf object detector are needed to train a captioning model.
The sentence corpus usually comes from external resources,
e.g., sentences crawled from real-world websites (Feng et al.
2019).
The main challenge of unsupervised image captioning
task lies in how to build the connection between images
and sentences from the external corpus. To address this
challenge, with the help of object detector, previous methods regard detected visual objects and extracted entities as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4524

