The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalizable Sleep Staging via Multi-Level Domain Alignment
Jiquan Wang1,2 , Sha Zhao1,2 * , Haiteng Jiang3,4,1 , Shijian Li1,2 , Tao Li3,4,1 , Gang Pan1,2,4 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Brain-machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Neurobiology, Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
4
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{wangjiquan, szhao, h.jiang, shijianli, litaozjusc, gpan}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Mikkelsen 2022) have been proposed to solve the task of automatic sleep staging. They are implemented with different
network structures based on sequence-to-sequence framework, obtaining good performance in sleep staging from
PSG recordings. However, most of existing methods adopt
the intra-dataset scheme, where the training data and testing
data are from the same dataset, ignoring the discrepancies
between various datasets and making it difficult to be generalized to unseen sleep staging datasets well (Anido-Alonso
and Alvarez-Estevez 2022). The discrepancies among multiple datasets could be caused by many factors, such as heterogeneous patient population, different signal channel, different data collection equipment types or manners, or different medical environments. In clinic, a sleep staging model
should better be generalized to unseen datasets of any new
populations in any environment. Some methods (Yoo, Lee,
and Kang 2021; Fan et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022) illustrate
that the training and testing samples are not drawn from the
same probability distribution which cause performance deterioration when directly applying models trained on source
datasets to target datasets. They adopt the ideas of Domain
Adaptation (DA) to solve it, but the generalization problem
still exist because DA methods assume that the target sleep
staging database is accessible.
In order to solve the generalizing-to-unseen-database
problem of automatic sleep staging, we introduce the idea of
domain generalization (DG) into the sleep staging task: A
domain is composed of data that is sampled from a join distribution of input space and label space. The goal of domain
generalization is to learn a model from one or several different but related domains (i.e., diverse training datasets) that
will perform well on unseen testing domains (Wang et al.
2023a). The unseen domain is inaccessible in training procedure. Inspired by some studies (Koh et al. 2021; Robey,
Pappas, and Hassani 2021) exploring hospital-level DG in
medical imaging, we set a single sleep staging dataset (usually from one hospital) as a domain and set the discrepancies between different datasets as domain shift. Then multiple datasets used for training can be regarded as source domains and the dataset used for testing can be seen as target
domain or unseen domain. Our goal is to learn a model from
several source domains (several sleep datasets) that can perform well at the unseen domain (unseen sleep dataset). We
name this task as generalizable sleep staging.

Automatic sleep staging is essential for sleep assessment and
disorder diagnosis. Most existing methods depend on one
specific dataset and are limited to be generalized to other
unseen datasets, for which the training data and testing data
are from the same dataset. In this paper, we introduce domain generalization into automatic sleep staging and propose
the task of generalizable sleep staging which aims to improve the model generalization ability to unseen datasets. Inspired by existing domain generalization methods, we adopt
the feature alignment idea and propose a framework called
SleepDG to solve it. Considering both of local salient features and sequential features are important for sleep staging, we propose a Multi-level Feature Alignment combining epoch-level and sequence-level feature alignment to learn
domain-invariant feature representations. Specifically, we design an Epoch-level Feature Alignment to align the feature
distribution of each single sleep epoch among different domains, and a Sequence-level Feature Alignment to minimize
the discrepancy of sequential features among different domains. SleepDG is validated on five public datasets, achieving
the state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Sleep plays an important role in human health. Sleep staging
refers to the classification of sleep into different sleep stages,
which is crucial to identifying sleep problems and other disorders in humans (He et al. 2018). Clinically, sleep stages
are scored by doctors or experts using electrical activity
recorded from sensors attached to different parts of the body.
A set of signals from these sensors is called a polysomnogram (PSG), consisting of multiple physiological signals
recorded, such as electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrooculogram (EOG). According to the American Academy
of Sleep Medicine (AASM) sleep standard (Iber et al. 2007),
PSG is usually segmented into 30-second epochs, which are
manually classified into five different sleep stages (Wake,
N1, N2, N3, and REM) by experts.
In recent years, with the development of deep learning
techniques (Sun et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2018; Yi et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2023c), many deep learning models (Phan and
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

265

