The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Completing Priceable Committees:
Utilitarian and Representation Guarantees for Proportional Multiwinner Voting
Markus Brill1 , Jannik Peters 2
1

University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
2
TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
markus.brill@warwick.ac.uk, jannik.peters@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

these conventions, the first two desiderata of Faliszewski
et al. (2017) have straightforward interpretations: Individual excellence is measured by the utilitarian welfare of a
committee, i.e., the sum over the voters’ utilities. Utilitarian
welfare is maximized when choosing the candidates with the
highest number of approvers, and the voting rule that selects
this committee is known as Approval Voting (AV). The diversity of a committee is captured by its coverage, i.e., the
number of voters that are represented by it. The (computationally intractable) voting rule that selects committees maximizing coverage is known as Chamberlin–Courant (CC).
The third desideratum, proportional representation, is much
harder to formalize, and the literature has identified a host of
different (axiomatic and quantitative) measures to assess the
proportionality of a committee (Aziz et al. 2017; SánchezFernández et al. 2017; Skowron 2021; Peters, Pierczyński,
and Skowron 2021; Brill and Peters 2023); a prominent example is the extended justified representation (EJR) axiom.
The study of trade-offs between the three desiderata has
been initiated by Lackner and Skowron (2020), who analyzed how closely classic multiwinner rules such as PAV
and Phragmén’s rules approximate the optimal utilitarian
welfare and coverage. The resulting bounds are referred to
as utilitarian and representation guarantees, respectively.
Besides guarantees for specific rules, they also proved upper bounds on the utilitarian and representation guarantees
of rules satisfying minimal proportionality requirements. In
follow-up work, Elkind et al. (2022) studied which guarantees can be achieved if the committee is required to satisfy
the justified representation (JR) axiom. While
√ Lackner and
Skowron (2020) gave an upper bound of 2/⌊ k⌋ − 1/k for
the utilitarian guarantee of any committee satisfying JR —
with a higher guarantee being better — Elkind et al. (2022)
were almost able to close this gap by showing that a utilitar2−ε
√ is possible for any ε > 0 and suffiian guarantee of 1+
k
ciently large k.1 Further, they showed that a representation
guarantee of 34 is possible in conjunction with EJR and that

When selecting committees based on preferences of voters,
a variety of different criteria can be considered. Two natural objectives are maximizing the utilitarian welfare (the sum
of voters’ utilities) and coverage (the number of represented
voters) of the selected committee. Previous work has studied
the impact on utilitarian welfare and coverage when requiring
the committee to satisfy minimal requirements such as justified representation or weak proportionality. In this paper, we
consider the impact of imposing much more demanding proportionality axioms. We identify a class of voting rules that
achieve strong guarantees on utilitarian welfare and coverage
when combined with appropriate completions. This class is
defined via a weakening of priceability and contains prominent rules such as the Method of Equal Shares. We show that
committees selected by these rules (i) can be completed to
achieve optimal coverage and (ii) can be completed to achieve
an asymptotically optimal approximation to the utilitarian
welfare if they additionally satisfy EJR+. Answering an open
question of Elkind et al. (2022), we use the Greedy Justified
Candidate Rule to obtain the best possible utilitarian guarantee subject to proportionality. We also consider completion
methods suggested in the participatory budgeting literature
and other objectives besides welfare and coverage.

1

Introduction

In multiwinner voting, a subset of candidates (often called a
committee) needs to be chosen in a way that reflects the preferences of a set of voters over these candidates. The (computational) social choice literature has identified many different, often competing, criteria for committees (Felsenthal
and Maoz 1992; Elkind et al. 2017; Lackner and Skowron
2022). In particular, Faliszewski et al. (2017) distinguish between three important desiderata referred to as individual
excellence, diversity, and proportional representation.
This paper focuses on approval-based multiwinner voting, where voters cast approval ballots over individual candidates (Lackner and Skowron 2022). In this setting, it is
commonly assumed that each voter evaluates a committee
by counting the number of approved committee members.
This number is often referred to as the utility that the voter
derives from the committee, and a voter is said to be represented by a committee if their utility is nonzero. Using

1
Here, k denotes the size of the committee. Lackner and
Skowron (2020) proved the upper bound for an axiom they call
weak proportionality, but — as Elkind et al. (2022) observe — the
bound also holds for JR. Moreover, we note that Elkind et al. (2022)
phrase their bounds in terms of the “price of JR,” with lower prices
being better: a price of P corresponds to a guarantee of 1/P .

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9528

