The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Neural Radiance Fields with Adaptive Multi-Exposure Fusion: A
Bilevel Optimization Approach for Novel View Synthesis
Yang Zou1 * , Xingyuan Li2 * , Zhiying Jiang2 , Jinyuan Liu2†
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology
yzou9073@uni.sydney.edu.au, xingyuan lxy@163.com, zyjiang0630@gmail.com, atlantis918@hotmail.com
2

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have made significant strides
in the modeling and rendering of 3D scenes. However, due
to the complexity of luminance information, existing NeRF
methods often struggle to produce satisfactory renderings
when dealing with high and low exposure images. To address this issue, we propose an innovative approach capable
of effectively modeling and rendering images under multiple exposure conditions. Our method adaptively learns the
characteristics of images under different exposure conditions through an unsupervised evaluator-simulator structure
for HDR (High Dynamic Range) fusion. This approach enhances NeRF’s comprehension and handling of light variations, leading to the generation of images with appropriate brightness. Simultaneously, we present a bilevel optimization method tailored for novel view synthesis, aiming to harmonize the luminance information of input images while preserving their structural and content consistency. This approach facilitates the concurrent optimization
of multi-exposure correction and novel view synthesis, in an
unsupervised manner. Through comprehensive experiments
conducted on the LOM and LOL datasets, our approach surpasses existing methods, markedly enhancing the task of
novel view synthesis for multi-exposure environments and attaining state-of-the-art results. The source code can be found
at https://github.com/Archer-204/AME-NeRF.

Figure 1: Visual comparison of our method with SOTA enhancement technique. Existing approaches primarily focus
on either image enhancement(indicated by the green line)
or novel view synthesis refinement(denoted by the yellow
line). In contrast, our method concurrently optimizes both
the NeRF network(highlighted by the blue line) and image
enhancement(represented by the red line), leading to a significantly reduced loss.

Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized numerous fields, with
computer vision being one of the most prominent beneficiaries. Techniques such as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF)(Mildenhall et al. 2020) have shown remarkable
promise in synthesizing novel views of complex scenes from
sparse 2D observations. However, similar to most computer
vision algorithms such as semantic segmentation, object detection, and etc., the performance of these techniques is often compromised under varying exposure conditions(Zhang
and Ma 2023; Xu, Haochen, and Ma 2023; Zhang et al.
2023), a common occurrence in real-world image capture.
The challenge lies in the fact that images captured under
different exposure conditions can exhibit significant varia-

tions in color, brightness, and global detail(Wu et al. 2022;
Wu, Chen, and Ma 2022; Han et al. 2022). This variation
poses a significant problem for NeRF, which heavily rely on
consistent and high-quality input data to generate accurate
and realistic outputs. The limitations of the NeRF stem from
its viewer-centric approach, which calculates the light emission from a specific location to the viewer, neglecting the interplay between illumination and the scene itself. This emitted light is actually a result of environmental light reflecting
off the scene. This reflected light then undergoes further refraction and absorption, leading to attenuation as it travels
through the environment once more(Srinivasan et al. 2021).
As a result, the NeRF algorithm perceives a dimly lit scene
as a result of inadequate radiation from the 3D particles that
depict objects within the scene.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7882

