The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SpikingBERT: Distilling BERT to Train Spiking Language Models Using Implicit
Differentiation
Malyaban Bal, Abhronil Sengupta
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
mjb7906@psu.edu, sengupta@psu.edu
Abstract

ally very deep. In order to alleviate the operational complexity of LLMs, we aim to draw motivation from the brain. Integrating the mechanism and knowledge embodied in LLMs
into brain-inspired neural models hold immense promise for
creating a bio-plausible and energy-efficient solution.
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Ghosh-Dastidar and
Adeli 2009) are biologically inspired and communication
between two neurons in an SNN architecture occurs in the
form of spikes. This sparse spike-based information flow enables event-driven computation and communication in neuromorphic hardware, thereby resulting in significant energy
savings (Sengupta et al. 2019). SNN based architectures
have been also tested extensively on neuromorphic hardware
like Intel’s Loihi 2 processor (Davies et al. 2021) and have
demonstrated orders of magnitude energy efficiency.
Scaling SNNs to complex domains, like NLP, poses significant challenges mainly due to the absence of scalable and
efficient learning algorithms. The complexity of the tasks,
coupled with the growing depth of the required model architectures, renders the practical application of BPTT infeasible. In this work, backed by robust theoretical foundations
and empirical evidence, we explore a scalable framework for
training spiking LMs. We consider our spiking LM as a dynamical system that, given an input, progressively converges
to a steady-state (over Tconv time steps). Similar to most supervised learning algorithms, training is done in two phases,
viz. “forward” and “backward”. However, instead of learning through unrolling the computational graph over the operated time steps (like in BPTT), we leverage the convergence
of the average spiking rate (ASR) of the neurons to an equilibrium state during the “forward” phase of learning. Upon
convergence, we can derive fixed-point equations from the
underlying model and subsequently employ implicit differentiation on the attained steady-state to train the model parameters effectively as described later on.
Training using implicit differentiation is primarily used
in deep equilibrium models (DEQ) (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun
2019). Recently, this method has also been used for training
of convolution based spiking architectures (Xiao et al. 2021)
for vision related tasks. This methodology offers exceptional
memory efficiency during training unlike BPTT, which requires a huge amount of memory to store a large computational graph. It also eliminates the necessity of surrogate gradient methods by implicitly calculating gradients, thereby

Large language Models (LLMs), though growing exceedingly powerful, comprises of orders of magnitude less neurons and synapses than the human brain. However, it requires
significantly more power/energy to operate. In this work, we
propose a novel bio-inspired spiking language model (LM)
which aims to reduce the computational cost of conventional
LMs by drawing motivation from the synaptic information
flow in the brain. In this paper, we demonstrate a framework that leverages the average spiking rate of neurons at
equilibrium to train a neuromorphic spiking LM using implicit differentiation technique, thereby overcoming the nondifferentiability problem of spiking neural network (SNN)
based algorithms without using any type of surrogate gradient. The steady-state convergence of the spiking neurons also
allows us to design a spiking attention mechanism, which is
critical in developing a scalable spiking LM. Moreover, the
convergence of average spiking rate of neurons at equilibrium
is utilized to develop a novel ANN-SNN knowledge distillation based technique wherein we use a pre-trained BERT
model as “teacher” to train our “student” spiking architecture. While the primary architecture proposed in this paper
is motivated by BERT, the technique can be potentially extended to different kinds of LLMs. Our work is the first
one to demonstrate the performance of an operational spiking LM architecture on multiple different tasks in the GLUE
benchmark. Our implementation source code is available at
https://github.com/NeuroCompLab-psu/SpikingBERT.

Introduction
Large language Models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly
popular because of its broad applications in a variety of
natural language processing (NLP) tasks. LLMs like GPT3 (Brown et al. 2020) has shown additional characteristics
such as emergent abilities (Wei et al. 2022) which can only
be realized once the model size/compute increases above a
certain threshold. Recent times have witnessed commercial
deployment of LLMs enabling worldwide reach and positively impacting real-world users. However, the immense
power of LLMs comes at the cost of huge energy consumption both during the computationally expensive training phase as well as the inference phase. LLMs are characterized by large number of trainable parameters and are usuCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10998

