The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quantum Interference Model for Semantic Biases of Glosses
in Word Sense Disambiguation
Junwei Zhang1 , Ruifang He2 * , Fengyu Guo3 , Chang Liu4
1

Center for Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Medicine,
Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhejiang Province, China.
2
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application,
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
3
College of Computer and Information Engineering, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, China.
4
CSSC Systems Engineering Research Institute, Beijing, China.
zhangjunwei@him.cas.cn, rfhe@tju.edu.cn, fyguo@tjnu.edu.cn, liuc1100101110@163.com
Abstract

SensEmBERT (Scarlini, Pasini, and Navigli 2020a) and
ARES (Scarlini, Pasini, and Navigli 2020b) leverage extensive external knowledge to obtain context-enhanced word
sense representations. BEM (Blevins and Zettlemoyer 2020)
adopts the bi-encoder joint training method to leverage the
context information of the target words to improve the performance of the representations. EWISE (Kumar et al. 2019)
replaces the discrete word sense representation space with a
continuous space for better generalization performance on
both seen and unseen word senses, which mines the inherent constraints between word senses. In addition, methods
proposed by Hadiwinoto et al. (Hadiwinoto, Ng, and Gan
2019), Luo et al. (Luo et al. 2018b), Simov et al. (Simov,
Osenova, and Popov 2016) are also included.

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) aims to determine the
meaning of the target word according to the given context.
Currently, a single representation enhanced by glosses from
different dictionaries or languages is used to characterize
each word sense. By analyzing the similarity between glosses
of the same word sense, we find semantic biases among
them, revealing that the glosses have their own descriptive
perspectives. Therefore, the traditional approach of integrating all glosses by a single representation results in failing
to present the unique semantics revealed by the individual
glosses. In this paper, a quantum superposition state is employed to formalize the representations of multiple glosses
of the same word sense to reveal their distributions. Furthermore, the quantum interference model is leveraged to calculate the probability that the target word belongs to this superposition state. The advantage is that the interference term
can be regarded as a confidence level to guide word sense
recognition. Finally, experiments are performed under standard WSD evaluation framework and the latest cross-lingual
datasets, and the results verify the effectiveness of our model.

The above methods employ a single representation enhanced by introducing external knowledge or mining intrinsic constraints to describe each word sense, such as
glosses from different dictionaries or multilingual glosses.
By analyzing the similarity between glosses of the same
word sense, we find that there are significant semantic biases (Misono et al. 1997; Nikolov and d’Aquin 2020) between the glosses, as shown in Fig. 1. It reveals that it is
difficult to effectively coordinate glosses from different definition perspectives (or descriptions from different application scenarios) using a single representation. For example,
to characterize a set of features, picking only one of them
or taking their average results in inaccurate descriptions and
loss of information.

Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) aims to determine the
word sense of target words according to a given specific context (Bevilacqua et al. 2021; Navigli 2009; Edmonds and
Agirre 2006). WSD is a fundamental research topic in the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), and it has a
profound impact on subsequent high-level tasks, such as information retrieval (Zhong and Ng 2012) and machine translation (Parameswarappa 2011).
Accurate and easy-to-distinguish word sense representations can improve the performance of WSD systems (Bevilacqua et al. 2021; Blevins and Zettlemoyer
2020). However, limited by the scarcity of word sense annotations (namely glosses) in dictionaries, obtaining highquality word sense representations is an important challenge
for the WSD task (Scarlini, Pasini, and Navigli 2020b; Kumar et al. 2019; Zhang, He, and Guo 2023; Zhang et al.
2022; Zhang, He, and Guo 2022).

In this paper, we try to use multiple representations
to characterize a word sense to simultaneously reveal the
distribution of the representations, and then refer to the
distribution information to improve the accuracy of word
sense recognition. To this end, we adopt the superposition
state (Nielsen and Chuang 2002) in quantum mechanics to
formalize representations from different glosses of the same
word sense, and then reveal their distribution. Furthermore,
we employ the quantum interference model (Busemeyer
and Bruza 2012) to calculate the probability that the target word belongs to this superposition state. The advantage
of this construction is that the similarity between the target word and each gloss can be calculated, and the interference term derived by the quantum interference model can be

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19551

