The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalized Variational Inference via Optimal Transport
Jinjin Chi1,2 , Zhichao Zhang1,2 , Zhiyao Yang1,2 , Jihong Ouyang1,2 , Hongbin Pei3 *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
3
MOE KLINNS Lab, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
chijinjin616@gmail.com, zhangzc0929@163.com, yangzy9529@gmail.com, ouyj@jlu.edu.cn, peihongbin@xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Variational Inference (VI) has gained popularity as a flexible approximate inference scheme for computing posterior
distributions in Bayesian models. Original VI methods use
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to construct variational objectives. However, KL divergence has zero-forcing behavior
and is completely agnostic to the metric of the underlying
data distribution, resulting in bad approximations. To alleviate this issue, we propose a new variational objective by
using Optimal Transport (OT) distance, which is a metricaware divergence, to measure the difference between approximate posteriors and priors. The superior performance of OT
distance enables us to learn more accurate approximations.
We further enhance the objective by gradually including the
OT term using a hyperparameter λ for over-parameterized
models. We develop a Variational inference method with OT
(VOT) which presents a gradient-based black-box framework
for solving Bayesian models, even when the density function
of approximate distribution is not available. We provide the
consistency analysis of approximate posteriors and demonstrate the practical effectiveness on Bayesian neural networks
and variational autoencoders.

Figure 1: (a) An example of distribution q not exactly match
distribution p. (b) Three ordinal discrete distributions: Left:
(0.6,0.2,0.2). Center: (0.2,0.6,0.2). Right: (0.2,0.2,0.6). “→”
denotes a transfer with distances computed by the standard KL divergence, OT distance and α-divergences (α =
0.5, 1.5, 2.0).

Introduction

A different divergence results in the approximation having different properties. The most commonly used divergence is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence in standard
VI (Ranganath, Gerrish, and Blei 2014; Blei, Kucukelbir,
and McAuliffe 2017), which measures the dissimilarity between the approximate distribution q and the true posterior
p, i.e., KL(q ∥ p). However, KL divergence has some limitations. For example, it is not a proper metric, due to its
non-symmetry and violation of the triangle inequality. Notably, it exhibits zero-forcing behavior, that is, p(x) = 0
must imply q(x) = 0, leading to a severe underestimation of
the posterior variance and an inability to capture the multimodality within the posterior distribution (Blei, Kucukelbir,
and McAuliffe 2017). This becomes particularly problematic if p(x) = 0 and q(x) > 0, since KL(q ∥ p) is infinite.
To overcome the zero-forcing behavior, some efforts turn
to more general families of divergences such as the αdivergence due to its zero-avoiding behavior when α > 0
(Hernandez-Lobato et al. 2016; Dieng et al. 2017; Li and
Turner 2016). By choosing different α, one can get some divergences as special cases, including reverse KL divergence,

Variational Inference (VI) (Jordan et al. 1999; Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017; Nazaret and Blei 2022) is a
powerful tool in modern probabilistic machine learning for
approximating intractable posterior distributions. The idea
behind VI is to posit a family of distributions over the latent
variables and then find the closest member as the approximation of the true posterior by minimizing a divergence objective function. VI has many elegant and favorable properties such as the fact that it tends to be fast and easy to
scale to large data (Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017).
Therefore, VI is widely used to approximate posterior distributions for Bayesian deep learning (Shi, Titsias, and Mnih
2020; Rudner et al. 2021; Pei et al. 2022, 2020), deep generative models (Okada and Taniguchi 2019), among many
others.
A dominating factor for successful VI relies on the choice
of a proper divergence metric (Wang, Liu, and Liu 2018).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11534

