The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enumerating Safe Regions in Deep Neural Networks
with Provable Probabilistic Guarantees
Luca Marzari1 , Davide Corsi1 , Enrico Marchesini2 , Alessandro Farinelli1 , Ferdinando Cicalese1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Italy
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
{luca.marzari, davide.corsi, alessandro.farinelli, ferdinando.cicalese}@univr.it
emarche@mit.edu

Abstract

which results in a violation of the safety property. It is crucial to point out that due to the fact that the DNN’s input is
typically defined in a continuous domain any empirical evaluation of a safety property cannot rely on testing all the (infinitely many) possible input configurations. In contrast, FV
can provide provable assurances on the DNNs’ safety aspect.
However, despite the considerable advancements made by
DNN-verifiers over the years (Katz et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021), the binary result (safe or unsafe) provided by these tools is generally not sufficient to gain a comprehensive understanding of these functions. For instance,
when comparing two neural networks and employing an FV
tool that yields an unsafe answer for both (i.e., indicating the
existence of at least one violation point), we cannot distinguish whether one model exhibits only a small area of violation around the identified counterexample, while the other
may have multiple and widespread violation areas.
To overcome this limitation, a quantitative variant of FV,
asking for the number of violation points, has been proposed
and analyzed, first in (Baluta et al. 2019) for the restricted
class of Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) and more recently in (Marzari et al. 2023) for general DNNs. Following
(Marzari et al. 2023) we will henceforth refer to such counting problem as #DNN-Verification. Due to the #P-hardness
of the #DNN-Verification, both studies in (Baluta et al. 2019;
Marzari et al. 2023), focus on efficient approximate solutions, which allow the resolution of large-scale real-world
problems while providing provable (probabilistic) guarantees regarding the computed count.
Solutions to the #DNN-Verification problem allow to estimate the probability that a DNN violates a given property
but they do not provide information on the actual input configurations that are safe or violations for the property of interest.
On the other hand, knowledge of the distribution of safe
and unsafe areas in the input space is a key element to devise
approaches that can enhance the safety of DNNs, e.g., by
patching unsafe areas through re-training.
To this aim, we introduce the AllDNN-Verification problem , which corresponds to computing the set of all the areas
that do not result in a violation for a given DNN and a safety
property (i.e., enumerating all the safe areas of a property’s
input domain). The AllDNN-Verification is at least as hard as
#DNN-Verification, i.e., it is easily shown to be #P-Hard.

Identifying safe areas is a key point to guarantee trust for
systems that are based on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).
To this end, we introduce the AllDNN-Verification problem:
given a safety property and a DNN, enumerate the set of
all the regions of the property input domain which are safe,
i.e., where the property does hold. Due to the #P-hardness of
the problem, we propose an efficient approximation method
called ϵ-ProVe. Our approach exploits a controllable underestimation of the output reachable sets obtained via statistical
prediction of tolerance limits, and can provide a tight —with
provable probabilistic guarantees— lower estimate of the safe
areas. Our empirical evaluation on different standard benchmarks shows the scalability and effectiveness of our method,
offering valuable insights for this new type of verification of
DNNs.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have emerged as a groundbreaking technology revolutionizing various fields ranging
from autonomous navigation (Tai, Paolo, and Liu 2017;
Marzari et al. 2022) to image classification (O’Shea and
Nash 2015) and robotics for medical applications (Corsi
et al. 2023). However, while DNNs can perform remarkably
well in different scenarios, their reliance on massive data
for training can lead to unexpected behaviors and vulnerabilities in real-world applications. In particular, DNNs are
often considered ”black-box” systems, meaning their internal representation is not fully transparent. A crucial DNNs
weakness is the vulnerability to adversarial attacks (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Amir et al. 2023), wherein small, imperceptible
modifications to input data can lead to wrong and potentially
catastrophic decisions when deployed.
To this end, Formal Verification (FV) of DNNs (Katz et al.
2017; Liu et al. 2021) holds great promise to provide assurances on the safety aspect of these functions before the
actual deployment in real scenarios. In detail, the decision
version of the DNN-Verification problem takes as input a
trained DNN N and a safety property, typically expressed
as an input-output relationship for N , and aims at determining whether there exists at least an input configuration
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21387

