The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Solving Satisfiability Modulo Counting for Symbolic and Statistical AI Integration
with Provable Guarantees
Jinzhao Li, Nan Jiang, Yexiang Xue
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA
{li4255, jiang631, yexiang}@purdue.edu

Abstract

As a motivating SMC application, stochastic connectivity optimization searches for the optimal plan to reinforce
the network structure so its connectivity is preserved under
stochastic events – a central problem for a city planner who
works on securing her residents multiple paths to emergency
shelters in case of natural disasters. This problem is useful for disaster preparation (Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein
2015), bio-diversity protection (Dilkina and Gomes 2010),
internet resilience (Israeli and Wood 2002), social influence
maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2005), energy
security (Almeida et al. 2019), etc. It requires symbolic reasoning (satisfiability) to decide which roads to reinforce and
where to place emergency shelters, and statistical inference
(model counting) to reason about the number of paths to
shelters and the probabilities of natural disasters. Despite
successes in many use cases, previous approaches (Williams
and Snyder 2005; Conrad et al. 2012; Sheldon et al. 2010;
Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2014) found solutions lack of
certifiable guarantees, which are unfortunately in need for
policy adoption in this safety-related application. Besides,
their surrogate approximations of connectivity may overlook
important probabilistic scenarios. This results in suboptimal
quality of the generated plans. As application domains for
SMC solvers, this paper considers emergency shelter placement and supply chain network management – two important stochastic connectivity optimization problems.
It is challenging to solve SMC because of their highly intractable nature (NPPP -complete) (Park and Darwiche 2004)
– still intractable even with good satisfiability solvers (Biere
et al. 2009; Rossi, van Beek, and Walsh 2006; Braunstein,
Mézard, and Zecchina 2005) and model counters (Gomes,
Sabharwal, and Selman 2006a; Ermon et al. 2013b; Achlioptas and Theodoropoulos 2017; Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi
2013; Kisa et al. 2014; Cheng et al. 2012; Gogate and
Dechter 2012). Previous research on SMC solves either a
special case or domain-specific applications (Belanger and
McCallum 2016; Welling and Teh 2003; Yedidia, Freeman, and Weiss 2000; Wainwright and Jordan 2008; Fang,
Stone, and Tambe 2015; Conitzer and Sandholm 2006; Sheldon et al. 2010). The special case is called the Marginal
Maximum-A-Posterior (MMAP) problem, whose decision
version can be formulated as a special case of SMC (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2014; Liu and Ihler 2013; Mauá
and de Campos 2012; Jiang, Rai, and III 2011; Lee et al.

Satisfiability Modulo Counting (SMC) encompasses problems that require both symbolic decision-making and statistical reasoning. Its general formulation captures many realworld problems at the intersection of symbolic and statistical Artificial Intelligence. SMC searches for policy interventions to control probabilistic outcomes. Solving SMC is
challenging because of its highly intractable nature (NPPP complete), incorporating statistical inference and symbolic
reasoning. Previous research on SMC solving lacks provable guarantees and/or suffers from sub-optimal empirical
performance, especially when combinatorial constraints are
present. We propose XOR-SMC, a polynomial algorithm with
access to NP-oracles, to solve highly intractable SMC problems with constant approximation guarantees. XOR-SMC transforms the highly intractable SMC into satisfiability problems, by replacing the model counting in SMC with SAT formulae subject to randomized XOR constraints. Experiments
on solving important SMC problems in AI for social good
demonstrate that XOR-SMC outperforms several baselines both
in solution quality and running time.

Introduction
Symbolic and statistical approaches are two fundamental
driving forces of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Symbolic AI,
exemplified by SATisfiability (SAT) and constraint programming, finds solutions satisfying constraints but requires rigid
formulations and is difficult to include probabilities. Statistical AI captures uncertainty but often lacks constraint satisfaction. Integrating symbolic and statistical AI remains an
open field and has gained research attention recently (cpm
2023; nes 2023; Munawar et al. 2023).
Satisfiability Modulo Counting (SMC) is an umbrella
problem at the intersection of symbolic and statistical
AI. It encompasses problems that carry out symbolic
decision-making (satisfiability) mixed with statistical reasoning (model counting). SMC searches for policy interventions to control probabilistic outcomes. Formally, SMC is an
SAT problem involving predicates on model counts. Model
counting computes the number of models (i.e., solutions) to
an SAT formula. Its weighted form subsumes probabilistic
inference on Machine Learning (ML) models.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20481

