The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Supervised 3D Human Mesh Recovery from a Single Image with
Uncertainty-Aware Learning
Guoli Yan, Zichun Zhong, Jing Hua
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
{guoliyan, zichunzhong, jinghua}@wayne.edu

Abstract

Cipolla 2017), for a weak supervision. To further alleviate
the reliance on paired 2D and 3D ground-truths, attempts
are made to regress 3D human pose and shape in a selfsupervised manner (Tung et al. 2017a; Kundu et al. 2020;
Gong et al. 2022). However, there are still restrictions existing in the previous self-supervised approaches that hinder the generalizability. For example, Gong et al. (2022) requires SMPL data to generate synthetic training data for full
supervision, which inherently induces domain gap between
synthetic data and real data. Kundu et al. (2020) requires
video datasets to generate sequential image pairs for appearance consistency-based self-supervision, which limits its application on datasets with only single-shot images. Different
from these methods, we aim to achieve superior generalizability by designing a self-supervised framework that relies
only on self-consistency between intermediate representations of images and projected 2D predictions.
Recently, regressing 3D human mesh from intermediate
representations (e.g., 2D joints, silhouettes and IUV maps)
has achieved promising performance in the self-supervised
setting (Tung et al. 2017a; Mugaludi et al. 2021; Gong et al.
2022). These representations can be automatically extracted
from RGB images using off-the-shelf algorithms (Cao et al.
2019; Wu et al. 2019; Güler, Neverova, and Kokkinos 2018).
Many previous works (Pavlakos et al. 2018; Sengupta, Budvytis, and Cipolla 2020) have explored 2D joints and silhouettes as a combination to provide the pose and shape
clues. However, both of them are highly vulnerable to induce
pose ambiguity since two different 3D poses may have the
same 2D joints and silhouette projection. The depth maps
can alleviate such ambiguities and thus can be viewed as a
richer substitute to silhouettes. Therefore, we propose to utilize both 2D joints and depth maps that are automatically
extracted from images as proxy inputs to infer accurate 3D
human meshes.
Although depth maps have been employed in the multihuman reconstruction problem using depth-ordering consistency constraints (Jiang et al. 2020), they are still unexplored
for self-supervised 3D human reconstruction. To effectively
use depth information, we design depth trimming and depthpoint sampling methods for better alignment between input depth and predicted depth. Furthermore, we propose an
uncertainty-aware module to automatically learn the reliability of the inputs at body-joint level based on the con-

Despite achieving impressive improvement in accuracy, most
existing monocular 3D human mesh reconstruction methods require large-scale 2D/3D ground-truths for supervision, which limits their applications on unlabeled in-the-wild
data that is ubiquitous. To alleviate the reliance on 2D/3D
ground-truths, we present a self-supervised 3D human pose
and shape reconstruction framework that relies only on selfconsistency between intermediate representations of images
and projected 2D predictions. Specifically, we extract 2D
joints and depth maps from monocular images as proxy inputs, which provides complementary clues to infer accurate 3D human meshes. Furthermore, to reduce the impacts
from noisy and ambiguous inputs while better concentrate on
the high-quality information, we design an uncertainty-aware
module to automatically learn the reliability of the inputs at
body-joint level based on the consistency between 2D joints
and depth map. Experiments on benchmark datasets show
that our approach outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
at similar supervision levels.

Introduction
3D human mesh recovery from monocular images is a challenging task in computer vision that can be used for a variety of human-centric applications such as augmented reality, human-robot interaction, computer-assisted coaching,
etc. It has received increasing attention in recent years due
to the availability of parametric 3D human body model, e.g.
SCAPE (Anguelov et al. 2005) and SMPL (Loper et al.
2015), and advances in deep learning techniques (Tian et al.
2023). Although recent monocular 3D human mesh reconstruction methods have gained considerable improvement in
accuracy, most of these works are in a fully-supervised setting (Kanazawa et al. 2018; Kolotouros et al. 2019; Lin,
Wang, and Liu 2021a,b). Such approaches require largescale 2D/3D ground truth labels for supervision, restricting
their applications on unlabeled in-the-wild data that is abundantly available.
In the absence of 3D ground-truth labels, e.g., SMPL
pose and shape parameters, several recent works leverage
more easily obtained 2D ground-truth, such as 2D keypoints
and silhouette (Pavlakos et al. 2018; Tan, Budvytis, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6422

