The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond Grounding: Extracting Fine-Grained Event Hierarchies across Modalities
Hammad Ayyubi1 , Christopher Thomas2 , Lovish Chum1 , Rahul Lokesh3 , Long Chen4 , Yulei Niu1 ,
Xudong Lin1 , Xuande Feng1 , Jaywon Koo1 , Sounak Ray1 , Shih-Fu Chang1
1

Columbia University
2
Virginia Tech
3
Samsung Research America
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
hayyubi@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract

Grounding
➔ Cross-Modal
➔ Events on same
Semantic Level

Events describe happenings in our world that are of importance. Naturally, understanding events mentioned in multimedia content and how they are related forms an important
way of comprehending our world. Existing literature can infer
if events across textual and visual (video) domains are identical (via grounding) and thus, on the same semantic level.
However, grounding fails to capture the intricate cross-event
relations that exist due to the same events being referred to
on many semantic levels. For example, the abstract event of
“war” manifests at a lower semantic level through subevents
“tanks firing” (in video) and airplane “shot” (in text), leading
to a hierarchical, multimodal relationship between the events.
In this paper, we propose the task of extracting event hierarchies from multimodal (video and text) data to capture how the
same event manifests itself in different modalities at different
semantic levels. This reveals the structure of events and is critical to understanding them. To support research on this task,
we introduce the Multimodal Hierarchical Events (MultiHiEve) dataset. Unlike prior video-language datasets, MultiHiEve is composed of news video-article pairs, which
makes it rich in event hierarchies. We densely annotate a part
of the dataset to construct the test benchmark. We show the limitations of state-of-the-art unimodal and multimodal baselines
on this task. Further, we address these limitations via a new
weakly supervised model, leveraging only unannotated videoarticle pairs from MultiHiEve. We perform a thorough evaluation of our proposed method which demonstrates improved
performance on this task and highlight opportunities for future
research. Data: https://github.com/hayyubi/multihieve

1

A man in blue and
a man in grey
greet each other…

NLP Hierarchy

protest

➔ Unimodal
➔ Events on many
Semantic Levels

marching

fire

Ours
➔ Cross-Modal
➔ Events on many
Semantic Levels

H

H

H

trapped
I
(burning)

(evacuation)

Figure 1: Illustration of our task’s differences with other
related tasks. Unlike prior tasks, our task is multimodal and
relates events on multiple semantic scales. H: Hierarchical
Relation; I: Identical Relation.

Introduction

Human life is eventful. We use events to describe what is happening (e.g. war, protest, etc.), to tell stories (e.g. during the
war an airplane was shot down), and to depict our understanding of the world (e.g. coffin procession happens in a funeral).
Thus, understanding and analyzing events is a crucial part of
comprehending our world. A critical component towards this
goal is to figure out the manner in which the same real-world
event is manifested in multiple modalities of data.
To this end, previous studies have utilized grounding (Gao
et al. 2017) to determine whether events in textual and visual
domains are related identically at the same semantic level.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17664

However, events in different domains can be referred to at
various semantic levels, resulting in intricate hierarchical and
sibling relationships. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 2,
the event of “tanks firing” is a component of event “war”
and denotes it at a finer semantic level. Consequently, “tanks
firing” is a subevent of the parent event “war”. Moreover,
textual event of “airplane shot” is also a subevent of “war”,
and together with “tanks firing” reveal the constituents of
“war” event. This creates siblings relations between “airplane
shot” and “tank firing”. Additionally, subevents can be further decomposed into sub-subevents, creating a hierarchy of
events (see Figure 2). These event hierarchies organize events
based on the semantic scale at which they occur and expose
a hierarchical compositional structure, which is crucial for
understanding events and their fine-grained relationships.
Much of the prior work on extracting such event hierarchies has been done in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
for the text-only domain. However, as our world is multimodal, the information conveyed by a unimodal text event
hierarchy is inherently limited. For example, in Figure 1,
extracting “evacuation” subevent from video as a child of
parent event “fire” provides us with the additional fact that
relief efforts reached on time.

