The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Point Transformer with Federated Learning for Predicting Breast Cancer HER2
Status from Hematoxylin and Eosin-Stained Whole Slide Images
Bao Li1, 2 * , Zhenyu Liu2 * , Lizhi Shao2 , Bensheng Qiu1 , Hong Bu3† , Jie Tian1, 2, 4†
1

Center for Biomedical Imaging, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Imaging,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology,
School of Engineering Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing, China
libao1506@mail.ustc.edu.cn, bqiu@ustc.edu.cn, hongbu@scu.edu.cn, {zhenyu.liu, lizhi.shao, jie.tian}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Directly predicting human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) status from widely available hematoxylin and eosin
(HE)-stained whole slide images (WSIs) can reduce technical costs and expedite treatment selection. Accurately predicting HER2 requires large collections of multi-site WSIs.
Federated learning enables collaborative training of these
WSIs without gigabyte-size WSIs transportation and data
privacy concerns. However, federated learning encounters
challenges in addressing label imbalance in multi-site WSIs
from the real world. Moreover, existing WSI classification
methods cannot simultaneously exploit local context information and long-range dependencies in the site-end feature
representation of federated learning. To address these issues, we present a point transformer with federated learning for multi-site HER2 status prediction from HE-stained
WSIs. Our approach incorporates two novel designs. We propose a dynamic label distribution strategy and an auxiliary
classifier, which helps to establish a well-initialized model
and mitigate label distribution variations across sites. Additionally, we propose a farthest cosine sampling based on
cosine distance. It can sample the most distinctive features
and capture the long-range dependencies. Extensive experiments and analysis show that our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance at four sites with a total of 2687 WSIs.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that our model can generalize to two unseen sites with 229 WSIs. Code is available at:
https://github.com/boyden/PointTransformerFL

Figure 1: Local context information and long-range dependencies are both essential for WSI analysis

HER2 treatment decisions (Oh and Bang 2019). Routinely,
pathologists rely on HE-stained WSIs for breast cancer diagnosis, followed by specialized immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and/or costly in-situ hybridization (ISH) techniques (Wolff
et al. 2018) to determine HER2 status. By utilizing deep
learning, we can predict HER2 status from broadly accessible HE-stained WSIs without requiring IHC and/or ISH.
Achieving better WSI-level prediction requires large
amounts of WSIs. Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al.
2017) has already exhibited promising progress in WSI analysis (Lu et al. 2022b; Jiang, Wang, and Dou 2022; Ogier du
Terrail et al. 2023). It can incorporate a large amount of
multi-site WSIs without actual transportation of gigabytesize WSIs and reduce the risk of data leakage. However,
real-world WSIs exist non-independent and identically distributed (non-i.i.d.) scenarios. For HER2 classification, labeling imbalance and varying histological specimen preparation at different sites can adversely affect the overall performance. Although many studies have addressed the noni.i.d. challenges (Hu et al. 2022; Guan and Liu 2023; Zhuang
and Lyu 2023) in natural scenes, these methods remain a major gap in real-world WSIs compared to centralized learning.
In the site-end feature representation, WSIs are cut into
patches, and these patches’ local context information and

Introduction
Hematoxylin and eosin (HE)-stained whole slide images
(WSIs) are now being used beyond visible tasks by applying deep learning methods (Lu et al. 2021; Shao et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2022). These images contain subtle molecular characteristics that can be inferred using deep learning (Kather
et al. 2020; Farahmand et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2022c). In breast
cancer, accurately predicting human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status is crucial for guiding anti* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3000

