The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

KG-TREAT: Pre-training for Treatment Effect Estimation by
Synergizing Patient Data with Knowledge Graphs
Ruoqi Liu1 , Lingfei Wu2 , Ping Zhang1
1

The Ohio State University
2
Anytime.AI
liu.7324@osu.edu, lwu@anytime-ai.com, zhang.10631@osu.edu

Abstract

of these medical concepts and identifying potential confounders to reduce estimation bias remains difficult. The
sheer volume of data does not necessarily equate to rich,
specific instances that the model needs to learn effectively.
Therefore, we turn to biomedical knowledge graphs
(KGs) - structured representations of diverse medical concepts and their relations. By synergizing potentially sparse
patient data with domain-specific knowledge from KGs, we
can derive meaningful insights and identify key confounders
for adjustment in TEE.
Despite its potential, synergizing patient data with KGs
poses several challenges. Firstly, utilization of the entire
KG can introduce noise that is irrelevant to patient data.
While recent works have suggested constructing personalized knowledge graphs (PKGs) by retrieving relevant medical information for each patient from the entire KG to mitigate noise (Ye et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023),
these methods fail to distinguish among various types of
medical codes, such as treatments, covariates, and outcomes.
This issue can lead to bias and spurious correlations in TEE.
Secondly, the primary application scenario of existing works
is clinical risk prediction (Choi et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2018a),
neglecting the encoding of vital causal relationships among
covariates, treatments, and outcomes unique to TEE. Additionally, existing methods (Ye et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2023)
often incorporate patient data and KGs only at the final prediction stage, leading to superficial combination and inefficient information utilization.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel
pre-training and fine-tuning framework for TEE, named
KG-TREAT, by synergizing patient data and KGs. Firstly,
we address the bias issue by constructing dual-focus PKGs,
one focusing on the relationship between treatment and
covariates (treatment-covariate PKG) and the other focusing on the relationship between outcome and covariates
(outcome-covariate PKG). These PKGs explicitly capture
and represent the key relationships and dependencies among
treatments, outcomes, and covariates, thereby mitigating the
risk of spurious correlations. Secondly, we present a deep bilevel attention synergy method, namely DIVE. The first level
of attention applies a treatment(outcome) attention mechanism to patient data and specific treatment(outcome) information from PKGs, explicitly encoding the complex relationships among covariates, treatments, and outcomes. The

Treatment effect estimation (TEE) is the task of determining
the impact of various treatments on patient outcomes. Current
TEE methods fall short due to reliance on limited labeled data
and challenges posed by sparse and high-dimensional observational patient data. To address the challenges, we introduce
a novel pre-training and fine-tuning framework, KG-TREAT,
which synergizes large-scale observational patient data with
biomedical knowledge graphs (KGs) to enhance TEE. Unlike previous approaches, KG-TREAT constructs dual-focus
KGs and integrates a deep bi-level attention synergy method
for in-depth information fusion, enabling distinct encoding
of treatment-covariate and outcome-covariate relationships.
KG-TREAT also incorporates two pre-training tasks to ensure a thorough grounding and contextualization of patient
data and KGs. Evaluation on four downstream TEE tasks
shows KG-TREAT’s superiority over existing methods, with
an average improvement of 7% in Area under the ROC Curve
(AUC) and 9% in Influence Function-based Precision of Estimating Heterogeneous Effects (IF-PEHE). The effectiveness
of our estimated treatment effects is further affirmed by alignment with established randomized clinical trial findings.

Introduction
Treatment effect estimation (TEE), which identifies the
causal effects of treatment options on patient outcomes
given observational covariates, is a pivotal task in healthcare (Glass et al. 2013). Yet, existing TEE methods (Shalit,
Johansson, and Sontag 2017; Shi, Blei, and Veitch 2019;
Zhang et al. 2022) are limited in both generalizability and
accuracy due to their dependence on small, task-specific
datasets that might not fully encompass the complex relationships among covariates, treatments, and outcomes.
To address this, one might consider deploying foundation
models (Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020; Bommasani
et al. 2021) trained on large datasets, to improve generalizability. However, the application of foundation models to
TEE is not straightforward. Medical data, often characterized by high-dimensional and sparse medical concepts, continue to pose challenges to these models (Huang, Altosaar,
and Ranganath 2019; Rasmy et al. 2021). Even with largescale datasets, developing a domain-specific understanding
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8805

