The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MKG-FENN: A Multimodal Knowledge Graph Fused End-to-End Neural
Network for Accurate Drug–Drug Interaction Prediction
Di Wu1,2 , Wu Sun1 , Yi He3 * , Zhong Chen4 , Xin Luo2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
4
School of Computing, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA
wudi.cigit@gmail.com, s220201081@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, yihe@cs.odu.edu, zhong.chen@siu.edu, luoxin21@gmail.com
Abstract
Taking incompatible multiple drugs together may cause adverse interactions and side effects on the body. Accurate prediction of drug-drug interaction (DDI) events is essential for
avoiding this issue. Recently, various artificial intelligencebased approaches have been proposed for predicting DDI
events. However, DDI events are associated with complex relationships and mechanisms among drugs, targets, enzymes,
transporters, molecular structures, etc. Existing approaches
either partially or loosely consider these relationships and
mechanisms by a non-end-to-end learning framework, resulting in sub-optimal feature extractions and fusions for prediction. Different from them, this paper proposes a Multimodal
Knowledge Graph Fused End-to-end Neural Network (MKGFENN) that consists of two main parts: multimodal knowledge graph (MKG) and fused end-to-end neural network
(FENN). First, MKG is constructed by comprehensively exploiting DDI events-associated relationships and mechanisms
from four knowledge graphs of drugs-chemical entities, drugsubstructures, drugs-drugs, and molecular structures. Correspondingly, a four channels graph neural network is designed
to extract high-order and semantic features from MKG. Second, FENN designs a multi-layer perceptron to fuse the extracted features by end-to-end learning. With such designs,
the feature extractions and fusions of DDI events are guaranteed to be comprehensive and optimal for prediction. Through
extensive experiments on real drug datasets, we demonstrate
that MKG-FENN exhibits high accuracy and significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art models in predicting DDI events.
The source code and supplementary file of this article are
available on: https://github.com/wudi1989/MKG-FENN.

Figure 1: The examples of taking incompatible multiple
drugs together may cause adverse interactions and side effects on the body.

may be impaired, as illustrated in Figure 1. To avoid the negative consequences associated with DDI events and maximize their benefits, it is crucial to proactively identify such
interactions in advance.
DDI events prediction is essential for addressing this
issue. Recently, various artificial intelligence-based approaches have been proposed for achieving DDI events prediction, such as utilizing graph neural networks (GNNs) to
analyze the structural similarity of chemicals (Huang et al.
2020), employing semi-supervised learning to extract valuable information from labeled and unlabeled drug data (Chu
et al. 2019), and leveraging knowledge graph for predicting the pharmacological effects of multi-typed DDIs (Yu
et al. 2021). Notably, DDI events are associated with complex relationships and mechanisms among drugs, targets,
enzymes, transporters, molecular structures, etc. (Cui et al.
2020; Lin et al. 2020). To exploit such complex relationships
and mechanisms, some efforts have been made (Deng et al.
2020), including drug features analyzed (Chu et al. 2019),
graph learning-based (Yu et al. 2021), and hybrid modeling
(Lyu et al. 2021) approaches. However, these approaches
either partially or loosely consider such relationships and
mechanisms by a non-end-to-end learning framework, making the cross-modality complementarity and potential relationships between different aspects of DDI events be not
well exploited. As a result, the feature extractions and fusions of DDI events are sub-optimal for predictions.
To address this issue, this study proposes a novel Multi-

Introduction
The joint use of multiple drugs is very common in clinical
care (Zitnik, Agrawal, and Leskovec 2018). While incompatible multiple drugs may cause adverse drug-drug interaction (DDI) events that have harmful side effects on the body
(Vilar et al. 2014). For example, taking Abemaciclib alongside Bosutinib can lead to an increase in serum concentrations of Abemaciclib; Conversely, if Abemaciclib is taken
at the same time as Clemastine, Abemaciclib’s metabolism
* Corresponding author: Dr. Yi He (yihe@cs.odu.edu)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10216

