The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Levenshtein Distance Embedding
with Poisson Regression for DNA Storage
Xiang Wei* 1 , Alan J.X. Guo* †1 , Sihan Sun1 , Mengyi Wei1 , Wei Yu2
1

Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, No. 92, Weijin Road, Tianjin, 300072, China
2
China Mobile Research Institute, No. 32, Xuanwumen West Street, Beijing, 100053, China
{weixiang, jiaxiang.guo, sihansun, mengyi.wei}@tju.edu.cn, YuweiNKU@outlook.com

Abstract

a method of calculating Levenshtein distance in linear complexity is not reachable. The computational complexity of
the Levenshtein distance poses limitations on its application at a large scale, particularly in the field of DNA storage (Rashtchian et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2020).
The applications of the Levenshtein distance encompass a
wide range of domains, including optical character recognition (Haldar and Mukhopadhyay 2011), text plagiarism detection (Su et al. 2008), entity linking (Jiang et al. 2014),
etc. In the field of bioinformatics, where nucleic acids and
proteins are represented as sequences of their basic building blocks, the Levenshtein distance finds widespread applications. It is utilized in tasks such as multiple sequence
alignment (Li and Homer 2010), biological database retrieval (Berger, Waterman, and Yu 2020), sequence hierarchical clustering (Sberro et al. 2019), etc. In recent years,
the rapid development of DNA storage (Goldman et al.
2013; Church, Gao, and Kosuri 2012; Grass et al. 2015) has
introduced numerous applications of the Levenshtein distance, including sequence clustering (Rashtchian et al. 2017;
Zorita, Cuscó, and Filion 2015; Qu, Yan, and Wu 2022; Logan et al. 2022), sequence alignment (Li and Homer 2010;
Corso et al. 2021), synchronization channel coding (Press
et al. 2020; Bar-Lev, Etzion, and Yaakobi 2023; Welzel et al.
2023), etc. However, as the scale of information stored by
DNA molecules continues to grow, the computational complexity of the Levenshtein distance becomes a significant
challenge for the aforementioned applications.
To address the challenge of high computational complexity, various methods have been proposed to approximate the
Levenshtein distance. For example, in (Ostrovsky and Rabani 2007), the authors utilized `1 distance to approximate
the Levenshtein distance of 0, 1-words with low distortion.
Another approach, the CGK algorithm (Chakraborty, Goldenberg, and Kouckỳ 2016), maps the Levenshtein distance to
Hamming distance through a randomized injective embedding. Both of these methods use low-complexity distances
as approximations for the Levenshtein distance.
Neural network-based methods have also been explored.
The gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014) has been
adopted to embed the Levenshtein distance into Euclidean
space (Zhang, Yuan, and Indyk 2019), preserving the relative order between the sequences. In (Dai et al. 2020),
a CNN-based embedding pipeline for the Levenshtein dis-

Efficient computation or approximation of Levenshtein distance, a widely-used metric for evaluating sequence similarity, has attracted significant attention with the emergence
of DNA storage and other biological applications. Sequence
embedding, which maps Levenshtein distance to a conventional distance between embedding vectors, has emerged as
a promising solution. In this paper, a novel neural networkbased sequence embedding technique using Poisson regression is proposed. We first provide a theoretical analysis of the
impact of embedding dimension on model performance and
present a criterion for selecting an appropriate embedding dimension. Under this embedding dimension, the Poisson regression is introduced by assuming the Levenshtein distance
between sequences of fixed length following a Poisson distribution, which naturally aligns with the definition of Levenshtein distance. Moreover, from the perspective of the distribution of embedding distances, Poisson regression approximates the negative log likelihood of the chi-squared distribution and offers advancements in removing the skewness.
Through comprehensive experiments on real DNA storage
data, we demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
The Levenshtein distance (Levenshtein et al. 1966) (also
known as the edit distance) between two sequences is defined as the minimum number of insertions, deletions, or
substitutions required to modify one sequence into another.
The dynamic programming algorithm introduced in (Wagner and Fischer 1974) is commonly employed for accurate calculation of the Levenshtein distance. However, this
method has a computational complexity of O(mn) for
two strings of length m and n. According to Theorem 1
from (Backurs and Indyk 2015),
Theorem 1. Given two sequences of length n, the Levenshtein distance can’t be computed in time O(n2−δ ), ∀ δ > 0,
otherwise the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis would be
violated.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15796

