The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Tree-of-Reasoning Question Decomposition for Complex Question Answering with
Large Language Models
Kun Zhang1,2 * , Jiali Zeng3 , Fandong Meng3 , Yuanzhuo Wang1,2,4† , Shiqi Sun4 ,
Long Bai2 , Huawei Shen1 , Jie Zhou3
1

CAS Key Laboratory of AI Security, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
4
Big Data Academy, Zhongke
{zhangkun18z, wangyuanzhuo}@ict.ac.cn, lemonzeng@tencent.com

Introduction

Abstract

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited
an impressive capability for question-answering tasks, particularly in scenarios where resolving complex questions requires a multi-hop reasoning process (Touvron et al. 2023;
OpenAI 2023). For example, Wei et al. (2022) proposes
few-shot chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting, which enables
LLMs to generate intermediate reasoning steps explicitly before predicting the final answer with a few manual step-bystep reasoning demonstration examples. However, the intricate nature of complex questions remains a significant challenge. To address this, Kojima et al. (2022) introduces zeroshot CoT, which eliminates the need for manually crafted
examples in prompts by appending “Let’s think step by step”
to the target problem fed to LLMs. This simple prompting strategy surprisingly yields performance similar to fewshot CoT without requiring any manual clues. To mitigate
the issue of generating incorrect information (i.e., hallucination) while retaining real-time knowledge, several studies
have incorporated information retrieval (IR) techniques into
LLM reasoning (Press et al. 2022; Khattab et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2023; Kandpal et al. 2023; Azamfirei, Kudchadkar, and
Fackler 2023). This integration of IR significantly improves
the quality of LLM-generated answers.
Although COT with IR methods has achieved great success in solving complex questions, they still face two challenges. Challenge 1: Multi-compositional Types of Subquestions. The interrelations among the sub-questions of
complex questions can be categorized into two distinct
classes (Pan et al. 2020): 1) nest-type: the solution of the
sub-question depends on the answers of the previous subquestion; 2) branch-type: the solution needs to summarize
or compare the answers of other sub-questions. As shown
in Figure, previous methods mainly consider single compositional type questions,i.e., nested-type questions through
the formulation of a sequence of prompt strategies. However, they tend to disregard branch-type questions and multicompositional type questions, resulting in diminished efficacy when tackling such questions. The hallucinations encountered during decomposition also exacerbate this disadvantage. Challenge 2: Inefficient Retrieval. Complex questions are often lengthy and contain abundant information,

Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated
remarkable performance across various Natual Language
Processing tasks. In the field of multi-hop reasoning, the
Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompt method has emerged as a
paradigm, using curated stepwise reasoning demonstrations
to enhance LLM’s ability to reason and produce coherent
rational pathways. To ensure the accuracy, reliability, and
traceability of the generated answers, many studies have incorporated information retrieval (IR) to provide LLMs with
external knowledge. However, existing CoT with IR methods decomposes questions into sub-questions based on a single compositionality type, which limits their effectiveness for
questions involving multiple compositionality types. Additionally, these methods suffer from inefficient retrieval, as
complex questions often contain abundant information, leading to the retrieval of irrelevant information inconsistent with
the query’s intent. In this work, we propose a novel question
decomposition framework called TRQA for multi-hop question answering, which addresses these limitations. Our framework introduces a reasoning tree (RT) to represent the structure of complex questions. It consists of four components:
the Reasoning Tree Constructor (RTC), the Question Generator (QG), the Retrieval and LLM Interaction Module (RAIL),
and the Answer Aggregation Module (AAM). Specifically,
the RTC predicts diverse sub-question structures to construct
the reasoning tree, allowing a more comprehensive representation of complex questions. The QG generates sub-questions
for leaf-node in the reasoning tree, and we explore two methods for QG: prompt-based and T5-based approaches. The
IR module retrieves documents aligned with sub-questions,
while the LLM formulates answers based on the retrieved information. Finally, the AAM aggregates answers along the
reason tree, producing a definitive response from bottom to
top. We evaluate our proposed framework on four benchmark datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our
proposed methods consistently outperform baseline methods
outperform strong baselines by a substantial margin across all
datasets.

* The work is done during internship at WeChat AI.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19560

