The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

One Step Closer to Unbiased Aleatoric Uncertainty Estimation
Wang Zhang1 , Ziwen Martin Ma2 , Subhro Das3 ,
Tsui-Wei Lily Weng4 , Alexandre Megretski1 , Luca Daniel1 , Lam M. Nguyen5
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
5
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
Abstract

to analyze the data, and can be reduced by increasing the
size of the training data, which in turn increases the confidence in the model. Distinguishing between aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainties can be beneficial in a wide range
of applications. For example, aleatoric uncertainty can be
used to recover the measurement tolerance of an instrument,
while epistemic uncertainty can guide optimization algorithms during training (Choi et al. 2021) or help to identify
outliers during prediction (Seeböck et al. 2019).
There have been recent developments in deep learning
research focused on techniques to capture aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainties. To estimate the model uncertainty,
one popular approach is to use Bayesian neural networks
(Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015; Blundell et al. 2015),
which are neural networks that incorporate prior probability distributions over the model parameters. Another approach is to use ensemble methods (Parker 2013; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017), where multiple
models are trained on the same dataset and their predictions are combined to produce a final prediction that incorporates epistemic uncertainties. Gal and Ghahramani (2016)
showed the Monte Carlo dropout in deep learning approximates the Bayesian inference. A more recent branch directly
estimates the aleatoric uncertainty together with the epistemic uncertainty (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell
2017; Amini et al. 2020; Valdenegro-Toro and Mori 2022),
by adding a parameterized variance term to the original
stochastic prediction model. This addition aims to capture
aleatoric uncertainty with a commonly used variance attenuation loss1 . Although it may appear to be capable to handle
two sources of uncertainty, this method has several significant drawbacks. Seitzer et al. (2022); Stirn et al. (2023) observed a decrease in the prediction performance when training it together with the variance head, which is attributed
to the loss function being heavily biased on well-predicted
samples with small variances. The prediction model performance difference presents additional challenges to the fair
evaluation of the variance approximation module. Additionally, as will be further discussed in this paper2 , the anticipated variance term under the ideal loss function exceeds
solely the aleatoric uncertainty. Indeed, in the prior works

Neural networks are powerful tools in various applications, and quantifying their uncertainty is crucial for reliable
decision-making. In the deep learning field, the uncertainties
are usually categorized into aleatoric (data) and epistemic
(model) uncertainty. In this paper, we point out that the existing popular variance attenuation method highly overestimates aleatoric uncertainty. To address this issue, we propose
a new estimation method by actively de-noising the observed
data. By conducting a broad range of experiments, we demonstrate that our proposed approach provides a much closer approximation to the actual data uncertainty than the standard
method.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NN) are capable of performing various
regression and classification tasks in computer vision and
natural language processing, ranging from basic multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) that approximate straightforward functions to more sophisticated structures like transformers. As
the capabilities of neural networks continue to expand, it
becomes increasingly important to acknowledge the limitations of machine learning techniques. For instance, how does
the corrupted data affect the trained model? And when does
the model lack confidence in its predictions? Since most the
neural network approaches have failed to capture the prediction confidence, quantifying the uncertainties for the deep
learning methods becomes a crucial research topic.
In the machine learning literature, the sources of uncertainty can be classified into two categories (Der Kiureghian
and Ditlevsen 2009; Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021; Gal
et al. 2016): (1) aleatoric uncertainty, or data uncertainty, and
(2) epistemic uncertainty, or model uncertainty. Aleatoric
uncertainty is a measure of the inherent complexity or randomness that arises from the process of observing data from
a true system, such as the noise in the measurements obtained from devices. This type of uncertainty is considered “irreducible” because no amount of additional data can
eliminate the inherent stochasticity of the observation process. In contrast, epistemic uncertainty refers to the uncertainty that arises from the parameters of the model used

1

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

16857

see Equation (2)
see Section 2.2

