The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unlocking the Power of Open Set: A New Perspective for Open-Set Noisy Label
Learning
Wenhai Wan* , Xinrui Wang* , Ming-Kun Xie, Shao-Yuan Li† , Sheng-Jun Huang, Songcan Chen
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence

Abstract
…

Learning from noisy data has attracted much attention, where
most methods focus on closed-set label noise. However, a
more common scenario in the real world is the presence of
both open-set and closed-set noise. Existing methods typically identify and handle these two types of label noise separately by designing a specific strategy for each type. However, in many real-world scenarios, it would be challenging to
identify open-set examples, especially when the dataset has
been severely corrupted. Unlike the previous works, we explore how models behave when faced with open-set examples, and find that a part of open-set examples gradually get
integrated into certain known classes, which is beneficial for
the separation among known classes. Motivated by the phenomenon, we propose a novel two-step contrastive learning
method CECL (Class Expansion Contrastive Learning) which
aims to deal with both types of label noise by exploiting the
useful information of open-set examples. Specifically, we incorporate some open-set examples into closed-set classes to
enhance performance while treating others as delimiters to
improve representative ability. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets with diverse label noise demonstrate the effectiveness of CECL.

Clean samples

…

…

Closed-set noise

Open-set noise

Labeled as Cat

…

…

…

Clean samples

Closed-set noise

Open-set noise

Labeled as Dog
…
Clean samples

…

…

Closed-set noise

Open-set noise

Labeled as Elephant

Figure 1: An example of open-set noisy label learning problem. {cat, dog, elephant} is the concerned known classes.
The left, middle, and right columns respectively show images that are correctly labeled, wrongly labeled with closedset and open-set noise.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in various tasks. The great success is primarily attributed to large amounts of data with high-quality annotations, which are expensive or even inaccessible in practice.
Actually, datasets collected via search engines or crowdsourcing platforms inevitably involve noisy labels (Xiao
et al. 2015; Li et al. 2018; Li, Huang, and Chen 2021; Shi, Li,
and Huang 2023). Given the powerful learning capacities of
DNNs, the model will ultimately overfit the label noise and
lead to poor generalization performance (Arpit et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2021a). To mitigate this issue, it is significant to
develop robust models for learning from noisy labels.
As shown in Figure 1, we divide the mislabeled examples
into two types: closed-set and open-set. More specifically, a
closed-set mislabeled example occurs when its true class fall
within the set of known classes {cat, dog, elephant}, while

an open-set mislabeled example occurs when its true class
does not fall within the set of known classes in the training data. To our knowledge, existing works mainly focus
on closed-set scenarios (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Li et al.
2022a), while a more common scenario in the real world is
the presence of both closed-set and open-set.
The problem has been formalized as a learning framework
called Open-Set Noisy Label Learning (OSNLL) (Wang
et al. 2018), which is also the main focus of our work. The
most challenging issue in OSNLL arises due to the presence
of open-set examples. The detection and handling of these
examples pose a significant challenge, especially when their
distribution is unknown. Several papers (Wang et al. 2018;
Yao et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2022) have proposed specific
methods and frameworks by identifying mislabeled open-set
examples and minimizing their impact. However, empirical
findings (Morteza and Li 2022) and theoretical results (Fang
et al. 2022) suggest that some open-set examples become
increasingly difficult for the model to distinguish. In some
cases, it is even impossible to recognize open-set examples

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15438

