The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Follow Your Pose: Pose-Guided Text-to-Video Generation Using Pose-Free Videos
Yue Ma1 * † , Yingqing He2 * , Xiaodong Cun3 , Xintao Wang3 , Siran Chen4 , Xiu Li1‡ , Qifeng Chen2‡
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen, China
{y-ma21, lixiu}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yhebm@connect.ust.hk, {vinthony,xintao.alpha}@gmail.com
Chensiran17@mails.ucas.ac.cn, cqf@ust.hk
✅ Well-designed
Pose Estimation Algorithm

Abstract
Generating text-editable and pose-controllable character
videos have an imperious demand in creating various digital human. Nevertheless, this task has been restricted by
the absence of a comprehensive dataset featuring paired
video-pose captions and the generative prior models for
videos. In this work, we design a novel two-stage training
scheme that can utilize easily obtained datasets (i.e., image pose pair and pose-free video) and the pre-trained textto-image (T2I) model to obtain the pose-controllable character videos. Specifically, in the first stage, only the poseimage pairs are used only for controllable text-to-image generation. We learn a zero-initialized convolutional encoder to
encode the pose information. In the second stage, we finetune the motion of the above network via a pose-free video
dataset by adding the learnable temporal self-attention and
reformed cross-frame self-attention blocks. Powered by our
new designs, our method successfully generates continuously
pose-controllable character videos while keeping the concept
generation and composition ability from the pre-trained T2I
model. The code and models are available on https://followyour-pose.github.io/.

PoseImage
Pairs

✅ Pose-Guided
Coherent Video Generation

♨

Training
Posefree
videos

The policeman
is dancing on
the street ,
Cartoon style

✅ Easy to Obtain!

Figure 1: High-level overview of training scheme. Images
with diverse characters are easy to get from the public largescale captioned image dataset (Schuhmann et al. 2021).
We can exploit the off-the-shelf pose estimation algorithm
to obtain accurate pose-image pairs. However, captioned
video datasets of diverse characters are absent. Therefore,
we leverage the in-the-wild videos which are easy to obtain
to learn temporal coherence. Through this separate learning
strategy, our tunable blocks also learn to synthesize creative
and diverse videos with pose-specific motion while maintaining realistic temporal coherence.

Introduction

In this work, we aim to create high-quality character
videos from text descriptions and also control their pose via
the given control signal, i.e., human skeletons. To achieve
this, we design an efficient training scheme using easily obtained image datasets and the pre-trained T2I models for controllable text-to-video generation. Specifically,
given image-pose pairs and pose-free videos, we design a
novel two-stage training strategy with carefully tuned blocks
through a pretrained text-to-image model, i.e., stable diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022). In the first stage, we add the
control ability into the pre-trained text-to-image model via
an additional multi-layer pose encoder. In the second stage,
we train our model on pose-free videos to learn temporal
consistency, such as coherent backgrounds, and avoid flickering. To make the pre-trained T2I model suitable for video
inputs, we make several key modifications. Firstly, we add
extra temporal self-attention layers (Singer et al. 2022; Wu
et al. 2022; Qi et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023a,b; He et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2023) to the stable diffusion network. Secondly, inspired by the recent one-shot video generation model (Wu
et al. 2022), we reshape the attention to cross-frame attention

Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) synthesis (Rombach et al. 2022; Ho et al. 2022a; Ma, Jia, and Zhou 2023)
have demonstrated impressive performance and creativity,
enabling the conversion of textural descriptions into visually
compelling creations. Such AI generative systems excel in
various aspects, including rendering realistic and diverse appearances (Mou et al. 2023; Zhang and Agrawala 2023; Ma
et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023), powerful editing (Hertz et al.
2022; Qi et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023c), composition (Avrahami, Fried, and Lischinski 2022), generalization capabilities, and creating new art that satisfies people’s imagination (Mou et al. 2023; Zhang and Agrawala 2023). However,
in text-to-video generation, there still have limited applications due to the restriction of the high-quality video dataset
and the video generative prior model.
* Equal contributions.
†

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

4117

