The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAT-Based Techniques for Lexicographically Smallest Finite Models
Mikoláš Janota1 , Choiwah Chow1 , João Araújo2, 3 , Michael Codish4 , Petr Vojtěchovský5
1

2

Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
Center for Mathematics and Applications (NOVA Math), Portugal
3
Department of Mathematics, NOVA FCT, Portugal
4
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
5
University of Denver, USA
mikolas.janota@cvut.cz

Abstract

ways of assigning a canonical form to a graph so that any
two are isomorphic if and only if their canonical forms are
the same, etc. But helping with decision problems is just
one of the applications of canonical forms. When we want
to enumerate all structures of a given type (e.g., all triangulated 3-manifolds) up to some size (e.g., on 11 vertices (Lutz
2008, 2009)), it suffices to generate the canonical forms and
ignore all the rest. These are just a few examples as the applications of canonical forms are countless, including applications to topics as far as chemistry (Weininger, Weininger,
and Weininger 1989; Schneider, Sayle, and Landrum 2015).
The key feature of canonical systems of representatives is
that two objects belong to the same equivalence class if and
only if their canonical forms are equal.
A largely widespread technique to assign canonical forms
to mathematical objects is to associate each object in the
class with a vector and then order all the vectors lexicographically: the canonical object will be the object with
the smallest vector. We will call this the lexicographically
smallest representative, lexmin for short. In constraint programming literature, a related term lex-leader is defined,
cf. Walsh (2012); Peter et al. (2014). Lexmin for graphs is
also extensively studied in the literature, cf. Babai and Luks
(1983); Crawford et al. (1996).
In computational algebra, this idea naturally translates to
concatenating the rows of a multiplication table into a single vector. This canonical form was used as early as 1955
to calculate all the distinct1 semigroups of order 4. More recently, Jipsen maintains an online database of a variety of
mathematical structures stored as lexmin (Jipsen 2016), the
GAP package Smallsemi enables calculating lexmin semigroups (Distler and Mitchell 2022).
Figure 1 shows a motivating example of a possible multiplication table for an operation ∗ together with its lexicographically smallest representative ⋄. It is relatively easy for
a human to detect that ∗ is a quasigroup (aka Latin square),
however, further properties are harder to see. In contrast, the
multiplication table of ⋄ is much easier to comprehend—
we see that the operation corresponds to addition modulo 7,
which is in fact the unique group of order 7 (the cyclic group
Z7 ).

This paper proposes SAT-based techniques to calculate a specific normal form of a given finite mathematical structure
(model). The normal form is obtained by permuting the domain elements so that the representation of the structure is
lexicographically smallest possible. Such a normal form is
of interest to mathematicians as it enables easy cataloging of
algebraic structures. In particular, two structures are isomorphic precisely when their normal forms are the same. This
form is also natural to inspect as mathematicians have been
using it routinely for many decades.
We develop a novel approach where a SAT solver is used in a
black-box fashion to compute the smallest representative. The
approach constructs the representative gradually and searches
the space of possible isomorphisms, requiring a small number of variables. However, the approach may lead to a large
number of SAT calls and therefore we devise propagation
techniques to reduce this number. The paper focuses on finite structures with a single binary operation (encompassing
groups, semigroups, etc.). However, the approach is generalizable to arbitrary finite structures. We provide an implementation of the proposed algorithm and evaluate it on a variety
of algebraic structures.

Introduction
Finite model finding of first-order or higher-order logic has
a long-standing tradition in automated reasoning. A number of techniques have been researched in SAT (Claessen
and Sörensson 2003), constraint programming (Audemard,
Benhamou, and Henocque 2006; Zhang 1996; Zhang and
Zhang 1995), or SMT (Reynolds et al. 2013a,b). In theorem proving and software verification, finite models are typically used to identify incorrectly stated theorems. In computational algebra, mathematicians use finite model finding
to study fundamental algebraic structures.
This paper does not focus on calculating specific models
but on providing a normal form for a given model. This is
one of the most prevalent problems in mathematics, i.e., assigning a canonical representative to an equivalence class.
For example, the canonical form of a rational fraction is the
quotient with the common prime factors removed (reduced
fraction); Jordan’s canonical form for matrices assigns a matrix to an equivalence class of similar matrices; there are

1
Two semigroups are distinct if they cannot be mapped to one
another by an isomorphism or by an anti-isomorphism.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8048

