The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Solving Spectrum Unmixing as a Multi-Task Bayesian Inverse Problem with
Latent Factors for Endmember Variability
Dong Wu1 , Mingmin Chi1,2 * , Xuan Zang1 , Bo Peng3
1

2

Fudan University
Zhongshan PoolNet Technology Co., Ltd
3
Shanghai Ocean University

Abstract
With the increasing customization of spectrometers, spectral unmixing has become a widely used technique in fields
such as remote sensing, textiles, and environmental protection. However, endmember variability is a common issue
for unmixing, where changes in lighting, atmospheric, temporal conditions, or the intrinsic spectral characteristics of
materials, can all result in variations in the measured spectrum. Recent studies have employed deep neural networks
to tackle endmember variability. However, these approaches
rely on generic networks to implicitly resolve the issue, which
struggles with the ill-posed nature and lack of effective convergence constraints for endmember variability. This paper
proposes a streamlined multi-task learning model to rectify
this problem, incorporating abundance regression and multilabel classification with Unmixing as a Bayesian Inverse
Problem, denoted as BIPU. To address the issue of the illposed nature, the uncertainty of unmixing is quantified and
minimized through the Laplace approximation in a Bayesian
inverse solver. In addition, to improve convergence under
the influence of endmember variability, the paper introduces
two types of constraints. The first separates background factors of variants from the initial factors for each endmember,
while the second identifies and eliminates the influence of
non-existent endmembers via multi-label classification during convergence. The effectiveness of this model is demonstrated not only on a self-collected near-infrared spectral textile dataset (FENIR), but also on three commonly used remote
sensing hyperspectral image datasets, where it achieves stateof-the-art unmixing performance and exhibits strong generalization capabilities.

(a) Variation #1

(b) Variation #2

(c) Variation #3

Figure 1: There are three types of variations for the cotton
textiles. The x-axis represents 200 equally divided spectral
sampling points of the near-infrared spectrum ranging from
900 to 1700nm, while the y-axis depicts the reflectance.

technique has been widely used in a variety of applications,
including mineral mapping (Rogge et al. 2006) and land
cover change detection (Adams et al. 1995). With the continued shrinking in size of spectrometers, handheld spectrometers are now being used in the field of textile composition
analysis. Spectral unmixing, denoted as a = F (x), involves
analyzing the abundance a of spectral materials from an input spectrum x. On the other hand, spectral construction is
x̂ = G(a)+η of generating a corresponding spectrum, given
the known abundance of spectral materials (where η represents random noise). In essence, spectral unmixing can be
viewed as the inverse problem of spectral construction.
Endmember variability (Zare and Ho 2013; Somers et al.
2011; Borsoi et al. 2021) is a common issue in unmixing,
where changes in lighting, atmospheric conditions, temporal factors, or the intrinsic spectral characteristics of materials can all result in variations in the measured spectrum. This problem is particularly pronounced with lowcost, low-precision devices such as handheld spectrometers,
as demonstrated in Figure 1, which depicts changes in the
near-infrared reflectance of pure cotton textiles. Variability
typically falls into two categories: intra-class variability and
inter-class similarity. Traditional models use a single endmember to represent multiple variants within a class, leading
to uncertainty in abundance estimation. Meanwhile, interclass similarity can result in mismatched abundance ratios.
Therefore, addressing endmember variability is crucial for
accurate unmixing tasks.
Recent research (Borsoi et al. 2021) has sought to address
the issue of endmember variability in unmixing tasks. One

Introduction
Due to the limited spatial resolution of hyperspectral images,
each pixel is, in fact, a mixture of several different pure materials. The spectrum of an pure material is referred to as an
endmember. Spectral unmixing (Keshava and Mustard 2002;
Bioucas-Dias et al. 2012) addresses this issue by breaking
down hyperspectral images into the spectral of endmembers
and their respective ratios (Abundance) for each pixel. This
* Corresponding author (mmchi@fudan.edu.cn). This work was
supported in part by Natural Science Foundation of China under
contract 62171139.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15878

