The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Simultaneous Optimization of Bid Shading and Internal Auction for Demand-Side
Platforms
Yadong Xu1 , Bonan Ni1 , Weiran Shen2 , Xun Wang1 ,
Zichen Wang3 , Yinsong Xue3 , Pingzhong Tang1
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
ByteDance
xuyd17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, bricksern@gmail.com, shenweiran@ruc.edu.cn, wxhelloworld@outlook.com,
wangzichen.118ada@bytedance.com, xueyinsong@bytedance.com, kenshinping@gmail.com
Abstract

ad exchange runs auctions to sell user impressions from diverse publishers to advertisers. As can be imagined, it is
challenging to bid well for each individual advertiser in such
complex ad exchanges. As a result, the DSPs (demand-side
platforms) are widely adopted to help advertiser clients target their desired users and optimize the bid price for corresponding valuable impressions. Besides, the DSPs allow advertisers to set high-level goals (e.g., effective cost per action
(eCPA)), and then bid on behalf of the managed advertisers
in the ad exchange. In this paper, we consider the problem of
optimizing trade-offs between surplus and profit for a target
DSP, while meeting the goals for every advertiser client.
In the ad exchange literature, second-price auction has
once been the most widely used online auction format, due
to its advantage in dominant strategy incentive compatibility.
That is, an advertiser will bid exactly her valuation for the
slot regardless of the bidding strategies of others. In recent
years, however, a large number of ad exchanges switch their
auctions to first-price auction (Google 2021) for a variety of
reasons, including (i) in first price auction the winner’s payment is not affected by the uncertainty about the opponents’
bids, which not only guarantees the implementation’s credibility (Akbarpour and Li 2018), but also possibly simplifies
the design of certain bidding strategy, especially when the
advertiser has a budget or ROI (return over investment) constraint, and (ii) an advertiser’s exact valuation for the slot
may be confidential, which makes the truth-telling equilibrium of second-price auction less attractive (Niu et al. 2017).
However, the shift from second-price to first-price auction makes it difficult for a DSP to adapt to the volatile auction environment, as the DSP needs to estimate the opponents’ bid prices to optimize its bidding strategy. The wellknown bid shading technique, which has been widely used
in US treasury auctions (Hortaçsu, Kastl, and Zhang 2018)
and FCC spectrum auctions (Chakravorti et al. 1995), is
then applied in first-price auction to adjust the bid price.
The challenge of bid shading lies in the trade-off between
payment and winning probability. Concretely, a lower bid
is more likely to lose but charged less when obtaining the
impression, while a higher bid is more likely to win but
charged more when winning the impression. Most studies
on bid shading (Pan et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2021) rely heavily on the exact estimation of winning probability, but Zhang

Online advertising has been one of the most important
sources for industry’s growth, where the demand-side platforms (DSP) play an important role via bidding to the ad exchanges on behalf of their advertiser clients. Since more and
more ad exchanges have shifted from second to first price
auctions, it is challenging for DSPs to adjust bidding strategy
in the volatile environment. Recent studies on bid shading in
first-price auctions may have limited performance due to relatively strong hypotheses about winning probability distribution. Moreover, these studies do not consider the incentive of
advertiser clients, which can be crucial for a reliable advertising platform. In this work, we consider both the optimization
of bid shading technique and the design of internal auction
which is ex-post incentive compatible (IC) for the management of a DSP. Firstly, we prove that the joint design of bid
shading and ex-post IC auction can be reduced to choosing
one monotone bid function for each advertiser without loss
of optimality. Then we propose a parameterized neural network to implement the monotone bid functions. With welldesigned surrogate loss, the objective can be optimized in an
end-to-end manner. Finally, our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our algorithm.

Introduction
Over the past two decades, online advertising has been
proven to be one of the most effective methods of monetization for internet companies. Typically, for each of these companies, there is a main auction mechanism that is in charge
of allocating relevant ads to target users and collecting payments from the winning advertisers. In practice, different
mechanisms such as VCG (Vickrey–Clarke–Groves) (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves et al. 1973) and GSP (generalized second-price) (Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz
2007) and their variations are widely adopted and advertisers
exhibit different bidding behaviors in different mechanisms.
For ad platforms such as Google or Tiktok, there are billions of ad auctions, each executed within a few milliseconds, conducted daily. With such stringent latency requirements, ad exchanges have emerged as a popular form of online advertising marketplaces in real time. Specifically, an
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9935

