The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Small Decision Trees for Data of Low Rank-Width
Konrad K. Dabrowski1 , Eduard Eiben2 , Sebastian Ordyniak3 , Giacomo Paesani3 , Stefan Szeider4
1
Newcastle University,
Royal Holloway, University of London,
3
University of Leeds,
4
TU Wien
konrad.dabrowski@newcastle.ac.uk, eduard.eiben@rhul.ac.uk, {giacomopaesani,sordyniak}@gmail.com, sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at
2

Abstract
We consider the NP-hard problem of finding a smallest decision tree representing a classification instance in terms of a
partially defined Boolean function. Small decision trees are
desirable to provide an interpretable model for the given data.
We show that the problem is fixed-parameter tractable when
parameterized by the rank-width of the incidence graph of
the given classification instance. Our algorithm proceeds by
dynamic programming using an NLC decomposition obtained
from a rank-width decomposition. The key to the algorithm
is a succinct representation of partial solutions. This allows
us to limit the space and time requirements for each dynamic
programming step in terms of the parameter.

Introduction
Decision trees (DTs) are extremely useful tools for describing, classifying, and generalizing data (Larose and Larose
2014; Murthy 1998; Quinlan 1986). In this paper, we consider DTs for classification instances (CIs), consisting of a
finite set E of examples, also called feature vectors, over
a finite set feat(E) of features. Each example e ∈ E is a
function e : feat(E) → {0, 1}, determining whether the
feature f is true or false for e. Moreover, E is given as
a partition E + ⊎ E − into positive and negative examples.
For instance, examples could represent medical patients and
features diagnostic tests; a patient is positive or negative,
corresponding to whether or not they have been diagnosed
with a certain disease. CIs are also called partially defined
Boolean functions (Boros et al. 1995), as we can consider
the features as Boolean variables and examples as truth assignments that evaluate to 0 (for negative examples) or 1 (for
positive examples). CIs have been studied as a key concept
for logical data analysis and switching theory (Boros et al.
2011, 2003; Boros, Ibaraki, and Makino 2003; Crama, Hammer, and Ibaraki 1988; Ibaraki, Crama, and Hammer 2011;
McCluskey 1965).
Because of their simplicity, DTs are particularly attractive for providing interpretable models of the underlying CI.
Given the impact and widespread use of machine learning
methods, the importance of transparency has been strongly
emphasized in recent years (Darwiche and Hirth 2023; DoshiVelez and Kim 2017; Goodman and Flaxman 2017; Ignatiev
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10476

et al. 2021; Lipton 2018; Monroe 2018). In this context, one
prefers small DTs, as they are easier to interpret and require
fewer tests to classify (a DT is smaller than another if it has
fewer nodes). Small trees are also preferred because of the
parsimony principle (Occam’s Razor), since small trees are
expected to generalize better to new data (Bessiere, Hebrard,
and O’Sullivan 2009). However, given a CI E = E + ⊎ E −
and an integer s, deciding whether E has a DT with at most
s nodes is NP-complete (Hyafil and Rivest 1976).
This complexity barrier motivates the study of the problem under the parameterized complexity paradigm. Ordyniak
and Szeider (2021) made the first approach in this direction, parameterizing the problem by solution size in terms
of the number of nodes or the depth of the computed DT.
In this paper, we parameterize the problem to exploit the
hidden structure of the given CI E. We capture the hidden
structure of E in terms of small rank-width of the incidence
graph, which is the bipartite graph G(E) whose vertices
are the examples in one part and the features in the other,
where an example e is adjacent to a feature f if and only
if e(f ) = 1. Figure 1 shows a CI and a smallest DT for it,
and the incidence graph. Rank-width is a well-known graph
invariant that generalizes treewidth in the sense that all graph
classes of bounded treewidth have bounded rank-width, but
there are classes of dense graphs of bounded rank-width
and unbounded treewidth. We denote the rank-width and the
treewidth of a graph G by rw(G) and tw(G), respectively,
and use rw(G(E)) and tw(G(E)) to denote the rank-width
and treewidth of E, respectively.
We can state our main algorithmic result as follows (for a
formal statement, see Corollary 0.4).
Computing a smallest DT for a given CI E is fixedparameter tractable parameterized by the rank-width
of E.
Rank-width is an exceptionally well-suited parameter for this
problem because of its robustness and generality. Borrowing
from a similar notion for propositional CNF formulas (Lewis
1978), we define a renaming rX (E) of a CI E with respect
to a set X ⊆ feat(E) to be the CI containing all the examples eX for e ∈ E with eX (f ) = 1 − e(f ) if f ∈ X and
eX (f ) = e(f ) if f ∈
/ X. Clearly, the size of a smallest DT
is the same for E and all its renamings, and a robust parameter should not depend on a particular chosen renaming. Let
us define the renamable rank-width of E as rw∗ (G(E)) =

