The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Efficient Subgraph-Inferring Framework for Large-Scale Heterogeneous
Graphs
Wei Zhou, Hong Huang* , Ruize Shi, Kehan Yin, Hai Jin
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
Services Computing Technology and System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
{weizhou2021, honghuang, rzshi, kehanyin, hjin}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract

Method
Type
Training
Inferring
NARS
Decoupled 15s/38.4G 13s/36.5G
SeHGNN
Decoupled 19s/16.9G 18s/14.7G
R-HGNN
Mini-batch 221s/16.8G 140s/16.1G
Cluster-RGCN Partition
15s/7.4G
42s/29.5G

Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs) play a vital role in advancing the field of graph representation learning by addressing the complexities arising from diverse data
types and interconnected relationships in real-world scenarios. However, traditional HGNNs face challenges when applied to large-scale graphs due to the necessity of training or
inferring on the entire graph. As the size of the heterogeneous
graphs increases, the time and memory overhead required by
these models escalates rapidly, even reaching unacceptable
levels. To address this issue, in this paper, we present a novel
framework named SubInfer, which conducts training and inferring on subgraphs instead of the entire graphs, hence efficiently handling large-scale heterogeneous graphs. The proposed framework comprises three main steps: 1) partitioning
the heterogeneous graph from multiple perspectives to preserve various semantic information, 2) completing the subgraphs to improve the convergence speed of subgraph training and the performance of subgraph inferring, and 3) training
and inferring the HGNN model on distributed clusters to further reduce the time overhead. The framework applies to the
vast majority of HGNN models. Experiments on five benchmark datasets demonstrate that SubInfer effectively optimizes
the training and inferring phase, delivering comparable performance to traditional HGNN models while significantly reducing time and memory overhead.

Table 1: Time and memory overhead of HGNN methods for
training and inferring on the ogbn-mag dataset. The table
shows the time spent in one epoch.

et al. 2023), decouple the message propagation and update operations of the HGNN, saving node embeddings in
pre-processing to greatly accelerate training. Mini-batchbased methods, such as R-GraphSAGE1 , R-GraphSAINT2 ,
HGT (Hu et al. 2020) and R-HGNN (Yu et al. 2023), sample
a set of neighbors associated with the target node, enabling
models to be trained more efficiently in terms of both time
and memory consumption. Partition-based methods, such as
Cluster-RGCN2 , partition the entire graph into subgraphs
and apply the message passing over the induced subgraphs.
However, these methods only reduce part of the overhead
in training and inferring. As shown in Table 1, decoupledbased methods achieve a relatively balanced time overhead
during training and inferring but require more memory to
save the results of message propagation, while partitionbased methods like Cluster-RGCN have less training time
and memory overhead due to their training being confined
to subgraphs, but more overhead during inference as they
require entire graph inferring. Considering the superior performance of partition-based methods during training and the
natural potential for distributed processing offered by subgraphs, we aim to develop a subgraph-inferring framework
suitable for large-scale HGs, which can leverage the benefits
of subgraphs on the one hand, and significantly reduce the
overhead during inferring on the other hand.
Nevertheless, subgraph inferring encounters three major
challenges: 1. How to partition large-scale HGs? There is
still no efficient method to partition large-scale HGs. Existing methods (NetClus (Sun, Yu, and Han 2009), Sclump (Li

Introduction
Representing real-world data with rich structural and semantic information is a crucial task in many fields, and heterogeneous graphs (HGs) have proven to be a powerful tool for
this purpose (Luo et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2023; Zhou et al.
2023; Huang et al. 2021). However, learning representations
from large-scale HGs remains a challenge in the field of heterogeneous graph representation learning.
To address this challenge, an increasing number of heterogeneous graph neural network (HGNN) methods have
been proposed for large-scale HGs, which can generally be
divided into three categories: decoupled-based, mini-batchbased, and partition-based methods. Decoupled-based methods, such as NARS (Yu et al. 2020) and SeHGNN (Yang
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

9431

https://ogb.stanford.edu/docs/lsc/leaderboards/#mag240m
https://ogb.stanford.edu/docs/leader nodeprop/#ogbn-mag

