The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Homophily-Related: Adaptive Hybrid Graph Filter for Multi-View Graph
Clustering
Zichen Wen1 , Yawen Ling1 , Yazhou Ren1,2 * , Tianyi Wu1 , Jianpeng Chen3 , Xiaorong Pu1,2 ,
Zhifeng Hao4 , Lifang He5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
4
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
5
Department Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA
{Zichen.Wen, yawen.Ling, TianYi-Wu}@outlook.com, {yazhou.ren, puxiaor}@uestc.edu.cn,
jianpengc@vt.edu, haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn, lih319@lehigh.edu
Abstract

such as O2MAC (Fan et al. 2020), graph convolutional encoders (Xia et al. 2022), and variational graph generator
for multi-view graph clustering (Chen et al. 2022). Undoubtedly, these approaches have contributed to the development of the MVGC. These approaches, however, are based
on the homophily assumption, i.e., the nodes connected by
edges belong to the same class (Hamilton 2020; Wang et al.
2022b). Yet, not all graphs in the real world exhibit homophily. For example, chemical interactions in proteins often occur between different types of amino acids (Zhu et al.
2020). Nt et al. and Li et al. point out that the GNNs based
on the homophily assumption are actually low-pass filters
spectrally (Nt and Maehara 2019; Li et al. 2019). It is well
known that low-pass filters employ truncation at a certain
frequency to obtain low-frequency signals (smooth signals),
i.e., similarity information, on the graph. However, the operational principle of the low-pass filters neglects the highfrequency signals (non-smooth signals) on the graph, that is,
dissimilarity information. This is feasible on homophilous
graphs primarily composed of low-frequency signals, however, on heterophilous graphs dominated by high-frequency
signals, capturing solely low-frequency signals is insufficient to facilitate the learning of node representations. Bo
et al. have also pointed out that capturing high-frequency
signals on heterophilous graphs is more valuable for learning great node representations (Bo et al. 2021).

Recently there is a growing focus on graph data, and multiview graph clustering has become a popular area of research
interest. Most of the existing methods are only applicable to
homophilous graphs, yet the extensive real-world graph data
can hardly fulfill the homophily assumption, where the connected nodes tend to belong to the same class. Several studies
have pointed out that the poor performance on heterophilous
graphs is actually due to the fact that conventional graph neural networks (GNNs), which are essentially low-pass filters,
discard information other than the low-frequency information on the graph. Nevertheless, on certain graphs, particularly heterophilous ones, neglecting high-frequency information and focusing solely on low-frequency information impedes the learning of node representations. To break this limitation, our motivation is to perform graph filtering that is
closely related to the homophily degree of the given graph,
with the aim of fully leveraging both low-frequency and
high-frequency signals to learn distinguishable node embedding. In this work, we propose Adaptive Hybrid Graph Filter
for Multi-View Graph Clustering (AHGFC). Specifically, a
graph joint process and graph joint aggregation matrix are
first designed by using the intrinsic node features and adjacency relationship, which makes the low and high-frequency
signals on the graph more distinguishable. Then we design an
adaptive hybrid graph filter that is related to the homophily
degree, which learns the node embedding based on the graph
joint aggregation matrix. After that, the node embedding of
each view is weighted and fused into a consensus embedding
for the downstream task. Experimental results show that our
proposed model performs well on six datasets containing homophilous and heterophilous graphs.

In general, the above analysis elucidates the reasons for
the hindered performance of MVGC approaches based on
GNNs acting as low-pass filters on heterophilous graphs
from graph-filtering perspective: the loss of high-frequency
information on the graph leads to inadequate information extraction. In order to solve the problem of information loss,
some researchers propose to obtain abundant information on
the graph by designing multiple graph filters (Luan et al.
2022). Specifically, several works have proposed using hyperparameters to weigh and combine low-pass and high-pass
filters, which are called mixed filter (Pan and Kang 2023), as
a way to obtain low and high-frequency information on the
graph. However, since the graph type in MVGC is unknown,
the hyperparameters as filter weights cannot be accurately

Introduction
Multi-view graph clustering (MVGC) has become a popular research topic due to the considerable structural information contained in graph data. Some related research
works have been proposed and achieved impressive results,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15841

