The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Offline Model-Based Optimization via Policy-Guided Gradient Search
Yassine Chemingui, Aryan Deshwal, Trong Nghia Hoang, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{yassine.chemingui, aryan.deshwal, trongnghia.hoang, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

Abstract

input-output pairs (Shahriari et al. 2015; Eriksson et al.
2019; Deshwal and Doppa 2021).
However, in some real-world scenarios where the overhead and cost of setting up experiments are prohibitively
expensive (e.g., wet lab experiments that often require expensive materials and equipment), it becomes impractical
to consider black-box optimization in the online setting. Instead, a more practical setting is to assume access to an existing database of previously collected input-output pairs,
and consider solving this problem in an offline manner.
This problem setting is termed offline model-based BBO
and was first introduced in the recent work of (Kumar and
Levine 2020; Trabucco et al. 2021). The goal of optimization method is to leverage this offline training data to uncover optimal designs from the given input space. There are
two main interrelated challenges for effectively solving the
offline optimization problem. First, how to learn surrogate
models from the offline dataset which are robust on inputs
outside the offline dataset. Second, how to create effective
search strategies beyond the local neighborhood of training
data to find high-quality inputs. These challenges are often
amplified due to the complexity of optimization problems
including high-dimensional search spaces, highly sensitive
objective functions where similar inputs might not induce
similar outputs, and sparsity of the available data.
Prior work on offline optimization (see Section ) can be
grouped into two broad categories based on the algorithmic design choices to address these two challenges. The
first family learns a generative model of the input distribution along side the surrogate model to characterize a trust
region from which high-performing inputs can be sampled
directly (Fannjiang and Listgarten 2020; Brookes, Park, and
Listgarten 2019). However, generative models cannot be
robustly learned on high-dimensional search spaces with
sparse training data and domain knowledge required to create valid trust regions may not be available. The second
family learns a surrogate model from the offline data which
is then optimized directly using gradient updates (Trabucco
et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021a; Fu and Levine 2021). Conservative regularizers are typically designed to avoid overestimation for inputs which are far away from the offline training
data. However, surrogate models, such as deep neural networks, can be non-smooth which could result in highly suboptimal solutions for a fixed gradient search strategy. This

Offline optimization is an emerging problem in many experimental engineering domains including protein, drug or aircraft design, where online experimentation to collect evaluation data is too expensive or dangerous. To avoid that, one has
to optimize an unknown function given only its offline evaluation at a fixed set of inputs. A naive solution to this problem
is to learn a surrogate model of the unknown function and optimize this surrogate instead. However, such a naive optimizer
is prone to erroneous overestimation of the surrogate (possibly due to over-fitting on a biased sample of function evaluation) on inputs outside the offline dataset. Prior approaches
addressing this challenge have primarily focused on learning robust surrogate models. However, their search strategies
are derived from the surrogate model rather than the actual
offline data. To fill this important gap, we introduce a new
learning-to-search perspective for offline optimization by reformulating it as an offline reinforcement learning problem.
Our proposed policy-guided gradient search approach explicitly learns the best policy for a given surrogate model created
from the offline data. Our empirical results on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that the learned optimization policy can
be combined with existing offline surrogates to significantly
improve the optimization performance.

Introduction
Many science and engineering applications involve optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions over complex
design spaces (Wang et al. 2023). Some prototypical examples include design optimization over input space of candidate proteins (Gao et al. 2020), molecules (Deshwal, Simon,
and Doppa 2021), drugs (Schneider et al. 2020), hardware
architectures (Huang et al. 2021; Deshwal et al. 2019), and
superconducting materials (Fannjiang and Listgarten 2020).
In such applications, evaluating a candidate input involves
performing a lab experiment or expensive computational
simulation. These problems are referred to as expensive
black-box optimization (BBO). One standard framework to
solve expensive BBO problems is Bayesian optimization
where we iteratively query the black-box function’s evaluation for inputs recommended by a surrogate model, whose
accuracy is continuously improved via learning from such
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11230

