The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Lightweight Image Denoising with Triple Attention Transformer
Yubo Zhou1 * , Jin Lin1 * , Fangchen Ye1 , Yanyun Qu1† , Yuan Xie2†
1

2

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
ybzhou@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

39.7

Abstract

Average…PSNR(dB)

Transformer has shown outstanding performance on image
denoising, but the existing Transformer methods for image
denoising are with large model sizes and high computational
complexity, which is unfriendly to resource-constrained devices. In this paper, we propose a Lightweight Image Denoising Transformer method (LIDFormer) based on Triple
Multi-Dconv Head Transposed Attention (TMDTA) to boost
computational efficiency. LIDFormer first implements Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), which transforms the input image into a low-frequency space, greatly reducing the
computational complexity of image denoising. However, the
low-frequency image lacks fine-feature information, which
degrades the denoising performance. To handle this problem,
we introduce the Complementary Periodic Feature Reusing
(CPFR) scheme for aggregating the shallow-layer features
and the deep-layer features. Furthermore, TMDTA is proposed to integrate global context along three dimensions,
thereby enhancing the ability of global feature representation. Note that our method can be applied as a pipeline for
both convolutional neural networks and Transformers. Extensive experiments on several benchmarks demonstrate that
the proposed LIDFormer achieves a better trade-off between
high performance and low computational complexity on realworld image denoising tasks.

39.6

LIDFormer
(ours)

39.5

LiNAFNet
(ours)

ADFNet
(AAAI2023)

39.4
DeamNet
(CVPR2021)

39.3

39.2

DANet
(ECCV2020)
0

20

InvDN
(CVPR2021)
40

VDN
(CVPR2019)

60
80
GFLOPs(G)

100

120

140

160

Figure 1: Performance and FLOPs cost of LIDFormer compared to other popular efficient and lightweight denoising
methods on SIDD. The LiNAFNet is formed by applying
the module from LIDFormer to NAFNet (Chen et al. 2022a).
Our method achieves a better trade-off between performance
and FLOPs cost on image denoising tasks.

Introduction

Yang, and Jiang 2017; Yuan, Liu, and Liang 2023) reduces
computations and storage costs by utilizing the sparse nature
of images. It has achieved remarkable results in denoising
effect and computational speed. Moreover, the approach (Yu
et al. 2018) based on the joint loss function is a new idea proposed in recent years, which improves the denoising effect
by simultaneously considering the local and global information of the image. Meanwhile, the method (Jin et al. 2019)
based on depthwise separable convolution is widely used in
image denoising tasks. It improves the denoising efficiency
and accuracy by separating spatial and channel dimensions
while reducing model parameters and computational costs.
This method has been shown to be effective in many image denoising tasks, especially for practical applications and
large-scale data.
Although the above methods have accelerated the denoising process in different aspects, the computational efficiency
of current lightweight image denoising models still has resource barriers compared with advanced semantic tasks such

Image denoising is an important task in image restoration
and is widely applied to many scenarios (Anwar, Khan, and
Barnes 2020). With the rise of deep learning, image denoising methods have made great progress (Tai et al. 2017;
Chen and Pock 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Mao, Shen, and
Yang 2016; Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018; Cheng
et al. 2021). However, the existing models mostly require
high computational complexity in order to obtain good performance, which may hinder the widespread application of
methods on resource-limited devices such as mobile phones,
robotics, and some edge devices. Efficient and lightweight
denoising methods attract more and more attention.
With the rising up of deep learning, convolutional neural networks are used for image denoising. The method (Xu,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7704

