The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Cluster-Wise Anchors for Multi-View Clustering
Chao Zhang1 , Xiuyi Jia2 , Zechao Li2 , Chunlin Chen1 , Huaxiong Li1 *
1

Department of Control Science and Intelligence Engineering, Nanjing University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
chzhang@smail.nju.edu.cn, {jiaxy, zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn, {clchen, huaxiongli}@nju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

a sample can be approximately represented by the samples
from the same class, multi-view subspace clustering learns
a consensus self-expression matrix (usually sparse or lowrank), and then adopts spectral clustering on the similarity
graph constructed from the self-expression matrix (Zhang
et al. 2017; Lv et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022). However,
multi-view subspace clustering usually suffers from high
time complexity, O(n2 ) and even O(n3 ), due to the construction of n × n similarity graph and spectral clustering
steps, making it unscalable to large datasets.
To address this problem, anchor based multi-view clustering is proposed, which leverages m (m ≪ n) anchors to
construct an n × m graph for clustering, and the time complexity can be greatly reduced to O(mn) (Li et al. 2023b).
The clustering performance highly depends on the quality
of anchors, and how to determine representative anchors receives much attention. Some early methods randomly select a part of samples from original data as anchors, which
is simple but usually unstable. Thus, some methods adopt
heuristic strategies such as k-means (Li et al. 2015; Kang
et al. 2020) and feature score based schemes (Li et al. 2022;
Xia et al. 2023). For example, (Li et al. 2022) proposed
a directly alternate sampling scheme for anchor selection
by measuring feature score. Instead of directly selecting
anchors from original samples as mentioned above, adaptive anchor learning has become popular recently. It usually
adaptively learns latent anchors and subspace representation
in a unified model. For example, (Sun et al. 2021) adaptively
learns a consensus anchor matrix and a non-negative graph
for all views in a latent subspace. (Chen et al. 2022) incorporates k-means into adaptive anchor learning to directly learn
a cluster indicator for anchor graph.
Although adaptive anchor learning based MVC methods
have achieved promising performance, they generally impose orthogonal constraint on anchors to improve the anchor
diversity, and jointly construct an anchor graph to reconstruct the original samples. However, the orthogonal constraint may cause an imbalanced anchor distribution, i.e.,
there may be few and even no anchors for some data clusters.
To obtain a discriminative representation matrix, it is expected that the anchors consist of some representative samples from each cluster and the samples can be only reconstructed by those anchors that come from the same class. In
other words, the learned anchors have a balanced and dis-

Due to its effectiveness and efficiency, anchor based multiview clustering (MVC) has recently attracted much attention.
Most existing approaches try to adaptively learn anchors to
construct an anchor graph for clustering. However, they generally focus on improving the diversity among anchors by using orthogonal constraint and ignore the underlying semantic relations, which may make the anchors not representative
and discriminative enough. To address this problem, we propose an adaptive Cluster-wise Anchor learning based MVC
method, CAMVC for short. We first make an anchor cluster
assumption that supposes the prior cluster structure of target anchors by pre-defining a consensus cluster indicator matrix. Based on the prior knowledge, an explicit cluster structure of latent anchors is enforced by learning diverse cluster centroids, which can explore both between-cluster diversity and within-cluster consistency of anchors, and improve
the subspace representation discrimination. Extensive results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method compared with some state-of-the-art MVC approaches.

Introduction
Due to the emergence of multi-source data in real-world,
multi-view learning has recently attracted much attention,
which aims to explore the underlying consistent and complementary information across views to improve the learning
performance (Li, Yang, and Zhang 2019; Wen et al. 2023c;
Sun et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023a; Jiang et al. 2023). As a
fundamental task, multi-view clustering (MVC) tries to divide multi-view data into groups by discovering the intrinsic cluster structures without label information (Fang et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023b,c; Wen et al. 2023a,b).
Generally speaking, most existing MVC approaches can
be divided into subspace based methods (Gao et al. 2015;
Zhang et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2022), matrix factorization based methods (Liu et al. 2021; Wan et al.
2023), multi-kernel based methods (Liu 2023; Wan et al.
2022; Li et al. 2023a), and deep learning based methods (Lin
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Wen et al. 2020; Yan et al.
2023). The majority of current MVC methods are based on
subspace learning. Motivated by sparse representation that
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16696

