The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DanceMVP: Self-Supervised Learning for Multi-Task Primitive-Based Dance
Performance Assessment via Transformer Text Prompting
Yun Zhong, Yiannis Demiris*
Personal Robotics Lab, Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London
{y.zhong20,y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

Pre-Train

Abstract

Dance Motion-Music

Music
Encoder

Downstream Tasks

Features
Representation

Encoders
Motion
Encoder

Dance is generally considered to be complex for most people
as it requires coordination of numerous body motions and accurate responses to the musical content and rhythm. Studies
on automatic dance performance assessment could help people improve their sensorimotor skills and promote research
in many fields, including human motion analysis and motion
generation. Recent papers on dance performance assessment
usually evaluate simple dance motions with a single task - estimating final performance scores. In this paper, we propose
DanceMVP: multi-task dance performance assessment via
text prompting that solves three related tasks - (i) dance vocabulary recognition, (ii) dance performance scoring and (iii)
dance rhythm evaluation. In the pre-training phase, we contrastively learn the primitive-based features of complex dance
motion and music using the InfoNCE loss. For the downstream task, we propose a transformer-based text prompter to
perform multi-task evaluations for the three proposed assessment tasks. Also, we build a multimodal dance-music dataset
named ImperialDance. The novelty of our ImperialDance
is that it contains dance motions for diverse expertise levels
and a significant amount of repeating dance sequences for the
same choreography to keep track of the dance performance
progression. Qualitative results show that our pre-trained feature representation could cluster dance pieces for different
dance genres, choreographies, expertise levels and primitives,
which generalizes well on both ours and other dance-music
datasets. The downstream experiments demonstrate the robustness and improvement of our method over several ablations and baselines across all three tasks, as well as monitoring the users’ dance level progression.

Frozen Modules

Task 1

Prompting 1

Latent
Vector

MLP

Trainable Modules
Frozen
Pretrained
Encoders

Vocabulary Recognition
Process

Task 1: Dance Vocabulary Regocnition
Task 2

Performance Scoring

Prompting 2

Frozen
Pretrained
Encoders

Process

Task 2: Dance Performance Scoring
Task 3

Rhythm Evaluation

Prompting 3

Frozen
Pretrained
Encoders

Process

Task 3: Dance Rhythm Evaluation

Figure 1: Proposed dance performance assessment model.
The input is dance motion and music, the output is the multitask performance evaluation including (i) dance vocabulary
recognition: dance genres, choreographies and expertise levels classification for recognized motion primitives, (ii) dance
performance scoring and (iii) dance rhythm evaluation: musical beats and motion alignment rate regression.

that continuously evaluates a dancer’s performance quality
could be developed to address this challenge.
Previous studies on Action Quality Assessment (AQA)
and Skill Determinations/Assessment (SA) have been
mainly focusing on surgery (Liu et al. 2021), Olympics
sports (Parmar and Morris 2019; Xu et al. 2022) and human daily activities (Doughty, Mayol-Cuevas, and Damen
2019) instead of dancing. Some recent research on multimedia dance-music tasks targeting dance motion generation (Li
et al. 2022; Siyao et al. 2022), motion and music synthesis
(Ren et al. 2020a; Chen et al. 2021), rather than dance-music
performance assessment. Other dance motion analysis approaches (Chan et al. 2011a; Zhong, Zhang, and Demiris
2023) have focused on simple, controlled conditions, where
their models ignore the music features or only provide final
performance scores. Hence, two main challenges of automatic dance performance assessment could be summarized:
(i) feature learning of complex dance motions and music:
The feature representations of various styles, genres, and

Introduction
Dance is a form of art with highly complex multi-sensory
processes. Experienced dancers could perform numerous
movements and align these movements to musical beats,
which requires professional practice and training to equip
them with such abilities. However, professional training
is usually expensive and limited by time and geography.
Hence, a multi-task dance performance assessment model
* Yiannis Demiris is supported by a Royal Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging Technologies.
Code&Dataset at www.imperial.ac.uk/personal-robotics/software
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10270

