The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Accelerate Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in Zero-Sum Games with
Subgame Curriculum Learning
Jiayu Chen1 * , Zelai Xu1 * , Yunfei Li1 , Chao Yu1 ,
Jiaming Song2 , Huazhong Yang1 , Fei Fang3 , Yu Wang1† , Yi Wu1,4†
1

Tsinghua University
2
Luma AI
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
{jia768167535, zelai.eecs, jxwuyi}@gmail.com
Abstract

One way to accelerate training is curriculum learning –
training agents in tasks from easy to hard. Many existing
works in solving zero-sum games with MARL generate a
curriculum by choosing whom to play with. They often use
self-play to provide a natural policy curriculum as the agents
are trained against increasingly stronger opponents (Bansal
et al. 2018; Baker et al. 2020). The self-play framework can
be further extended to population-based training (PBT) by
maintaining a policy pool and iteratively training new best
responses to mixtures of previous policies (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003; Lanctot et al. 2017). Such a policylevel curriculum generation paradigm is very different from
the paradigm commonly used in goal-conditioned RL (Matiisen et al. 2019; Portelas et al. 2020). Most curriculum learning methods for goal-conditioned problems directly reset the
goal or initial states for each training episode to ensure the
current task is of suitable difficulty for the learning agent. In
contrast, the policy-level curriculum in zero-sum games only
provides increasingly stronger opponents, and the agents are
still trained by playing the full game starting from a fixed
initial state distribution, which is often very challenging.
In this paper, we propose a general subgame curriculum
learning framework to further accelerate MARL training for
zero-sum games. It leverages ideas from goal-conditioned
RL. Complementary to policy-level curriculum methods like
self-play and PBT, our framework generates subgames (i.e.,
games induced by starting from a specific state) with growing difficulty for agents to learn and eventually solve the
full game. We provide justifications for our proposal by
analyzing a simple iterated Rock-Paper-Scissors game. We
show that in this game, vanilla MARL requires exponentially many samples to learn the NE. However, by using a
buffer to store the visited states and choosing an adaptive
order of state-induced subgames to learn, the NE can be
learned with linear samples.
A key challenge in our framework is to choose which subgame to train on. This is non-trivial in zero-sum games since
there does not exist a clear progression metric like the success rate in goal-conditioned problems. While the squared
difference between the current state value and the NE value
can measure the progress of learning, it is impossible to calculate this value during training as the NE is generally un-

Learning Nash equilibrium (NE) in complex zero-sum games
with multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) can be extremely computationally expensive. Curriculum learning is
an effective way to accelerate learning, but an under-explored
dimension for generating a curriculum is the difficulty-tolearn of the subgames – games induced by starting from a
specific state. In this work, we present a novel subgame curriculum learning framework for zero-sum games. It adopts an
adaptive initial state distribution by resetting agents to some
previously visited states where they can quickly learn to improve performance. Building upon this framework, we derive
a subgame selection metric that approximates the squared distance to NE values and further adopt a particle-based state
sampler for subgame generation. Integrating these techniques
leads to our new algorithm, Subgame Automatic Curriculum
Learning (SACL), which is a realization of the subgame curriculum learning framework. SACL can be combined with
any MARL algorithm such as MAPPO. Experiments in the
particle-world environment and Google Research Football
environment show SACL produces much stronger policies
than baselines. In the challenging hide-and-seek quadrant environment, SACL produces all four emergent stages and uses
only half the samples of MAPPO with self-play. The project
website is at https://sites.google.com/view/sacl-rl.

Introduction
Applying reinforcement learning (RL) to zero-sum games
has led to enormous success, with trained agents defeating
professional humans in Go (Silver et al. 2016), StarCraft
II (Vinyals et al. 2019), and Dota 2 (Berner et al. 2019).
To find an approximate Nash equilibrium (NE) in complex
games, these works often require a tremendous amount of
training resources including hundreds of GPUs and weeks
or even months of time. The unaffordable cost prevents RL
from more real-world applications beyond these flagship
projects supported by big companies and makes it important
to develop algorithms that can learn close-to-equilibrium
strategies in a substantially more efficient manner.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11320

