The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robustly Train Normalizing Flows via KL Divergence Regularization
Kun Song1 , Ruben Solozabal1 , Hao Li2 , Martin Takáč1 , Lu Ren2 * , Fakhri Karray1
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
Anhui University, Heifei City, Anhui, China
{kun.song, ruben.solozabal, martin.takac, fakhri.karray}@mbzuai.ac.ae, lihao6897@gmail.com, penny lu@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

Thus, the task of economically providing prior information
to NFs is crucial. Alongside pre-trained models, regularization on learnable parameters stands out as a feasible and effective method (Liu et al. 2018; Dai et al. 2019) for enhancing Neural Network training. Therefore, we aim to explore
regularization techniques to enhance NFs.
In this paper, we unveil that the training process of NFs
is sensitive to both the quantity (dimensionality) of training
samples and the presence of outliers. This inherent sensitivity poses challenges for NFs when dealing with a small
number of samples or datasets containing outliers, which offers us insights for providing prior information to enhance
its performance. For better demonstrating the aforementioned sensitivity issue, we use the example of a linear normalizing flow (θ = (U, b), fθ (x) = UT x+b) with Gaussian
target distribution as an example. For linear NFs, U is solved
by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) which performs
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) on the inverse of the
PN (xi −x̄)(xi −x̄)T
estimated covariance matrix T =
∈
i=1
N
T
−1
d×d
R
of train samples, i.e., UU = T . Consequently, we
can deduce that the training of linear NFs is affected by two
key factors. First, when the sample number N is smaller than
the dimension d, T lacks an inverse matrix, resulting in the
failure to calculate U. Second, outliers significantly bias the
estimation of the covariance matrix T from its true value, as
their contribution to T outweighs normal samples. Consequently, without prior information to address the sensitivity
issues, the solution of U will be compromised significantly.
As for the non-linear case, the sensitivity problem referred still exists. We explain this using the conclusion obtained from a linear model. As well known, a complex distribution can be approximated by a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM). Because a linear projection is enough to connect
two Gaussian distributions, training non-linear NFs can be
approximated by finding a series of linear projections parameterized by non-linear NFs, which project each Gaussian component to the target Gaussian distribution. If the
non-linear NFs are powerful enough, those linear projections for different Gaussian components may be less related.
In this way, we can consider that samples in each neighborhood only contribute to their own projection. Suppose that
there is an outlier, it can be considered a Gaussian component consisting of one sample. Thus, the linear projection for

In this paper, we find that the training of Normalizing Flows
(NFs) are easily affected by the outliers and a small number
(or high dimensionality) of training samples. To solve this
problem, we propose a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
regularization on the Jacobian matrix of NFs. We prove that
such regularization is equivalent to adding a set of samples
whose covariance matrix is the identity matrix to the training
set. Thus, it reduces the negative influence of the outliers and
the small sample number on the estimation of the covariance
matrix, simultaneously. Therefore, our regularization makes
the training of NFs robust. Ultimately, we evaluate the performance of NFs on out-of-distribution (OoD) detection tasks.
The excellent results obtained demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed regularization term. For example, with the
help of the proposed regularization, the OoD detection score
increases at most 30% compared with the one without the
regularization.

Introduction
Normalizing flows (NFs) provide a general mechanism for
defining expressive probability distributions only requiring
the specification of a base (usually simple) distribution and
an invertible neural network fθ . Due to their effectiveness,
NFs have been widely applied in a range of applications,
such as providing posterior for VAEs (Ardizzone et al. 2020;
Mackowiak et al. 2021; Rudolph, Wandt, and Rosenhahn
2021), image generation (Yao et al. 2023; Zhang, Zhang, and
McDonagh 2021), and out-of-distribution detection (Gudovskiy, Ishizaka, and Kozuka 2022; Rudolph, Wandt, and
Rosenhahn 2021), etc.
It is well known that deep neural networks (DNNs) thrive
on a large volume of training samples. In the case of limited training samples, leveraging prior information becomes
vital for improving performance. An effective approach is
initializing the parameters of DNNs using pre-trained models on extensive image datasets. However, this technique is
challenging for NFs due to the lack of available pre-trained
models, primarily because of the complexity of training NFs
on large datasets. Notably, NFs’ progress is often demonstrated using simpler datasets like Cifar10/100 or MNIST.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15047

