The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Real-World Test-Time Adaptation: Tri-net Self-Training with Balanced
Normalization
Yongyi Su1 , Xun Xu2, 1 * , Kui Jia3 *
1

South China University of Technology
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
eesuyongyi@mail.scut.edu.cn, alex.xun.xu@gmail.com, kuijia@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract

sometimes unpredictable before deployment. Therefore, a
new line of works emerge by adapting pre-trained models
to testing data distribution at inference stage, a.k.a. test-time
adaptation (TTA) (Sun et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Su, Xu,
and Jia 2022). The success of test-time adaptation is often
achieved by distribution alignment (Su, Xu, and Jia 2022; Liu
et al. 2021), self-supervised training (Chen et al. 2022) and
self-training (Goyal et al. 2022), all demonstrating remarkable improvement of robustness on multiple types of visual
corruptions in the testing data. Despite the unprecedented
performance, existing TTA approaches are often developed
under restrictive assumptions of testing data, e.g. stationary
class distribution and static domain shift, and this gives rise to
many attempts to explore TTA methods for real-world testing
data (Wang et al. 2022b; Yuan, Xie, and Li 2023; Gong et al.
2022; Niu et al. 2023).

Test-Time Adaptation aims to adapt source domain model to
testing data at inference stage with success demonstrated in
adapting to unseen corruptions. However, these attempts may
fail under more challenging real-world scenarios. Existing
works mainly consider real-world test-time adaptation under
non-i.i.d. data stream and continual domain shift. In this work,
we first complement the existing real-world TTA protocol with
a globally class imbalanced testing set. We demonstrate that
combining all settings together poses new challenges to existing methods. We argue the failure of state-of-the-art methods
is first caused by indiscriminately adapting normalization layers to imbalanced testing data. To remedy this shortcoming,
we propose a balanced batchnorm layer to swap out the regular batchnorm at inference stage. The new batchnorm layer is
capable of adapting without biasing towards majority classes.
We are further inspired by the success of self-training (ST) in
learning from unlabeled data and adapt ST for test-time adaptation. However, ST alone is prone to over adaption which
is responsible for the poor performance under continual domain shift. Hence, we propose to improve self-training under
continual domain shift by regularizing model updates with an
anchored loss. The final TTA model, termed as TRIBE, is built
upon a tri-net architecture with balanced batchnorm layers.
We evaluate TRIBE on four datasets representing real-world
TTA settings. TRIBE consistently achieves the state-of-the-art
performance across multiple evaluation protocols. The code is
available at https://github.com/Gorilla-Lab-SCUT/TRIBE.

Introduction
The recent success of deep neural networks relies on the assumption of generalizing pre-trained model to i.i.d. testing
domain (Wang et al. 2022a). When deep learning models
are to be deployed on real-world applications, robustness to
out-of-distribution testing data, e.g. visual corruptions caused
by lighting conditions, adverse weather, etc. becomes a major concern. Recent studies revealed such corruptions could
severely deteriorate the generalization of model pre-trained
on clean training samples (Sun et al. 2022; Hendrycks and
Dietterich 2019; Sakaridis, Dai, and Van Gool 2018). Importantly, the corruption on testing data is often unknown and
* Correspondence
to alex.xun.xu@gmail.com and kuijia@cuhk.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15126

The recently explored real-world TTA, a.k.a. wild
TTA (Niu et al. 2023) or Practical TTA (Yuan, Xie, and
Li 2023), settings mainly consider the challenges brought
by local class-imbalance (Niu et al. 2023; Yuan, Xie, and Li
2023; Gong et al. 2022) and continual domain shift (Wang
et al. 2022b) which are expected to be encountered in realworld applications. Local class-imbalance is often observed
when testing data are drawn in a non-i.i.d. manner (Gong
et al. 2022). Direct adaptation indiscriminately results in biased distribution estimation and the recent works proposed
exponential batchnorm update (Yuan, Xie, and Li 2023) or
instance batchnorm update (Gong et al. 2022) to tackle this
challenge. In this work, our aim is to address beyond the local class-imbalance challenge by taking into account the fact
that the global distribution of testing data could be severely
imbalanced and the class distribution may shift over time.
We provide an illustration of the more challenging scenario
in Fig. 1. This additional challenge renders existing TTA
methods ineffective as the class prevalence on testing data
is unknown before inference stage and the model could be
biased towards majority classes through blind test-time adaptation. Through empirical observations, this issue becomes
particularly acute for methods relying on estimating global
statistics for updating normalization layers(Nado et al. 2020;
Lee et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2021). It mainly owes to the fact
that a single global distribution is estimated from the whole
testing data on which samples are normalized. As such, the
global distribution could easily bias towards majority classes,

