The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards More Faithful Natural Language Explanation Using Multi-Level
Contrastive Learning in VQA
Chengen Lai, Shengli Song* , Shiqi Meng, Jingyang Li, Sitong Yan, Guangneng Hu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
{laice, ShiqiMeng, jylee, styan}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, shlsong@xidian.edu.cn, njuhgn@gmail.com

Abstract

by generating a natural language sentence (Camburu et al.
2018; Park et al. 2018), which is more accessible to understand. NLE can also improve the ability of large models to
perform complex reasoning (Wei et al. 2022). Post-hoc NLE
methods have achieved good performance on VQA (Park
et al. 2018; Kayser et al. 2021; Wu and Mooney 2019a).
They first gain answers for VQA by exploiting a visionlanguage (VL) model. Then the predicted answers along
with the visual questions are fed into an explanation generation model to gain corresponding explanations. To reduce
the high storage and memory requirements caused by the
addition of the task model in post-hoc NLE methods, a selfrationalization method is proposed to predict an answer and
explain it by formulating the answer prediction as a text generation task along with the explanation (Sammani, Mukherjee, and Deligiannis 2022).
Despite their success, few VQA-NLE methods consider
the faithfulness of the generated explanations and they suffer from the issue of logical inconsistency. As shown in
Figure 1, we manually inspected a large number of VQANLE samples with wrong answer predictions generated by
the NLX-GPT model (Sammani, Mukherjee, and Deligiannis 2022) and found that: (a) the relationships between generated explanations and answers are deductive unsatisfiability (the generated explanation does not logically lead to the
answer); (b) the explanations are inconsistent with the facts
in corresponding images (the model falsifies its counterfactual explanations for the answer without considering the visual information); and (c) the generated explanations are insensitivity with semantic perturbations on visual questions
(the model fails to recognize the semantic change caused by
changing only several words or visual objects). These findings raise fundamental questions on the role of explanations
in VQA: How to improve the faithfulness of explanations
and reduce inconsistencies between explanations and visual
question answers?
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose a Multi-level Contrastive Learning based natural language Explanation (MCLE) framework which can learn
discriminative representations from semantic-level, imagelevel, and instance-level factual and counterfactual samples.
MCLE can encourage faithful explanations to be close to
their corresponding visual questions and answers while to
be far from other counterfactual (negative) samples. Specif-

Natural language explanation in visual question answer
(VQA-NLE) aims to explain the decision-making process of
models by generating natural language sentences to increase
users’ trust in the black-box systems. Existing post-hoc methods have achieved significant progress in obtaining a plausible explanation. However, such post-hoc explanations are not
always aligned with human logical inference, suffering from
the issues on: 1) Deductive unsatisfiability, the generated explanations do not logically lead to the answer; 2) Factual inconsistency, the model falsifies its counterfactual explanation
for answers without considering the facts in images; and 3)
Semantic perturbation insensitivity, the model can not recognize the semantic changes caused by small perturbations.
These problems reduce the faithfulness of explanations generated by models. To address the above issues, we propose a
novel self-supervised Multi-level Contrastive Learning based
natural language Explanation model (MCLE) for VQA with
semantic-level, image-level, and instance-level factual and
counterfactual samples. MCLE extracts discriminative features and aligns the feature spaces from explanations with
visual question and answer to generate more consistent explanations. We conduct extensive experiments, ablation analysis, and case study to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method on two VQA-NLE benchmarks.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved significant progress on
visual question answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015). However, most of them are black-box systems, which makes it
hard to gain users’ trust. It is a critical problem for these
models to explain their decision-making process. In recent
years, there has been some development of explainable VQA
systems (Patro et al. 2019; Chen and Zhao 2022). Visualization analytic approaches generate a heatmap with different values by exploiting attention mechanisms and gradient
analysis (Lu et al. 2016; Selvaraju et al. 2017) where the regions with higher values contribute the most to the predicted
answers. However, such visualizations do not explain how
these regions support the answer.
In contrast, natural language explanation (NLE) can provide the decision-making process of the model for users
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2849

