The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Your Career Path Matters in Person-Job Fit
Zhuocheng Gong1 , Yang Song2 , Tao Zhang2 , Ji-Rong Wen3 , Dongyan Zhao1,4,5† , Rui Yan 3†
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
BOSS Zhipin
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
5
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
{gzhch,zhaody}@pku.edu.cn, {ruiyan,jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, {songyang,kylen.zhang}@kanzhun.com
Abstract
Self Statement

We are again confronted with one of the most vexing aspects
of the advancement of technology: automation and AI technology cause the devaluation of human labor, resulting in unemployment. With this background, automatic person-job fit
systems are promising solutions to promote the employment
rate. The purpose of person-job fit is to calculate a matching score between the job seeker’s resume and the job posting, determining whether the job seeker is suitable for the
position. In this paper, we propose a new approach to personjob fit that characterizes the hidden preference derived from
the job seeker’s career path. We categorize and utilize three
types of preferences in the career path: consistency, likeness, and continuity. We prove that understanding the career
path enables us to provide more appropriate career suggestions to job seekers. To demonstrate the practical value of our
proposed model, we conduct extensive experiments on realworld data extracted from an online recruitment platform and
then present detailed cases to show how the career path matters in person-job fit.

I have extensive experience in framework development. My coding
style is good and the code quality is high. Personal Statement
Career Path

Career Path
Experience 1 I have extensive experience open-source framework
development. My coding style is good and the code
quality is high.
Experience 2 Responsible for the design and development of an
intelligent testing platform with Swift.
Experience 3 Working as a system architect, responsible for
developing an audio related software using FFMPEG
and C language.

Job Position

Software Engineer

Job Description
Major in computer science or software engineering
Familiar with software engineering and software quality
assurance methods.

Introduction
The job market is experiencing a rapid transformation in hiring practices due to the emergence of online recruitment services. The ongoing AI revolution has further accelerated the
urgent need for an effective online recruitment system. Recent breakthroughs in NLP (e.g. ChatGPT* ) and CV (e.g.
Diffusion Model) have given us a glimpse into a future
where human labor may no longer be necessary for many
industries, potentially leading to a decline in employment.
As we stand on the brink of another technological revolution
that will reshape human society, we believe that employment
is now more crucial than ever as a social issue. Therefore, the
task of person-job fit, which seeks to automatically match
job seekers with suitable employers, has garnered significant
attention.
Numerous researchers have delved into the concept of
person-job fit using vast amounts of online recruitment data.
A common approach among these studies is to frame the

Proficient in one or more of the following programming
languages: Java, object-c, Swift...
Good communication skills and teamwork

Figure 1: An illustrative example for person-job fit in our
scenario. The upper part indicates a candidate’s resume and
the lower part denotes a job posting.

task as a supervised text-matching problem, where resumes
and job postings are treated as text pieces and various text
mining and deep learning techniques are applied to the task.
Based on this approach, different perspectives have been explored to improve performance, including job-oriented ability modeling (Qin et al. 2018), user preference mining (Yan
et al. 2019), psychological motivation modeling (Le et al.
2019), and two-way relationship modeling (Yang et al.
2022). These methods have demonstrated significant success and achieved promising milestones in real-world applications with commercial value.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding authors: Dongyan Zhao (zhaody@pku.edu.cn)
and Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn).
* https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/

8427

