The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Vision-Language Pre-training with Object Contrastive Learning for 3D Scene
Understanding
Taolin Zhang1 * , Sunan He2 * , Tao Dai3† , Zhi Wang1 , Bin Chen4 , Shu-Tao Xia1, 5
1

2

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering , Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
5
Research Center of Artifcial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
zhangtlin3@gmail.com,sunan.he@connect.ust.hk,daitao.edu@gmail.com
wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn,xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
(a) 3D Visual Grounding

Abstract

Object Detector

In recent years, vision language pre-training frameworks
have made significant progress in natural language processing and computer vision, achieving remarkable performance
improvement on various downstream tasks. However, when
extended to point cloud data, existing works mainly focus
on building task-specific models, and fail to extract universal 3D vision-language embedding that generalize well. We
carefully investigate three common tasks in semantic 3D
scene understanding, and derive key insights into the development of a pre-training model. Motivated by these observations, we propose a vision-language pre-training framework 3DVLP (3D vision-language pre-training with object
contrastive learning), which transfers flexibly on 3D visionlanguage downstream tasks. 3DVLP takes visual grounding as the proxy task and introduces Object-level IoUguided Detection (OID) loss to obtain high-quality proposals in the scene. Moreover, we design Object-level CrossContrastive alignment (OCC) task and Object-level SelfContrastive learning (OSC) task to align the objects with descriptions and distinguish different objects in the scene, respectively. Extensive experiments verify the excellent performance of 3DVLP on three 3D vision-language tasks, reflecting its superiority in semantic 3D scene understanding. Code
is available at https://github.com/iridescentttt/3DVLP.

match
Fusion Module
An armchair on
the right of the
other chair.

(b) 3D Question Answering
Object Detector

answer
Fusion Module

Brown.

What color is the
armchair in the right?
(c) 3D Dense Captioning
Object Detector

select

caption
An armchair
on the right of
the other chair.

Figure 1: Relationship between 3D vision-language tasks.
Firstly, all the tasks rely heavily on the object detector to locate object in the scene. Secondly, 3D vision-language tasks
require an effective fusion module to understand the connection between point cloud and language.

Introduction
Semantic 3D scene understanding has recently attracted increasing research interest due to its wide applications such
as automatic driving, human-machine interaction, etc. Much
progress has been made in semantic 3D scene understanding, with task-specific models continuously pushing the
state-of-the-art in various downstream tasks including visual grounding (Chen, Chang, and Nießner 2020; Zhao et al.
2021; Cai et al. 2022), dense captioning (Chen et al. 2021b),
and question answering (Azuma et al. 2022).
While effective on their benchmarks, the task-specific
representations obtained by existing approaches prevent

them from generalizing well to other tasks. A common practice for extracting joint multimodal representation is to adopt
the pre-training plus fine-tuning paradigm (Tan and Bansal
2019; Zhai et al. 2022; Alayrac et al. 2022; Zha et al. 2023).
Existing works on semantic 3D scene understanding are still
limited, which motivates us to introduce this paradigm in an
appropriate way. However, 3D vision-language pre-training
differs from pre-training in 2D vision-language tasks since
point cloud data is introduced (Guo et al. 2020). The objectives designed in previous works cannot be directly applied
to 3D vision-language pre-training due to the gap of downstream tasks. Therefore, it is essential to identify the shared

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Tao Dai.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7296

