The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MLNet: Mutual Learning Network with Neighborhood Invariance
for Universal Domain Adaptation
Yanzuo Lu1 , Meng Shen1 , Andy J Ma1,2,3 * , Xiaohua Xie1,2,3 , Jian-Huang Lai1,2,3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Pazhou Lab (HuangPu), Guangzhou, China
{luyz5, shenm25}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {majh8, xiexiaoh6, stsljh}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
Baseline

Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) is a practical but challenging problem, in which information about the relation
between the source and the target domains is not given
for knowledge transfer. Existing UniDA methods may suffer from the problems of overlooking intra-domain variations in the target domain and difficulty in separating between the similar known and unknown class. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Mutual Learning Network (MLNet) with neighborhood invariance for UniDA.
In our method, confidence-guided invariant feature learning with self-adaptive neighbor selection is designed to
reduce the intra-domain variations for more generalizable
feature representation. By using the cross-domain mixup
scheme for better unknown-class identification, the proposed method compensates for the misidentified knownclass errors by mutual learning between the closed-set and
open-set classifiers. Extensive experiments on three publicly available benchmarks demonstrate that our method
achieves the best results compared to the state-of-the-arts
in most cases and significantly outperforms the baseline
across all the four settings in UniDA. Code is available at
https://github.com/YanzuoLu/MLNet.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Ours

(e)
Car (Known-class)

(f)
(g)
(h)
Bus (Known-class)
Train (Unknown-class)

Figure 1: CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017) and t-SNE (Van der
Maaten and Hinton 2008) visualizations on the VisDA (Peng
et al. 2017) dataset. Our method outperforms the OVANet
baseline by learning more discriminative features for both
known and unknown classes even though they are similar.
More t-SNE examples are provided in supplementary.

Without the assumption of identical label sets across domains in CDA, several variants of UDA have been developed
to solve the practical problem of category shift. In open-set
domain adaptation (ODA) (Saito et al. 2018; Jing, Liu, and
Ding 2021) Cs is a subset of Ct , while Cs is a superset of Ct in
partial domain adaptation (PDA) (Lin et al. 2022; Cao et al.
2018). If Cs ∩Ct ̸= ∅, Cs −Ct ̸= ∅ and Ct −Cs ̸= ∅, it becomes
open partial domain adaptation (OPDA) (Busto and Gall
2017; Kundu et al. 2020). More difficultly but practically,
the relation between Cs and Ct is unknown, giving rise to the
problem of universal domain adaptation (UniDA) (You et al.
2019; Shen et al. 2023). The objective of UniDA is to classify target samples into either one of the known classes in the
source domain or an unknown class, without prior knowledge on the relation between label sets across domains.
In UniDA, it is challenging to identify unknown-class
samples in the target domain, since the labeled source
domain does not contain the unknown class. In several
works (You et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2020), a fixed threshold is
selected to reject a certain proportion of target samples for
learning the concept of the unknown. Due to the difficulty
in determining a proper decision threshold, universal classifier is designed for both the known classes and the additional unknown class (Yang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022d),

Introduction
Deep neural networks have made significant progress in
computer vision, natural language processing and many
other research areas in recent years (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015). With the rapid development of hardware, existing architectures are expanding with strong data-fitting
capacity. Nevertheless, supervised learners may not generalize well when testing on novel domains with distribution
shift. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is proposed
to mitigate this by transferring knowledge from the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled target domain (Kouw and
Loog 2021). Denote the label sets of the source and target
domains as Cs and Ct , respectively. Though existing works
on closed-set domain adaptation (CDA) (Chen et al. 2022a;
Rangwani et al. 2022) achieve promising results under the
assumption that Cs = Ct , the validity of this assumption cannot be verified without labels in target domain.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3900

