The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Fairness in Online Service with K Servers
and Its Application on Fair Food Delivery
Daman Deep Singh, Amit Kumar, Abhijnan Chakraborty
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
{Daman.Deep.Singh, abhijnan, amitk}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract

problem (Gupta, Kumar, and Panigrahi 2022b) where each
request, additionally, has a deadline associated with it within
which it needs to be served, allowing a server to handle several ‘live’ requests in a single visit. Many of these extensions
have the capacity to model specific problems like caching,
path planning, and resource allocation.
However, all existing variants of the k- SERVER problem
assume that the server movement is instantaneous, i.e., once
a server is assigned to a particular request, it takes no time
for it to move to the request location. Moreover, there is no
service time associated with a request, and thus all k servers
are available to serve a request at time t even if some of
them were assigned a request at time t − 1. Such simplifying
assumptions limit the applicability of k- SERVER problem to
more realistic scenarios.
To overcome these issues, in this work, we introduce a
general problem, called the k- FOOD problem, which builds
upon a number of aforementioned k-server extensions but
is more rooted in reality. In this problem, each request corresponds to a pair of points – source and destination – in
a metric space accompanied by a pick-up (or preparation)
time window. Serving a request involves moving one of the k
servers to its source location within the pick-up time window
and subsequently moving to its destination. Importantly, the
servers take finite amount of time to travel, during which
they are unavailable to serve a new request. The objective of
k- FOOD is still to minimize the net server movement.
Going further, motivated by the recent reports highlighting the difficult condition of gig delivery drivers in the
global south (Gupta et al. 2022; Nair et al. 2022; Sühr et al.
2019; Cao, Wang, and Li 2021; Singh, Das, and Chakraborty
2023), particularly their struggle to earn even minimum
wage, we also introduce a variant of k- FOOD problem, called
the FAIR k- FOOD problem which assumes a max-min objective instead of the min cost objective. This objective, inspired
by Rawls’ theory of justice (Rawls 1971), aims to maximize
the minimum reward earned by any server. We demonstrate
the applicability of FAIR k- FOOD problem in ensuring fairness in food delivery platforms.
Today, platforms like DoorDash, Deliveroo and Zomato
have become de facto destinations for ordering food. Apart
from serving many customers, they also provide livelihood
to millions of delivery drivers worldwide. Although multiple
approaches have been proposed to ensure fair driver assign-

The k- SERVER problem is one of the most prominent problems in online algorithms with several variants and extensions. However, simplifying assumptions like instantaneous
server movements and zero service time has hitherto limited its applicability to real-world problems. In this paper,
we introduce a realistic generalization of k- SERVER without such assumptions – the k- FOOD problem, where requests
with source-destination locations and an associated pickup
time window arrive in an online fashion, and each has to be
served by exactly one of the available k servers. The k- FOOD
problem offers the versatility to model a variety of real-world
use cases such as food delivery, ride sharing, and quick commerce. Moreover, motivated by the need for fairness in online platforms, we introduce the FAIR k- FOOD problem with
the max-min objective. We establish that both k- FOOD and
FAIR k- FOOD problems are strongly NP-hard and develop an
optimal offline algorithm that arises naturally from a timeexpanded flow network. Subsequently, we propose an online algorithm D OC 4F OOD involving virtual movements of
servers to the nearest request location. Experiments on a realworld food-delivery dataset, alongside synthetic datasets, establish the efficacy of the proposed algorithm against stateof-the-art fair food delivery algorithms.

Introduction
The k- SERVER problem (Manasse, McGeoch, and Sleator
1990) is one of the most studied problems in the domain of
online algorithms. In this problem, a sequence of requests
arrives online at various locations in a m-point metric space
and each request has to be served by one of the k servers
by moving the server to the corresponding location, and the
objective is to minimize the total movement of the servers.
Owing to its significance, a number of variants of this problem have been explored in the past. For instance, the k- TAXI
problem (Coester and Koutsoupias 2019) extends the kSERVER problem to consider each request as a pair of points
in the metric space. A server must move from a request’s
source point to the corresponding destination point in order
to fulfill the request. The goal is to efficiently assign the k
taxis to minimize the total travel distance. Another notable
variant is the k-server with Time Windows (k- SERVERTW)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19929

