The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Coalition Structures with Games
Yixuan Even Xu1 * , Chun Kai Ling2,3 , Fei Fang3
1

Tsinghua University
Columbia University
3
Carnegie Mellon University
xuyx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {chunkail,feif}@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

such, we propose the Coalition Structure Learning (CSL)
problem, where we actively put agents through a small set
of carefully designed games and infer the underlying coalition structure by observing their behavior.
We stress the difference between our work and cooperative game theory. Our work identifies coalition structures by
exploiting the differences in interactions between agents and
is separate from the study of underlying mechanisms ensuring the stability of the said coalitions.
In this paper, we assume members in a coalition secretly
share their individual utilities, i.e., they act as a joint agent
whose utility equals the sum of the individual utilities of its
members. Crucially, this difference in behavior allows us to
detect coalitions. Consider the game shown in Fig. 1a, a variant of the classic Prisoner’s Dilemma. Here, the only Nash
Equilibrium (NE) is for both agents to Defect. However, if
they are in a coalition, they behave collectively as a single
agent with payoffs shown in Fig. 1b. From the coalition’s
perspective, it is rational for both agents to Cooperate as it
maximizes the sum of both agent’s payoff.

Coalitions naturally exist in many real-world systems involving multiple decision makers such as ridesharing, security,
and online ad auctions, but the coalition structure among the
agents is often unknown. We propose and study an important yet previously overseen problem – Coalition Structure
Learning (CSL), where we aim to carefully design a series of
games for the agents and infer the underlying coalition structure by observing their interactions in those games. We establish a lower bound on the sample complexity – defined as
the number of games needed to learn the structure – of any
algorithms for CSL and propose the Iterative Grouping (IG)
algorithm for designing normal-form games to achieve the
lower bound. We show that IG can be extended to other succinct games such as congestion games and graphical games.
Moreover, we solve CSL in a more restrictive and practical
setting: auctions. We show a variant of IG to solve CSL in the
auction setting even if we cannot design the bidder valuations.
Finally, we conduct experiments to evaluate IG in the auction
setting and the results align with our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Coalitions are an integral part of large, multi-agent environments. Some coalitions can lead to undesirable outcomes.
For example, in ridesharing platforms (e.g., Uber, Lyft),
groups of drivers sometimes deliberately and simultaneously
disconnect themselves from the platform in hopes of artificially inducing a price surge which they enjoy later at the expense of the platform and riders (Hamilton 2019; Sweeney
2019; Dowling 2023), sparking studies on mechanisms to
discourage such behaviors (Tripathy, Bai, and Heese 2022).
In security domains, coordinated attacks are often more difficult to mitigate compared to those conducted in isolation.
(Jena, Ghosh, and Koley 2021; Lakshminarayana, Belmega,
and Poor 2019). On the other hand, coalitions are common
and crucial to the proper functioning of real-world societies.
Ultimately, knowing the underlying coalition structure in
such environments can lead to more accurate game models,
more robust strategies, or the construction of better welfaremaximizing mechanisms. However, unlike payoffs, it is often not known apriori which coalitions (if any) exist. As

Cx
Dx

Cy
(3, 3)
(5, 0)

Dy
(0, 5)
(1, 1)

(a) Not in a coalition

Cx Cy Cx Dy
3+3 0+5

Dx Cy
5+0

Dx Dy
1+1

(b) In a coalition

Figure 1: A variant of Prisoner’s dilemma when agents x
and y are (b) in and (a) not in a coalition. Bolded cells are
the (unique) Nash Equilibria.
More generally, we have a set N = {1, 2, . . . , n} of
n strategic agents1 , divided into m separate coalitions. A
coalition S ⊆ N is a nonempty subset of the agents, in
which the agents coordinate with each other. A coalition
structure of the agents is represented by a partition S =
{S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm } of N , S
where S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm are mutum
ally disjoint coalitions and i=1 Si = N . Note that some
of the coalitions might be singletons. We use [i]S to denote
the coalition that agent i belongs to under S. If [i]S = {i}
for each i ∈ N , we recover the regular game setting.

* This work was done when Xu was a visiting intern at CMU.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9944

We provide a list of key notations in Appendix A.

