The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continual Learning in an Open and Dynamic World
Yunhui Guo
The University of Texas at Dallas
yunhui.guo@utdallas.edu

Abstract

tinually. In the third paper (Pian et al. 2023), AV-CIL is introduced, featuring the integration of the Dual-Audio-Visual
Similarity Constraint (D-AVSC) to uphold both instanceaware and class-aware semantic similarity across audiovisual modalities. Additionally, Visual Attention Distillation (VAD) is employed to preserve the previously acquired
audio-guided visual attentive ability.

Building autonomous agents that can process massive
amounts of real-time sensor-captured data is essential for
many real-world applications including autonomous vehicles,
robotics and AI in medicine. As the agent often needs to explore in a dynamic environment, it is thus a desirable as well
as challenging goal to enable the agent to learn over time
without performance degradation. Continual learning aims to
build a continual learner which can learn new concepts over
the data stream while preserving previously learnt concepts.
In the talk, I will survey three pieces of my recent research
on continual learning (i) supervised continual learning, (ii)
unsupervised continual learning, and (iii) multi-modal continual learning. In the first work, I will discuss a supervised
continual learning algorithm called MEGA which dynamically balances the old tasks and the new task. In the second
work, I will discuss unsupervised continual learning algorithms which learn representation continually without access
to the labels. In the third work, I will elaborate an efficient
continual learning algorithm that can learn multiple modalities continually without forgetting.

Speaker Bio
Yunhui Guo is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science
at the University of Texas at Dallas. He was a postdoctoral research associate working with Professor Stella Yu
at UC Berkeley/ICSI. He received Ph.D in 2020 from the
Department of Computer Science, University of California
San Diego, under the supervision of Professor Tajana Rosing. His expertise is in the overall area of Machine Learning, Computer Vision and Deep Learning. In particular, he
mainly works on problems related to transfer learning (Guo
et al. 2019, 2020b), continual learning (Guo et al. 2020c; Yu
et al. 2023; Pian et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023) and few-shot
learning (Guo et al. 2020a).

A significant step towards artificial general intelligence is
to enable the learning agent to acquire the ability of remembering past experiences while being trained on a continuum
of tasks. Deep neural networks are capable of achieving remarkable performance on a single task. However, when the
network is retrained on a new task, its performance drops
drastically on previously trained tasks, a phenomenon which
is referred to as catastrophic forgetting. In contrast, the human cognitive system is capable of acquiring new knowledge without damaging previously learned experiences. The
goal of continual learning aims to train a machine learning
model on a sequence of tasks without performance drop.
It is essential for many practical applications including autonomous driving, robotics and AI in medicine.
In this talk, I will discuss three research papers on continual learning. In this first paper, an algorithm called mixed
stochastic gradient descent (MEGA) (Guo et al. 2020c) is
proposed which allows the model to maintain the performance on old tasks while being trained on a new task. In the
second paper, an algorithm called SCALE (Yu et al. 2023)
is proposed to learn from a sequence of unlabeled data con-

References
Guo, Y.; Codella, N. C.; Karlinsky, L.; Codella, J. V.; Smith, J. R.;
Saenko, K.; Rosing, T.; and Feris, R. 2020a. A broader study of
cross-domain few-shot learning. In European conference on computer vision, 124–141. Springer.
Guo, Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, L.; and Rosing, T. 2020b. Adafilter: Adaptive filter fine-tuning for deep transfer learning. In AAAI, volume 34, 4060–4066.
Guo, Y.; Liu, M.; Yang, T.; and Rosing, T. 2020c. Improved
Schemes for Episodic Memory-based Lifelong Learning. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33.
Guo, Y.; Shi, H.; Kumar, A.; Grauman, K.; Rosing, T.; and Feris,
R. 2019. Spottune: transfer learning through adaptive fine-tuning.
In CVPR, 4805–4814.
Pian, W.; Mo, S.; Guo, Y.; and Tian, Y. 2023. Audio-Visual ClassIncremental Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11073.
Yu, X.; Guo, Y.; Gao, S.; and Rosing, T. 2023. SCALE: Online
Self-Supervised Lifelong Learning without Prior Knowledge. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2483–2494.
Zhu, X.; Hao, J.; Guo, Y.; and Liu, M. 2023. AUC Maximization
in Imbalanced Lifelong Learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2574–2585. PMLR.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22666

