The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mimic: Speaking Style Disentanglement for Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation
Hui Fu1, 3 , Zeqing Wang2 , Ke Gong3 , Keze Wang2 , Tianshui Chen4 , Haojie Li3 , Haifeng Zeng3 ,
Wenxiong Kang1 *
1

South China University of Technology
2
Sun Yat-sen University
3
X-ERA.ai
4
Guangdong University of Technology
au fuhui@mail.scut.edu.cn, wangzq73@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
{kegong936, kezewang, tianshuichen, 12hjli4, haifengzeng459}@gamil.com, auwxkang@scut.edu.cn
Abstract

opening and closing, the dimensionality of pouting, etc. In
real-world scenarios, individuals exhibit remarkably distinct
speaking styles even when delivering the same speech, as
depicted in Figure 1. These significant diversities in speak-

Speech-driven 3D facial animation aims to synthesize vivid
facial animations that accurately synchronize with speech and
match the unique speaking style. However, existing works
primarily focus on achieving precise lip synchronization
while neglecting to model the subject-specific speaking style,
often resulting in unrealistic facial animations. To the best of
our knowledge, this work makes the first attempt to explore
the coupled information between the speaking style and the
semantic content in facial motions. Specifically, we introduce
an innovative speaking style disentanglement method, which
enables arbitrary-subject speaking style encoding and leads to
a more realistic synthesis of speech-driven facial animations.
Subsequently, we propose a novel framework called Mimic
to learn disentangled representations of the speaking style
and content from facial motions by building two latent spaces
for style and content, respectively. Moreover, to facilitate disentangled representation learning, we introduce four welldesigned constraints: an auxiliary style classifier, an auxiliary inverse classifier, a content contrastive loss, and a pair
of latent cycle losses, which can effectively contribute to the
construction of the identity-related style space and semanticrelated content space. Extensive qualitative and quantitative
experiments conducted on three publicly available datasets
demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art
methods and is capable of capturing diverse speaking styles
for speech-driven 3D facial animation. The source code and
supplementary video are publicly available at: https://zeqingwang.github.io/Mimic/

Now they make bad choices that create jobs for most familes …

Style 1

Style 2

Style 3

Figure 1: Illustrations of various speaking styles, which reveals the differences in the amplitudes of mouth opening
(red border) and closing (green border), as well as the level
of dimensionality in pouting (blue border).
ing styles pose a challenge in producing facial animations
that accurately match an individual’s unique speaking style.
Previous works usually utilize a person-specific model or
treat speaking styles simply as identity classes. The former
approaches (Karras et al. 2017; Richard et al. 2021a) can
generate facial animations for a specific individual with a
corresponding speaking style but lack generalization ability
across diverse subjects. The latter methods (Cudeiro et al.
2019; Richard et al. 2021b; Fan et al. 2022; Xing et al. 2023)
employ a one-hot encoding of the training identities to distinguish different speaking styles and can control the synthesized speaking style by modifying the one-hot vector. However, such a formulation is far from representing informative
speaking styles. Besides, it fails to match the new speaking style of an unseen subject in the training stage. To solve
this, Imitator (Thambiraja et al. 2022) aims at designing a
style embedding layer with one-hot encoding to optimize for
identity-specific speaking style based on a reference video.

Introduction
Speech-driven 3D facial animation is receiving increasing
attention due to its broad applications, such as digital avatar
synthesis, movie production, etc. Recently, it has become
possible to generate fluent and lip-synchronized facial animations with the advent of deep learning. However, most
previous works focus only on learning the speaking content, going for synchronization of speech and lip movements
(Cudeiro et al. 2019; Richard et al. 2021b; Fan et al. 2022;
Xing et al. 2023). Learning speaking style has often been
neglected. The speaking style reflects the unique lip movement pattern of a speaker, including the amplitude of mouth
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1770

