The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sparse3D: Distilling Multiview-Consistent Diffusion for Object Reconstruction
from Sparse Views
Zixin Zou1 , Weihao Cheng2 , Yan-Pei Cao2 , Shi-Sheng Huang3 ,
Ying Shan2 , Song-Hai Zhang1†
1

BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
3
Beijing Normal University
{zouzx19@mails.,shz@}tsinghua.edu.cn, airrafer@hotmail.com, {caoyanpei,shishenghuang.net}@gmail.com,
yingsshan@tencent.com
Input Views

Abstract

SparseFusion

Unseen Categories

Unseen Instances

Reconstructing 3D objects from extremely sparse views is a
long-standing and challenging problem. While recent techniques employ image diffusion models for generating plausible images at novel viewpoints or for distilling pre-trained
diffusion priors into 3D representations using score distillation sampling (SDS), these methods often struggle to simultaneously achieve high-quality, consistent, and detailed
results for both novel-view synthesis (NVS) and geometry.
In this work, we present Sparse3D, a novel 3D reconstruction method tailored for sparse view inputs. Our approach
distills robust priors from a multiview-consistent diffusion
model to refine a neural radiance field. Specifically, we employ a controller that harnesses epipolar features from input
views, guiding a pre-trained diffusion model, such as Stable
Diffusion, to produce novel-view images that maintain 3D
consistency with the input. By tapping into 2D priors from
powerful image diffusion models, our integrated model consistently delivers high-quality results, even when faced with
open-world objects. To address the blurriness introduced by
conventional SDS, we introduce category-score distillation
sampling (C-SDS) to enhance detail. We conduct experiments
on CO3DV2 which is a multi-view dataset of real-world objects. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that our approach outperforms previous state-of-the-art
works on the metrics regarding NVS and geometry reconstruction.

Ours

Figure 1: Novel-view synthesis from two input views using our Sparse3D and SparseFusion. Our approach can
achieve higher-quality images with more details for unseen
instances, especially for the unobserved regions of them
(e.g., the left face of the teddybear). Furthermore, our approach can generalize to some unseen categories without any
further finetuning, while SparseFusion fails.

Introduction
Reconstructing 3D objects from sparse-view images remains a pivotal challenge in the realms of computer graphics
and computer vision. This technique has a wide range of applications such as Augmented and Virtual Reality (AR/VR).
The advent of the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) and its subsequent variants has catalyzed significant strides in geometry reconstruction and novel-view synthesis, as delineated
in recent studies (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021a;
Yariv et al. 2021). However, NeRFs exhibit limitations when
operating on extremely sparse views, specifically with as
few as 2 or 3 images. In these scenarios, the synthesized
novel views often suffer in quality due to the limited input
observations.

Existing methods for sparse-view reconstruction typically
leverage a generalizable NeRF model, pre-trained on multiview datasets, to infer 3D representations from projected
image features (Yu et al. 2021; Chibane et al. 2021). However, these approaches tend to regress to the mean, failing
to produce perceptually sharp outputs, especially in intricate details. To produce plausible results, either in terms
of geometry or appearance, from limited observations, sev†

corresponding author
ArXiv version with supplementary materials is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.14078

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7900

