The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Coevolutionary Algorithm for Building Robust Decision Trees under Minimax
Regret
Adam Żychowski1 , Andrew Perrault2 , Jacek Mańdziuk1, 3, 4
1

Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
3
Faculty of Computer Science, AGH University of Krakow
4
Center of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence, AGH University of Krakow
adam.zychowski@pw.edu.pl, perrault.17@osu.edu, jacek.mandziuk@pw.edu.pl
Abstract

within that perturbation range, so that small malicious alterations of input objects should not deceive a robust classifier.
The vast majority of defensive algorithms for DTs focus on adversarial accuracy (Kantchelian, Tygar, and Joseph
2016; Chen et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2022; Ranzato and Zanella
2021; Justin et al. 2021). We argue that there are better metrics in principle, and the focus on adversarial accuracy has
been driven by computational tractability. Adversarial accuracy is highly sensitive to accuracy on the worst-case perturbation, and when the perturbation range can be large, this
can lead to flattening of intuitively good models and bad
ones, as the worst-case perturbations can “defeat” all models.
There are other metrics that can better evaluate model robustness, like max regret (Savage 1951). Max regret is defined as the maximum difference between the result of the
given model and the result of the optimal model for any input data perturbation within a given range. Minimizing max
regret is referred to as the minimax regret decision criterion.
Adversarial accuracy might provide an overly optimistic or
pessimistic view of the model’s robustness by focusing only
on absolute accuracy value. In contrast, max regret is a more
realistic approach since it counts the magnitude of the potential loss by considering the model trained on perturbed data.
However, max regret cannot be directly optimized and used
as a splitting criterion in the state-of-the-art algorithms.
In recent years, researchers successfully explored the potential of coevolutionary algorithms to various optimization
problems (Mahdavi, Shiri, and Rahnamayan 2015) including DTs induction (Aitkenhead 2008). Coevolutionary algorithms consist in simultaneous evolution of multiple populations, each of them representing a different aspect of the
problem. By fostering competition between populations, coevolutionary algorithms can guide the search towards the optimal solutions.
Considering the limitations of traditional DT algorithms
and the promises of coevolutionary computation, we propose a novel coevolutionary algorithm specifically tailored
for creating robust decision trees (RDTs) in adversarial contexts. Our approach leverages the power of adaptive coevolution, allowing to exploit the competitive interactions between populations of decision trees and adversarial perturbations to adapt and converge toward robust and accurate classifications for complex and noisy data. In this process, we

In recent years, there has been growing interest in developing
robust machine learning (ML) models that can withstand adversarial attacks, including one of the most widely adopted,
efficient, and interpretable ML algorithms—decision trees
(DTs). This paper proposes a novel coevolutionary algorithm
(CoEvoRDT) designed to create robust DTs capable of handling noisy high-dimensional data in adversarial contexts.
Motivated by the limitations of traditional DT algorithms,
we leverage adaptive coevolution to allow DTs to evolve and
learn from interactions with perturbed input data. CoEvoRDT
alternately evolves competing populations of DTs and perturbed features, enabling construction of DTs with desired
properties. CoEvoRDT is easily adaptable to various target
metrics, allowing the use of tailored robustness criteria such
as minimax regret. Furthermore, CoEvoRDT has potential to
improve the results of other state-of-the-art methods by incorporating their outcomes (DTs they produce) into the initial population and optimize them in the process of coevolution. Inspired by the game theory, CoEvoRDT utilizes mixed
Nash equilibrium to enhance convergence. The method is
tested on 20 popular datasets and shows superior performance
compared to 4 state-of-the-art algorithms. It outperformed all
competing methods on 13 datasets with adversarial accuracy
metrics, and on all 20 considered datasets with minimax regret. Strong experimental results and flexibility in choosing
the error measure make CoEvoRDT a promising approach for
constructing robust DTs in real-world applications.

Introduction
Decision trees (DTs) is a popular, easily interpretable machine learning (ML) algorithm for classification and regression tasks. One of the primary challenges in DT construction is dealing with noisy and high-dimensional data. In particular, it has been shown that ML models (including DTs)
are vulnerable to adversarial, perturbed samples that trick
the model into misclassifying them (Kantchelian, Tygar, and
Joseph 2016; Zhang, Zhang, and Hsieh 2020; Grosse et al.
2017). To address this challenge, researchers have proposed
new defensive algorithms for creating robust classification
models (see, e.g., Chakraborty et al. (2021)). A model is
defined to be robust to some perturbation range of its input
samples when it assigns the same class to all the samples
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21869

