The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MultiSum: A Multi-Facet Approach for Extractive Social Summarization
Utilizing Semantic and Sociological Relationships
Tanglong Zhao1,2 , Ruifang He1,2 * , Jing Xu1,2 , Bo Wang1,2
1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, Tianjin, China
{zhaotl,rfhe,jingxu,bo wang} @tju.edu.cn

Abstract

ing algorithms to get summaries based on the textual content of the posts, such as graph-based ranking algorithms
(Erkan and Radev 2004; Dutta et al. 2018; Sharifi, Inouye,
and Kalita 2013) and clustering-based methods (Andy, Wijaya, and Callison-Burch 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Gillani
et al. 2017). These methods mainly consider each post as a
separate unit and extract features independently based on its
content. However, because of post’s brief content and informal expression, its representation tends to be sparse. Work
in recent years has focused on improving the summarization
by enriching post representation. Ali et al. (2020) propose
a technique for summarizing microblogs on Twitter that simultaneously considers topic sentiments. But this approach
still focuses on the content of the posts and ignores the relationships between them. Liu et al. (2021) use graph convolutional network (GCN) on social networks to integrate text
content and social relation features into a universal representation. Despite the validity of it, existing studies usually
involve only one type of edges when constructing graphs.
However, posts often have multiple types of relations, such
as social and semantic relationships (Jing, Park, and Tong
2021). Different relationships provide relational information
from distinct aspects, and jointly modeling various relations
of them will improve the performance of the model (Yan
et al. 2021; Jing et al. 2021a).

Social summarization aims to provide summaries for a large
number of social texts (called posts) about a single topic. To
extract a summary, both the representation of post and summary selection method are crucial. Previous methods introduce social relation to enhance post embedding to mitigate
the sparse representation due to its brief and informal expression. However, they ignore that there are multiple relations
between posts. Besides, existing graph-based centrality calculation approaches tend to select posts from one aspect. This
leads to facet bias especially when there are multiple viewpoints. In this paper, we propose a model named MultiSum to
improve social summarization. Specifically, 1) We use graph
convolutional networks to fuse text content with social and
semantic relations to improve post representation; 2) The similarity between the summary and all aspects is incorporated
into the centrality score during the selection phase, encouraging the model to pay attention to different facets. Experimental results on English and Chinese corpora support the effectiveness of this model. Furthermore, external evaluations by
human experts and large language models demonstrate the
validity of MultiSum in facet coverage and redundancy reduction.

Introduction
Social summarization aims to produce a short and compact summary for a collection of posts on a specific topic.
It can efectively alleviate information overloading problem
and help people acquire key information on social media
quickly. A notable technique in the field of text summarization is the ‘Extractive’ approach, in which representative
sentences are directly extracted from the source document.
An alternative method, called the ‘Abstractive’ approach,
generates summaries based on the core idea within the text.
Both of them have made great progress within conventional
summarization domains, such as news summarization and
dialogue summarization (Liu et al. 2022; Liu, Jia, and Zhu
2022; Dixit, Wang, and Chen 2023; Li et al. 2023; Gao et al.
2023).
Similarly, there have been strides in social summarization.
Traditional approaches typically use different types of rank-

In addition to the representation of posts, the approach
for summary selection is also important for extractive summarization. Graph-based centrality calculation methods are
commonly used in this task (Radev, Jing, and Budzikowska
2000; Erkan and Radev 2004). They suggest the more similar a sentence is to other sentences, the more important it
is. Zheng and Lapata (2019) introduce a directed centrality method called PacSum, premise on the assumption that
the contribution of any two nodes to their respective centralities is influenced by their relative positions in the document. For documents focusing on a single aspect, this approach typically works well. However, in longer documents
or social media posts, there are often multiple facets to consider. Taking into account the property that posts have various opinions can enhance the diversity of summary. Existing
methods, such as clustering (Andy, Wijaya, and CallisonBurch 2019), can enhance the variety of aspects, but they
need manual feature extraction from posts and the number
of human-defined facets, which require expert experiences

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19661

