The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discrepancy and Uncertainty Aware Denoising Knowledge Distillation for
Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Named Entity Recognition
Ling Ge1 , Chunming Hu1,2,3, * , Guanghui Ma1 , Jihong Liu4, * , Hong Zhang5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
College of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
4
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Beihang University, Beijing, China
5
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team / Coordination Center of China, Beijing, China
{geling, hucm, maguanghui, ryukeiko}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangh@isc.org.cn
Abstract

proaches effectively transfer language-independent knowledge from high-resource (source) languages to zero-shot
(target) languages and are expected to achieve good performance for target languages.
Among these, the knowledge distillation-based approaches have yielded the most remarkable results and
gained widespread attention (Wu et al. 2020a; Liang et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2022;
Ge et al. 2023). These approaches typically train a teacher
network with the source language to infer pseudo-soft labels
for the target language, and then force the student network to
mimic the teacher’s inference to transfer knowledge. Since
soft labels contain valuable information (e.g., inter-label relations) (Hinton et al. 2015), the student network can perform better than the teacher network in the target language.
However, due to the language gap between source and
target languages, the teacher network that only accesses the
ground-truth labels of the source language inevitably infers
low-quality (noisy) pseudo labels for the target language. If
these noisy pseudo labels are directly utilized for knowledge distillation, they will mislead the training process of
the student network, resulting in negative knowledge transfer (Feng et al. 2021). Only a few works have focused on this
issue. RIKD (Liang et al. 2021) combines multiple data features to filter low-valuable target data, and AdvPicker (Chen
et al. 2021) picks target samples similar to the source data
for knowledge distillation. These methods attempt to reduce
noise via data selection. Unfortunately, the pseudo labels of
the selected samples still contain different-level noise (Xu
et al. 2022; Qin et al. 2022), which can confound the optimization of the student network. Furthermore, these methods neglect to improve the quality of pseudo labels that determines the accuracy degree of knowledge transfer.
In this paper, we propose an Denoising Knowledge
Distillation model (named DenKD) to mitigate the noise
issue via enhancing the pseudo labels’ quality and adjusting the student network’s focus on different samples. Firstly,
DenKD introduces a discrepancy-aware denoising representation learning method to enable the teacher network to
learn discriminative representations for the target language.
In general, better representations lead to better classifiers
(Zhou et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b), yielding higherquality pseudo labels. In addition, to further mitigate the

The knowledge distillation-based approaches have recently
yielded state-of-the-art (SOTA) results for cross-lingual NER
tasks in zero-shot scenarios. These approaches typically employ a teacher network trained with the labelled source (richresource) language to infer pseudo-soft labels for the unlabelled target (zero-shot) language, and force a student network to approximate these pseudo labels to achieve knowledge transfer. However, previous works have rarely discussed
the issue of pseudo-label noise caused by the source-target
language gap, which can mislead the training of the student
network and result in negative knowledge transfer. This paper proposes an discrepancy and uncertainty aware Denoising
Knowledge Distillation model (DenKD) to tackle this issue.
Specifically, DenKD uses a discrepancy-aware denoising representation learning method to optimize the class representations of the target language produced by the teacher network,
thus enhancing the quality of pseudo labels and reducing
noisy predictions. Further, DenKD employs an uncertaintyaware denoising method to quantify the pseudo-label noise
and adjust the focus of the student network on different samples during knowledge distillation, thereby mitigating the
noise’s adverse effects. We conduct extensive experiments on
28 languages including 4 languages not covered by the pretrained models, and the results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our DenKD.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental information extraction task that aims to identify and classify
text spans into predefined entity classes. Recently, tremendous advances in deep learning have propelled NER towards
SOTA performance (Ge et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023).
However, the success of these deep learning-based methods depends on large-scale, manually annotated data. Due
to the lack of labeled training data, most languages have yet
to benefit from these technical advances. In consequence, researchers begin to focus on cross-lingual transfer learning in
zero-shot (no annotated data) scenarios, proposing various
approaches (Huang, May, and Peng 2019; Bari, Joty, and
Jwalapuram 2020; Plank 2021; Guo et al. 2022). These ap* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18056

