The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GOALNET: Interleaving Neural Goal Predicate Inference with Classical Planning
for Generalization in Robot Instruction Following
Jigyasa Gupta1, 2 * , Shreya Sharma1 * , Shreshth Tuli3 , Rohan Paul1 , Mausam1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
2
Samsung R&D Institute Delhi, India
3
Happening Technology, UK
{jigyasagupta27, iitd.shreya.sharma, shreshthtuli}@gmail.com, {rohan, mausam}@cse.iitd.ac.in
Instruction
“Place pillow on bed”

Abstract
Our goal is to enable a robot to learn how to sequence its
actions to perform high-level tasks specified as natural language instructions, given successful demonstrations from a
human partner. Our novel neuro-symbolic solution G OAL N ET builds an iterative two-step approach that interleaves (i)
inferring next subgoal predicate implied by the language instruction, for a given world state, and (ii) synthesizing a feasible subgoal-reaching plan from that state. The agent executes
the plan, and the two steps are repeated. G OAL N ET combines
(i) learning, where dense representations are acquired for language instruction and the world state via a neural network
prediction model, enabling generalization to novel settings
and (ii) planning, where the cause-effect modeling by a classical planner eschews irrelevant predicates, facilitating multistage decision making in large domains. G OAL N ET obtains
78% improvement in the goal reaching rate in comparison to
several state-of-the-art approaches on benchmark data with
multi-stage instructions. Further, G OAL N ET can generalize
to novel instructions for scenes with unseen objects. Source
code available at https://github.com/reail-iitd/goalnet.

GoalNet
Goal predicate

Near(robot, pillow)

Classical Planner
Action

MoveTo(robot, pillow)

World State
New State

Simulator

Figure 1: G OAL N ET infers goal predicates (red), which are
forwarded to a classical planner (blue) and actions are executed in a simulator (green) to reach a goal state.
NL instruction. Preliminary experiments show that this approach faces limitations. First, the hypothesis space of conjunctive goals is exponential (powerset of all predicates).
Second, irrelevant predicates or side-effects in demonstrated
plans can lead to inaccurate predictions. Finally, there may
be stochasticity or erroneous plan executions that may not
exactly lead to the intended goal state.
In response, we propose an interleaved strategy (see
Fig. 1). Here, a neuro-symbolic model, namely G OAL N ET,
predicts a subgoal predicate (one each for positive and negative) from the current world state, which is forwarded to a
classical planner that outputs a sequence of actions. The plan
is executed to obtain the next world state. This is repeated
iteratively till the final goal state is reached. G OAL N ET’s architecture has several benefits: prediction of single subgoals
reduces hypothesis space, prediction of intermediate goals
makes it more robust to side-effects, and interleaving allows
the model to recover from execution errors and earlier mistakes in subgoal prediction. Furthermore, to handle scenes
with unseen objects, we extend G OAL N ET to be agnostic to
the object set in the world state – we call this G OAL N ET *.
We experiment on a benchmark dataset by Misra et al.
(2015) collected from a mobile manipulator in a kitchen or
living-room environment possessing a rich set multi-stage
interactions. Our evaluation shows that the interleaved architecture of G OAL N ET outperforms state-of-the-art methods that use (i) a non-neural subgoal predictor with a similar
interleaving, (ii) a conjunctive goal predictor without interleaving, and (iii) a pure imitation learner. Our results demonstrate a significant improvement in the task completion rate

Introduction
Robots may be placed in scenarios where they learn from humans on how to perform tasks. Hence, they must possess the
ability to understand high-level task specifications, communicated in natural language (NL) by humans, and successfully generate goal-reaching plans, possibly in novel environments. A popular paradigm for training a robot is imitation learning, wherein models are trained directly from such
demonstrations (Tuli et al. 2022; Mei, Bansal, and Walter
2016; Suhr and Artzi 2018). However, prior work highlights
that such methods tend to lack the ability to scale with environment complexity (Misra et al. 2018).
On the other hand, symbolic planners allow us to scale
well, while circumventing the challenges posed by sideeffect or irrelevant predicates (Misra et al. 2018). However,
planners need symbolic goal predicates and cannot directly
take NL instructions as input. We can decompose the problem into first predicting the final goal predicates and using
them to generate actions via a planner. This will entail training a model to output intended goal predicates for a given
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20113

