The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DifAttack: Query-Efficient Black-Box Adversarial Attack via Disentangled
Feature Space
Jun Liu1 , Jiantao Zhou1 * Jiandian Zeng2 , Jinyu Tian3
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
{yc07453, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, jiandian@bnu.edu.cn, jytian@must.edu.mo

Abstract

and scores is known as a score-based black-box attack, while
the situation where only categories are included is named
a decision-based black-box attack (Brendel, Rauber, and
Bethge 2018). The third category refers to the gray-box attack (Guo et al. 2018), where attackers can obtain models’
knowledge that falls between white-box attacks and blackbox attacks. Given that contemporary potent classification
APIs (Google 2023; Imagga 2023) generally provide image
prediction categories alongside scores, this work primarily
focuses on practical score-based black-box attacks.
We observe that current state-of-the-art (SOTA) scorebased black-box attack methods predominantly exhibit two
aspects that can be improved. On the one hand, prior techniques that seek AEs by optimizing image features usually operate within the entire feature space, such as AdvFlow (Mohaghegh Dolatabadi, Erfani, and Leckie 2020),
TREMBA (Huang and Zhang 2020) and CGA (Feng et al.
2022), without embracing the disentanglement of adversarial capability and visual characteristics in the image feature.
Optimizing the entire feature of images perhaps results in
substantial pixel perturbations that will encounter truncation
by the predefined disturbance constraint, thus diminishing
the optimization efficacy of the features and eventually increasing query numbers. Another possible chain reaction is
the decrease in the Attack Success Rate (ASR) caused by the
limited query numbers. To improve the unsatisfactory ASR
and query efficiency, our DifAttack disentangles an image’s
latent feature into an adversarial feature and a visual feature, where the former dominates the adversarial capability
of an image, while the latter largely determines its visual
appearance. Such a disentanglement is feasible because the
adversarial capability is mainly entwined with the decision
boundary of classifiers and is relatively independent of the
intrinsic image signal, whereas a contrast holds true for the
visual appearance. Afterward, in DifAttack, the adversarial
feature is iteratively optimized according to the query feedback from the victim model, while keeping the visual feature
unaltered, until a successful AE can be reconstructed from
the fusion of these two features.
On the other hand, some score-based attack techniques
including P-RGF (Cheng et al. 2019) and GFCS (Lord,
Mueller, and Bertinetto 2022), exploit the gradients from local white-box surrogate models to update AEs during each
query. These methods are effective when image categories

This work investigates efficient score-based black-box adversarial attacks with a high Attack Success Rate (ASR) and
good generalizability. We design a novel attack method based
on a Disentangled Feature space, called DifAttack, which
differs significantly from the existing ones operating over the
entire feature space. Specifically, DifAttack firstly disentangles an image’s latent feature into an adversarial feature and
a visual feature, where the former dominates the adversarial
capability of an image, while the latter largely determines its
visual appearance. We train an autoencoder for the disentanglement by using pairs of clean images and their Adversarial
Examples (AEs) generated from available surrogate models
via white-box attack methods. Eventually, DifAttack iteratively optimizes the adversarial feature according to the query
feedback from the victim model until a successful AE is generated, while keeping the visual feature unaltered. In addition,
due to the avoidance of using surrogate models’ gradient information when optimizing AEs for black-box models, our
proposed DifAttack inherently possesses better attack capability in the open-set scenario, where the training dataset of
the victim model is unknown. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that our method achieves significant improvements in ASR and query efficiency simultaneously, especially
in the targeted attack and open-set scenarios. The code is
available at https://github.com/csjunjun/DifAttack.git.

Introduction
It has been observed that meticulously crafted Adversarial
Examples (AEs) are beneficial for evaluating and improving the robustness of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (Dong
et al. 2020; Croce and Hein 2020b). AEs refer to images that
deceive DNNs by incorporating imperceptible perturbations
onto clean images. The methods for generating AEs can be
roughly classified into three categories based on the information of victim DNNs available to the attacker. The first
category is the white-box attack (Dong et al. 2018; Croce
and Hein 2020a; Zhang et al. 2021), in which the attack
method has access to the architecture and weights of the victim model. The second category is called the black-box attack, where the attacker can only obtain the model’s output.
The case where the model’s output contains both categories
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3666

