The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

U-Mixer: An Unet-Mixer Architecture with Stationarity Correction for Time
Series Forecasting
Xiang Ma1 , Xuemei Li1 , Lexin Fang1 , Tianlong Zhao1 , Caiming Zhang1,2 *
1

2

School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan 250101, China
Shandong Provincial Laboratory of Future Intelligence and Financial Engineering, Yantai 264005, China
{xiangma, fanglexin, tianlongzhao}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {xmli, czhang}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

hibits non-stationary caused by factors such as trend, seasonality, or irregular fluctuations. Such property can hinder
accurate modeling and prediction, thereby limiting the effectiveness of the Mixer architecture. In dealing with nonstationary, Mixer mainly have the following three problems:
(1) The deep structure of Mixer leads to unstable propagation of shallow features. When information flows through
multiple layers, the transmission of low-level features becomes non-stationary. (2) The mixed feature extraction of
different channels leads to non-stationary feature distributions, due to significant distribution variations among channels. (3) Model training cannot intuitively learn changes in
data distribution, resulting in shifted and non-stationary distribution of predicted values.
In this article, we present U-Mixer to address the issue
of non-stationarity in time series forecasting. U-Mixer combines the advantages of both Unet and Mixer architecture to
capture local temporal patterns of different levels while separately handles the temporal and channel interactions. The
key contribution of U-Mixer lies in the novel stationarity
correction technique, which explicitly restores the distribution of data by correcting the stationarity of data.
Specifically, we divide the time series into some patches
and process them independently using the Mixer architecture. This patch-based processing allows localized analysis of temporal patterns and captures fine-grained details
within the data. Mixer effectively captures the dependencies between different patches and channels without disrupting the overall temporal sequence through the multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) block, and learns meaningful representations from the entire time series. Simultaneously, it separately handles the temporal interactions and channel interactions, avoiding feature instability caused by significant variations in data distributions across different channels. Different from MLP-Mixer, U-Mixer adopts a Unet architecture to merge the low- and high-level features and obtain a
more comprehensive and richer data representation, thereby
improving the ability to understand and model data. Additionally, in order to improve model performance, time series
often undergoes a process of stationarization. However, due
to the loss of non-stationary information, the model cannot
intuitively learn the changes in data distribution, resulting
in a shift in the distribution of predicted values. Learning
the mapping of data distribution through training is inher-

Time series forecasting is a crucial task in various domains.
Caused by factors such as trends, seasonality, or irregular
fluctuations, time series often exhibits non-stationary. It obstructs stable feature propagation through deep layers, disrupts feature distributions, and complicates learning data distribution changes. As a result, many existing models struggle
to capture the underlying patterns, leading to degraded forecasting performance. In this study, we tackle the challenge
of non-stationarity in time series forecasting with our proposed framework called U-Mixer. By combining Unet and
Mixer, U-Mixer effectively captures local temporal dependencies between different patches and channels separately to
avoid the influence of distribution variations among channels,
and merge low- and high-levels features to obtain comprehensive data representations. The key contribution is a novel
stationarity correction method, explicitly restoring data distribution by constraining the difference in stationarity between
the data before and after model processing to restore the nonstationarity information, while ensuring the temporal dependencies are preserved. Through extensive experiments on various real-world time series datasets, U-Mixer demonstrates its
effectiveness and robustness, and achieves 14.5% and 7.7%
improvements over state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods.

Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a vital role in various domains
such as finance (Ma et al. 2022), weather forecasting (Liu
et al. 2022a), and sensor data analysis (Zhao et al. 2023).
Extracting meaningful patterns, understanding the underlying dynamics of time series to forecast future trends are crucial for informed decision-making and effective problemsolving (Zhang, Guo, and Wang 2023). With the advent
of deep learning, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Fukushima 1980) and Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017)
have shown remarkable progress in capturing temporal dependencies and extracting features from time series. Recently, the Mixer architecture (Tolstikhin et al. 2021), initially introduced for vision tasks, has gained attention for
its ability to model complex relationships within sequential
data. However, the application of Mixer to time series forecasting also presents challenges. Time series data often ex* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14255

