The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TA&AT: Enhancing Task-Oriented Dialog with Turn-Level Auxiliary Tasks and
Action-Tree Based Scheduled Sampling
Longxiang Liu1,2 , Xiuxing Li1,2 , Yang Feng1,2,*
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{liulongxiang21s, lixiuxing, fengyang}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Task-oriented dialog systems have witnessed substantial
progress due to conversational pre-training techniques. Yet,
two significant challenges persist. First, most systems primarily utilize the latest turn’s state label for the generator. This
practice overlooks the comprehensive value of state labels in
boosting the model’s understanding for future generations.
Second, an overreliance on generated policy often leads to
error accumulation, resulting in suboptimal responses when
adhering to incorrect actions. To combat these challenges, we
propose turn-level multi-task objectives for the encoder. With
the guidance of essential information from labeled intermediate states, we establish a more robust representation for both
understanding and generation. For the decoder, we introduce
an action tree-based scheduled sampling technique. Specifically, we model the hierarchical policy as trees and utilize
the similarity between trees to sample negative policy based
on scheduled sampling, hoping the model to generate invariant responses under perturbations. This method simulates potential pitfalls by sampling similar negative policy, bridging
the gap between task-oriented dialog training and inference.
Among methods without continual pre-training, our approach
achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on the MultiWOZ dataset series and was also competitive with pre-trained
SOTA methods.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of task-oriented dialog system.

language models, especially dialog pre-training. However,
two issues still exist. Firstly, there are some datasets with
intermediate state annotations, which most works simply use
to supervise the generator. While we believe that the annotations are not fully utilized and their essential value for understanding is overlooked. Secondly, the sequence-to-sequence
(Seq2Seq) training approach leads to error accumulation, especially generating unsatisfying responses that are attached
to incorrect actions.
To solve the first problem, we utilize the labels of intermediate states to supervise the hidden states output by
encoder, hoping better representations provide useful clues
for the subsequent generation. Inspired by MTTOD (Lee
2021), which utilizes the belief state annotations to construct
a context-span labeling auxiliary task, we leverage more annotations to construct more auxiliary tasks (e.g., slot type,
slot change, action type, and response keywords prediction).
Besides, inspired by DialoFlow (Li et al. 2021), we optimize
the turn-level representation instead of token-level since it
reflects higher-level information such as conversational goal
or potential influence before generation of next response.
To solve the second problem, we attempt to use scheduled sampling technique (Bengio et al. 2015) to reduce the
inconsistency between training and inference. However, in
TOD system, simply using the token-level scheduled sampling does not actually simulate the errors at inference.
Given a specific token, the likelihood of generating a subsequent token is highly deterministic due to the strong conditional relationships between tokens. This results in a sharp
token-level conditional probability distribution, making it
challenging for a single negative token to be sampled. In-

Introduction

The goal of task-oriented dialog (TOD) is to better accomplish a user-specific task through multi-turn dialog. As
shown in Figure 1, a typical TOD system consists of four
modules: (1) natural language understanding (NLU) to determine the user intent. (2) dialog state tracking (DST) to
extract the user constraints which will be used to query the
database (DB). (3) policy (POL) to plan for the system’s next
action sequence. (4) natural language generation (NLG) to
generate a fluent and informative response. In recent works,
NLU is usually not handled specifically, but put into DST
module (Takanobu et al. 2020). End-to-end task-oriented dialog, which is also the focus of our work, integrates submodules into one model for joint training.
Performance of end-to-end TOD systems has improved
dramatically in recent years thanks to powerful pre-trained
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18671

