The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Toward Robustness in Multi-Label Classification:
A Data Augmentation Strategy against Imbalance and Noise
Hwanjun Song1 , Minseok Kim2 , Jae-Gil Lee1
1

KAIST
Amazon
{songhwanjun, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr, kminseok@amazon.com
2

Dog

Cat Bird Door Cap Bowl

Clean Label:

1

0

0

1

0

0

Mislabeling:

0

1

0

1

0

0

Random Flip:

1

1

0

0

0

1

Missing Label:

1

Abstract
Multi-label classification poses challenges due to imbalanced
and noisy labels in training data. We propose a unified data
augmentation method, named BalanceMix, to address these
challenges. Our approach includes two samplers for imbalanced labels, generating minority-augmented instances with
high diversity. It also refines multi-labels at the label-wise
granularity, categorizing noisy labels as clean, re-labeled, or
ambiguous for robust optimization. Extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets demonstrate that BalanceMix outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. We release the
code at https://github.com/DISL-Lab/BalanceMix.

Figure 1: Examples of noisy labels in multi-label classification. 1 and 0 indicate positive and negative labels, symbolizing the existence of an object class.

such as negative labels for a cat and a bowl being flipped
independently to positive labels; and (partially) missing labels, where even humans cannot find all applicable class labels for each image, and it is more difficult to detect their
absence than to detect their presence (Cole et al. 2021).
Ensuring the robustness of AI systems calls for a holistic approach that effectively operates within the following
settings: clean, noisy, missing, and imbalanced labels at the
same time. However, this task is non-trivial given that minority and noisy labels have similar behavior in learning, e.g.,
larger gradients, making the task even more complicated
and challenging. As a result, prior studies have addressed
these two problems separately in different setups, assuming either clean or well-balanced training data—i.e., imbalanced clean labels (Lin et al. 2017; Ben-Baruch et al. 2021;
Du et al. 2023) and well-balanced noisy labels (Zhao and
Gomes 2021; Ferreira, Costeira, and Gomes 2021; Shikun
et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2023).
We address this challenge using a new data augmentation
method, BalanceMix, without complex data preprocessing
and architecture change. First, for imbalanced multi-labels,
we maintain an additional batch sampler called a minority
sampler, which samples the instances containing minority
labels with high probability, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). To
counter the limited diversity in oversampling, we interpolate
the instances sampled from the minority sampler with those
sampled from a random sampler using the Mixup (Zhang
et al. 2018) augmentation. By mixing with a higher weight
to the random instances, the sparse context of the oversampled instances literally percolates through the majority of
training data without losing diversity. Minority sampling in

Introduction
The issue of data-label quality emerges as a major concern
in the practical use of deep learning, potentially resulting in
catastrophic failures when deploying models in real-world
test scenarios (Whang et al. 2021). This concern is magnified in multi-label classification, where instances can be associated with multiple labels simultaneously. In this context,
AI system robustness is at risk due to diverse types of datalabel issues, although the task can reflect the complex relationships present in real-world data (Bello et al. 2021).
The presence of class imbalance occurs when a few
majority classes occupy most of the positive labels, and
positive-negative imbalance arises due to instances typically
having fewer positive labels but numerous negative labels.
Such imbalanced labels can dominate the optimization process and lead to underemphasizing the gradients from minority classes or positive labels. Additionally, the presence
of noisy labels stems from the costly and time-consuming
nature of meticulous annotation (Song et al. 2022). Labels
can be corrupted by adversaries or system failures (Zhang
et al. 2020). Notably, instances have both clean and incorrect
labels, therefore resulting in diverse cases of noisy labels.
Three distinct types of noisy labels arise in multi-label
classification, as illustrated in Fig. 1: mislabeling, where a
visible object in the image is labeled incorrectly by a human
or machine annotator, such as a dog being labeled as a cat;
random flipping, where labels are randomly flipped by an
adversary regardless of the presence of other class objects,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21592

