The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Diverse and Stable 2D Diffusion Guided Text to 3D Generation with Noise
Recalibration
Xiaofeng Yang1 , Fayao Liu2 , Yi Xu3 , Hanjing Su4 ,
Qingyao Wu5 , Guosheng Lin1 *
2

1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
OPPO US Research Center, USA
4
Tencent, China
5
South China University of Technology, China
{yang.xiaofeng, gslin}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

similarity between rendered images and text. Meanwhile,
Dreamfusion (Poole et al. 2022) represents a significant
breakthrough in improving generation quality by using 2D
language-guided diffusion models to train NeRF.
Specifically, Dreamfusion (Poole et al. 2022) starts from
a random initialized NeRF and adjusts the NeRF weights by
calculating the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss between the NeRF rendered images and the text prompt based
on the 2D diffusion model’s output. A detailed illustration of
the Dreamfusion method can be found in the third Section.
Despite the success of SDS loss, it faces two major issues. First, as also witnessed in Dreamfusion, the SDS loss
can hardly generate diversified content given different random seeds during NeRF training. The authors attribute the
reason to that the smoothed density may not contain many
distinct modes at high noise levels (Poole et al. 2022). In experiments, we also witness the similar issue – given a fixed
text prompt, the randomness in NeRF optimization does not
guarantee sufficient generation variety. Second, the degeneration issue. The SDS loss can cause the learned NeRF to
gradually collapse, preventing it from learning high-quality
texture details. This issue occurs not only with the original
SDS loss, but also with its successors like VSD loss (Wang
et al. 2023). We show a visual illustration of the two problems in Fig. 2.
In this paper, we thoroughly investigate the two issues and
propose a Noise-Recalibration SDS (NR-SDS) algorithm to
overcome them. The NR-SDS algorithm contains two parts:
the single noise training and the Noise Recalibration loss.
First, we propose a single noise training scheme to address
the diversity issue. We demonstrate that the original SDS
loss is searching for the optimal mode using random noises
from the entire Gaussian space. However, the generation
process can be limited to a single noise sampled from the
Gaussian space, leading to more diverse results. Second, we
propose Noise-Recalibration loss to address the degeneration issue. We attribute the degeneration problem to the high
guidance weight used in SDS loss. While a high guidance
factor is essential for the NeRF model to learn text-specific
content, it tends to cause the learned NeRF to degrade during training. To resolve this dilemma, we make the “single noise” in the single noise training method learnable and

In recent years, following the success of text guided image
generation, text guided 3D generation has gained increasing
attention among researchers. Dreamfusion is a notable approach that enhances generation quality by utilizing 2D text
guided diffusion models and introducing SDS loss, a technique for distilling 2D diffusion model information to train
3D models. However, the SDS loss has two major limitations
that hinder its effectiveness. Firstly, when given a text prompt,
the SDS loss struggles to produce diverse content. Secondly,
during training, SDS loss may cause the generated content to
overfit and collapse, limiting the model’s ability to learn intricate texture details. To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel approach called Noise Recalibration algorithm.
By incorporating this technique, we can generate 3D content
with significantly greater diversity and stunning details. Our
approach offers a promising solution to the limitations of SDS
loss.

Introduction
Text guided 3D generation is a challenging task that aims
to generate 3D content based on textual prompts. This approach has numerous applications in various fields such as
gaming, virtual environments, automation, AI augmented
design, and 3D data augmentations. However, the lack of
annotated 3D data makes this task extremely difficult. Current 3D generation methods (Chan et al. 2022; Liao et al.
2020; Henzler, Mitra, and Ritschel 2019; Nguyen-Phuoc
et al. 2019, 2020; Wu et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2018; Zhou
et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021), which typically focus on generating categorical objects, often require pose supervision
during training, resulting in a significant gap between 3D
generation and text guided generation.
To address this challenge and achieve photo-realistic 3D
object and scene generation, recent methods have utilized
2D models trained on 2D image data. For example, Dreamfield (Jain et al. 2022) leverages the contrastive image text
model CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) to train Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) by measuring the
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6549

