The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Variable Importance in High-Dimensional Settings Requires Grouping
Ahmad Chamma1, 2, 3 , Bertrand Thirion1, 2, 3 * , Denis Engemann4 *
1

Inria-Saclay, Palaiseau, France
2
Universite Paris Saclay
3
CEA Saclay
4
Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F.
Hoffmann La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland
ahmad.chamma@inria.fr, bertrand.thirion@inria.fr, denis.engemann@roche.com
Abstract

the decision process is crucial for providing statistical and,
ideally, scientific insights to the practitioner (Gao et al. 2022;
Molnar et al. 2021a; Fleming 2020; Hooker et al. 2019).
To gauge the impact of variables on model prediction, aka variable importance, several model-agnostic attempts have emerged (Molnar 2022; Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016). Examples include Permutation Feature Importance (PFI) (Breiman 2001), Conditional Randomization Test (Candes et al. 2017) and Leave-One-CovariateOut (LOCO) (Lei et al. 2018). All these instances constitute removal-based approaches (Covert, Lundberg, and Lee
2020), and are so far, the only ones known to provide statistically grounded measures of significance. Importantly,
removal-based approaches require retraining the model after removing the variable of interest and are, therefore,
time-consuming. Moreover, the common Permutation Importance (PI, Breiman 2001) risks mistaking insignificant
variables for significant ones when variables are correlated
(Hooker, Mentch, and Zhou 2021). Conditional Permutation
Importance CPI can overcome these limitations (Blesch,
Watson, and Wright 2023; Watson and Wright 2021; Debeer and Strobl 2020; Fisher, Rudin, and Dominici 2019;
Chamma, Engemann, and Thirion 2023). However, in highdimensional settings, single variable importance computation suffers from very high correlation between the variables
(Chevalier et al. 2021). More precisely, this makes conditional importance estimation less informative, as it remains
unclear how much information each variable adds. In the
extreme case where variables are duplicated, conditional importance can no longer be defined. More generally, correlations larger than .8 are known to present a hard challenge,
at least for linear learners (Chevalier et al. 2021). Importance analysis then typically yields spuriously significant
variables, which ruins its ability to statistically control the
false positive rate (Strobl et al. 2008). Besides, examining
the importance of each of the hundreds or thousands variables separately will result in prohibitive computation costs
(Covert, Lundberg, and Lee 2020) —removal procedures
typically have quadratic complexity— and defy model interpretability.
Group-based analysis can offer a remedy at it regularizes power estimates and leads to reduced computation time
(Molnar et al. 2021b; Bühlmann 2013). This can improve
inference as it helps handle the curse of correlated vari-

Explaining the decision process of machine learning algorithms is nowadays crucial for both a model’s performance enhancement and human comprehension. This can
be achieved by assessing the variable importance of single variables, even for high-capacity non-linear methods,
e.g. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). While only removalbased approaches, such as Permutation Importance (PI), can
bring statistical validity, they return misleading results when
variables are correlated. Conditional Permutation Importance
(CPI) bypasses PI’s limitations in such cases. However, in
high-dimensional settings, where high correlations between
the variables cancel their conditional importance, the use of
CPI as well as other methods leads to unreliable results, besides prohibitive computation costs. Grouping variables statistically via clustering or some prior knowledge gains some
power back and leads to better interpretations. In this work,
we introduce BCPI (Block-Based Conditional Permutation
Importance), a new generic framework for variable importance computation with statistical guarantees handling both
single and group cases. Furthermore, as handling groups with
high cardinality (such as a set of observations of a given
modality) are both time-consuming and resource-intensive,
we also introduce a new stacking approach extending the
DNN architecture with sub-linear layers adapted to the group
structure. We show that the ensuing approach extended with
stacking controls the type-I error even with highly-correlated
groups and shows top accuracy across benchmarks. Furthermore, we perform a real-world data analysis in a large-scale
medical dataset where we aim to show the consistency between our results and the literature for a biomarker prediction.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are extensively used
in many fields of science, such as biomedical application
(Strzelecki and Badura 2022; Alber et al. 2019), neuroscience (Kora et al. 2021; Knutson and Pan 2020), and social sciences (Lundberg, Brand, and Jeon 2022; Chen et al.
2021). The increasing importance of ML in society raises issues of accountability, hence, stimulating research on interpretable ML. Reaching a comprehensive understanding of
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11195

