The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ALISON: Fast and Effective Stylometric Authorship Obfuscation
Eric Xing1 , Saranya Venkatraman2 , Thai Le3 , Dongwon Lee2
2

1
McKelvey School of Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, MO, USA
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA
3
School of Engineering, University of Mississippi, MS, USA
e.xing@wustl.edu, saranyav@psu.edu, thaile@olemiss.edu, dongwon@psu.edu

Abstract

VBD RB

I got back my first memo today

Authorship Attribution (AA) and Authorship Obfuscation
(AO) are two competing tasks of increasing importance in
privacy research. Modern AA leverages an author’s consistent writing style to match a text to its author using an AA
classifier. AO is the corresponding adversarial task, aiming to
modify a text in such a way that its semantics are preserved,
yet an AA model cannot correctly infer its authorship. To
address privacy concerns raised by state-of-the-art (SOTA)
AA methods, new AO methods have been proposed but remain largely impractical to use due to their prohibitively slow
training and obfuscation speed, often taking hours. To this
challenge, we propose a practical AO method, ALISON, that
(1) dramatically reduces training/obfuscation time, demonstrating more than 10x faster obfuscation than SOTA AO
methods, (2) achieves better obfuscation success through attacking three transformer-based AA methods on two benchmark datasets, typically performing 15% better than competing methods, (3) does not require direct signals from a target
AA classifier during obfuscation, and (4) utilizes unique stylometric features, allowing sound model interpretation for explainable obfuscation. We also demonstrate that ALISON can
effectively prevent four SOTA AA methods from accurately
determining the authorship of ChatGPT-generated texts, all
while minimally changing the original text semantics. To ensure the reproducibility of our findings, our code and data are
available at: https://github.com/EricX003/ALISON.

10x faster

ALISON

Author A

15 % Authorship
success Attributor

I just received my first memo today
RB VBD

Author B

Figure 1: An example of ALISON successfully obfuscating
a text by changing its style while preserving semantics.

(e.g., semantics of words and phrases in the text) are engineered to allow a machine learning model to match a text
to an authorship label. These engineered features, such as
Writeprints (Abbasi and Chen 2008), often include not one
but several interpretable signals such as word and character bigrams, word length distributions, or special character
frequencies to improve the classification accuracy.
However, recent AA techniques (Fabien et al. 2020;
Devlin et al. 2019) utilize complex transformer models–
e.g., BERT (Jin et al. 2020), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019),
BertAA (Fabien et al. 2020), to automatically learn useful
features for AA from raw text. This removes the need to rely
on explicitly engineered stylometric features. While these
models are more computationally expensive to train and notorious for their lack of interpretability, they significantly
outperform traditional AA classifiers (Fabien et al. 2020).
As AA techniques become more accurate and efficient,
they are more likely to be exploited by malicious actors to
detect authorship identities behind anonymous texts. This
is severely detrimental to a number of groups, especially
NGO activists, whistleblowers, and journalists. As current
SOTA transformer-based AA models are sufficiently powerful, it becomes important to develop methods that reduce
the risk of an anonymous text’s true authorship being exposed. Therefore, in this work, we study the opposite task of
AA, known as Authorship Obfuscation (AO), which aims
to thwart authorship attribution classifiers by making a few
changes to the input text in a systematic way. Successful
AO will fool the target model into making an incorrect attribution out of a pool of candidates. Because AA techniques
generally degrade in performance as the number of authors

Introduction
Writing styles are often consistent among texts written by
the same author. However, the writing styles of different authors can be very dissimilar. Therefore, the authorship identity of an anonymous piece of writing can still be revealed
by analyzing its writing style and matching it to a pool of
known authorship markers, a task known as Authorship
Attribution (AA). In a machine learning context, authorship markers are predictive signals that can distinguish one
author’s writing style from the others. Such signals are often called stylometric features. Multiple types of stylometric
features, including lexical features (e.g., structure of words
and frequency of different character sequences), syntactic
features (e.g., part-of-speech distributions and occurrences
of functional words and punctuation), and content features
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19315

