The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cell Graph Transformer for Nuclei Classification
Wei Lou1, 2 , Guanbin Li3, 4 , Xiang Wan1 , Haofeng Li1 *
1

Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
weilou@link.cuhk.edu.cn, liguanbin@cuhk.edu.cn, {wanxiang, lhaof}@sribd.cn
2

Topology-aware Pre-training

Abstract

Feature
Extractor

Nuclei classification is a critical step in computer-aided diagnosis with histopathology images. In the past, various methods have employed graph neural networks (GNN) to analyze cell graphs that model inter-cell relationships by considering nuclei as vertices. However, they are limited by the
GNN mechanism that only passes messages among local
nodes via fixed edges. To address the issue, we develop a
cell graph transformer (CGT) that treats nodes and edges as
input tokens to enable learnable adjacency and information
exchange among all nodes. Nevertheless, training the transformer with a cell graph presents another challenge. Poorly
initialized features can lead to noisy self-attention scores and
inferior convergence, particularly when processing the cell
graphs with numerous connections. Thus, we further propose a novel topology-aware pretraining method that leverages a graph convolutional network (GCN) to learn a feature extractor. The pre-trained features may suppress unreasonable correlations and hence ease the finetuning of CGT.
Experimental results suggest that the proposed cell graph
transformer with topology-aware pretraining significantly improves the nuclei classification results, and achieves the stateof-the-art performance. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/lhaof/CGT

GCN

Weights

Feature
Extractor

Transformer

Cell Graph Transformer Training

Figure 1: The idea of Topoloyg-aware Pre-training for Cell
Graph Transformer. Simple initialization for the cell graph
transformer fails to converge due to a large amount of unreasonable connections. The topology-aware pre-training can
reduce the initial noise in features and boost the representation ability of the cell graph transformer.

cell graph of a histopathology image, and has been studied
for decades (Schnorrenberg et al. 1996; Hassan et al. 2022).
A Cell Graph is a set of vertices and edges, where a vertex is
a cell or nucleus and an edge is built between two neighboring cells. Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
have been used to learn embeddings with cell graphs (Zhou
et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020; Anklin et al. 2021; Hassan et al.
2022). These GCN-based solutions update the embedding of
a nucleus by aggregating its adjacent nuclei. However, these
GCN methods aggregate features along non-learnable edge
connections that are fixed after building a cell graph, which
limits the model capacity.
To overcome the issue, we propose a Cell Graph Transformer (CGT) for the nuclei classification task, inspired by
(Kreuzer et al. 2021; Ying et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2022). The
proposed CGT takes both nuclei and edges as input tokens to
compute any pairwise correlations among all tokens, which
can capture long-range contexts in a more flexible way. CGT
is a portable model that can identify cell types, based on
any form of binary segmentation or detection results of nuclei. These results could be obtained by existing methods or
manual labeling. In the CGT framework, we first compute
the centroid coordinates of nuclei from the segmentation/detection result, then determine if two cells are connected by
an edge according to their spatial distance, and build up the

Introduction
Identifying cell types for histopathology image has emerged
as a fundamental task in computational pathology (Krithiga
and Geetha 2021; Amgad et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023a).
By effectively classifying nuclei, medical professionals gain
crucial insights into the intricate cellular structures, which
helps make decisions related to disease diagnosis (Lagree
et al. 2021) and prognosis (Liu et al. 2022a). Thus, in this
paper, we focus on inferring the types of cell nuclei in a
histopathology image.
Deep learning (DL) based methods (Graham et al. 2019;
Abousamra et al. 2021; Doan et al. 2022) have been widely
applied to the nuclei classification task. Most of them employ convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to compute
pixel-wise local features and fail to consider the macrostructure of nuclei distribution (Anand, Gadiya, and Sethi 2020;
Javed et al. 2020). Another group of methods exploits the
* Haofeng Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3873

