The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Low-Latency Space-Time Supersampling for Real-Time Rendering
Ruian He* , Shili Zhou* , Yuqi Sun, Ri Cheng, Weimin Tan† , Bo Yan†
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
rahe16@fudan.edu.cn, slzhou19@fudan.edu.cn, yqsun20@fudan.edu.cn, rcheng22@m.fudan.edu.cn, wmtan@fudan.edu.cn,
byan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rise of real-time rendering and the evolution of display devices, there is a growing demand for post-processing
methods that offer high-resolution content in a high frame
rate. Existing techniques often suffer from quality and latency issues due to the disjointed treatment of frame supersampling and extrapolation. In this paper, we recognize
the shared context and mechanisms between frame supersampling and extrapolation, and present a novel framework,
Space-time Supersampling (STSS). By integrating them into
a unified framework, STSS can improve the overall quality
with lower latency. To implement an efficient architecture,
we treat the aliasing and warping holes unified as reshading regions and put forth two key components to compensate
the regions, namely Random Reshading Masking (RRM) and
Efficient Reshading Module (ERM). Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach achieves superior visual fidelity compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Notably,
the performance is achieved within only 4ms, saving up to
75% of time against the conventional two-stage pipeline that
necessitates 17ms.

Figure 1: Visual comparison with the state-of-the-arts. The
input has the aliasing caused by low-resolution rendering
(Up) and the warping hole by frame extrapolation (Down).
Our method can address them well in a unified pipeline.

Introduction

explored video super-resolution (Liang et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023), frame interpolation (Huang et al. 2022; Plack et al.
2023) and space-time video super-resolution (Geng et al.
2022; Hu et al. 2023). Nonetheless, simply transferring these
video processing methods to real-time rendering reveals two
evident shortcomings, as shown in Fig. 2(a): (1) Not effective in addressing aliasing. The aliasing in rendered content
is caused by a low point sampling rate, while the pixels in
photographic images are formed by integrating light rays.
The fragmented object, such as the spear, can not be adequately compensated using conventional video methods. (2)
High processing latency. The video methods primarily emphasize interpolation over extrapolation, which implies that
the future frame (T + 1) is needed first before generating the
current frame (T ). The methods unavoidably introduce extra
display delay and spoil the user experience. Consequently,
addressing these major drawbacks requires more effective
methodologies tailored for real-time rendering.
Existing rendering techniques (Akeley 1993; Lottes 2009;
Karis 2014) enhance rendering quality by leveraging Gbuffers and the motion vectors (MV). In real-time rendering,
the engine first generates the G-buffers by fast preprocess-

Recently, the rendered contents have been a spotlight in
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) applications, spanning
personal computers, mobile devices, and VR/AR hardware.
Notably, the Meta Quest 2 VR headset supports an impressive 90 Hz frame rate with 1832x1920 resolution per eye.
Meanwhile, Unreal Engine 5 can create photorealistic 3D
environments using real-time ray tracing and physicallybased shading. However, these advances pose a significant
challenge for the limited hardware. Low resolution (LR) and
low frame rate (LFR) significantly affect the user’s immersion, as users are sensitive to both the details and the smoothness of rendered frames, which lies over 90Hz (Shi et al.
2023). The post-processing methods provide a plausible solution to increase resolution and frame rate.
Neural networks have demonstrated remarkable performance in enhancing video resolution and frame rate before
their application to rendered content. Existing literature has
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Bo Yan, Weimin Tan.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2103

