The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FPRF: Feed-Forward Photorealistic Style Transfer of
Large-Scale 3D Neural Radiance Fields
GeonU Kim1 , Kim Youwang2 , Tae-Hyun Oh1,2,3
1

Grad. School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
2
Dept. of Electrical. Engineering, POSTECH
3
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University
gukim@postech.ac.kr, youwang.kim@postech.ac.kr, taehyun@postech.ac.kr
Abstract

UPST-NeRF StyleRF
LipRF
FPRF
(arXiv’22) (CVPR’23) (CVPR’23) (Ours)

We present FPRF, a feed-forward photorealistic style transfer method for large-scale 3D neural radiance fields. FPRF
stylizes large-scale 3D scenes with arbitrary, multiple style
reference images without additional optimization while preserving multi-view appearance consistency. Prior arts required
tedious per-style/-scene optimization and were limited to
small-scale 3D scenes. FPRF efficiently stylizes large-scale
3D scenes by introducing a style-decomposed 3D neural radiance field, which inherits AdaIN’s feed-forward stylization
machinery, supporting arbitrary style reference images. Furthermore, FPRF supports multi-reference stylization with the
semantic correspondence matching and local AdaIN, which
adds diverse user control for 3D scene styles. FPRF also preserves multi-view consistency by applying semantic matching
and style transfer processes directly onto queried features in
3D space. In experiments, we demonstrate that FPRF achieves
favorable photorealistic quality 3D scene stylization for largescale scenes with diverse reference images.

Photorealistic
Feed-forward
Multi-reference
Single-stage train

✓
✓
✗
✗

✗
✓
✗
✗

✓
✗
✗

✓
✓
✓
✓

Table 1: FPRF provides a photorealistic, feed-forward style
transfer method for large-scale neural radiance fields, while
supporting multiple style reference images in the stylization
stage. Our model, FPRF, differs from competing methods,
where it needs only an efficient single stage training, and it
works with arbitrary style images in a feed-forward manner.

it can enrich virtual 3D spaces of XR applications and realistically augment existing real-world autonomous driving
datasets (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012; Cordts et al. 2016).
Recent studies (Chen et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) have
developed methods for 3D scene PST and shown plausible visual qualities. However, all of them require additional
time-consuming learning and optimization stages even after
scene reconstruction (Chen et al. 2022) or tedious per-style
optimization steps to apply even just a single style to the
scene (Zhang et al. 2023). More importantly, due to the aforementioned drawbacks, the previous 3D scene PST methods
do not scale to large 3D scenes. This motivates us to develop an efficient PST method for large-scale 3D scenes that
stylizes the whole 3D scene without exhaustive and timeconsuming per-scene or per-style optimization.
In this work, we propose FPRF, an efficient and feedforward PST for large-scale 3D scenes. To implement a feedforward PST method for a large-scale 3D scene, we employ
the adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) method, which
has shown efficient and promising style transfer results on
various tasks (Huang and Belongie 2017; Huang et al. 2018;
Gunawan et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2020; Aberman et al. 2020;
Segu et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). Specifically, we propose a photorealistic stylizable radiance field
consisting of a scene content field and a scene semantic field.
Given a large set of photos of the target scene, we first train a
grid-based scene content field to embed the scene geometry
and content features that can be later decoded to a large-scale

Introduction
Large-scale 3D scene reconstruction is a longstanding problem in computer vision and graphics (Früh and Zakhor 2004;
Snavely, Seitz, and Szeliski 2006; Pollefeys et al. 2008; Agarwal et al. 2009; Zhu et al. 2018; Tancik et al. 2022), which
aims to build realistic 3D virtual scenes from a set of images.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (Mildenhall et al. 2020;
Barron et al. 2021, 2022; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022; JunSeong et al. 2022; Müller et al. 2022; Fridovich-Keil et al.
2023) and its large-scale extensions (Tancik et al. 2022; Turki,
Ramanan, and Satyanarayanan 2022; Zhenxing and Xu 2022)
have shown remarkable progress in modeling coherent and
photorealistic outdoor 3D scenes, suggesting promising future directions, e.g., VR/AR applications. In this work, we
take a step further and focus on a task, photorealistic style
transfer (PST) for large-scale 3D scenes, i.e., 3D scene PST.
The 3D scene PST task aims to transfer the visual styles
of style reference images onto a large-scale 3D scene represented by a neural radiance field. Within this objective,
the resulting stylized output is expected to be photorealistic
and preserve the geometric structure of the original scene.
Large-scale 3D scene PST has various applications, where
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2750

