The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond the Label Itself: Latent Labels Enhance Semi-supervised Point Cloud
Panoptic Segmentation
†

Yujun Chen1,2,* , Xin Tan1,2,* , Zhizhong Zhang1,2, , Yanyun Qu3 , Yuan Xie1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Chongqing Institute, East China Normal University
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University
51215901065@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {xtan, zzzhang, yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
As the exorbitant expense of labeling autopilot datasets
and the growing trend of utilizing unlabeled data, semisupervised segmentation on point clouds becomes increasingly imperative. Intuitively, finding out more “unspoken
words” (i.e., latent instance information) beyond the label itself should be helpful to improve performance. In this paper,
we discover two types of latent labels behind the displayed
label embedded in LiDAR and image data. First, in the LiDAR Branch, we propose a novel augmentation, CylinderMix, which is able to augment more yet reliable samples for
training. Second, in the Image Branch, we propose the Instance Position-scale Learning (IPSL) Module to learn and
fuse the information of instance position and scale, which is
from a 2D pre-trained detector and a type of latent label obtained from 3D to 2D projection. Finally, the two latent labels are embedded into the multi-modal panoptic segmentation network. The ablation of the IPSL module demonstrates
its robust adaptability, and the experiments evaluated on SemanticKITTI and nuScenes demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art method, LaserMix.

Figure 1: Segmentation quality at various Semi-supervised
ratios. Our model outperforms all other methods in mIoU.
Niyogi, and Belkin 2005; You et al. 2022). Thus, in this paper, we pay attention to semi-supervised multi-modal point
cloud (panoptic) segmentation (SMPS).
We have observed two major limitations in the previous SMPS methods. First, due to the limited ground-truth
data, the preceding semi-supervised (SS) models generated pseudo-labels as ground-truth for training (Kong et al.
2023; Park et al. 2022). Nevertheless, such pseudo-labels
are sometimes unreliable and of poor quality when the network is not fully trained. Second, for the 3D-2D cross-modal
processing, previous multi-modal point cloud models (Liu
et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2022) treat all pixels equally without leveraging sufficient image-level information (e.g., size
and boundary), despite the fact that images have a superior
ability to detect and locate objects, which even outperforms
point clouds in certain cases (Park et al. 2022).
According to the above discussions, we argue that the information contained in point cloud labels is not only as superficial as the displayed label itself but also encompasses
some latent labels beneath the surface. Hence, it is a feasible solution to explore unspoken words (i.e., latent labels) to
address the two issues. Specifically, for the first, since only
given labeled data is reliable and completely correct, 1) can
we exploit self-information among labeled point clouds to
construct other reliable and diverse labels? For the second

Introduction
Point clouds, with richer visual and geometric information,
have played an increasingly significant role in perception
tasks (Roriz, Cabral, and Gomes 2021; Triess et al. 2021).
Given its extensive potential, point cloud panoptic segmentation, unifying instance and semantic segmentation, has
been applied in various fields, such as autonomous driving,
robotics, and industrial manufacturing (Geiger, Lenz, and
Urtasun 2012; Fernandes et al. 2021; Wang and Kim 2019).
However, it is exhausting to annotate point cloud data,
which prohibitively restricts its potential applications (Hu
et al. 2022; Unal, Dai, and Van Gool 2022; Xu and Lee
2020). Hence, it is highly demanded to utilize less point
data to achieve better performance. Nowadays, images play
a crucial role in point cloud segmentation since they are costeffective (Cui et al. 2021; Li and Lee 2021). In addition, with
the larger number of unlabeled point cloud data collected,
the trend towards semi-supervision is prevalent (Sindhwani,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1245

