The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Regret Analysis of Policy Gradient Algorithm for Infinite Horizon Average
Reward Markov Decision Processes
Qinbo Bai* , Washim Uddin Mondal* , Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University, USA
{bai113, wmondal, vaneet}@purdue.edu

Abstract

et al. 2017; Fruit et al. 2018). It is worth noting that modelbased techniques encounter a significant challenge – these
algorithms demand a substantial memory to house the model
parameters. Consequently, their practical application is hindered when dealing with large state spaces. An alternative
strategy is referred to as model-free algorithms. These methods either directly estimate the policy function or maintain
an estimate of the Q function, which are subsequently employed for policy generation (Mnih et al. 2015; Schulman
et al. 2015; Mnih et al. 2016). The advantage of these algorithms lies in their adaptability to handle large state spaces.

In this paper, we consider an infinite horizon average reward
Markov Decision Process (MDP). Distinguishing itself from
existing works within this context, our approach harnesses the
power of the general policy gradient-based algorithm, liberating it from the constraints of assuming a linear MDP structure. We propose a policy gradient-based algorithm and show
its global convergence property. We then prove that the proposed algorithm has Õ(T 3/4 ) regret. Remarkably, this paper
marks a pioneering effort by presenting the first exploration
into regret-bound computation for the general parameterized
policy gradient algorithm in the context of average reward
scenarios.

In the average reward MDP, which is the setting considered in our paper, one of the key performance indicators of
an algorithm is the expected regret. It has been theoretically
demonstrated in (Auer, Jaksch, and Ortner 2008) that the expected regret of any algorithm
for a broad class of MDPs is
√
lower bounded by Ω( T ) where T denotes the length of the
time horizon. Many model-based algorithms, such as, (Auer,
Jaksch, and Ortner 2008; Agrawal and Jia 2017) achieve this
bound. However, these algorithms are applicable for the tabular setup, and hence not practical for large state spaces. Recently, (Wei et al. 2021) proposed a model-based algorithm
for the linear MDP setup that is shown to achieve the optimal
regret bound. On the other hand, (Wei et al. 2020) proposed
a model-free Q-estimation-based algorithm that achieves the
optimal regret in the tabular setup.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) describes a class of problems
where a learner repeatedly interacts with an unknown environment with the intention of maximizing the cumulative sum of rewards. This model has found its application
in a wide array of areas, ranging from networking to transportation to epidemic control (Geng et al. 2020; Al-Abbasi,
Ghosh, and Aggarwal 2019; Ling, Mondal, and Ukkusuri
2023). RL problems are typically analysed via three distinct
setups − episodic, infinite horizon discounted reward, and
infinite horizon average reward. Among these, the infinite
horizon average reward setup holds particular significance in
real-world applications (including those mentioned above)
due to its alignment with many practical scenarios and its
ability to capture essential long-term behaviors. However,
scalable algorithms in this setup have not been widely studied. This paper provides the first algorithm in the infinite
horizon average reward setup with general parametrization
(which helps scale this to large state spaces), for which sublinear regret guarantees are provided.
There are two major approaches to solving an RL problem. The first one, known as the model-based approach, involves constructing an estimate of the transition probabilities of the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP). This
estimate is subsequently leveraged to derive policies (Auer,
Jaksch, and Ortner 2008; Agrawal and Jia 2017; Ouyang

One way to allow algorithms to handle large state space
is via policy parameterization. Here, the policies are indexed
by parameters (via, for example, neural networks), and the
learning process is manifested by updating these parameters
using some update rule (such as gradient descent). Such algorithms are referred to as policy gradient (PG) algorithms.
Interestingly, the analysis of PG algorithms is typically restricted within the discounted reward setup. For example,
(Agarwal et al. 2021) characterized the sample complexity of PG and Natural PG (NPG) with softmax and tabular parameterization. Sample complexity results for general
parameterization are given by (Liu et al. 2020; Ding et al.
2020). However, the sub-linear regret analysis of a PG-based
algorithm with general parameterization in the average reward setup, to the best of our knowledge, has not been studied in the literature. This paper aims to bridge this gap by
addressing this crucial problem.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10980

