The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Frugal LMs Trained to Invoke Symbolic Solvers Achieve Parameter-Efficient
Arithmetic Reasoning
Subhabrata Dutta* 1 , Ishan Pandey* 2 , Joykirat Singh* 2 ,
Sunny Manchanda3 , Soumen Chakrabarti4 , Tanmoy Chakraborty1
1

IIT Delhi, India
IIIT Delhi, India
3
DYSL-AI, India
4
IIT Bombay, India
subha0009@gmail.com, joykirat19166@iiitd.ac.in, ishan20304@iiitd.ac.in, manchanda.sunny@gmail.com,
soumen@cse.iitb.ac.in, tanchak@ee.iitd.ac.in
2

Abstract

2022). Despite major recent strides, LLMs, on their own,
are resource-intensive, inefficient and unreliable devices for
many rigorous tasks such as arithmetic, logic, calculus, or
geometry. Indeed, one should not expect word sequence inputs and outputs to capture such domains and tasks. Moreover, folding such ‘skills’ into an opaque, massive LM resists diagnosis and interpretability. Therefore, LLMs are also
being trained to invoke tools that can perform such tasks as
subroutines (Paranjape et al. 2023; Schick et al. 2023; Wolfram 2023), with the LLM acting as a ‘glue’ between user
utterances and these tools.
Here, we focus on the interplay between symbolic and
arithmetic reasoning tasks mediated by an LM. Educational
neuroscientists have long detected a stronger correlation between dysfunctional word problem-solving capability and
symbolic algebraic reasoning than between the former and
arithmetic calculation abilities (Nathan, Kintsch, and Young
1992; Powell and Fuchs 2014). In light of fMRI evidence,
this may not be surprising that different areas of the brain
(Mahowald et al. 2023, §2.2.1, §2.2.2) are responsible for
linguistic, analytical and logical processing. A common pedagogic trick employed by grade school teachers is to repeat arithmetic word problems with diverse numerals to
see if a pupil understands the problem at the level of symbolic reasoning, as against numeric shortcuts. Beyond grade
school, the correctness of SQL queries is checked by weeding out incorrect mutant queries using adversarially engineered database instances (Chandra et al. 2015).
The above discussion naturally suggests that an LM that
can call an arithmetic calculator tool to solve word problems can perform better (perhaps even with a smaller model
size) if it also learns to translate the word problem to a logical form in a formal language (FL) and a symbolic solver
to manipulate the FL specification. After all, the recipe often given to school children to solve word problems goes
roughly like this (paraphrased for the current audience):

Large Language Models (LLM) exhibit zero-shot mathematical reasoning capacity as a behavior emergent with scale,
commonly manifesting as chain-of-thoughts (CoT) reasoning. However, multiple empirical findings suggest that this
prowess is exclusive to LLMs with exorbitant sizes (beyond
50 billion parameters). Meanwhile, educational neuroscientists suggest that symbolic algebraic manipulation be introduced around the same time as arithmetic word problems to
modularize language-to-formulation, symbolic manipulation
of the formulation, and endgame arithmetic. In this paper, we
start with the hypothesis that much smaller LMs, which are
weak at multi-step reasoning, can achieve reasonable arithmetic reasoning if arithmetic word problems are posed as a
formalize-then-solve task. In our architecture, which we call
S Y R E LM, the LM serves the role of a translator to map natural language arithmetic questions into a formal language
(FL) description. A symbolic solver then evaluates the FL expression to obtain the answer. A small frozen LM, equipped
with an efficient low-rank adapter, is capable of generating
FL expressions that incorporate natural language descriptions of the arithmetic problem (e.g., variable names and
their purposes, formal expressions combining variables, etc.).
We adopt policy-gradient reinforcement learning to train the
adapted LM, informed by the non-differentiable symbolic
solver. This marks a sharp departure from the recent development in tool-augmented LLMs, in which the external tools
(e.g., calculator, Web search, etc.) are essentially detached
from the learning phase of the LM. S Y R E LM shows massive
improvements (e.g., +30.65 absolute point improvement in
accuracy on the SVAMP dataset using GPT-J 6B model) over
base LMs, while keeping our testbed easy to diagnose, interpret and within reach of most researchers.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on giant corpora
of text, code, reasoning chains, and dialogues have recently
taken centerstage in not only most NLP tasks but also arithmetic and logical reasoning (Brown et al. 2020; Kojima et al.

1. Read the word problem to allocate variables to quantities
mentioned therein.
2. Parse the text to bind some subset of variables to constants grounded in the problem statement.
3. Further parse the text to extract arithmetic relationships

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17951

