The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Where It Really Matters: Few-Shot Environmental Conservation Media
Monitoring for Low-Resource Languages
Sameer Jain1 , Sedrick Scott Keh1 , Shova Chettri2 , Karun Dewan2 ,
Pablo Izquierdo2 , Johanna Prussman2 , Pooja Shreshtha2 , César Suárez2 ,
Zheyuan Ryan Shi3 , Lei Li1 , Fei Fang1
1
2

Carnegie Mellon University
World Wide Fund for Nature
3
University of Pittsburgh

Abstract

deployed. This is significant extra work for the staff at these
conservation organizations who are already occupied with
their routine job. As such, it is no wonder previous works
focus on articles written in English only, due to the relative
abundant human resources. However, these news monitoring tools would actually make a much bigger difference in
the global south where the news of interest is mainly in local low-resource languages. The reason is two-fold: First, in
these regions, there are more developments that may yield
high environmental impacts. Second, many projects do not
gain exposure on international media until they reach a later
more developed stage, if they gain any exposure at all, where
it would be too late for nonprofits to intervene. Our collaborators at the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), a
conservation-focused nonprofit, have local offices in over 70
countries. Admittedly, for many of these 70+ countries, it is
impossible to develop and maintain a media monitoring tool
in local languages in the same way as has been done in English – the operational burden and data work are too much
for their limited workforce.
From a technical perspective, automatically classifying
news articles written in local languages is challenging because many of these are low-resource languages that do not
enjoy the same power from large language models (LLMs)
as they are trained on high-resource languages like English.
Cultural factors may also come into play: certain things that
are acceptable in Western countries may be taboo under
certain cultures, and vice-versa. Consequently, as we will
show later, off-the-shelf language models may struggle to
accurately classify articles in low-resource languages. Finetuning is also difficult because it requires a neatly annotated
dataset, which is often not readily available.
To tackle this challenge, we propose NewsSerow, a multilingual few-shot classification method for conservation news
monitoring. NewsSerow is built on top of LLMs and consists
of a novel pipeline of summarization, in-context few-shot
demonstrations, and self-reflection. For news articles written
in Nepali, with only 10 examples, NewsSerow significantly
outperforms other few-shot methods and can even achieve
comparable performance with models fully fine-tuned using
more than 1800 labeled data points. NewsSerow was initially developed and demonstrated for Nepali, and hence the
algorithm’s name – Himalayan serow, an important animal
in Nepal. The method is scalable and language-agnostic, al-

Environmental conservation organizations routinely monitor
news content on conservation in protected areas to maintain
situational awareness of developments that can have an environmental impact. Existing automated media monitoring systems require large amounts of data labeled by domain experts, which is only feasible at scale for high-resource languages like English. However, such tools are most needed
in the global south where news of interest is mainly in local low-resource languages, and far fewer experts are available to annotate datasets sustainably. In this paper, we propose NewsSerow, a method to automatically recognize environmental conservation content in low-resource languages.
NewsSerow is a pipeline of summarization, in-context fewshot classification, and self-reflection using large language
models (LLMs). Using at most 10 demonstration example
news articles in Nepali, NewsSerow significantly outperforms other few-shot methods and achieves comparable performance with models fully fine-tuned using thousands of examples. The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has deployed NewsSerow for media monitoring in Nepal, significantly reducing their operational burden, and ensuring that
AI tools for conservation actually reach the communities that
need them the most. NewsSerow has also been deployed for
countries with other languages like Colombia.

1

Introduction

News monitoring for environmental conservation has long
been a significant task of many nonprofit organizations.
The organizations aim to remain informed about developments that can have potentially significant environmental
impacts, and intervene promptly, such as advocating for
more environmental-friendly progress. However, manually
reading and analyzing news articles is a very labor-intensive
and time-consuming process. Recent studies have eased this
burden by automating the scraping, classification, and analysis of conservation-related articles (Keh et al. 2023). Such
efforts allow for early detection of high-impact activities and
enable nonprofits to take timely action.
However, although effective, such approaches come with
a hefty price tag: they require a lot of labeled data prepared
by domain experts at these organizations, not only in training
the model, but also in its maintenance after the tool has been
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22141

