The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parsing All Adverse Scenes: Severity-Aware Semantic Segmentation with
Mask-Enhanced Cross-Domain Consistency
Fuhao Li1 * , Ziyang Gong2 * , Yupeng Deng3 * , Xianzheng Ma4† ,
Renrui Zhang5 , Zhenming Ji2 , Xiangwei Zhu2 , Hong Zhang1†
1

Wuhan University of Science and Technology
2
Sun Yat-Sen University
3
National University of Singapore
4
University of Oxford
5
Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Although recent methods in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) have achieved success in segmenting rainy or
snowy scenes by improving consistency, they face limitations
when dealing with more challenging scenarios like foggy and
night scenes. We argue that these prior methods excessively
focus on weather-specific features in adverse scenes, which
exacerbates the existing domain gaps. To address this issue,
we propose a new metric to evaluate the severity of all adverse scenes and offer a novel perspective that enables task
unification across all adverse scenarios. Our method focuses
on Severity, allowing our model to learn more consistent features and facilitate domain distribution alignment, thereby alleviating domain gaps. Unlike the vague descriptions of consistency in previous methods, we introduce Cross-domain
Consistency, which is quantified using the Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) to measure the distance between the source and target domains. Specifically, our unified model consists of two key modules: the Merging Style
Augmentation Module (MSA) and the Severity Perception
Mask Module (SPM). The MSA module transforms all adverse scenes into augmented scenes, effectively eliminating
weather-specific features and enhancing Cross-domain Consistency. The SPM module incorporates a Severity Perception mechanism, guiding a Mask operation that enables our
model to learn highly consistent features from the augmented
scenes. Our unified framework, named PASS (Parsing All
adverSe Scenes), achieves significant performance improvements over state-of-the-art methods on widely used benchmarks for all adverse scenes. Notably, the performance of
PASS is superior to Semi-Unified models and even surpasses
weather-specific models.

Figure 1: Previous methods excessively focus on the
weather-specific features of all adverse scenes causing
their weaknesses. In contrast, our method eliminates these
weather-specific features by transforming them into new
augmented scenes. Then our method will be guided by
Severity Perception to divide augmented images into images with high and low severity corresponding to whether
to mask source domain images to strengthen Cross-domain
Consistency. We note the solid box means the images and
the dashed box means the features.
all of them with a unified model. While recent methods have
attempted to address adverse scene tasks by improving consistency (Hoyer et al. 2023), they still have limitations.
Although prior works (Wang et al. 2022; Wang, Zhu, and
Yang 2021) have achieved success in addressing rainy or
snowy scenes by enhancing consistency, they show weaknesses when faced with more demanding scenarios like
foggy and night scenes. We argue that previous methods
(Wang et al. 2020) excessively focus on weather-specific
features such as brightness, hue, and contrast conditions during the adaptation process, resulting in models overly sensitive to these specific features and lacking generalization
across all adverse scenes.
To overcome this challenge, we propose that models
should not prioritize learning weather-specific features inherent in all adverse scenes. Instead, we suggest unifying all adverse scenes by eliminating these intrinsic fea-

Introduction
Adverse scene understanding is always challenging for autonomous driving perception due to unpredictable noise information in severe observations. Additionally, the large
discrepancy between different adverse scenes, such as fog,
night, rain, and snow, makes it particularly difficult to solve
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13483

