The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Training of Spiking Neural Network with Stochastic Latency
Srinivas Anumasa1, * , Bhaskar Mukhoty1, * , Velibor Bojković1 ,
Giulia De Masi2,3 , Huan Xiong4,1,† , Bin Gu5, 1,†
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
2
ARRC, Technology Innovation Institute, UAE
3
BioRobotics Institute, Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies Pisa, Italy
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China

Abstract

layer only when their membrane potential exceeds a predetermined membrane threshold, making the spiking activity event-driven and asynchronous. The neuromorphic hardware allows for a simple accumulation of network weights
activated by incoming spikes, eliminating the need for computationally intensive floating-point inner products. Overall, this results in significantly lower energy consumption in
neuromorphic hardware compared to their standard counterparts, particularly when spiking activity in SNN neurons is
sparse.
While the binary spikes produced by the Heaviside activation offer several benefits, they pose a unique challenge
for direct training of SNNs. As the gradient of the Heaviside function is almost always zero and non-differentiable at
the transition, the standard back-propagation algorithm does
not propagate any gradients backwards when used as it is.
To circumvent this issue, surrogate training methods (Wu
et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2021) replace the non-differentiable
Heaviside activation function with differentiable surrogate
functions such as Sigmoid. Recently, (Mukhoty et al. 2023)
have shown applying zeroth-order gradients on the Heaviside, on expectation, is equivalent to choosing different surrogates for the Heaviside.
The temporal dimension of the network adds further challenges to the training algorithm. The temporal dimension increases the training time proportionally and creates a longer
path for the back-propagation algorithm, introducing vanishing gradients. The direct training method using surrogate
functions involves training many parameters in the stateof-the-art SNNs, which is accomplished with the help of
GPUs. These SNNs can then be deployed on neuromorphic
hardware for energy-efficient inference. In contrast, standard
ANNs are trained on GPUs and may require CPU or GPU
support during inference, depending on the specific application requirements.
The energy efficiency of SNN models has attracted realworld applications that require predictions from a standalone
model based on a finite energy budget. For example, in
robotic control, tasks such as localization, motor control,
navigation, etc., require frequent decision-making by a neural network deployed onboard with a limited energy source
(Gutierrez-Galan et al. 2020; Strohmer, Manoonpong, and

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have garnered significant attention for their low power consumption when deployed on
neuromorphic hardware that operates in orders of magnitude
lower power than general-purpose hardware. Direct training
methods for SNNs come with an inherent latency for which
the SNNs are optimized, and in general, the higher the latency, the better the predictive powers of the models, but
at the same time, the higher the energy consumption during training and inference. Furthermore, an SNN model optimized for one particular latency does not necessarily perform well in lower latencies, which becomes relevant in scenarios where it is necessary to switch to a lower latency because of the depletion of onboard energy or other operational
requirements. In this work, we propose Stochastic Latency
Training (SLT), a direct training method for SNNs that optimizes the model for the given latency but simultaneously
offers a minimum reduction of predictive accuracy when
shifted to lower inference latencies. We provide heuristics
for our approach with partial theoretical justification and experimental evidence showing the state-of-the-art performance
of our models on datasets such as CIFAR-10, DVS-CIFAR10, CIFAR-100, and DVS-Gesture. Our code is available at
https://github.com/srinuvaasu/SLT

Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have attracted significant
attention as the next-generation neural network, thanks to
their bio-inspired, event-driven, and low-power computational capabilities, supported by specialized neuromorphic
hardware such as Loihi (Davies et al. 2018), TrueNorth
(DeBole et al. 2019), and Spinnaker (Furber et al. 2014).
In a typical artificial neural network (ANN), neurons receive input activation values from the previous layer neurons and compute output activation values as a function of
the weighted input activation computed as the inner product between input activations and network weights. In contrast, the SNN neurons send the activation spike to the next
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding authors: huan.xiong.math@gmail.com, jsgubin@gmail.com
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10900

