The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Incremental Quasi-Newton Methods with Faster Superlinear Convergence Rates
Zhuanghua Liu1, 2 , Luo Luo* 3 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
CNRS@CREATE LTD, 1 Create Way, #08-01 CREATE Tower, Singapore 138602
3
School of Data Science, Fudan University
liuzhuanghua9@gmail.com, luoluo@fudan.edu.cn, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider the finite-sum optimization problem, where each
component function is strongly convex and has Lipschitz continuous gradient and Hessian. The recently proposed incremental quasi-Newton method is based on BFGS update and
achieves a local superlinear convergence rate that is dependent
on the condition number of the problem. This paper proposes a
more efficient quasi-Newton method by incorporating the symmetric rank-1 update into the incremental framework, which
results in the condition-number-free local superlinear convergence rate. Furthermore, we can boost our method by applying
the block update on the Hessian approximation, which leads
to an even faster local convergence rate. The numerical experiments show the proposed methods significantly outperform
the baseline methods.

1

Introduction

We study the following finite-sum minimization problem:
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where each individual function fi : Rd → R is strongly
convex and has Lipschitz continuous gradient and Hessian.
This formulation is ubiquitous in various machine learning
models, including maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
(Bishop and Nasrabadi 2006; Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal
2018) and unsupervised learning problems (Hastie et al. 2009;
Murphy 2012). A notable example of the problem (1) is the
empirical risk minimization in supervised learning, where n
is the number of data examples and fi (·) corresponds to the
loss function incurred by each training instance.
In this paper, we are interested in solving the large-scale
finite-sum problem, that is, the number of components n in
formulation (1) is large. In this scenario, accessing the exact
gradient or Hessian over the entire dataset is too expensive for
each iteration. To circumvent this issue, stochastic or incremental optimization methods were introduced since they only
require computing an estimation of the gradient or Hessian
by a single sample (or a small mini-batch of samples) at each
* The corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14097

round. The most popular of these methods is stochastic gradient descent (SGD). It has been widely used in large-scale
optimization problems thanks to its cheap computational cost
per iteration (Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2018). Applying
the variance reduction (Defazio, Bach, and Lacoste-Julien
2014; Johnson and Zhang 2013; Schmidt, Le Roux, and Bach
2017; Zhang, Mahdavi, and Jin 2013) and acceleration techniques (Allen-Zhu 2017; Nesterov 2003) can improve the
vanilla SGD, and it achieves a linear convergence rate with
optimal incremental first-order oracle complexity (Woodworth and Srebro 2016).
The second-order methods (Nesterov 2003) incorporate
the additional curvature information in every iteration, and
it is possible to establish the local superliner convergence
rate with these methods. For the finite-sum problem (1),
Rodomanov and Kropotov (2016) proposed the Newton incremental method (NIM), which requires accessing the exact
gradient and exact Hessian of one individual function in each
iteration and attains the local superlinear convergence rate.
The classical quasi-Newton methods (Broyden, Dennis Jr,
and Moré 1973; Dennis and Moré 1974; Powell 1971) estimate the second-order information with first-order oracle
calls and still hold the superlinear convergence rate. However,
most of the stochastic variants for quasi-Newton methods
(Lucchi, McWilliams, and Hofmann 2015; Moritz, Nishihara, and Jordan 2016) that employ gradient estimators only
achieve linear convergence rates.
Mokhtari, Eisen, and Ribeiro (2018) proposed the Incremental quasi-Newton (IQN) method by using classical
BFGS update (Broyden 1970; Fletcher 1970; Goldfarb 1970;
Shanno 1970), which is the first superlinear convergent
quasi-Newton method without exact second-order oracle
call in each iteration. However, the best-known analysis
of IQN (Mokhtari, Eisen, and Ribeiro 2018) only provided
the asymptotic convergence result. Several follow-up works
(Gao, Koppel, and Ribeiro 2020; Lahoti et al. 2023) attempted
to characterize the convergence rate by fusing the greedy
quasi-Newton update (Rodomanov and Nesterov 2021a) into
the framework of IQN. Specifically, Lahoti et al. (2023) proposed sharpened lazy incremental quasi-Newton (SLIQN) by
utilizing lazy propagation strategy and showed it achieves
2
the superlinear convergence rate of O (1 − d−1 κ −1 )⌈t/n⌉ ,
where κ is the condition number and t is the number of
iterations. Gao, Koppel, and Ribeiro (2020) proposed the

