The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Online Markov Decision Processes Configuration with Continuous Decision Space
Davide Maran* , Pierriccardo Olivieri* , Francesco Emanuele Stradi* ,
Giuseppe Urso, Nicola Gatti, Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano,
{davide.maran, pierriccardo.olivieri, francescoemanuele.stradi, nicola.gatti, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it,
giuseppe.urso@mail.polimi.it

Abstract

MDP to her advantage. For example, consider the sale of
hotel rooms, where the MDP states are characterized by the
number of rooms booked in different categories each day,
while the transitions depend on the hotel’s pricing and user
behavior. Customarily, the hotels use a fixed pricing strategy that is trained offline and implemented online (technically, it is a post-training scenario). Given that users compare prices across hotels before booking rooms, a competing
hotel (acting as the MDP configurator) can strategically adjust its pricing to influence user behavior and consequently
alter the MDP transitions. Specifically, the competitor seeks
to reduce the number of room reservations obtained by the
agent to maximize her own.
Although this example illustrates an adversarial setting,
our model applies to general scenarios that do not require a
relationship between the configurator’s loss and the agent’s
reward.

In this paper, we investigate the optimal online configuration
of episodic Markov decision processes when the space of the
possible configurations is continuous. Specifically, we study
the interaction between a learner (referred to as the configurator) and an agent with a fixed, unknown policy, when the
learner aims to minimize her losses by choosing transition
functions in online fashion. The losses may be unrelated to
the agent’s rewards. This problem applies to many real-world
scenarios where the learner seeks to manipulate the Markov
decision process to her advantage. We study both deterministic and stochastic settings, where the losses are either fixed
or sampled from an unknown probability distribution. We design two algorithms whose peculiarity is to rely on occupancy
measures to explore with optimism the continuous space of
transition functions, achieving constant regret in deterministic settings and sublinear regret in stochastic settings, respectively. Moreover, we prove that the regret bound is tight with
respect to any constant factor in deterministic settings. Finally, we compare the empiric performance of our algorithms
with a baseline in synthetic experiments.

Related Work
Online learning in MDPs Several works initially introduced for on online learning (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi
2006; Hazan 2019) have been subsequently extended to
MDPs (Auer, Jaksch, and Ortner 2008; Even-Dar, Kakade,
and Mansour 2009; Neu et al. 2010). In particular, (Azar,
Osband, and Munos 2017) study the problem of optimal exploration in episodic MDPs with unknown transitions and
stochastic losses when the feedback is bandit. (Rosenberg
and Mansour 2019a) study the online learning problem in
episodic MDPs with adversarial losses and unknown transitions when the feedback is full information, presenting an
online
p algorithm which provides a regret upper bound of
Õ( T ), where T is the number of episodes. (Rosenberg and
Mansour 2019b) study the same setting when the feedback
is bandit, providing a regret upper p
bound of Õ(T 3/4 ), which
was subsequently improved to Õ( T ) by (Jin et al. 2019).

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) investigates the sequential interaction between a learner and an environment, aiming
at continually improving the learner’s strategy (Sutton and
Barto 2018). In this context, the environment is customarily represented as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) with
a fixed but unknown transition function. We study a general
scenario where the interaction occurs in episodes, each with
a predetermined length. Differently from the standard RL
setting, we consider the learner not to be the agent playing
the MDP, but the configurator. Precisely, at each episode,
the learner picks the transition functions for the entire MDP
(i.e., a configuration) from a fixed continuous set. Next, she
observes the loss suffered and the path traversed by the
agent, which depend both on the agent’s fixed policy and
the transition chosen for the specific episode. The aim of the
configurator is to minimize her regret between her total loss
and that provided by an optimal fixed configuration.
Our model represents various real-world situations where
the learner aims to manipulate the stochastic nature of the

Configurable MDPs In MDPs, the transition function is
customarily assumed to be fixed, see, e.g., (Sutton and Barto
2018). However, various subsequent works represent environments with non-fixed transition probabilities, as provided
in the works by (Satia and Lave 1973), (White and Eldeib
1994), and (Bueno et al. 2017). Recently, the concept of
Configurable Markov Decision Processes (Conf-MDPs) was
formalized by (Metelli, Mutti, and Restelli 2018). In particu-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14315

