The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond Prototypes: Semantic Anchor Regularization
for Better Representation Learning
Yanqi Ge1 * , Qiang Nie2 * , Ye Huang1 , Yong Liu2 ,
Chengjie Wang2,3 , Feng Zheng4† , Wen Li1 , Lixin Duan1,5†
1

Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
3
Shanghai Jiao tong University
4
Southern University of Science and Technology
Class
5
Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital
geyanqiqi@gmail.com, qnie.cuhk@gmail.com, edward.ye.huang@qq.com, choasliu@tencent.com,
jasoncjwang@tencent.com, f.zheng@ieee.org, liwenbnu@gmail.com, lxduan@gmail.com
Abstract

Seed

One of the ultimate goals of representation learning is to
achieve compactness within a class and well-separability between classes. Many outstanding metric-based and prototypebased methods following the Expectation-Maximization
paradigm, have been proposed for this objective. However,
they inevitably introduce biases into the learning process, particularly with long-tail distributed training data. In this paper,
we reveal that the class prototype is not necessarily to be derived from training features and propose a novel perspective to
use pre-defined class anchors serving as feature centroid to unidirectionally guide feature learning. However, the pre-defined
anchors may have a large semantic distance from the pixel
features, which prevents them from being directly applied. To
address this issue and generate feature centroid independent
from feature learning, a simple yet effective Semantic Anchor
Regularization (SAR) is proposed. SAR ensures the interclass separability of semantic anchors in the semantic space
by employing a classifier-aware auxiliary cross-entropy loss
during training via disentanglement learning. By pulling the
learned features to these semantic anchors, several advantages
can be attained: 1) the intra-class compactness and naturally
inter-class separability, 2) induced bias or errors from feature
learning can be avoided, and 3) robustness to the long-tailed
problem. The proposed SAR can be used in a plug-and-play
manner in the existing models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the SAR performs better than previous sophisticated
prototype-based methods. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/geyanqi/SAR.

Class

Prototype

CD

Semantic Anchor
0.95 0.02

0.02

0.96

0.02

0.02

Figure 1: The difference between prototypes and semantic
0.00 0.99 0.01
anchors in feature space (UMAP-Based).0.03We0.95
train0.02HRNet
with two different seeds on Cityscapes to get these prototypes
and semantic anchors. Shapes, colors, and CD represent random seeds, classes, and class dependencies, respectively. The
generation of semantic anchors is independent of the main
task, and it achieves more consistent and weaker inter-class
dependencies on imbalanced data.

achieved in recent years, especially after deep learning methods (Perronnin, Sánchez, and Mensink 2010; He et al. 2016;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017; Chen, Fan, and
Panda 2021; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al.
2017a; Wang et al. 2020) being introduced. However, no matter what kind of methods are utilized or what kind of network
structures are designed, the ultimate goal is to learn representations of data that are compact within a class and separable
between classes in the semantic space. To achieve this, many
methods have been proposed, such as metric learning and
prototype-based learning.
Metric learning is to pull together the intra-class samples
and push away the samples of different categories by designing a distance metric. A lot of distance metrics have been
widely utilized and benefit the representation learning, such
as the contrastive loss (He et al. 2020; Oord, Li, and Vinyals
2018; Wu et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Wang and Isola
2020; Wang and Liu 2021; Yang et al. 2022) and the triplet

Introduction
Classification, either at the image level or at the pixel level
(semantic segmentation), is a foundation computer vision
task with a wide range of applications, including but not limited to autonomous agent tasks such as scene understanding,
augmented reality, and autonomous driving. Many efforts
have been made in this problem and great progress has been
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1887

