The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

eTag: Class-Incremental Learning via Embedding Distillation and
Task-Oriented Generation
Libo Huang1 , Yan Zeng2 , Chuanguang Yang1 , Zhulin An1 * , Boyu Diao1 , Yongjun Xu1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business University
{www.huanglibo, yanazeng013}@gmail.com, {yangchuanguang, anzhulin, diaoboyu2012, xyj}@ict.ac.cn
2

achieve comparable performance. For instance1 , deep generative replay (DGR), while training a solver (S), trains a
generator (G) to produce past data when needed (Shin et al.
2017; Wu et al. 2018; Ramapuram, Gregorova, and Kalousis
2020), as illustrated in Fig.1(a). However, generative replay is hindered in generating complex images (van de Ven,
Siegelmann, and Tolias 2020). Recently, CIL research has
shifted from rebuilding the joint training environment to the
knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al. 2015). It transfers
the probabilistic knowledge between prediction layers from
the old frozen network to a current trainable one. The solver
network is usually divided into two parts, a feature extractor and a classifier, corresponding to the extractor-aimed and
prototype-aimed methods, respectively.
On the one hand, Rebuffi et al. (2017) first introduced
extractor-aimed methods that take the cross-entropy criterion to differentiate the learned classes and get a discriminative feature extractor. Instead of the cross-entropy criterion,
various metric criteria have been proposed. Yu et al. (2020)
enforced that the feature distance between relevant and irrelevant samples is larger than a fixed margin. Cha, Lee, and
Shin (2021) constrained the contrastive relations between
samples to be constant (Yang et al. 2022). In particular, Lucir established a cosine similarity between the extracted features and the parameters in the classifier (Hou et al. 2019).
Benefiting from such a similarity, Lucir obtained a discriminative feature extractor and rectified the inter-class separations when confusion arose in CIL. However, all the above
extractor-aimed methods require storing a few exemplars for
each learned class (Castro et al. 2018; Douillard et al. 2020).
For data privacy and security concerns, it is generally not
allowed to store exemplars of learned tasks (Yu et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2020). Therefore, on the other hand, prototypeaimed methods emerge. They store the feature mean (i.e.,
prototype) and keep the classifier behind the feature extractor to avoid the mismatch between the stored prototype and
the feature extractor. For instance, PASS incrementally expanded the Gaussian distribution dominated by each stored

Abstract
Class incremental learning (CIL) aims to solve the notorious
forgetting problem, which refers to the fact that once the network is updated on a new task, its performance on previouslylearned tasks degenerates catastrophically. Most successful
CIL methods store exemplars (samples of learned tasks) to
train a feature extractor incrementally, or store prototypes
(features of learned tasks) to estimate the incremental feature
distribution. However, the stored exemplars would violate the
data privacy concerns, while the fixed prototypes might not
reasonably be consistent with the incremental feature distribution, hindering the exploration of real-world CIL applications. In this paper, we propose a data-free CIL method with
embedding distillation and Task-oriented generation (eTag),
which requires neither exemplar nor prototype. Embedding
distillation prevents the feature extractor from forgetting by
distilling the outputs from the networks’ intermediate blocks.
Task-oriented generation enables a lightweight generator to
produce dynamic features, fitting the needs of the top incremental classifier. Experimental results confirm that the proposed eTag considerably outperforms state-of-the-art methods on several benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Dynamic scenarios require the deployed model can handle
sequential arriving tasks (Parisi et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021).
Models often incur the catastrophic forgetting problem in
these scenarios, which implies that its performance dramatically degenerates on the previously-learned tasks when the
model learns a new task (McCloskey and Cohen 1989).
One of the most general solutions to the forgetting
problem is Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) (Aljundi,
Chakravarty, and Tuytelaars 2017; Masana et al. 2022). The
oracle CIL method, joint training, assumes that the data of
previously-learned tasks are always available, and combines
such data with the current-task one to jointly train the CIL
model, whereas this oracle violates the CIL setting where
previous data are not allowed (Chen and Liu 2018; Caruana
1997). Early CIL methods intuitively attempted to rebuild
the training or inference environment of joint training to

1
Methods of rebuilding inferences environment of joint training are as follows. Parameter isolation retains either a well-trained
network (Rusu et al. 2016) or a set of parameters (Li and Hoiem
2017) for each learned task. The regularization-based method prevents crucial parameters of the learned tasks from adapting to the
current one (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017).

* Zhulin An is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12591

