The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CLIP-Guided Federated Learning on Heterogeneous and Long-Tailed Data
∗

Jiangming Shi1 , Shanshan Zheng2 , Xiangbo Yin2 , Yang Lu2 , Yuan Xie3, 4 , Yanyun Qu1, 2*
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
3
East China Normal University
4
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University
jiangming.shi@outlook.com, shanshanzheng@stu.xmu.edu.cn, S yinxb@163.com, luyang@xmu.edu.cn,
yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
federated feature

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) provides a decentralized machine
learning paradigm where a server collaborates with a group
of clients to learn a global model without accessing the
clients’ data. User heterogeneity is a significant challenge for
FL, which together with the class-distribution imbalance further enhances the difficulty of FL. Great progress has been
made in large vision-language models, such as Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP), which paves a new
way for image classification and object recognition. Inspired
by the success of CLIP on few-shot and zero-shot learning, we use CLIP to optimize the federated learning between
server and client models under its vision-language supervision. It is promising to mitigate the user heterogeneity and
class-distribution balance due to the powerful cross-modality
representation and rich open-vocabulary prior knowledge.
In this paper, we propose the CLIP-guided FL (CLIP2FL)
method on heterogeneous and long-tailed data. In CLIP2FL,
the knowledge of the off-the-shelf CLIP model is transferred
to the client-server models, and a bridge is built between
the client and server. Specifically, for client-side learning,
knowledge distillation is conducted between client models
and CLIP to improve the ability of client-side feature representation. For server-side learning, in order to mitigate the
heterogeneity and class-distribution imbalance, we generate
federated features to retrain the server model. A prototype
contrastive learning with the supervision of the text encoder
of CLIP is introduced to generate federated features depending on the client-side gradients, and they are used to retrain
a balanced server classifier. Extensive experimental results
on several benchmarks demonstrate that CLIP2FL achieves
impressive performance and effectively deals with data heterogeneity and long-tail distribution. The code is available at
https://github.com/shijiangming1/CLIP2FL.

class prototype

push

pull

Optimizing

(a) CReFF

(b) CLIP2FL

Figure 1: The figure illustrates the differences between CReFF and CLIP2FL: CReFF uses only gradients for supervision, while CLIP2FL introduces the textual features of the
CLIP as prototypes for federated feature learning.

It allows users to collectively reap the benefits of a server
model trained from client-side privacy data without accessing the client-side data (Li et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2023a).
Accompanied by the prospect of FL, it faces the challenge of data heterogeneity, which is a universal issue arising from disparities in data distribution among clients due to
data source differences between clients (Karimireddy et al.
2020; Huang, Ye, and Du 2022). Furthermore, real-world
data frequently exhibits the long-tailed phenomenon (Shuai
et al. 2022), that is, the class distribution is imbalanced,
where the head classes have a large number of samples
while the tail classes have a small number of samples. Longtailed data makes client-side models biased toward the head
class (Shang et al. 2022). It is known that the server model
based on client models is destined to not work well if the
client models are poor in performance. Thus, heterogeneity
and long-tailed data make FL more challenging.
There are some FL methods for imbalanced data. In the
works (Duan et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021), the class distribution is appended to adopt client selection to match clients.
Because clients need to upload the local class distribution to
the server, the operation violates the principle of privacy protection of FL. In FedNova (Wang et al. 2021), the auxiliary
balanced data on the server are used to compute the class
distribution output by the global class, but they are unavailable in the real world. CReFF (Shang et al. 2022) is the latest solution, whose core idea is to implement the decoupling

Introduction
With the demand for data privacy protection, federated learning (Shokri and Shmatikov 2015; Huang et al.
2023c) (FL) springs up, which only uses the local client
models without their private data to train the server model,
and it provides a distributed machine-learning paradigm
with the communication efficiency and privacy protection.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14955

