The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Focus-Then-Decide: Segmentation-Assisted Reinforcement Learning
Chao Chen1,2 * , Jiacheng Xu1,2 * , Weijian Liao1,2 , Hao Ding1,2 ,
Zongzhang Zhang1,2† , Yang Yu1,2 , Rui Zhao3
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
Tencent Robotics X, Shenzhen, China
{chenc, xujc, liaowj, dingh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn, rui.zhao.ml@gmail.com
Abstract
Visual Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a promising approach
to achieve human-like intelligence. However, it currently faces
challenges in learning efficiently within noisy environments.
In contrast, humans can quickly identify task-relevant objects in distraction-filled surroundings by applying previously
acquired common knowledge. Recently, foundational models in natural language processing and computer vision have
achieved remarkable successes, and the common knowledge
within these models can significantly benefit downstream task
training. Inspired by these achievements, we aim to incorporate common knowledge from foundational models into visual
RL. We propose a novel Focus-Then-Decide (FTD) framework, allowing the agent to make decisions based solely on
task-relevant objects. To achieve this, we introduce an attention mechanism to select task-relevant objects from the object
set returned by a foundational segmentation model, and only
use the task-relevant objects for the subsequent training of the
decision module. Additionally, we specifically employed two
generic self-supervised objectives to facilitate the rapid learning of this attention mechanism. Experimental results on challenging tasks based on DeepMind Control Suite and Franka
Emika Robotics demonstrate that our method can quickly and
accurately pinpoint objects of interest in noisy environments.
Consequently, it achieves a significant performance improvement over current state-of-the-art algorithms.
Project Page: https://www.lamda.nju.edu.cn/chenc/FTD.html
Code: https://github.com/LAMDA-RL/FTD

Introduction
Human-like intelligence, holding the prospect of liberating
humans from repetitive labor, has long been one of the goals
pursued by the machine learning community. Reinforcement
Learning (RL), as a general decision-making framework,
has the potential to enable machines to generate human-like
decision-making behaviors (Sutton and Barto 2018; Wu and
Zhang 2023). Research has shown that visual input constitutes the majority of human information intake (Goldstein
and Cacciamani 2021); therefore, visual RL methods targeting such input have garnered widespread attention and are
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Zongzhang Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11240

potential methods for achieving human-like intelligence. Living up to expectations, visual RL algorithms have consistently
made remarkable progress in areas such as gaming (Hessel
et al. 2018), robotic control (Andrychowicz et al. 2020), and
autonomous driving (Chen, Li, and Tomizuka 2022).
However, there is still a substantial gap if we want to
apply visual RL algorithms to practical scenarios. One reason is that current visual RL algorithms struggle to train an
effective policy in complex and noisy real-world environments. Consider the most influential visual RL benchmarks,
such as Atari (Bellemare et al. 2012) and DeepMind Control
Suite (Tassa et al. 2018). Agents trained in these clean, structured scenarios merely need to leverage all the information
they receive to make decisions. However, when trained under
complex, unstructured real-world conditions, agents may be
overwhelmed by the massive influx of information, lacking
the ability to identify which parts are useful, thus leading to
learning failure (Stone et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2023b). Discerning which concepts are task-relevant and worth focusing on,
and which are task-irrelevant and should be ignored, allowing
learning to proceed undisturbed in any scenario, is a human
internalized ability. This ability is also essential for advanced
visual intelligent agents.
Recent works have sought to address the challenge of learning in complex scenarios filled with disturbances (Zhang et al.
2021; Fu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b; Xu et al. 2023a).
The main approach of previous methods involves utilizing
auxiliary representation objectives to extract task-relevant information from the original observations while disregarding
noise. These loss functions are commonly optimized over
the unstructured pixel space, necessitating sophisticated design to ensure proper functioning. We identify two potential
problems. The first pertains to the proposal of representation learning targets, which may contain erroneous inductive
biases or approximation errors due to their complexity, leading to biased information extraction. The second problem
concerns the optimization in pixel space, which is overly
fine-grained and does not align with human perception mechanisms. Using prior knowledge, humans perceive and make
decisions at a more coarser object level. Considering these
issues, we aim to propose a visual perception and extraction
method that is both simply designed and more human-like.
Similar to the human ability to rapidly leverage existing
knowledge to learn new tasks, foundation models pre-trained

