The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Near-Optimal Resilient Aggregation Rules for Distributed Learning Using
1-Center and 1-Mean Clustering with Outliers
Yuhao Yi1 * , Ronghui You2 * , Hong Liu1 , Changxin Liu3 , Yuan Wang4† , Jiancheng Lv1†
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
School of Statistics and Data Science, Nankai University
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology
4
School of Robotics, Hunan University
yuhaoyi@scu.edu.cn, yourh@nankai.edu.cn, changxin@kth.se, yuanw@hnu.edu.cn, lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn
2

silience in distributed ML has recently received increasing
attention from both academia and industry.
In resilient distributed ML, a robust distributed optimization algorithm is designed such that the training model remains to be accurate in the presence of a subset of Byzantine
workers (Farhadkhani et al. 2022). The key to achieving this
objective is a robust aggregation protocol within the server
to distill the information sent by the workers. Prior works in
this regard are roughly categorized into two classes depending on the property of the training dataset. In the first class,
known as the homogeneous setup, the data sampled by the
workers are assumed to be identically distributed. Another
class is the heterogeneous setup (Li et al. 2019; Data and
Diggavi 2021), where the data samples among the workers
may not precisely reflect the overall population. The difference in datasets induces distinct treatment of Byzantine
workers and the best achievable performance (Karimireddy,
He, and Jaggi 2022), and the problem of resilient distributed
ML under heterogeneity is arguably more challenging (Allouah et al. 2023a).
To facilitate the analysis of the aggregation rules, a line
of recent work has established the connections between the
properties of aggregators and the performance of the optimization algorithms. The paper (Farhadkhani et al. 2022)
studied resilient distributed ML with homogeneous data distributions and proposed the concept of (f, λ)-resilient averaging aggregators. Subsequent work study distributed ML
with heterogeneous data distributions, proposing a series
of concepts such as the (δmax , ζ)-agnostic robust (Karimireddy, He, and Jaggi 2022), the (f, κ)-robust (Allouah
et al. 2023a), and the (f, ξ)-robust averaging (Allouah et al.
2023b) aggregators. The relationships of these concepts are
also discussed in (Allouah et al. 2023a) and (Allouah et al.
2023b).
The criteria for the aggregation rules are defined using
metrics on subsets of update vectors. However, most of the
aggregators are not directly designed to minimize the criteria, resulting in the suboptimality of many aggregation
rules. Exceptions include the MDA algorithm in (Farhadkhani et al. 2022) and the SMEA algorithm in (Allouah et al.
2023b), both of which suffer from high computational costs.
The 1-Center problem, or the minimum enclosing ball
problem, is a fundamental problem in computational geom-

Abstract
Byzantine machine learning has garnered considerable attention in light of the unpredictable faults that can occur in
large-scale distributed learning systems. The key to secure
resilience against Byzantine machines in distributed learning is resilient aggregation mechanisms. Although abundant
resilient aggregation rules have been proposed, they are designed in ad-hoc manners, imposing extra barriers on comparing, analyzing, and improving the rules across performance
criteria. This paper studies near-optimal aggregation rules using clustering in the presence of outliers. Our outlier-robust
clustering approach utilizes geometric properties of the update vectors provided by workers. Our analysis show that
constant approximations to the 1-center and 1-mean clustering problems with outliers provide near-optimal resilient aggregators for metric-based criteria, which have been proven
to be crucial in the homogeneous and heterogeneous cases
respectively. In addition, we discuss two contradicting types
of attacks under which no single aggregation rule is guaranteed to improve upon the naive average. Based on the discussion, we propose a two-phase resilient aggregation framework. We run experiments for image classification using a
non-convex loss function. The proposed algorithms outperform previously known aggregation rules by a large margin
with both homogeneous and heterogeneous data distributions
among non-faulty workers. Code and appendix are available
at https://github.com/jerry907/AAAI24-RASHB.

1

Introduction

Distributed machine learning (ML) that involves several collaborative computing machines has been recognized as the
backbone for training large-scale ML models in the modern society (Warnat-Herresthal et al. 2021; Kairouz et al.
2021). However, although distributed ML has significantly
improved the efficiency of training process, it tends to be
more vulnerable to misbehaving (a.k.a., Byzantine) workers.
It has been reported in (Baruch, Baruch, and Goldberg 2019;
Karimireddy, He, and Jaggi 2022) that a few Byzantine machines can largely deteriorate the training performance by
transmitting falsified information. To this end, Byzantine re* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16469

