The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AMD: Anatomical Motion Diffusion with Interpretable Motion Decomposition
and Fusion
Beibei Jing, Youjia Zhang, Zikai Song, Junqing Yu, Wei Yang *
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{jingbeibei,youjiazhang, skyesong, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

tion from text-motion paired datasets (Petrovich, Black, and
Varol 2022; Lee, Moon, and Lee 2023). Recent strategies
harness advances in diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Tevet et al. 2022),
treating motion synthesis as an inverse diffusion process
(Chen et al. 2023; Ao, Zhang, and Liu 2023; Yuan et al.
2022). Additionally, some research transforms human motion features into a codebook, iteratively predicting the motion index and reconstructing the entire motion (Guo et al.
2022b; Zhang et al. 2023a; Lucas et al. 2022).
Despite these strides, existing methods frequently oversimplify the complexity of language, utilizing a text encoder
to transform text prompts into a fixed-length vector, regardless of text length or rarity. Such an approach demands largescale datasets to encompass the full mapping spectrum and
is prone to failure with unseen text related to complex or
extended sequential actions. For example, the term ‘scorpion’ refers to an expert dance move described by the specific motions ‘flex and grasp foot, swing leg around, lock
out arm’. Clearly, synthesizing this rare ‘scorpion’ motion
is intractable without adequate training, yet the detailed description offers abundant instructions about its execution in
a common language. This issue is analogous to lengthy motion texts, which could be dissected into concise anatomical
scripts.
Inspired by this observation, we introduce the innovative
Adaptable Motion Diffusion (AMD) model. It leverages the
capabilities of a Large Language Model (LLM), specifically
a finetuned ChatGPT-3.5 in our implementation, to parse
input text into sequences of concise, interpretable anatomical scripts, synergized with the generative prowess of diffusion models. Our approach capitalizes on the LLM’s capacity to elucidate complex motion synthesis via anatomical
explanations. We construct a two-branch diffusion process
wherein one branch uses the source text as a condition, and
the other depends on the dissected anatomical scripts, and
corresponding reference motions retrieved from a motion
database using the anatomical scripts.The database consists
of text descriptions, decomposed text, and corresponding action sequences in our implementation. The inverse diffusion
processes in both branches yield two motion sequences that
align with the source text and anatomical scripts, respectively. We then blend these motions through a meticulously
designed fusion block, generating the final motion sequence.

Generating realistic human motion sequences from text descriptions is a challenging task that requires capturing the rich
expressiveness of both natural language and human motion.
Recent advances in diffusion models have enabled significant
progress in human motion synthesis. However, existing methods struggle to handle text inputs that describe complex or
long motions. In this paper, we propose the Adaptable Motion Diffusion (AMD) model, which leverages a Large Language Model (LLM) to parse the input text into a sequence of
concise and interpretable anatomical scripts that correspond
to the target motion. This process exploits the LLM’s ability
to provide anatomical guidance for complex motion synthesis. We then devise a two-branch fusion scheme that balances
the influence of the input text and the anatomical scripts on
the inverse diffusion process, which adaptively ensures the semantic fidelity and diversity of the synthesized motion. Our
method can effectively handle texts with complex or long
motion descriptions, where existing methods often fail. Experiments on datasets with relatively more complex motions,
such as CLCD1 and CLCD2, demonstrate that our AMD significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
Human motion generation has witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years, largely driven by the emergence
of sophisticated language models (Devlin et al. 2018; Anil
et al. 2023) and the innovation of diffusion generation techniques (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020). These breakthroughs have culminated in the development of motion generation models capable of crafting diverse and high-quality sequences, modulated by either textual (Zhang et al. 2022; Ren et al. 2023; Shafir et al. 2023)
or other control inputs (Gong et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023).
With applications already spreading into the gaming industry (Zhang and Tang 2022), these models present a promising frontier for both novices and professionals in character
animation.
Traditional methods employ variational autoencoder
(VAE) structures to encode conditions and 3D human motions separately, subsequently learning the joint distribu* indicates the corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2643

