The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TACIT: A Target-Agnostic Feature Disentanglement Framework for
Cross-Domain Text Classification
Rui Song1 , Fausto Giunchiglia1, 2, 3 , Yingji Li3 , Mingjie Tian1 , Hao Xu* 1, 3, 4
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 938123, Trento, Italy
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
4
Chongqing Research Institute, Jilin University, Chongqing 401123, China
{songrui20, yingji21, mjtian19}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, fausto@disi.unitn.it, xuhao@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

the performance of cross-domain text classification, numerous researches have focused on improving the generalization ability by extracting domain invariant features, including pivot-based methods (Ziser and Reichart 2018; Peng
et al. 2018; Ben-David, Rabinovitz, and Reichart 2020),
task-specific knowledge-based methods (Zhou et al. 2020),
domain adversarial training methods (Wu and Shi 2022),
and class-aware methods (Ye et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2022).
Besides, there are approaches that use language models to
perform self-supervised tasks to capture task-agnostic features in the target domain (Karouzos, Paraskevopoulos, and
Potamianos 2021). These methods take full advantage of the
commonality between the source and target domains to encourage model generalization.
However, these approaches still face two main challenges. First, capturing domain-invariant features tends to
depend heavily on the target domain, which makes the
model ineffective when the target domain is agnostic. Besides, the training of the generalized model requires consideration of additional target domain samples, which adds
training and deployment costs. Second, the models are susceptible to shortcut learning1 in the source domain, which
also hinders the improvement of domain generalization ability (Geirhos et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2023).
To overcome the above challenges, we propose a TargetAgnostic framework for Cross-domain text classIficaTion
(TACIT). It is inspired by the work of feature disentanglement (Huang et al. 2021) as well as Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) for text generation (Bao et al. 2019). The
aim of TACIT is to separate robust and unrobust features
from the potential latent feature space of the source domain,
and use robust features to promote cross-domain generalization performance. Moreover, we design a feature distillation task to encourage further separation of the unrobust
features from the robust features. The teacher model in the
distillation task learns from easy samples in the training set

Cross-domain text classification aims to transfer models from
label-rich source domains to label-poor target domains, giving it a wide range of practical applications. Many approaches
promote cross-domain generalization by capturing domaininvariant features. However, these methods rely on unlabeled
samples provided by the target domains, which renders the
model ineffective when the target domain is agnostic. Furthermore, the models are easily disturbed by shortcut learning in the source domain, which also hinders the improvement of domain generalization ability. To solve the aforementioned issues, this paper proposes TACIT, a target domain agnostic feature disentanglement framework which adaptively
decouples robust and unrobust features by Variational AutoEncoders. Additionally, to encourage the separation of unrobust features from robust features, we design a feature distillation task that compels unrobust features to approximate the
output of the teacher. The teacher model is trained with a few
easy samples that are easy to carry potential unknown shortcuts. Experimental results verify that our framework achieves
comparable results to state-of-the-art baselines while utilizing
only source domain data.

Introduction
In recent years, natural language processing (NLP) models
based on deep networks have made significant progress and
have even surpassed human-level performance. But these
methods often rely on manually labeled data, and the inconsistency between the distribution of labeled training domains
and the unlabeled target domains poses a challenge for deploying these methods in practical applications (Ben-David,
Rabinovitz, and Reichart 2020). To address this challenge,
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has emerged as a
solution. UDA aims to generalize a model trained on labeled
data from source domains to perform well on a target domain without labeled data. By employing UDA, models can
overcome their dependency on labeled data from the target
domain, which has attracted considerable attention from researchers.
In UDA, cross-domain text classification is a basic but
challenging task because of the differences in text expressions among the source and target domains. To enhance

1
Shorcuts are defined as simple decision rules that can not be
applied to more challenging scenarios, such as cross-domain generalization. Shortcut learning occurs when the model relies excessively on superficial correlations in the source domain, disregarding
domain-specific features crucial for accurate classification in the
target domain. Therefore, mitigating shorcuts can improve crossdomain generalization (Moon et al. 2021). In our study, shortcuts
are not predefined, but included in easy samples.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18999

