The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When Causal Inference Meets Graph Machine Learning
Jing Ma
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
jing.ma5@case.edu

Improve the trustworthiness
of graph machine learning

Graphs (i.e., networks) are effective tools to model many
real-world systems with connected units, such as social networks and biological networks. Recent years have witnessed
rapid development in graph-based machine learning (GML)
in various high-impact domains. Currently, the mainstream
GML methods are based on statistical learning, e.g., utilizing the statistical correlations between node features, graph
structure, and labels for node classification. However, statistical learning has been widely criticized for only capturing the superficial relations between variables, and consequently, rendering the lack of trustworthiness in realworld applications. Therefore, it is crucial to understand the
causality in the data system and the learning process. Causal
inference is the discipline that investigates the causality, for
example, to identify and estimate the causal effect of a certain treatment (e.g., wearing a face mask) on an outcome
(e.g., COVID-19 infection). Involving causal inference in
ML methods is often considered significant for human-level
intelligence and can serve as the foundation of artificial intelligence (AI). However, traditional causal inference often
relies on strong assumptions, and focuses on independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, while causal inference on graphs faces many barriers. Therefore, there is still
a gap between causal inference and GML.
To bridge the gap, we need to address the following challenges: (C1): Hidden confounders - Classical causal inference often assumes that hidden confounders (unobserved
variables that influence both treatment and outcome) do not
exist. However, in practice, hidden confounders widely exist and are often time-varying. This phenomenon can cause
serious confounding biases in causal effect estimation. (C2):
Network interference - Traditional causal inference methods
assume that different units do not interfere with each other,
or interference only exists between pairs of units. These assumptions are often impractical. Especially, when there are
group interactions with more than two units involved, highorder interference may exist in the group. (C3): Fairness The predictions of ML models are often biased towards certain demographic groups w.r.t. sensitive attributes (e.g., age,
gender). In graphs, such biases can also be induced by one’s
neighboring nodes, as well as the causal relations between
variables. These make existing fair ML algorithms incapable

Causal
Inference
Hidden
Confounders
Network
Interference

X
Y

Explainability

Graph
Machine
Learning

Fairness

Improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of causal inference

Figure 1: An overview of my research work.
of mitigating such biases without consideration of graph
connections and causality. (C4): Explainability - Most GML
predictions are made by opaque models without explainability from a causal view. As shown in Fig. 1, my research
works mainly cover different aspects of the aforementioned
two directions by tackling the challenges (C1, C2, C3, and
C4). Specifically, some of them study the following topics
and develop corresponding principled approaches: (1) GML
for causal inference, including a) causal effect estimation
under hidden confounders (Ma 2021, 2022d) and its application for COVID-19 policy assessment (Ma 2022a); and
b) causal effect estimation under interference (Ma 2022c);
(2) Causality for GML, including c) counterfactual fairness
in graph node representation learning (Ma 2022e); and d)
counterfactual explanation for GML models (Ma 2022b).

References
Ma, J. e. a. 2021. Deconfounding with networked observational data in a dynamic environment. In ACM WSDM,
166–174.
Ma, J. e. a. 2022a. Assessing the causal impact of COVID19 related policies on outbreak dynamics: A case study in
the US. In WWW, 2678–2686.
Ma, J. e. a. 2022b. Clear: Generative counterfactual explanations on graphs. NeurIPS, 35: 25895–25907.
Ma, J. e. a. 2022c. Learning Causal Effects on Hypergraphs.
In ACM SIGKDD.
Ma, J. e. a. 2022d. Learning causality with graphs. AI Magazine, 43(4): 365–375.
Ma, J. e. a. 2022e. Learning fair node representations with
graph counterfactual fairness. In ACM WSDM, 695–703.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22676

