The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Test-Time Adaptation for Zero-Shot Prompt Tuning
Ding-Chu Zhang* , Zhi Zhou* , Yu-Feng Li†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{zhangdc,zhouz,liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

2022) using appropriately hand-crafted prompts, greatly reducing the cost of deploying models in real-world applications. However, the appropriate prompt, which is challenging to choose in practical applications, plays a crucial role in
downstream tasks.
Prompt tuning, a method that optimizes the prompt by using data from downstream tasks, is an effective way to tackle
the previous problems. Some studies (Zhou et al. 2022b,a)
optimize the prompt with the help of training data, which can
eliminate the need for us to manually select prompts. However, we need to collect accurate data for training, which
may be difficult or expensive in practical situations. Recent
studies (Shu et al. 2022) propose to fine-tune the prompt by
using unlabeled test data, solving the problem of unavailable
training data (Guo, Zhou, and Li 2020; Zhu et al. 2023; Tian
et al. 2023; Jia et al. 2024; Guo and Li 2024). However, they
encounter performance degradation on certain domains. In
addition, they also use a large amount of data augmentation,
which requires the model to predict at a long time cost.
Therefore, it is urgent to study a zero-shot classification
method that does not require us to manually choose the optimal prompts and can also solve the robustness of prompt
tuning at a small time cost. We demonstrate that existing
problems are caused by two biases, Data Bias and Model
Bias, through experimental results. Specifically, Data Bias
causes a problem that the performance of different prompts
can vary across datasets, resulting in the difficulty of selecting an optimal prompt for downstream tasks. Model Bias
causes prediction biases towards specific classes, leading to
error accumulation. And the errors accumulated by Model
Bias will finally result in performance degradation problem.
To this end, we propose robust test-time adaptation for
zero-shot prompt tuning, which updates the efficient and reliable prompts for CLIP model at a small time cost by using unlabeled test data. To tackle the Data Bias, we propose
an ensemble-tuning method for prompts optimization during
the testing. Specifically, we ensemble multiple hand-crafted
prompts, such as ”an image of a”, ”a colorful picture of a”
and ”a noisy image of a”, to avoid the worst-case prediction.
Meanwhile, we fine-tune all prompts with unlabeled test
data to adapt to Data Bias. Then, a confidence-aware data
buffer is proposed to eliminate the problem of Model Bias
during the updating process. Specifically, we store highconfidence, class-balanced samples, which ensures robust

CLIP has demonstrated remarkable generalization across diverse downstream tasks. By aligning images and texts in a
shared feature space, they enable zero-shot classification via
hand-crafted prompts. However, recent studies have shown
that hand-crafted prompts may be unsuitable in practical applications. Specifically, choosing an appropriate prompt for a
given task requires accurate data and knowledge, which may
not be obtainable in practical situations. An inappropriate
prompt can result in poor performance. Moreover, if there is
no training data, tuning prompts arbitrarily through unlabeled
test data may lead to serious performance degradation when
giving hand-crafted prompts. Our study reveals that the aforementioned problems are mainly due to the biases in testing
data (Data Bias) and pre-trained CLIP model (Model Bias).
The Data Bias makes it challenging to choose an appropriate
prompt, while Model Bias renders some predictions inaccurate and biased, which leads to error accumulation. To address
these biases, we propose robust test-time Adaptation for zeroshot Prompt tuning (A DA P ROMPT). Specifically, we ensemble multiple prompts to avoid the worst-case results and dynamically tune prompts to adapt to Data Bias during testing.
Furthermore, we adopt a confidence-aware buffer to store balanced and confident unlabeled test data to tune prompts in
order to overcome Model Bias. Our extensive experiments
on several benchmarks demonstrate that A DA P ROMPT alleviates model bias, adapts to data bias and mostly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods at a small time cost. Moreover,
our experimental results reveal that A DA P ROMPT hardly encounters any performance degradation on these datasets.

Introduction
Benefited from recent advances in computer vision (Radford
et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021) and natural language processing (Kenton and Toutanova 2019; Brown et al. 2020; Shi,
Wei, and Li 2024), large pre-trained vision-language models
like CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) have shown the outstanding
generalization on numerous downstream tasks. These models align visual and textual contents within a common feature space through training with millions of noisy imagetext pairs. This enables zero-shot classification (Wei et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16714

