The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Layer-Wise Representation Fusion for Compositional Generalization
Yafang Zheng1,2 * , Lei Lin1,2,3 * , Shuangtao Li1,2 , Yuxuan Yuan1,2 , Zhaohong Lai1,2 ,
Shan Liu1,2 , Biao Fu1,2 , Yidong Chen1,2 , Xiaodong Shi1,2†
2

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage
of Fujian and Taiwan (Xiamen University), Ministry of Culture and Tourism, China
3
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
{zhengyafang, linlei}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {ydchen, mandel}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing neural models are demonstrated to struggle with
compositional generalization (CG), i.e., the ability to systematically generalize to unseen compositions of seen components. A key reason for failure on CG is that the syntactic and semantic representations of sequences in both the
uppermost layer of the encoder and decoder are entangled.
However, previous work concentrates on separating the learning of syntax and semantics instead of exploring the reasons behind the representation entanglement (RE) problem
to solve it. We explain why it exists by analyzing the representation evolving mechanism from the bottom to the top
of the Transformer layers. We find that the “shallow” residual connections within each layer fail to fuse previous layers’ information effectively, leading to information forgetting between layers and further the RE problems. Inspired
by this, we propose LRF, a novel Layer-wise Representation
Fusion framework for CG, which learns to fuse previous layers’ information back into the encoding and decoding process effectively through introducing a fuse-attention module
at each encoder and decoder layer. LRF achieves promising results on two realistic benchmarks, empirically demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposal. Codes are available
at https://github.com/thinkaboutzero/LRF.

Transformer Layer

Transformer Layer

......

......

Transformer Layer

Transformer Layer

Transformer Layer

Transformer Layer

Embedding Layer

Embedding Layer

Inputs

Inputs

(a) Standard Transformer

(b) LRF (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) Standard Transformer
and (b) LRF (ours). (a) illustrates the standard architecture
of the Transformer model and (b) illustrates the architecture
of our method, which fuses representations from previous
layers at each layer effectively.

have never seen it before. Such nature is beneficial for models to perform robustly in real-world scenarios, as even huge
training data can not cover a potentially infinite number of
novel combinations.
Recent studies have demonstrated that a key reason for
failure on CG is that the syntactic and semantic representations of sequences in both the uppermost layer of the encoder and decoder are entangled, i.e., encoder or decoder RE
problem (Russin et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Raunak and et al
2019; Liu et al. 2020a, 2021; Mittal et al. 2022; Zheng and
Lapata 2022; Thrush 2020; Akyurek and Andreas 2021; Yao
and Koller 2022; Yin et al. 2022). To alleviate it, one line
of research on CG concentrates on utilizing separate syntactic and semantic representations. Specifically, they either
produce two separate syntactic and semantic representations
and then compose them appropriately (Li et al. 2019; Russin
et al. 2019; Jiang and Bansal 2021), or design external modules and then employ a multi-stage generation process (Liu
et al. 2020b, 2021; Ruis and Lake 2022; Li et al. 2022; Cazzaro et al. 2023).
However, they focus on separating the learning of syn-

Introduction
The remarkable progress of sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
models in language modeling has been primarily attributed
to their ability to learn intricate patterns and representations
from vast amounts of data (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Dong and Lapata 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017). However, a
critical challenge that remains unsolved for neural sequence
models is the ability to understand and produce novel combinations from known components (Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988;
Lake et al. 2017), i.e., compositional generalization (CG).
For example, if a person knows “the doctor has lunch” [Der
Arzt hat Mittagessen] and “the lawyer” [Der Anwalt] where
the segment in “[]” denotes the German translation, then it is
natural for the person to know the translation of “the lawyer
has lunch” is [Der Anwalt hat Mittagessen] even though they
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19706

