The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning in Online Principal-Agent Interactions: The Power of Menus
Minbiao Han1 , Michael Albert2 , Haifeng Xu1
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Chicago
2
Darden Business School, University of Virginia
{minbiaohan, haifengxu}@uchicago.edu, albertm@darden.virginia.edu

Abstract

(referred to as he) who responds, a class of problems denoted principal-agent problems (Myerson 1982; Gan et al.
2022), has generated significant interest in the computer science literature (e.g., Kleinberg and Leighton 2003; Letchford, Conitzer, and Munagala 2009; Haghtalab et al. 2022).
However, existing work focuses on learning the agent’s type
by using carefully chosen strategies from the possible set
of principal strategies. In the pricing of a single item example, this would be the principal setting a price in every
round of play to narrow down the agent’s value for the item.
Specifically, the principal’s strategy space consists of offering a fixed price, p, and a probability of allocating an item,
x, to the agent who has an unknown valuation v, which is his
type. The agent can choose to purchase the item or not, providing information to the principal about the agent’s type.
In this setting, the best strategy for the principal to learn the
agent’s type exactly requires O(log(K)) rounds, where K
is the number of possible agent types.
Often, in practice, a principal does not choose a single strategy but instead offers a menu of strategies. The
agent then chooses among the strategies, potentially revealing something about their type. Exploiting revealed preferences through offering a menu of strategies is common in
pricing. For example, a retailer may bundle goods at different prices, or there may be different pricing based on the
quantity purchased. If the principal can offer a menu of possible strategies, can she learn significantly more efficiently?
To illustrate the type of results we demonstrate in the revealed preferences setting with menus, consider the pricing problem again. In this setting, instead of posting a single price and allocation probability every round, the principal posts a menu of prices {x, p(x)}x2[0,1] . The agent then
chooses a strategy, i.e. an x, from the menu, at which point
the principal plays that strategy. In this case, the agent’s type
can be learned in a single round. Specifically, if the payment
function p(x) is strictly convex, then x⇤ = argmaxx v · x
p(x) is uniquely determined by v, and v = rp(x⇤ ).
In this work, we examine, for general principal-agent
problems, the question of the sample complexity of identifying the agent’s private type. We provide a condition,
which for most common classes of principal-agent problems
is generic, that allows the principal to identify the agent’s
type in a single round. Additionally, for settings under which
the aforementioned condition does not hold, we demonstrate

We study a ubiquitous learning challenge in online principalagent problems during which the principal learns the agent’s
private information from the agent’s revealed preferences in
historical interactions. This paradigm includes important special cases such as pricing and contract design, which have
been widely studied in recent literature. However, existing
work considers the case where the principal can only choose
a single strategy at every round to interact with the agent and
then observe the agent’s revealed preference through their
actions. In this paper, we extend this line of study to allow
the principal to offer a menu of strategies to the agent and
learn additionally from observing the agent’s selection from
the menu. We provide a thorough investigation of several online principal-agent problem settings and characterize their
sample complexities, accompanied by the corresponding algorithms we have developed. We instantiate this paradigm
to several important design problems — including Stackelberg (security) games, contract design, and information design. Finally, we also explore the connection between our
findings and existing results about online learning in Stackelberg games, and we offer a solution that can overcome a
key hard instance of previous work.

1

Introduction

Asymmetric information is a key friction in many economic
interactions. When setting a price for an item, the seller typically does not know the exact value the buyer has for the
item. In hiring and compensation decisions, the employer
does not know the work ethic of the particular employee. For
a security professional, the specific value of different potential targets to an attacker may be unknown. Note that this
information asymmetry is distinct from the standard strategic considerations in these interactions. For example, even
if the security professional knows the value of all targets,
an attacker may choose to attack a low-value target in order to avoid any potential defenses. However, if the security
professional does not know the value of the targets to the
attacker, it is much less likely that she will be able to implement a successful defense.
Learning from interactions where there is a single principal (referred to as she) who acts first and then an agent
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17426

