The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Harnessing the Power of Beta Scoring in Deep Active Learning for Multi-Label
Text Classification
Wei Tan1 , Ngoc Dang Nguyen1 , Lan Du1 * , Wray Buntine2
1

Faculty of IT, Monash University
2
VinUniversity
wei.tan2@monash.edu, dan.nguyen2@monash.edu, lan.du@monash.edu, wray.buntine@vinuni.edu.vn

Abstract

annotation of the most informative instances. However, a
comprehensive AL framework for MLTC, which robustly
tackles imbalanced label distributions, has yet to be fully realized (Cherman et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020). In spite of
these challenges, MLTC remains a critical task in NLP with
diverse practical applications.
AL can alleviated the complexities MLTC, primarily due
to its capacity to identify high-information samples, which
subsequently optimizes human annotation and enhances
model performance (Reyes, Morell, and Ventura 2018; Wu
et al. 2020). Binary Relevance (BR) plays a key role in
MLTC for its ability to segment multi-label tasks into individual binary classifications, facilitating the inclusion of
advanced classifiers like deep neural networks and support
vector machines (SVMs) (Zhang et al. 2018). Inspired by
BR’s framework, earlier work in multi-label active learning
(MLAL) adopted standard SVMs to establish binary classifiers tailored to individual labels (Yang et al. 2009; Li
and Guo 2013; Cherman et al. 2019). Contrary to the notion that BR overlooks label correlation, when paired with
deep neural networks, label correlations are implicitly handled, addressing a critical aspect of multi-label classification (Su et al. 2021). However, this focus on label correlation should not overshadow another crucial aspect of MLTC:
data imbalance. The skewed distribution of labels in many
real-world datasets affects instance selection strategies, potentially biasing models towards frequent labels (Wu, Lyu,
and Ghanem 2016). Therefore, recent studies, emphasize
the need to explore the inherent properties of MLTC, especially label imbalance, as a pathway to enhance generalization performance, making it imperative to address this issue
precisely (Zhang et al. 2018).
In this paper, we propose a hybrid approach, named Beta
Scoring Rules for Deep Active Learning (BESRA1 ) that incorporates the Beta family of proper scoring rules within
the Expected Loss Reduction (ELR) framework, applied to
MLTC. Unlike expected loss used in other MLAL methods,
BESRA pinpoints informative samples involving both uncertainty and diversity, drawing on expected score changes
within a predictive model governed by the Beta scoring
function. Through extensive experimentation on diverse ar-

Within the scope of natural language processing, the domain
of multi-label text classification is uniquely challenging due
to its expansive and uneven label distribution. The complexity
deepens due to the demand for an extensive set of annotated
data for training an advanced deep learning model, especially
in specialized fields where the labeling task can be laborintensive and often requires domain-specific knowledge. Addressing these challenges, our study introduces a novel deep
active learning strategy, capitalizing on the Beta family of
proper scoring rules within the Expected Loss Reduction
framework. It computes the expected increase in scores using
the Beta Scoring Rules, which are then transformed into sample vector representations. These vector representations guide
the diverse selection of informative samples, directly linking
this process to the model’s expected proper score. Comprehensive evaluations across both synthetic and real datasets reveal our method’s capability to often outperform established
acquisition techniques in multi-label text classification, presenting encouraging outcomes across various architectural
and dataset scenarios.

Introduction
Text classification is an essential task in natural language processing (NLP) with various applications, including sentiment analysis and topic classification (Allaouzi and
Ben Ahmed 2019; Koßmann, Wilhelm, and Fink 2021).
While deep learning has significantly improved multi-class
text classification, yet its sub-task, multi-label text classification (MLTC), presents unique challenges. In MLTC,
samples can be assigned multiple labels, navigating a vast,
sparse label space with unresolved complexities (Liu et al.
2017; Wei and Li 2020). For every multi-label instance,
the determination of appropriate labels adds to the intricacies and costs of annotation, making it even more resourceintensive than single-label learning. The increased demand
for data becomes especially evident in specialized sectors,
like the medical field, where domain-specific expertise and
privacy considerations are crucial (Bustos et al. 2020). Recently, active learning (AL) has been explored as a promising solution to MLTC’s data scarcity issue, focusing on the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our implementation of BESRA can be downloaded from
https://github.com/davidtw999/BESRA.

15240

