The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Domain Invariant Learning for Gaussian Processes and Bayesian Exploration
Xilong Zhao1 * , Siyuan Bian1 , Yaoyun Zhang1 , Yuliang Zhang1 , Qinying Gu2 , Xinbing Wang1 ,
Chenghu Zhou1 , Nanyang Ye1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Aritificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
zhaoxilong@sjtu.edu.cn, biansiyuan@sjtu.edu.cn, yaoyunzhang897@gmail.com, blu 26@sjtu.edu.cn,
guqinying@pjlab.org.cn, xwang8@sjtu.edu.cn, zhouchsjtu@gmail.com, ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Yin, and Cui 2023; Jørgensen and Osborne 2022). This can
also lead to degenerated sample efficiency of Bayesian optimization when GP is used as the surrogate function (Lei
et al. 2021).
To improve OOD generalization, many domain generalization methods have been proposed to learn invariant representations across different domains. This can be achieved
by invariant risk minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al. 2019),
which attempts to tackle this issue by penalizing predictions
based on the unstable spurious features in the data collected
from different domains. Although methods like IRM seems
promising for OOD generalization, data need to be manually
split into different domains to enable them to minimize the
performance discrepancies across domains. This fundamental restrictions prevent this algorithmic schemes to be practical. First, how data are split can largely influence the final
prediction performances. Second, sometimes it is impossible
to split the data in continuous environments, especially for
Bayesian optimization scenario, where the data is sequentially sampled from trials, such as sensor data collected on a
drone flight under turbelent stormy weather.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach, domain invariant learning for Gaussian processes (DIL-GP), to iteratively construct worst-case domains/environments splittings
for IRM for learning GP parameters. The optimized partition
for data samples enforce GP to generalize on the worst possible data distributions thus benefit the OOD generalization.
Then, DIL-GP is further extended as the surrogate function
for Bayesian optimization. We demonstrate that the combination of this adversarial partitioning and IRM is key for
learning generalizable GP kernels. Numerical experiments
on synthetic and real-world datasets shows the superiority
of the proposed algorithmic scheme.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization has long been a
challenging problem that remains largely unsolved. Gaussian
processes (GP), as popular probabilistic model classes, especially in the small data regime, presume strong OOD generalization abilities. Surprisingly, their OOD generalization abilities have been under-explored before compared with other
lines of GP research. In this paper, we identify that GP is
not free from the problem and propose a domain invariant
learning algorithm for Gaussian processes (DIL-GP) with a
min-max optimization on the likelihood. DIL-GP discovers
the heterogeneity in the data and forces invariance across partitioned subsets of data. We further extend the DIL-GP to improve Bayesian optimization’s adaptability on changing environments. Numerical experiments demonstrate the superiority of DIL-GP for predictions on several synthetic and realworld datasets. We further demonstrate the effectiveness of
the DIL-GP Bayesian optimization method on a PID parameters tuning experiment for a quadrotor. The full version and
source code are available at: https://github.com/Billzxl/DILGP.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GP) have been widely used as models for Bayesian nonparametrics methods in machine learning (Gahungu et al. 2022; Moreno-Muñoz, Feldager, and
Hauberg 2022). However, the extrapolation ability of GP especially in the long tail regime suffers from generalization
problems, i.e. failing on the non-i.i.d test data (Pilario et al.
2022). How to guarantee the generalization ability of GP on
data sampled from out-of-distribution sets is of great importance, also known as the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. Previous GP methods mitigate the OOD generalization problems often by hand-crafting problem-specific kernel functions to capture the inherent long-tail characteristics
of the data. While these methods are effective, it is hard to
transfer the success to other types of problems (Pilario et al.
2022; Schmidt, Morales-Álvarez, and Molina 2023; Chen,

2
2.1

Related Work

Gaussian Processes

Gaussian Process(GP), as a non-parametric Bayesian model
that models the relationship between data by defining a stochastic process has the characteristics of nonparametricity, flexibility, interpretability, and uncertainty
quantification. GP has demonstrated utility on diverse domains, including but not limited to regression analysis (Luo,

* Xilong Zhao is currently a student at MoE Key Lab of Ar-

tificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17024

