The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimistic Model Rollouts for Pessimistic Offline Policy Optimization
Yuanzhao Zhai1,2 , Yiying Li3 , Zijian Gao1,2 , Xudong Gong1,2 ,
Kele Xu1,2 , Dawei Feng1,2⇤ , Ding Bo1,2 , Huaimin Wang1,2
1

National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Center, DII, Beijing, China
{yuanzhaozhai, liyiying10, gaozijian19, gongxudong09, dingbo, hmwang}@nudt.edu.cn,
xukelele@163.com, davyfeng.c@qq.com
2

Abstract

Datasets

Model-based offline reinforcement learning (RL) has made remarkable progress, offering a promising avenue for improving
generalization with synthetic model rollouts. Existing works
primarily focus on incorporating pessimism for policy optimization, usually via constructing a Pessimistic Markov Decision Process (P-MDP). However, the P-MDP discourages the
policies from learning in out-of-distribution (OOD) regions
beyond the support of offline datasets, which can under-utilize
the generalization ability of dynamics models. In contrast, we
propose constructing an Optimistic MDP (O-MDP). We initially observed the potential benefits of optimism brought by
encouraging more OOD rollouts. Motivated by this observation, we present ORPO, a simple yet effective model-based
offline RL framework. ORPO generates Optimistic model
Rollouts for Pessimistic offline policy Optimization. Specifically, we train an optimistic rollout policy in the O-MDP to
sample more OOD model rollouts. Then we relabel the sampled state-action pairs with penalized rewards and optimize
the output policy in the P-MDP. Theoretically, we demonstrate
that the performance of policies trained with ORPO can be
lower-bounded in linear MDPs. Experimental results show that
our framework significantly outperforms P-MDP baselines by
a margin of 30%, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
the widely used benchmark. Moreover, ORPO exhibits notable
advantages in problems that require generalization.

Datasets

Dynamics ModelDynamics Model

DynamicsDynamics
Model
Model

Rollout

Policy

Rollout

Policy

P-MDP

P-MDP

Datasets

Datasets

Optimistic Relabel
Rollout Relabel
Optimistic
Rollout

Rollout

Rollout Policy

Policy

O-MDP Rollout
P-MDPPolicy

Act

Act
(a) Prior approach.

In scenarios where online trial-and-error are too costly or
prohibited, such as autonomous driving (Yu et al. 2018),
healthcare (Gottesman et al. 2019), and robotics (Mandlekar
et al. 2020), offline RL (Levine et al. 2020) has emerged as
a solution to leverage previously-collected datasets. While
successful, recent research (Wang et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2022)
demonstrates that model-free offline RL methods typically
learn overly conservative policies and lack generalization
beyond the datasets.
Model-based approach, which leverages a learned dynamics model to generate rollouts for policy optimization (Sutton
1990), has been introduced to offline RL, achieving remarkable progress (Yu et al. 2020; Rigter et al. 2022). In the
⇤

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16678

Policy

O-MDP
Act P-MDP
(b) ORPO framework.

Figure 1: (a) Previous model-based offline RL generates
model rollouts and optimizes the policy within the P-MDP.
(b) We decouple the training of optimistic rollout policies
from the pessimistic policy optimization.

Introduction

Rollout

context of offline RL, the dynamic models may exhibit inaccuracies due to limited datasets. To avoid over-estimation
on out-of-distribution (OOD) data, prior methods construct a
Pessimistic Markov Decision Process (P-MDP) based on uncertainty quantification of dynamics models (Yu et al. 2020;
Kidambi et al. 2020), which lower-bounds the real MDP.
Dynamics models trained in a supervised manner can
exhibit refined generalization capacity for some neardistribution OOD state-action pairs, which is mainly studied
and utilized in the model-based online RL (Janner et al. 2019;
Moerland et al. 2023). Recent works (An et al. 2021; Bai
et al. 2022) have demonstrated that OOD sampling can effectively regularize behaviors and enhance generalization for
offline policy optimization. However, P-MDP used in prior
model-based offline RL penalizes OOD state-action pairs
that have high uncertainty (Figure 1(a)), discouraging policies from sampling in OOD regions. Therefore, utilizing only
pessimistic rollouts may under-utilize the dynamics model,
thereby limiting generalization. We verify this by designing
a toy task in Figure 2.
This paper delves into the efficacy of optimism in the context of model-based offline RL, aiming to take full advantage
of the learned dynamics model. To introduce optimism when

Act

