The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combinatorial Stochastic-Greedy Bandit
Fares Fourati1 , Christopher John Quinn2 , Mohamed-Slim Alouini1 , Vaneet Aggarwal3,1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
Iowa State University
3
Purdue University
fares.fourati@kaust.edu.sa, cjquinn@iastate.edu, slim.alouini@kaust.edu.sa, vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract

significantly less information than the semi-bandit feedback
scenario (Fourati et al. 2023a). This paper focuses on the
first scenario for combinatorial MAB, i.e., the bandit feedback setting.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in studying combinatorial multi-armed bandit problems with submodular1 reward functions (Niazadeh et al. 2020; Nie et al.
2022; Fourati et al. 2023a). The submodularity assumption
finds motivation in various real-world scenarios. For instance, opening additional supermarkets in a specific location would result in diminishing returns due to market saturation. As a result, submodular functions are commonly
used as objective functions in game theory, economics, and
optimization (Fourati et al. 2023a). Submodularity arises in
important contexts within combinatorial optimization, such
as graph cuts (Goemans and Williamson 1995; Iwata, Fleischer, and Fujishige 2001), rank functions of matroids (Edmonds 2003), and set covering problems (Feige 1998). Some
key problems where combinatorial multi-armed bandit problems with submodular reward functions include proposing
items with redundant information (Qin and Zhu 2013; Takemori et al. 2020), optimizing client participation in federated
learning (Balakrishnan et al. 2022; Fourati et al. 2023b), and
social influence maximization without knowledge of the network or diffusion model (Wen et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020;
Perrault et al. 2020; Agarwal et al. 2022; Nie et al. 2022).
Similar to previous works (Streeter and Golovin 2008;
Golovin, Krause, and Streeter 2014; Niazadeh et al. 2021;
Agarwal et al. 2021, 2022; Nie et al. 2022), we assume that
the reward function is non-decreasing (monotone) in expectation. Without further constraints, the optimal set will contain all the arms in this setup. Thus, we limit the cardinality of the set to k. Recently, (Nie et al. 2022, 2023) studied
this problem and proposed an explore-then-commit greedy
(ETCG) algorithm for this problem with full-bandit feed1
2
back and showed a (1 − 1/e)-regret bound of Õ(n 3 kT 3 ),
where n is the number of arms. The algorithm follows
a greedy explore-then-commit approach that greedily adds
base arms to a super arm (a subset of base arms) until the

We propose a novel combinatorial stochastic-greedy bandit
(SGB) algorithm for combinatorial multi-armed bandit problems when no extra information other than the joint reward
of the selected set of n arms at each time step t ∈ [T ] is
observed. SGB adopts an optimized stochastic-explore-thencommit approach and is specifically designed for scenarios
with a large set of base arms. Unlike existing methods that explore the entire set of unselected base arms during each selection step, our SGB algorithm samples only an optimized proportion of unselected arms and selects actions from this subset. We prove that our algorithm achieves a (1 − 1/e)-regret
1
2
2
2
bound of O(n 3 k 3 T 3 log(T ) 3 ) for monotone stochastic
submodular rewards, which outperforms the state-of-the-art
in terms of the cardinality constraint k. Furthermore, we empirically evaluate the performance of our algorithm in the
context of online constrained social influence maximization.
Our results demonstrate that our proposed approach consistently outperforms the other algorithms, increasing the performance gap as k grows.

Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB) problem involves selecting an arm in each round t and observing a
reward that follows an unknown distribution. The objective is to maximize the accumulated reward within a finite
time horizon T . Solving the classical MAB problem requires
striking a balance between exploration and exploitation.
Should the agent try arms that have been explored less frequently to gather more information (exploration), or should
it stick to arms that have yielded higher rewards based on
previous observations (exploitation)? An extension of the
MAB problem is the combinatorial MAB problem, where,
instead of choosing a single arm per round, the agent selects
a set of multiple arms and receives a joint reward for that
set. When the agent only receives information about the reward associated with the selected set of arms, it is known as
full-bandit feedback or simply bandit feedback. On the other
hand, if the agent obtains additional information about the
contribution of each arm to the overall reward, it is referred
to as semi-bandit feedback. The full-bandit feedback setting
poses a more significant challenge as the decision-maker has

1
A set function f : 2Ω → R defined on a finite set Ω is
considered submodular if it exhibits the property of diminishing
returns: for any A ⊆ B ⊂ Ω and x ∈ Ω\B, it holds that
f (A ∪ x) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ x) − f (B).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12052

