The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SimFair: Physics-Guided Fairness-Aware Learning with Simulation Models
Zhihao Wang1 , Yiqun Xie1 * , Zhili Li1 , Xiaowei Jia2 , Zhe Jiang3 , Aolin Jia1 , Shuo Xu1
1

University of Maryland
University of Pittsburgh
3
University of Florida
{zhwang1, xie, lizhili}@umd.edu, xiaowei@pitt.edu, zhe.jiang@ufl.edu, {aolin, shuoxu98}@umd.edu
2

Abstract

a different region, which often does not follow the same pattern as the training region (e.g., the number of locations may
vary; data distribution may vary). Finally, the training and
test areas often have completely different sets of locations,
making the groups used in the fairness evaluation nonstationary as well.
In this paper, we use the temperature prediction problem as a concrete example. Air and surface temperatures
are two key variables for estimating the Earth’s energy budget, which connects to a diverse range of social applications,
such as solar power, agriculture, climate change, global
warming, ecosystem dynamics, and urban heat islands (Kim
and Entekhabi 1998; Peng et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2022b). For example, temperature-related variables
help estimate solar energy potential or predict the risks of
floods or droughts at different locations. The results may
affect resource allocation decisions such as subsidies, promotions, or insurance. Practically, satellite remote sensing is
the only approach to measuring these variables at the spatial
and temporal resolution needed for most applications (Liang
2001). Due to the large volume of satellite data, machine
learning methods have become increasingly popular choices
in predicting temperature-related variables (Deo and Şahin
2017; Wang et al. 2021). However, fairness has yet to be
considered. Due to the social impact, it is important to ensure fairness among different places in the prediction map.
Given passive microwave and multi-spectral optical remote sensing imagery, the goal of the paper is to predict temperature while maintaining fairness among prediction performance over locations. In particular, we aim to improve
the fairness of predictions in new test areas.
Recent studies have developed various approaches for
fairness improvement. On the data side, fairness-driven collection methods and filtering strategies were proposed to
reduce bias caused by data issues such as imbalance (Jo
and Gebru 2020; Yang et al. 2020; Steed and Caliskan
2021). The methods are more suitable for domains where
ground-truth data are reasonably easy to obtain. However,
for most remote sensing problems, it is resource-intensive
and time-consuming to collect new ground-truth samples
(e.g., field surveys, sensor installation, and monitoring stations). Many formulations explored decorrelating the feature
learning process with sensitive attributes, which revealed information such as races and genders should not be discrim-

Fairness-awareness has emerged as an essential building
block for the responsible use of artificial intelligence in real
applications. In many cases, inequity in performance is due to
the change in distribution over different regions. While techniques have been developed to improve the transferability of
fairness, a solution to the problem is not always feasible with
no samples from the new regions, which is a bottleneck for
pure data-driven attempts. Fortunately, physics-based mechanistic models have been studied for many problems with
major social impacts. We propose SimFair, a physics-guided
fairness-aware learning framework, which bridges the data
limitation by integrating physical-rule-based simulation and
inverse modeling into the training design. Using temperature
prediction as an example, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed SimFair in fairness preservation.

Introduction
As the use of artificial intelligence (AI) expands to more and
more traditional domains, the bias in predictions made by
AI has also raised broad concerns in recent years. To facilitate the responsible use of AI, fairness-aware learning has
emerged as an essential component in AI’s deployment in
societal applications. In this study, we focus on learningbased mapping applications, where it is important to evaluate fairness over locations. Such maps are often used to inform critical decision-making in major social sectors, such
as food, energy, water, public safety, etc.
In these applications, especially at large scales, inequity
in performance is often caused by changes in distribution
over different regions (Xie et al. 2021; Goodchild and Li
2021). One of the major bottlenecks is the unavailability of
ground truth data in test regions. With no labels from the test
area (e.g., when applying models trained in one state to another), it is very difficult to know how to obtain fairness over
new locations in the test area. This is more challenging than
transferring the overall prediction performance (e.g., measured by RMSE), which only needs to consider f : X → Y
for the whole dataset. In the fairness-driven scenario, we also
need to understand how the errors may vary over locations in
* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22420

