The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Stop Cut Generation for Efficient Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
Haotian Ling, Zhihai Wang, Jie Wang*
University of Science and Technology of China
{haotianling,zhwangx}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

A key component in modern MILP solvers is the cutting
plane method. The cutting plane method aims to generate
valid linear constraints—known as cutting planes (cuts)—
that are able to tighten the LP relaxation of the original problem. They are usually repeatedly generated and added to the
original problem in multiple rounds, as illustrated in Figure
1, which has a significant impact on the efficiency of solving
MILPs (Achterberg 2009; Wesselmann and Stuhl 2012).
Recently, using machine learning (ML) to improve the
cutting plane method in modern MILP solvers has been an
active topic of significant interest. Many existing methods
(Tang, Agrawal, and Faenza 2020; Huang et al. 2022; Paulus
et al. 2022; Turner et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023a) introduced machine learning into the selection of cuts. Besides,
Berthold, Francobaldi, and Hendel (2022) proposed to dynamically determine whether to use local cuts. As for the
theoretical analysis, Balcan et al. (2021) provided provable
guarantees for learning high-performing cuts. They have
demonstrated the strong ability to enhance MILP solvers via
incorporating ML into the cutting plane method.
However, the stopping strategy for the cutting plane
method—which significantly impacts the efficiency of solving MILPs (see Section 3)—has received limited attention.
On one hand, stopping cuts generation too early often struggles to effectively tighten the LP relaxation, making it difficult for the solver to efficiently find optimal solutions
(Nemhauser and Wolsey 2020). On the other hand, adding
too many cuts leads to a significant increase in the size of
MILPs, posing a computational problem and thus degrading the solving efficiency (Wesselmann and Stuhl 2012).
Although many modern solvers employ stopping strategies
based on hard-coded heuristics, they often tend to neglect
underlying patterns among MILPs from certain applications
(Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021; Gupta et al. 2022).
To address this challenge, we propose a novel hybrid
graph representation model (HYGRO) to learn intelligent
stopping strategies based on a novel transformed reinforcement learning formulation. To the best of our knowledge,
HYGRO is the first data-driven approach to tackle the cuts
generation stopping problem, which significantly improves
the efficiency of solving MILPs. Specifically, we first transform the stopping strategy learning problem into a reinforcement learning problem to learn simple and efficient stopping conditions, which can significantly reduce the action

Cutting planes (cuts) play an important role in solving mixedinteger linear programs (MILPs), as they significantly tighten
the dual bounds and improve the solving performance. A
key problem for cuts is when to stop cuts generation, which
is important for the efficiency of solving MILPs. However,
many modern MILP solvers employ hard-coded heuristics to
tackle this problem, which tends to neglect underlying patterns among MILPs from certain applications. To address this
challenge, we formulate the cuts generation stopping problem as a reinforcement learning problem and propose a novel
hybrid graph representation model (HYGRO) to learn effective stopping strategies. An appealing feature of HYGRO is
that it can effectively capture both the dynamic and static features of MILPs, enabling dynamic decision-making for the
stopping strategies. To the best of our knowledge, HYGRO
is the first data-driven method to tackle the cuts generation
stopping problem. By integrating our approach with modern
solvers, experiments demonstrate that HYGRO significantly
improves the efficiency of solving MILPs compared to competitive baselines, achieving up to 31% improvement.

1

Introduction

Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) is a widelyused mathematical optimization model employed to solve
various real-world problems, such as production planning
(Pochet and Wolsey 2010), vehicle routing (Laporte 2009),
project scheduling (Berthold et al. 2010), and facility location (Abend 2016). A MILP aims to find the values of the
decision variables, including integer and continuous, to optimize a linear objective function while satisfying all the linear constraints. A standard MILP takes the form of
min{cT x|Ax ≤ b, xj ∈ Z, ∀j ∈ I},
(1)
x
where c ∈ Rn ,b ∈ Rm and A ∈ Rm×n . x ∈ Rn represents a vector of decision variables, where a subset denoted
as {xj |j ∈ I, I ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , n}} consists of integer decision
variables, while the remaining decision variables are continuous. MILP solving initiates with its Linear Programming
(LP) relaxation, where the integer decision variables in Definition (1) are treated as continuous. The specific form of LP
relaxation can be found in the Definition (2).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20759

