The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Offline and Online Optical Flow Enhancement for Deep Video Compression
Chuanbo Tang, Xihua Sheng, Zhuoyuan Li, Haotian Zhang, Li Li, Dong Liu*
University of Science and Technology of China
{cbtang,xhsheng,zhuoyuanli,zhanghaotian}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {lil1,dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Ilg et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018) to estimate the motions
between video frames. Taking a widely acknowledged and
highly flexible scheme, DCVC (Li, Li, and Lu 2021), as an
example, the pre-trained Spynet (Ranjan and Black 2017)
is used for estimating the optical flows. The optical flows
can be considered as pixel-wise motion vectors (MV) and
are compressed by an autoencoder-based MV encoder (Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici 2018). In the training stage, the pretrained Spynet is first loaded, and then the whole deep video
compression network is optimized in an end-to-end manner.
In the inference stage, the motion information of different
video contents is obtained through the fixed networks.
However, regarding the optical flows estimated by the
commonly-used pre-trained optical flow estimation networks (Ranjan and Black 2017; Ilg et al. 2017; Sun et al.
2018) as motion information in deep video compression
schemes may be less suitable due to the following two factors. First, the pre-trained optical flow estimation networks
are trained to perform inter-frame prediction as accurately
as possible, but the optical flows themselves may cost too
many bits to encode. Although they can be further optimized
with the whole video compression networks in an end-toend manner, the inappropriate initial point may affect the
final optimization result. Second, the optical flow estimation
networks are trained on synthetic data (Dosovitskiy et al.
2015; Butler et al. 2012; Baker et al. 2011), and may not generalize well enough to real-world videos. The end-to-end optimization in video compression networks can alleviate the
domain gap between the synthetic data and the real-world
videos to some degree. However, once the end-to-end optimization is finished, the optical flow estimation network is
”optimal” in the sense that the average performance over the
entire training set is optimal, but not ”optimal” in the sense
that the network produced optical flows may not be the optimal for any given video sequence.
To address the twofold limitations, we consider learning the good traditions from the inter-frame prediction
techniques in traditional (non-deep) video compression
schemes. The latest traditional video compression standard
H.266/VVC (Bross et al. 2021) has achieved great success in effectively estimating and using the motion information, which is represented by MV. Specifically, in the offline
stage, various hand-crafted inter-frame prediction modes are
first designed for different types of motions without op-

Video compression relies heavily on exploiting the temporal
redundancy between video frames, which is usually achieved
by estimating and using the motion information. The motion information is represented as optical flows in most of
the existing deep video compression networks. Indeed, these
networks often adopt pre-trained optical flow estimation networks for motion estimation. The optical flows, however, may
be less suitable for video compression due to the following
two factors. First, the optical flow estimation networks were
trained to perform inter-frame prediction as accurately as possible, but the optical flows themselves may cost too many
bits to encode. Second, the optical flow estimation networks
were trained on synthetic data, and may not generalize well
enough to real-world videos. We address the twofold limitations by enhancing the optical flows in two stages: offline
and online. In the offline stage, we fine-tune a trained optical flow estimation network with the motion information provided by a traditional (non-deep) video compression scheme,
e.g. H.266/VVC, as we believe the motion information of
H.266/VVC achieves a better rate-distortion trade-off. In the
online stage, we further optimize the latent features of the
optical flows with a gradient descent-based algorithm for the
video to be compressed, so as to enhance the adaptivity of
the optical flows. We conduct experiments on two state-ofthe-art deep video compression schemes, DCVC and DCVCDC. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed offline and online enhancement together achieves on average
13.4% bitrate saving for DCVC and 4.1% bitrate saving for
DCVC-DC on the tested videos, without increasing the model
or computational complexity of the decoder side.

Introduction
Video compression relies heavily on exploiting the temporal redundancy between video frames, which is usually
achieved by estimating and using the motion information.
The motion information is represented as optical flows in
most of the existing deep video compression networks (Lu
et al. 2019; Li, Li, and Lu 2021; Sheng et al. 2022; Lin et al.
2020; Shi et al. 2022; Li, Li, and Lu 2022, 2023; Hu and
Xu 2023). Indeed, these networks often adopt pre-trained
optical flow estimation networks (Ranjan and Black 2017;
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5118

