The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SIG: Speaker Identification in Literature via Prompt-Based Generation
Zhenlin Su* 1 , Liyan Xu†2 , Jin Xu†1,3 , Jiangnan Li4 , Mingdu Huangfu1
1

School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology
2
WeChat AI, Tencent
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhenlinsu75@gmail.com, liyanlxu@tencent.com, jinxu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

Quote Type: Explicit

Identifying speakers of quotations in narratives is an important task in literary analysis, with challenging scenarios including the out-of-domain inference for unseen speakers, and
non-explicit cases where there are no speaker mentions in surrounding context. In this work, we propose a simple and effective approach SIG, a generation-based method that verbalizes the task and quotation input based on designed prompt
templates, which also enables easy integration of other auxiliary tasks that further bolster the speaker identification performance. The prediction can either come from direct generation by the model, or be determined by the highest generation probability of each speaker candidate. Based on our approach design, SIG supports out-of-domain evaluation, and
achieves open-world classification paradigm that is able to
accept any forms of candidate input. We perform both crossdomain evaluation and in-domain evaluation on PDNC, the
largest dataset of this task, where empirical results suggest
that SIG outperforms previous baselines of complicated designs, as well as the zero-shot ChatGPT, especially excelling
at those hard non-explicit scenarios by up to 17% improvement. Additional experiments on another dataset WP further
corroborate the efficacy of SIG.

Quotation (w/ context):

1

Mrs. Elton hardly waited for the affirmative.
”Well, we shall see.” said Mrs Elton.
Emma was almost too much astonished to answer

Speaker: Mrs Elton
Quote Type: Anaphoric
Quotation (w/ context):
But Mrs. Elton was very much discomposed indeed.
She said:”Rather he than I!”,

Speaker: Mrs. Elton
Quote Type: Implicit
Quotation (w/ context):
”Your father will not be easy; why do not you go?”
”I am ready, if the others are.”
”Shall I ring the bell?”

Speaker: Emma
Table 1: Examples of three quote types in PDNC. The quotation in each example is highlighted in bold.

Introduction

Speaker identification in literary text aims at identifying the
speaker of quotation in narrative genres such as fictions or
novels (Elson and McKeown 2010), serving as an important step for downstream applications such as novel-to-script
conversion (Soo, Yang, and Soo 2019).
Table 1 shows the examples of three types of quotation
in the PDNC dataset proposed for this task (Vishnubhotla,
Hammond, and Hirst 2022), based on whether the speaker
is explicitly indicated by an adjoining expression (explicit),
or appears without an attribution (implicit), or is indicated
by an anaphoric mention (anaphoric). In this paper, the latter two are referred to as the “non-explicit” case that cannot be solved by simple superficial narrative patterns, calling
for a deep global understanding of the context surrounding
the quotation, of which the importance is also highlighted
by other related tasks, such as character comprehension in

narrative stories (Yu et al. 2022; Sang et al. 2022). It becomes even more challenging for cross-domain inference,
where the system neither has prior knowledge about candidate speakers, nor it could identify the absent speaker mentioned in context for those implicit cases. Ideally, a practical
system should be able to determine the speakers under any
circumstances, achieving an open-world speaker identification paradigm.
Early works on this task involve linguistic-based properties and designs that can be effective especially for explicit
cases (Elson and McKeown 2010). With the remarkable success of pretrained language models (PLMs) such as BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019), recent studies have shifted their focus towards leveraging PLMs for speaker identification (Liu
et al. 2019), (Pan et al. 2021). However, several problems
still remain. On the one hand, certain previous works divide the speaker identification task into interrelated subtasks
executed with separately trained models, including named
entity recognition and coreference resolution ((Pan et al.

* Primary work done in WeChat AI.
†

Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19035

