The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAVSR: Arbitrary-Scale Video Super-Resolution via a Learned
Scale-Adaptive Network
Zekun Li1 , Hongying Liu2, 4 * , Fanhua Shang3 * ,
Yuanyuan Liu1 * , Liang Wan2, 3 , Wei Feng3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
2
Medical College, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
hyliu2009@tju.edu.cn; fhshang@tju.edu.cn; yyliu@xidian.edu.cn

Arbitrary-scale
Image SR

Deep learning-based video super-resolution (VSR) networks
have gained significant performance improvements in recent years. However, existing VSR networks can only support a fixed integer scale super-resolution task, and when we
want to perform VSR at multiple scales, we need to train
several models. This implementation certainly increases the
consumption of computational and storage resources, which
limits the application scenarios of VSR techniques. In this
paper, we propose a novel Scale-adaptive Arbitrary-scale
Video Super-Resolution network (SAVSR), which is the
first work focusing on spatial VSR at arbitrary scales including both non-integer and asymmetric scales. We also
present an omni-dimensional scale-attention convolution,
which dynamically adapts according to the scale of the
input to extract inter-frame features with stronger representational power. Moreover, the proposed spatio-temporal
adaptive arbitrary-scale upsampling performs VSR tasks using both temporal features and scale information. And we
design an iterative bi-directional architecture for implicit
feature alignment. Experiments at various scales on the
benchmark datasets show that the proposed SAVSR outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods at non-integer
and asymmetric scales. The source code is available at
https://github.com/Weepingchestnut/SAVSR.

× 𝟑𝟑. 𝟓𝟓

× 𝟏𝟏. 𝟑𝟑

Existing methods

Abstract

(a) Frame-by-frame Image SR
× 𝟏𝟏. 𝟑𝟑

Video SR + BI

× 𝟑𝟑. 𝟓𝟓

(b) Video SR + Post-processing

Arbitrary-scale
Video SR

× 𝟑𝟑. 𝟓𝟓

× 𝟏𝟏. 𝟑𝟑

Our method

(c) Our end-to-end pipeline

Figure 1: Comparison of the three ways for arbitrary-scale
video super-resolution. (a) Frame-by-frame arbitrary-scale
image super-resolution. (b) Video super-resolution and interpolation post-processing to resize the target resolution. (c)
Our end-to-end arbitrary-scale video super-resolution. Note
that “+BI” means that the network output is further resized
to the target resolution by using the Bicubic interpolation.
and many deep learning-based methods (Liao et al. 2015;
Caballero et al. 2017; Jo et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Haris,
Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2019; Tian et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020; Isobe et al. 2020b; Li et al. 2020; Isobe et al. 2020a;
Chan et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Yi et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2022; Wen et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2023) have been developed
to improve the performance of VSR tasks.
Although deep learning-based VSR methods can obtain
high performance, almost all the methods only consider certain specific integer scale factors (e.g., ×2, ×3, ×4), or even
develop models only for a scaling factor of 4. However, the
scale requirements for VSR in practical applications may
not be integers. For instance, when we want to super-resolve
480P video to 720P or 1080P, we need to enlarge ×1.5 and
×2.25, respectively. And the 1080P video should be superresolved ×1.33 to 2K videos. With the varying of current
photography and display devices as well as the rise of video
editing (Bar-Tal et al. 2022; Kasten et al. 2021) and art
creation (Kasten et al. 2021; Siarohin et al. 2019; Ye and
Bilodeau 2022), the arbitrary-scale VSR with asymmetric

1 Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) is the process of recovering highresolution (HR) images or video frames from low-resolution
(LR) ones, which is a fundamental problem in low-level vision tasks. Nowadays, streaming data represented by video
is gradually becoming the mainstream of visual information
carriers, but the mismatch between different video resolutions and numerous display devices has become a major
concern. For example, 720P video does not provide satisfactory visual experience when played back on a 1080P or
even 2K display device. Therefore, the study of video superresolution (VSR) techniques has become one of the current
research spotlights in low-level vision (Liu et al. 2022). In
recent years, the rapid development of deep learning has
greatly contributed to the progress of video super-resolution,
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3288

