The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Domain-Independent Heuristics for Grounded and Lifted Planning
Dillon Z. Chen1,2 , Sylvie Thiébaux1,2 , Felipe Trevizan1
1

School of Computing, The Australian National University
2
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse
{dillon.chen, sylvie.thiebaux}@laas.fr, felipe.trevizan@anu.edu.au

Abstract

cannot generalise to unseen problems with a different number of predicates. Neural Logic Machines (Dong et al. 2019;
Gehring et al. 2022) are also domain-dependent models as
they assume a maximum arity of input predicates.
STRIPS-HGN has several drawbacks when learning
domain-independent heuristics: (1) its hypergraph representation of planning tasks ignores delete lists and thus cannot
theoretically learn h∗ , (2) its aggregation function is not permutation invariant due to ordering the neighbours of each
node which may prevent it from generalising effectively, (3)
it assumes a bound on the sizes of action preconditions and
effects, meaning that it also has to discard certain edges in
its hypergraph in its message updating step, and (4) it requires constructing the whole grounded hypergraph, whose
size becomes impractical for large problems.
Our contributions remedy these issues and make the following advances to the state of the art. Building on wellknown planning formalisms, namely propositional STRIPS,
FDR, and lifted STRIPS, we define novel grounded and
lifted graph representations of planning tasks suitable for
learning domain-independent heuristics. In particular, this
results in the first domain-independent GNN heuristic based
on a lifted graph representation. We also establish the theoretical expressiveness of Message-Passing Neural Networks
(MPNN) acting upon our graphs in terms of the known
domain-independent heuristics they are able to learn, and
suggest further research directions for learning h∗ .
We then conduct two sets of experiments to complement
our theory and evaluate the effectiveness of learned heuristics. The first set aims to measure the accuracy of learned
heuristics on unseen tasks, while the second set evaluates the
effectiveness of such learned heuristics for heuristic search.
Planners guided by heuristics learnt using our new graphs
solve significantly larger problems than those considered
by Shen, Trevizan, and Thiébaux (2020), Karia and Srivastava (2021) and Ståhlberg, Bonet, and Geffner (2022b). In
the domain-dependent setting, planners guided by our lifted
heuristics achieves greater coverage than using hFF in several domains and returns lower cost plans overall.

We present three novel graph representations of planning
tasks suitable for learning domain-independent heuristics using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to guide search. In particular, to mitigate the issues caused by large grounded GNNs
we present the first method for learning domain-independent
heuristics with only the lifted representation of a planning
task. We also provide a theoretical analysis of the expressiveness of our models, showing that some are more powerful
than STRIPS-HGN, the only other existing model for learning domain-independent heuristics. Our experiments show
that our heuristics generalise to much larger problems than
those in the training set, vastly surpassing STRIPS-HGN
heuristics.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently attracted the
interest of the planning community, for learning heuristic
cost estimators, task orderings, value functions, action policies, and portfolios, to name a few (Shen, Trevizan, and
Thiébaux 2020; Garg, Bajpai, and Mausam 2020; Karia and
Srivastava 2021; Ståhlberg, Bonet, and Geffner 2022a; Ma
et al. 2020; Sharma et al. 2022; Teichteil-Königsbuch et al.
2023). GNNs exhibit great generalisation potential, since
once trained, they offer outputs for any graph, regardless
of size or structure. Representing the structure of planning
domains as graphs, GNNs can train on a set of small problems to learn generalised policies and heuristics that apply to
all problems in a domain. As noted by Shen, Trevizan, and
Thiébaux (2020), this also allows for learning heuristics applicable to multiple domains, or even domain-independent
heuristics that apply to domains unseen during training.
In this paper, we explore the use of GNNs for learning
both domain-dependent and domain-independent heuristics
for classical planning, with an emphasis on the latter. To the
best of our knowledge, STRIPS-HGN (Shen, Trevizan, and
Thiébaux 2020) is the only existing model designed to learn
domain-independent heuristic functions from scratch. The
models in (Ståhlberg, Bonet, and Geffner 2022a) are inherently domain-dependent, given that they use different update
functions for predicates of the planning problems, and hence

2

Background and Notation

Planning A classical planning task (Geffner and Bonet
2013) is a state transition model Π = ⟨S, A, s0 , G⟩ consisting of a set S of states, a set A of actions, an initial state s0 ,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20078

