The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Hierarchical Video Compression
Ming Lu1,2 , Zhihao Duan3 , Fengqing Zhu3 , and Zhan Ma1 *
2

1
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University
Interdisciplinary Research Center for Future Intelligent Chips (Chip-X), Nanjing University
3
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
minglu@nju.edu.cn, duan90@purdue.edu, zhu0@purdue.edu, mazhan@nju.edu.cn

𝑥#!"#
𝑥!

Abstract
Recently, probabilistic predictive coding that directly models the conditional distribution of latent features across successive frames for temporal redundancy removal has yielded
promising results. Existing methods using a single-scale Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) must devise complex networks
for conditional probability estimation in latent space, neglecting multiscale characteristics of video frames. Instead, this
work proposes hierarchical probabilistic predictive coding,
for which hierarchal VAEs are carefully designed to characterize multiscale latent features as a family of flexible priors
and posteriors to predict the probabilities of future frames.
Under such a hierarchical structure, lightweight networks are
sufficient for prediction. The proposed method outperforms
representative learned video compression models on common
testing videos and demonstrates computational friendliness
with much less memory footprint and faster encoding/decoding. Extensive experiments on adaptation to temporal patterns also indicate the better generalization of our hierarchical
predictive mechanism. Furthermore, our solution is the first
to enable progressive decoding that is favored in networked
video applications with packet loss.

𝑝(𝑧! |𝑍"! )

𝑥#!"#

𝑥$!
𝑥!

𝑧!

𝑥!

𝑣#!

Motion Codec

𝑥"!

𝑥#!

Residual Codec

(a)
𝑥!

(b)
…

𝑧!"

…

"
𝑝(𝑧!" |𝑍!$" , 𝑍$!
)

𝑥"!

𝑧!#

…

…

(c)

Figure 1: Interframe coding using (a) hybrid motion & residual coding, (b) single-scale probabilistic predictive coding,
and (c) hierarchical probabilistic predictive coding (Ours).

in Fig. 1a: code motion flows first and then the residual between the current and motion-warped frame, either in an explicit (Lu et al. 2019) or conditional (Li, Li, and Lu 2021)
manner. This framework is usually cumbersome in design
(for example, separate models for intraframe coding, inter
residual coding, motion coding, and motion estimation are
required); thus, extensive hyperparameter tuning is necessary. Furthermore, inaccurate motion-induced warping error
propagates inevitably across temporal frames, gradually degrading the quality of reconstructed frames over time.
As a promising solution to the problems mentioned earlier, (latent-space) probabilistic predictive coding attempts
to reduce temporal redundancy by conditionally predicting
future frames in a one-shot manner. Intuitively, if the current
frame can be well predicted through the past frames, motion (e.g., flow) estimation and compensation can be completely exempted, and the aforementioned error propagation can also be eliminated accordingly. Recently, Mentzer
et al. (Mentzer et al. 2022) proposed a probabilistic predictive video coding framework named Video Compression
Transformer (VCT). Under the VAE-based image compression framework, VCT models the latent features of the current frame conditioned on the previous-frame latent features
using a transformer-based temporal entropy model. Though
VCT outperforms many previous video coding methods, its

Introduction
Deep learning breathes fresh life into the visual signal
(e.g., images and videos) compression community that has
been dominated by handcrafted codecs for decades (Wallace 1991; Marcellin et al. 2000; Wiegand et al. 2003;
Sullivan et al. 2012; Bross et al. 2021). Instead of manually designing and optimizing individual modules such as
transforms, mode selection, and quantization in traditional
codecs, data-driven approaches adopt end-to-end learning
of neural networks (Ballé, Laparra, and Simoncelli 2016;
Theis et al. 2017). Despite the conceptual simplicity, learned
image compression methods have achieved superior ratedistortion performance, surpassing the latest VVC (Versatial Video Coding (Bross et al. 2021)) intra codec (He et al.
2022; Lu et al. 2022).
For videos, however, learning-based methods are still not
free from the shackles of the traditional hybrid framework.
Most existing methods follow the two-stage pipeline shown
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8859

