The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Prot2Text: Multimodal Protein’s Function Generation with GNNs and
Transformers
Hadi Abdine1 , Michail Chatzianastasis1 , Costas Bouyioukos2, 3 , Michalis Vazirgiannis1
1

Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
2
Epigenetics and Cell Fate, CNRS UMR7216, Université Paris Cité, F-75013 Paris, France.
3
Bioinformatics Research Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
{hadi.abdine, michail.chatzianastasis}@polytechnique.edu, costas.bouyioukos@u-paris.fr, mvazirg@lix.polytechnique.fr
Abstract

a massive revolution to the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). These models have demonstrated impressive
language generation capabilities, allowing them to perform
a wide range of NLP tasks with remarkable performance,
including text completion, translation, sentiment analysis
and question-answering (Vaswani et al. 2017; Radford et al.
2019; Brown et al. 2020). On the other hand, Graph Neural Networks(GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for
modeling graph-structured data, capturing the intricate relationships between different elements in a graph (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Reiser et al. 2022). However, the integration
of GNNs and transformers faces various challenges, such
as effectively handling the heterogeneity of data representations, therefore the field is still in its early stages. Despite this, the potential benefits of leveraging both GNNs
and transformers for graph-to-text applications, such as predicting the functional properties of proteins are substantial.
To that end, we develop a novel multimodal framework,
Prot2Text, that can generate detailed and accurate descriptions of proteins’ functions in free text. We effectively integrate GNNs and Large Language Models (LLMs), to encompass both structural and sequential information of the
protein’s 3D structure and amino acid’s sequence respectively. The encoder-decoder architecture forms the backbone
of our model, with the encoder component employing a Relational Graph Convolution Network (RGCN) (Schlichtkrull
et al. 2018) to process the proteins’ graphs and the ESM
protein language model (Lin et al. 2023a) to encode the
proteins’ sequences. The decoder component utilizes a pretrained GPT-2 model to generate detailed proteins’ descriptions. To train our multimodal model, we compile a dataset
of proteins extracted from SwissProt, a comprehensive collection of protein annotations obtained from the UniProt
database (Consortium 2015). This dataset encompasses a
vast number of proteins, each annotated with its corresponding function or description. In addition to the textual information, we obtain the 3D structure representation of the proteins from AlphaFold (Varadi et al. 2022). We further release
this curated dataset to the public, allowing other researchers
to use it for benchmarking and further advancements in the
field. Code, data and models are publicly available1 . Our
main contributions can be summarized as follows:

In recent years, significant progress has been made in the field
of protein function prediction with the development of various machine-learning approaches. However, most existing
methods formulate the task as a multi-classification problem,
i.e. assigning predefined labels to proteins. In this work, we
propose a novel approach, Prot2Text, which predicts a protein’s function in a free text style, moving beyond the conventional binary or categorical classifications. By combining
Graph Neural Networks(GNNs) and Large Language Models(LLMs), in an encoder-decoder framework, our model effectively integrates diverse data types including protein sequence, structure, and textual annotation and description.
This multimodal approach allows for a holistic representation of proteins’ functions, enabling the generation of detailed
and accurate functional descriptions. To evaluate our model,
we extracted a multimodal protein dataset from SwissProt,
and demonstrate empirically the effectiveness of Prot2Text.
These results highlight the transformative impact of multimodal models, specifically the fusion of GNNs and LLMs,
empowering researchers with powerful tools for more accurate function prediction of existing as well as first-to-see proteins.

1

Introduction

Understanding proteins’ function is a central problem in biological sciences, as proteins are the fundamental elements of
almost all biological functions. Accurate prediction of proteins’ function is essential for understanding biological systems as well as for various applications, such as drug discovery, enabling researchers to identify and target specific
proteins that play critical roles in disease pathways (Ha et al.
2021). Traditionally, proteins’ functions prediction has been
approached through classification methods, assigning predefined labels to proteins based on their characteristics (Kulmanov and Hoehndorf 2019). However, this approach often
oversimplifies the complexity of proteins’ functionality, limiting the depth of our understanding. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel view on proteins’ functions prediction based on reformulating the task using free-text proteins’ descriptions instead of relying on predefined labels.
The rapid progress in transformer-based models has brought
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10757

https://github.com/hadi-abdine/Prot2Text

