The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EAT: Towards Long-Tailed Out-of-Distribution Detection
Tong Wei* , Bo-Lin Wang, Min-Ling Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{weit, wangbl, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection, most current studies assume a class-balanced indistribution training dataset, which is rarely the case in realworld scenarios. This paper addresses the challenging task
of long-tailed OOD detection, where the in-distribution data
follows a long-tailed class distribution. The main difficulty lies
in distinguishing OOD data from samples belonging to the tail
classes, as the ability of a classifier to detect OOD instances is
not strongly correlated with its accuracy on the in-distribution
classes. To overcome this issue, we propose two simple ideas:
(1) Expanding the in-distribution class space by introducing
multiple abstention classes. This approach allows us to build a
detector with clear decision boundaries by training on OOD
data using virtual labels. (2) Augmenting the context-limited
tail classes by overlaying images onto the context-rich OOD
data. This technique encourages the model to pay more attention to the discriminative features of the tail classes. We
provide a clue for separating in-distribution and OOD data by
analyzing gradient noise. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate that our method outperforms the current state-ofthe-art on various benchmark datasets. Moreover, our method
can be used as an add-on for existing long-tail learning approaches, significantly enhancing their OOD detection performance. Code is available at: https://github.com/Stomachache/Long-Tailed-OOD-Detection.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) can achieve high performance
in various real-world applications by training on large-scale
and well-annotated datasets. Most supervised learning literature makes a common assumption that the training and test
data have the same distribution. However, DNNs in deployment often encounter data from an unknown distribution, and
it has been shown that DNNs tend to produce wrong predictions on anonymous, or out-of-distribution (OOD) test data
with high confidence (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Liang,
Li, and Srikant 2018; Hein, Andriushchenko, and Bitterwolf
2019), which can result in severe mistakes in practice.
Recently, OOD detection, which aims to reject OOD test
data without classifying them as in-distribution labels, has
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15787

caught great attention. Existing state-of-the-art OOD detectors achieve huge success by maximizing the predictive uncertainty (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019; Meinke
and Hein 2020), energy function (Liu et al. 2020), and abstention class confidence (Mohseni et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021) for OOD data. However, these approaches assume that
the in-distribution data is class-balanced, which is usually
violated in real-world tasks (Van Horn and Perona 2017; Liu
et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2019; Wei and Li 2020; Wei et al.
2021b; Wei and Gan 2023). In this paper, we consider that
the in-distribution training data follows a long-tailed class distribution. Under this setup, directly combining existing OOD
detectors with long-tailed learning methods still leads to unsatisfactory performance (Wang et al. 2022). So, a natural
question is raised:
Is it possible to effectively distinguish OOD data from
tail-class samples?
To answer this question, we propose a novel framework,
EAT, which is composed of two key ingredients: (1) dynamic
virtual labels, which expand the classification space with abstention classes for OOD data and are dynamically assigned
by the model in the training process. EAT classifies OOD
samples into abstention OOD classes rather than imposing
uniform predictive probabilities over inlier classes such as
in OE (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019), Energy
(Liu et al. 2020), and PASCL (Wang et al. 2022). This step is
critical because inherent similar OOD samples can be pushed
closer if they are classified as an identical OOD class, and
the decision boundary between inlier data and OOD data will
be clearer. (2) tail class augmentation, which augments the
tail-class images by pasting them onto the context-rich OOD
images to force the model to focus on the foreground objects.
Precisely, given an original image from the tail class, it is
cropped in various sizes and pasted onto images from OOD
data. Then, we can create tail-class images with more diverse
contexts by changing the background. The generalization for
tail classes can be significantly improved.
To further enhance the classification of inlier data, we
propose a method that involves fine-tuning the classifiers exclusively using inlier data. This fine-tuning process employs a
class-balanced loss function for a few iterations. Additionally,
we illustrate that our method can be seamlessly integrated
with existing long-tail learning approaches, leading to a significant improvement in their OOD detection performance.

