The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving the Robustness of Knowledge-Grounded
Dialogue via Contrastive Learning
Jiaan Wang1 , Jianfeng Qu1 * , Kexin Wang1 , Zhixu Li2 * , Wen Hua3 , Ximing Li4 , An Liu1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
jawang.nlp@gmail.com, jfqu@suda.edu.cn, kxwang1@stu.suda.edu.cn, zhixuli@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

Have you ever heard about Leonardo?

1997

Knowledge-grounded dialogue (KGD) learns to generate an
informative response based on a given dialogue context and
external knowledge (e.g., knowledge graphs; KGs). Recently,
the emergence of large language models (LLMs) and pretraining techniques has brought great success to knowledgegrounded dialogue. However, when building KGD systems in
real applications, there are various real-world noises that are
inevitable to face. For example, the dialogue context might
involve perturbations such as misspellings and abbreviations.
In addition, KGs typically suffer from incompletion and also
might contain erroneous and outdated facts. Such real-world
noises pose a challenge to the robustness of KGD systems
and hinder their applications in the real world. In this paper,
we propose an entity-based contrastive learning framework
for improving the robustness of KGD. Specifically, we make
use of the entity information in a KGD sample to create both
its positive and negative samples which involve semanticirrelevant and semantic-relevant perturbations, respectively.
The contrastive learning framework ensures the KGD model
is aware of these two types of perturbations, thus generating informative responses with the potentially noisy inputs
in real applications. Experimental results on three benchmark
datasets show that our method achieves new state-of-the-art
performance in terms of automatic evaluation scores, verifying its effectiveness and potentiality. Furthermore, we show
that our method can generate better responses than comparison models in both the noisy and the few-shot settings.

Oh, absolutely! He is one of my
favorite actors. Some of my favorite
movies starring Leonardo DiCaprio
include “Titanic”.

Act in

Leonardo
What movies has Leonardo been in?
The Earth Wandering II.

year

Titanic
Act in
(error facts in KGs)

2023
The Earth Wandering II

Figure 1: Illustrations of robustness in knowledge-grounded
dialogue. The response in the first dialogue satisfies humans,
while the second does not due to erroneous facts in the KG.

2023; Li et al. 2023). Despite the great success that has been
achieved by these efforts, especially along with the rapid development of large language models (LLMs), existing work
neglects the robustness of KGD methods facing real-world
noises. As shown in Figure 1, the dialogue context might involve inevitable perturbations like misspellings and abbreviations. The KGs might also convey erroneous and outdated
facts. These perturbations pose a challenge to the robustness
of KGD methods.
As large language models (LLMs) become a promising
way toward artificial general intelligence, many dialogue
systems utilize LLMs as their backbone to achieve strong
conversational ability. However, as pointed out by recent
work (Wang et al. 2023d), there is still room for improving their robustness even for ChatGPT. Besides, some studies (Zhu, Song, and Liu 2023; Wang et al. 2023a,b) show
the robustness of knowledge-enhanced LLM is also limited.
Thus, improving the model robustness becomes one of the
key challenges when deploying KGD models in real scenes.
In this paper, we propose an entity-based contrastive
learning (EnCo) framework for improving the robustness of
KGD models. Our key insight is to add perturbations in the
given dialogue context as well as related knowledge, and let
the KGD model learn how to generate an informative response with the potentially noisy inputs. Specifically, for a
vanilla KGD sample, we create its positive samples and negative samples, where the positive samples should share faithful (similar or clipped) semantics with the vanilla sample,
and the negative samples involve conflict semantics with the

Introduction
Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue (KGD) aims to generate an
informative response based on a given dialogue context and
external knowledge to improve the usefulness and meaningfulness of the generated responses (Ghazvininejad et al.
2017; Zhou et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Kim, Ahn, and Kim
2020; Li et al. 2021; Rashkin et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022; Sun
et al. 2023). As for the choice of knowledge source, structural knowledge graphs (KGs) are proven options (Moon
et al. 2019; Jung, Son, and Lyu 2020; Wu et al. 2022), which
consist of a lot of knowledge facts that are frequently used
in daily life (Zheng et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Cao et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19135

