The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Performative Federated Learning: A Solution to Model-Dependent and
Heterogeneous Distribution Shifts
Kun Jin* 1 , Tongxin Yin* 1 , Zhongzhu Chen* 1 ,
Zeyu Sun 1 , Xueru Zhang 2 , Yang Liu 3 , Mingyan Liu 1
1

University of Michigan
The Ohio State University
3
University of California, Santa Cruz
2

Abstract
We consider a federated learning (FL) system consisting of
multiple clients and a server, where the clients aim to collaboratively learn a common decision model from their distributed
data. Unlike the conventional FL framework that assumes the
client’s data is static, we consider scenarios where the clients’
data distributions may be reshaped by the deployed decision
model. In this work, we leverage the idea of distribution shift
mappings in performative prediction to formalize this modeldependent data distribution shift and propose a performative
FL framework. We first introduce necessary and sufficient
conditions for the existence of a unique performative stable
solution and characterize its distance to the performative optimal solution. Then we propose the performative FedAvg
algorithm and show that it converges to the performative stable
solution at a rate of O(1/T ) under both full and partial participation schemes. In particular, we use novel proof techniques
and show how the clients’ heterogeneity influences the convergence. Numerical results validate our analysis and provide
valuable insights into real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Traditional learning problems often assume static data distributions, which holds true for applications like face recognition. However, in many other domains, this assumption is
invalid. In some cases, there is a natural evolution or shift in
the data distribution, requiring periodic acquisition of new
data and re-training of the algorithm. Additionally, distribution shifts can occur as a result of user responses to algorithmic decisions or attempts to manipulate the system. These
changes directly impact the features and labels used by the
algorithm for decision-making. Such shifts are considered
model-dependent. A typical example is banks’ loan issuance
decisions. The deployed decision model at this bank will
influence the data distribution of all its corresponding applicants. For example, if increasing the number of credit cards
significantly decreases the default rate prediction, then the
applicants will try to get more credit cards to get the loan.
Adapting algorithms to these evolving distributions is crucial for maintaining effective learning performance. The
model-dependent distribution shifts, where the deployed
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12938

model itself can trigger changes in the data distribution and
influence the objective, is said to be performative. Performing prediction in the presence of such distribution shift is
called performative prediction (PP) (Perdomo et al. 2020).
The strategic learning problem (Hardt et al. 2016; Dong
et al. 2018; Milli et al. 2019; Hu, Immorlica, and Vaughan
2019; Braverman and Garg 2020; Chen, Wang, and Liu 2020;
Miller, Milli, and Hardt 2020; Shavit, Edelman, and Axelrod
2020; Haghtalab et al. 2020; Kleinberg and Raghavan 2020;
Zrnic et al. 2021) is a typical scenario of PP. In these problems, the users can “game the algorithm” through honest or
dishonest means to attempt to improve critical features so
as to obtain a favorable decision by the algorithm (e.g., in
loan approvals or job applications). Such user actions directly
lead to the distributional change in features and label that the
algorithm relies on for decision making.
Performative prediction has been primarily studied in a
centralized setting, with fruitful literature including the convergence analysis (Mendler-Dünner et al. 2020; Drusvyatskiy
and Xiao 2020; Brown, Hod, and Kalemaj 2020; Li and Wai
2022; Wood, Bianchin, and Dall’Anese 2022) and algorithm
development (Izzo, Ying, and Zou 2021; Izzo, Zou, and Ying
2022; Miller, Perdomo, and Zrnic 2021; Ray et al. 2022).
In modern large-scale machine learning, distributed learning offers greater privacy protection and better avoids the
computational resource bottlenecks compared to centralized
learning, and federated learning (FL) is a very popular example. Suppose multiple banks use FL to jointly train a model
to predict applicants’ default rate. The aggregated model on
the central server is influenced by the strategic manipulation
of each bank’s applicants, and this model will be later deployed to every bank, which influences that bank’s applicants’
strategic manipulation in the next round. Here the issue of
distribution shift is further compounded due to data heterogeneity in a distributed setting. Specifically, the distributed
data sources can be heterogeneous in nature, and their respective distribution shifts can also be different. Prior works
in FL systems that address data distribution shifts, such as
(Guo, Lin, and Tang 2021; Casado et al. 2022; Rizk, Vlaski,
and Sayed 2020; Hosseinalipour et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2021;
Eichner et al. 2019; Ding et al. 2020), typically do not consider shifts in local distributions at the client end induced
by the model. In this work, we propose the performative FL
framework to study and handle such data shifts in FL.

