The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Alternating-Time Temporal Logic, Hyperproperties, and Strategy Sharing
Raven Beutner, Bernd Finkbeiner
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany

Abstract

values (Shapley 1953) are inherently based on the relative
contribution of individual agents: To compute the Shapley
value for some agent i, we need to compare the ability of
some arbitrary coalitions A with that of A ∪ {i}. Stating
such comparison-based properties in ATL∗ is impossible as
ATL∗ only considers a single path in isolation.

∗

Alternating-time temporal logic (ATL ) is a well-established
framework for formal reasoning about multi-agent systems.
However, while ATL∗ can reason about the strategic ability of agents (e.g., some coalition A can ensure that a goal
is reached eventually), we cannot compare multiple strategic
interactions, nor can we require multiple agents to follow the
same strategy. For example, we cannot state that coalition A
can reach a goal sooner (or more often) than some other coalition A′ . In this paper, we propose HyperATL∗S , an extension
of ATL∗ in which we can (1) compare the outcome of multiple strategic interactions w.r.t. a hyperproperty, i.e., a property that refers to multiple paths at the same time, and (2)
enforce that some agents share the same strategy. We show
that HyperATL∗S is a rich specification language that captures
important AI-related properties that were out of reach of existing logics. We prove that model checking of HyperATL∗S
on concurrent game structures is decidable. We implement
our model-checking algorithm in a tool we call HyMASMC
and evaluate it on a range of benchmarks.

1

Hyperproperties. In contrast, the formal methods community has extensively studied properties that relate multiple system executions and coined them hyperproperties
(Clarkson and Schneider 2008). In this paper, we bring the
powerful concept of hyperproperties to the realm of AI and
MASs. We introduce HyperATL∗S – a temporal logic that
combines strategic reasoning (as found in ATL∗ ), the ability
to compare executions w.r.t. a hyperproperty (as, e.g., found
in HyperATL∗ ), and the possibility of enforcing agents to
share strategies. As in HyperATL∗ (Beutner and Finkbeiner
2021, 2023b), we bind the outcome of a strategic interaction
(resulting from an ATL∗ -like quantification) to a path variable and can then refer to atomic propositions on multiple
paths. This combination of strategic reasoning and hyperproperties is needed for many AI-related properties; not only
the information-flow properties envisioned in (Beutner and
Finkbeiner 2021, 2023b). For example, HyperATL∗S allows
us to express that coalition A can reach ψ strictly sooner
than coalition A′ as follows.

Introduction

Logics play a key role in the specification and verification
of strategic properties in multi-agent systems (MAS) (Calegari et al. 2021). One of the most influential temporal logics
for MASs is alternating-time temporal logic (ATL∗ ), which
extends CTL∗ with (implicit) quantification over strategies
(Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002). As an example, assume we want to formally verify that a set of agents A can
ensure that some temporal objective ψ is ultimately fulfilled.
We can express this as the ATL∗ formula ⟪A⟫ F ψ, stating
that the agents in A have a joint strategy that ensures that
all compatible executions eventually (F) satisfy ψ. Likewise,
we can express that coalition A has no strategy to ensure that
ψ is reached as JAK G ¬ψ, i.e., for every strategy of A, some
execution globally (G) satisfies ¬ψ.
However, in many situations, we are interested not only
in the strategic (in)ability of a coalition but also in comparing the ability of multiple coalitions. For example, we
might ask if some coalition A is able to reach some goal ψ
strictly sooner (or more often) than some other coalition A′ .
Indeed, important game-theoretic concepts such as Shapley

⟪A⟫π. JA′ Kπ ′ . (¬ψπ′ ) U(¬ψπ′ ∧ ψπ ).

This formula states that there exist strategies for the agents in
A, such that for every path π under those strategies, it holds
that: under every strategy for the agents in A′ , there exists
some compatible path π ′ , such that π reaches ψ (denoted
ψπ ) before π ′ does (expressed using LTL’s until operator U).
Phrased differently, some strategy A can ensure that ψ is
reached strictly faster than any strategy for A′ could.
Note that this approach is very flexible, as we can compare π and π ′ w.r.t. to an arbitrary temporal property (e.g.,
π reaches ψ more often than π ′ ). This goes well beyond the
capabilities of ATL∗ , even when extended with quantitative
operators (cf. Section 2).
Strategy Sharing and HyperATL∗S . HyperATL∗S then
extends HyperATL∗ with the ability to force agents to follow the same strategy. A sharing constraint ξ is a set of pairs
of agents, and the HyperATL∗S formula ⟪A⟫ξ π. φ requires

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17317

