The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ZO-AdaMU Optimizer: Adapting Perturbation by the Momentum
and Uncertainty in Zeroth-Order Optimization
Shuoran Jiang1 , Qingcai Chen1,2 * , Youcheng Pan2∗ , Yang Xiang2 ,
Yukang Lin1 , Xiangping Wu1 , Chuanyi Liu3,2 , Xiaobao Song3
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Institute of Data Security, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
shuoran.chiang@gmail.com, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn, panyoucheng4@gmail.com, xiangy@pcl.ac.cn
Abstract

adapts LLMs to specific use cases through demonstrations
before test examples. However, a few demonstrations can
only cover some possible case types due to the limited maximum sequence length for LLMs inputs. The parameterefficient fine-tuning methods (PEFT) (Fu et al. 2023), e.g.,
LoRA (Hu et al. 2021), ZeRA (Rajbhandari et al. 2020),
EMAT (Wu et al. 2022) et. al., update only a fraction of
the model parameters. Even though these methods can tune
LLMs with low memory and computation resources, there
are more practical solutions to fully use the emergent ability
as full-parameters fine-tuning (Ding et al. 2022; Sun et al.
2023b).
The memory-efficient full-parameter fine-tuning method
is a better way to exploit the deployment of LLMs on limited
resources. The low-memory optimization (LOMO) gives
up gradient storage in stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
(Shamir and Zhang 2013), but computes gradients at each
training step. Zeroth-order optimization (ZO) relies solely
on forward passes to estimate gradients and update parameters, costing the same memory size as inference. Malladi et al. (2023a) proposed the memory-efficient zerothorder optimizer (MeZO) to fine-tune LLMs with just forward passes, and they achieved excellent performance on
various NLP tasks. The surprising performance of MeZO
is attributed to the small local effective rank of Hession parameter matrices in pre-trained deep neural networks (Papyan 2018, 2020; Ghorbani, Krishnan, and Xiao 2019; Yao
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020; Sagun et al. 2017). MeZO computes gradients from two forward passes with random perturbations. Therefore, MeZO greatly reduces the latency between GPU calculations compared to LOMO. However, the
simulated perturbation stochastic approximation for the gradient in MeZO is non-smoothness in consecutive training
steps. Without the regularization from momentum, like in
back-propagation optimization methods, MeZO causes the
over-fitting problem. ZO-AdaMM (Chen et al. 2019) first
efforts to integrate adaptive momentum methods with ZO
optimization, but the perturbation-irrelevant momentum requires longer training steps to convergence.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose the ZOAdaMU optimizer, in which we first make an effort to introduce adaptive momentum and uncertainty on simulated
perturbation to approximate gradients. Specifically, we relocate the momentum from gradient to simulated perturba-

Lowering the memory requirement in full-parameter training on large models has become a hot research area. MeZO
fine-tunes the large language models (LLMs) by just forward
passes in a zeroth-order SGD optimizer (ZO-SGD), demonstrating excellent performance with the same GPU memory usage as inference. However, the simulated perturbation stochastic approximation for gradient estimate in MeZO
leads to severe oscillations and incurs a substantial time overhead. Moreover, without momentum regularization, MeZO
shows severe over-fitting problems. Lastly, the perturbationirrelevant momentum on ZO-SGD does not improve the convergence rate. This study proposes ZO-AdaMU to resolve
the above problems by adapting the simulated perturbation
with momentum in its stochastic approximation. Unlike existing adaptive momentum methods, we relocate momentum
on simulated perturbation in stochastic gradient approximation. Our convergence analysis and experiments prove this is
a better way to improve convergence stability and rate in ZOSGD. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ZO-AdaMU
yields better generalization for LLMs fine-tuning across various NLP tasks than MeZO and its momentum variants.

Introduction
Large-scale models demonstrate remarkable abilities such as
emergence and grokking (Wei et al. 2022), especially the
large language models (LLMs) show excellent in-context
learning (ICL) abilities and revolutionize the dominant
methodology in various natural language processing (NLP)
tasks. However, full-parameter fine-tuning with billions of
parameters raises the bar for most NLP researches (Lv et al.
2023; Li et al. 2023). Malladi et al. (2023a) experimentally
proved that back-propagation optimization necessitates approximately 12 times of memory cost of forward inference.
full-parameter fine-tuning a 6.7 billion (B) OPT (Zhang et al.
2022) with Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015) requires at least
3× A100 GPUs (240GB memory).
Therefore, the memory-efficient fine-tuning method has
become an important research topic in the large-scale model
era. Some approaches have been proposed, such as ICL
does not need optimization (Sun et al. 2023a) and quickly
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18363

