The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MatchDet: A Collaborative Framework for Image Matching and Object Detection
Jinxiang Lai* 1 , Wenlong Wu* 1 , Bin-Bin Gao†1 , Jun Liu1 , Jiawei Zhan1 , Congchong Nie1 , Yi Zeng1 ,
Chengjie Wang†1, 2
1

Tencent Youtu Lab, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
layjins1994@gmail.com, ezrealwu@tencent.com, {csgaobb, junsenselee}@gmail.com, {gavynzhan, nickccnie,
sylviazeng}@tencent.com, jasoncjwang@tencent.com
2

Target 𝑥 𝑡

Abstract

Backbone

Image matching and object detection are two fundamental and challenging tasks, while many related applications
consider them two individual tasks (i.e. task-individual). In
this paper, a collaborative framework called MatchDet (i.e.
task-collaborative) is proposed for image matching and object detection to obtain mutual improvements. To achieve
the collaborative learning of the two tasks, we propose three
novel modules, including a Weighted Spatial Attention Module (WSAM) for Detector, and Weighted Attention Module
(WAM) and Box Filter for Matcher. Specifically, the WSAM
highlights the foreground regions of target image to benefit the subsequent detector, the WAM enhances the connection between the foreground regions of pair images to ensure
high-quality matches, and Box Filter mitigates the impact of
false matches. We evaluate the approaches on a new benchmark with two datasets called Warp-COCO and miniScanNet. Experimental results show our approaches are effective
and achieve competitive improvements.

MatchDet

e e

Target 𝑥 𝑡

Detector
collaborative
learning
Matcher

Target
Reference
Reference 𝑥 𝑟
Reference 𝑥 𝑟
(a) MatchDet with collaborative learning
Target 𝑥 𝑡

Target 𝑥 𝑡

Backbone
Backbone

Tracker

e e

Detector
Aggregation
Correlation

Introduction

Reference 𝑥 𝑟
Reference 𝑥
Target
Reference
(b) Object Tracker with correlation-aggregation learning
𝑟

Image matching (Shrivastava et al. 2011) and object detection (Liu et al. 2020) are two fundamental and challenging
tasks in computer vision. Image matching finds pixel-wise
correspondences between image pairs, and object detection
seeks to locate and classify object instances in images. With
the combination of them, there are numerous important applications, including robot vision, autonomous driving, and
industrial defect inspection. In robot vision and autonomous
driving, it usually uses image matching technique to perform
Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) (MurArtal, Montiel, and Tardos 2015), and also needs to find the
target category objects (e.g. pedestrian in autonomous driving) in images based on object detection technique. In industrial defect inspection, it applies image matching for registration (Shrivastava et al. 2011) to obtain Region-of-Interest
(ROI), and then detects the target defects. The aforementioned applications consider image matching and object detection as two individual tasks (i.e. task-individual).
In this paper, a collaborative framework called MatchDet
(i.e. task-collaborative) is proposed for image matching and

30.94 30.95

39.56 43.62

Detector
MDBase
Tracker
MatchDet
(c) Object Detection (AP)

63.18
38.94 36.42

23.22

Matcher
MDBase
Tracker
MatchDet
(d) Image Matching (AUC@3)

Figure 1: (a) Our MatchDet with collaborative learning for
improving image matching and object detection. We introduce a baseline named MDBase network, which removes the
collaborative learning module of MatchDet. (b) The object
Tracker with correlation-aggregation learning. The dashed
line represents that the Tracker has the potential ability to
obtain pairwise correspondences, while there is no matching objective function to supervise it. (c) and (d) are the
results on Warp-COCO dataset. (c) Our MatchDet obtains
4.06% improvement in object detection. (d) Our MatchDet
achieves 24.24% higher performance in image matching.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2858

