The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CPN: Complementary Proposal Network for Unconstrained Text Detection
Longhuang Wu, Shangxuan Tian* , Youxin Wang, Pengfei Xiong
Shopee Pte. Ltd.
{wlonghuang, wyxileroy, xiongpengfei2019}@gmail.com, tianshangxuan@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Existing methods for scene text detection can be divided
into two paradigms: segmentation-based and anchor-based.
While Segmentation-based methods are well-suited for irregular shapes, they struggle with compact or overlapping layouts. Conversely, anchor-based approaches excel for complex
layouts but suffer from irregular shapes. To strengthen their
merits and overcome their respective demerits, we propose
a Complementary Proposal Network (CPN) that seamlessly
and parallelly integrates semantic and geometric information
for superior performance. The CPN comprises two efficient
networks for proposal generation: the Deformable Morphology Semantic Network, which generates semantic proposals
employing an innovative deformable morphological operator,
and the Balanced Region Proposal Network, which produces
geometric proposals with pre-defined anchors. To further enhance the complementarity, we introduce an Interleaved Feature Attention module that enables semantic and geometric
features to interact deeply before proposal generation. By
leveraging both complementary proposals and features, CPN
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches with significant margins under comparable computation cost. Specifically, our approach achieves improvements of 3.6%, 1.3% and 1.0% on
challenging benchmarks ICDAR19-ArT, IC15, and MSRATD500, respectively. Code for our method will be released.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison between existing detectors and our
proposed CPN. The input image is shown in (a). Segmentation based methods tend to produce false positives and negatives while facing compact layouts as illustrated in (b). Anchor based approaches struggle for texts of large aspect ratio as shown in (c). Our CPN addresses the above issues by
complementary proposals and features, with results given in
(d). True positive results are colored in green, while the false
boxes are indicated in red.

Introduction
Automated detection of various texts in scenes has been extensively studied for years due to its applications in many
useful tasks such as multi-modal image and video understanding, autonomous indoor and outdoor navigation, etc.
However, the detection of text in arbitrary shapes and complex layouts remains a challenge for most existing scene text
detectors, leading to a high number of false positives and
false negatives as illustrated in Figure 1b and 1c.
Prevalent scene text detection work follows two typical
paradigms: segmentation-based approach and anchor-based
approach. The segmentation approach has achieved great
success thanks to its simplicity and capacity to deal with
text of arbitrary shapes (Liao et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019a).
However, this approach often struggles while facing texts of

complex layouts and background noise, as illustrated in Figure 1b. This is largely due to the challenges in identification
of text boundaries and complicated heuristic post-processing
for pixel grouping (Wang et al. 2019a; Deng et al. 2018; Tian
et al. 2019). On the other hand, the anchor approach generally achieves higher accuracy due to its two-stage design
with proposal generation and verification. However, it is designed for generic object detection tasks and often suffers
while dealing with scene texts of arbitrary shapes such as
curved texts and long text lines, as illustrated in 1c.
In light of the aforementioned analysis, we contend that
the segmentation approach and the anchor approach are inherently complementary to each other, not only in terms of
candidate proposals but also in the features used to generate them. By combining the strengths of these two approaches, we could potentially address their respective limitations and lead to improved performance in unconstrained

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6057

