The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Mechanism in a Dynamic Stochastic Knapsack Environment
Jihyeok Jung1 , Chan-Oi Song2 , Deok-Joo Lee1 * , Kiho Yoon2
1

Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Department of Economics, Korea University
firedaeman@snu.ac.kr, gnos@korea.ac.kr, leedj@snu.ac.kr, kiho@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

of maximizing expected value naturally aligns with the goal
of maximizing expected revenue, since the value can be interpreted as the maximum willingness to pay.
However, this assumption about non-strategic buyers does
not hold true in many real-life scenarios. In reality, customers might strategically misreport their information to
achieve favorable outcomes. They could request quantities
exceeding their actual desire or overbid the resource’s value
in an attempt to improve their chances of securing an allocation priority. Given this potential, the seller needs to devise
an optimal selling mechanism that maximizes expected revenue when buyers are behaving strategically.
If all participants act strategically, the aforementioned
problem can be effectively tackled through mechanism design. By extending the work of Myerson (1981), which proposed the optimal mechanism in one-dimensional and static
environments, we can derive the optimal dynamic mechanism in two-dimensional and dynamic environments. However, it’s important to note that dynamic mechanisms often involve intricate mathematical formulations, which can
pose challenges when directly applied to real-world service
systems. To overcome these complexities, the development
of approximation algorithms for the derived mathematical
solutions becomes essential. This approach aims to render
these mechanisms practically implementable, mitigating the
challenges associated with their mathematical complexity.
To this end, we consider a revenue-maximizing dynamic
mechanism under the dynamic stochastic knapsack environment. Buyers arrive randomly throughout the finite time
horizon with private two-dimensional information about
their desired quantities and values, which follows a continuous joint probability distribution. In this setting, the optimal
allocation and payment rules that satisfy incentive compatibility and individual rationality are derived by modifying the
characterization approach and dynamic program. Furthermore, we propose two algorithms to approximate the proposed mathematical solution by implementing Monte Carlo
(MC) simulation-based regression method and reinforcement learning. We compare and analyze the performance of
these algorithms to evaluate their effectiveness.
The suggested model and algorithms in this study contribute in the following ways:

This study introduces an optimal mechanism in a dynamic
stochastic knapsack environment. The model features a single seller who has a fixed quantity of a perfectly divisible
item. Impatient buyers with a piece-wise linear utility function arrive randomly and they report the two-dimensional private information: marginal value and demanded quantity. We
derive a revenue-maximizing dynamic mechanism in a finite
discrete time framework that satisfies incentive compatibility,
individual rationality, and feasibility conditions. It is achieved
by characterizing buyers’ utility and deriving the Bellman
equation. Moreover, we propose the essential penalty scheme
for incentive compatibility, as well as the allocation and payment policies. Lastly, we propose algorithms to approximate
the optimal policy, based on the Monte Carlo simulationbased regression method and reinforcement learning.

Introduction
Dynamic resource allocation refers to the distribution of
a limited amount of resources in a dynamic environment.
This problem arises in various fields where the system has a
fixed capacity to serve time-varying demands, such as cloud
computing and software-as-a-service (Wu, Garg, and Buyya
2011; Wang, Liang, and Li 2013; Zhang et al. 2015). Therefore, it is crucial for system designers to find an optimal policy to achieve their desired objectives while considering the
resource provision for future demands. Although the structure of dynamic allocation problems can vary depending on
the objectives and assumptions, this study focuses on a specific category of dynamic resource allocation, the Dynamic
Stochastic Knapsack Problem (DSKP).
In the original DSKP, the seller tries to sell a fixed amount
of an item over a finite time horizon. During each time period, customers with information about the item’s value and
desired quantity enter the system. The seller, with stochastic knowledge of customer arrivals, aims to determine the
optimal allocation strategy to maximize the total expected
value (Papastavrou, Rajagopalan, and Kleywegt 1996; Kleywegt and Papastavrou 1998). Moreover, the original DSKP
assumes that arriving demands are non-strategic. As each
buyer is assumed to behave non-strategically, the problem
* Deok-Joo Lee is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a general structure for an optimal dynamic
mechanism by relaxing assumptions presented in exist-

9807

