The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deciphering Raw Data in Neuro-Symbolic Learning with Provable Guarantees
Lue Tao,1,2 Yu-Xuan Huang,1,2 Wang-Zhou Dai,1,3 Yuan Jiang1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
{taol, huangyx, daiwz, jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
1. Perception

Abstract
Neuro-symbolic hybrid systems are promising for integrating
machine learning and symbolic reasoning, where perception
models are facilitated with information inferred from a symbolic knowledge base through logical reasoning. Despite empirical evidence showing the ability of hybrid systems to learn
accurate perception models, the theoretical understanding of
learnability is still lacking. Hence, it remains unclear why a
hybrid system succeeds for a specific task and when it may
fail given a different knowledge base. In this paper, we introduce a novel way of characterising supervision signals from
a knowledge base, and establish a criterion for determining
the knowledge’s efficacy in facilitating successful learning.
This, for the first time, allows us to address the two questions
above by inspecting the knowledge base under investigation.
Our analysis suggests that many knowledge bases satisfy the
criterion, thus enabling effective learning, while some fail to
satisfy it, indicating potential failures. Comprehensive experiments confirm the utility of our criterion on benchmark tasks.

1

1∧0=1

(X)
Perceived Labels f𝑓(𝑋)

Classifier

0∧0=0

3. Learning
Raw Inputs 𝑋
X

0∧1=0

1∧0=0
1∧1=1
Abduced Labels Ȳ
𝑌

Knowledge
Base
Minimal
Inconsistency

2. Abduction

Figure 1: An illustration of the hybrid learning framework.
First, raw data such as handwritten equations are perceived
by a classifier. Next, the perceived labels are revised via logical abduction under the principle of minimal inconsistency.
Finally, the abduced labels are used to update the classifier.
edge helps improve learning performance; there are failures in practice (Cai et al. 2021; Marconato et al. 2023a,b).
More importantly, the theoretical underpinnings that drive
these empirical successes or failures remain elusive, which
may hinder the adoption of neuro-symbolic methods in other
applications. In particular, it is unclear why such a hybrid
learning system works for a specific task and when it may
fail given a different knowledge base.
In this paper, we address the above questions under the
framework of abductive learning (ABL), an expressive and
representative paradigm of hybrid systems (Zhou 2019;
Zhou and Huang 2022). As illustrated in Fig. 1, a hybrid
learning system usually involves the perception of raw inputs using a classifier, followed by an abductive reasoning
module (Kakas, Kowalski, and Toni 1992) that aims to correct the wrongly perceived labels by minimising the inconsistency with a given symbolic knowledge base.

Introduction

Integrating machine learning and symbolic reasoning is a
holy grail challenge in artificial intelligence. This pursuit
has attracted much attention over the past decades (Garcez,
Broda, and Gabbay 2002; Getoor and Taskar 2007; Russell
2015; De Raedt et al. 2021; Hitzler and Sarker 2022), leading to fruitful developments such as probabilistic logic programing (De Raedt and Kimmig 2015) and statistical relational artificial intelligence (De Raedt et al. 2016).
In recent years, great progress has been made in neurosymbolic methods, equipping symbolic systems with the
ability to perceive sub-symbolic data. One intriguing finding
in these hybrid systems is that the perception performance of
initialised classifiers can be significantly enhanced through
abduction, a.k.a. abductive reasoning (Dai et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2020). Moreover, it has been shown that accurate classifiers can be learned from scratch without relying on fully
labelled data, given appropriate objectives and knowledge
bases (Xu et al. 2018; Manhaeve et al. 2018; Tsamoura,
Hospedales, and Michael 2021; Dai and Muggleton 2021).
These advances highlight the value of symbolic reasoning
in many learning tasks. However, not all symbolic knowl-

Contributions. We present a theoretical analysis illuminating the factors underlying the success of hybrid systems.
Our analysis is based on a key insight: the objective of popular hybrid methods implies a secret objective that finely characterises supervision signals from a given knowledge base.
Formally, we show that the objective of minimising the inconsistency with a knowledge base, under reasonable conditions, is equivalent to optimising an upper bound of another
objective denoted by L-Risk, which contains a probability
matrix relating the ground-truth labels and their locations in

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15310

