The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Diverse Representations for Open Set Recognition
Yu Wang, Junxian Mu, Pengfei Zhu* , Qinghua Hu
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
wang.yu@tju.edu.cn, jxmu@tju.edu.cn, zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn, huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

the open space using available data or features, such as explicitly estimating the probability of a test unknown sample (Bendale and Boult 2016), assigning placeholders to predict the distribution of unknown data (Zhou, Ye, and Zhan
2021), and utilizing supervised contrastive learning to improve the quality of representations (Xu, Shen, and Zhao
2023). These methods are simple and robust in various scenarios and easy to scale to large-scale tasks, but their performance is often limited due to the difficulty of modeling the open space. By contrast, generative methods encode
known classes into various latent distributions using generative models and identify unknowns by measuring their
distance to known distributions, such as mapping the latent
known classes to prototypes (Yang et al. 2022), Gaussian
distributions, and manifolds (Oza and Patel 2019). These
methods have shown promising results and achieved stateof-the-art performance.
Despite effectiveness, generative methods are shown to
be computationally infeasible or performatively unstable
on complex tasks. (Xu, Shen, and Zhao 2023) pointed out
that training generative models significantly increases the
total training cost of the recognition system, and (Vaze
et al. 2022) found it infeasible to train generative methods on large-scale benchmarks, e.g., ImageNet. Moreover,
(Guo et al. 2021) and (Huang et al. 2023) empirically
proved that generative methods suffer from significant performance degradation in recognizing unknowns when unknown classes are similar to known classes.
The aforementioned analysis raises a straightforward
question: is it possible to find the rationale of existing methods to design OSR models that are effective and robust as
well as efficient and scalable?
In this paper, we first provide insights into OSR and theoretically find a key factor of generative methods is learning diverse representations that contain additional information to discriminative representations for identifying known
classes. Subsequently, we propose a simple discriminative
method that learns diverse representations using only vanilla
discrimination models. Inspired by the mixture-of-experts
model, we design multiple experts that share shallow layers
and own expert-independent layers. To collaboratively learn
diverse representations, the attention maps learned by the experts are constrained to be different using a diversity regularization term. Finally, the logits of each expert are adaptively

Open set recognition (OSR) requires the model to classify
samples that belong to closed sets while rejecting unknown
samples during test. Currently, generative models often perform better than discriminative models in OSR, but recent
studies show that generative models may be computationally infeasible or unstable on complex tasks. In this paper,
we provide insights into OSR and find that learning supplementary representations can theoretically reduce the open
space risk. Based on the analysis, we propose a new model,
namely Multi-Expert Diverse Attention Fusion (MEDAF),
that learns diverse representations in a discriminative way.
MEDAF consists of multiple experts that are learned with an
attention diversity regularization term to ensure the attention
maps are mutually different. The logits learned by each expert are adaptively fused and used to identify the unknowns
through the score function. We show that the differences in
attention maps can lead to diverse representations so that the
fused representations can well handle the open space. Extensive experiments are conducted on standard and OSR largescale benchmarks. Results show that the proposed discriminative method can outperform existing generative models by
up to 9.5% on AUROC and achieve new state-of-the-art performance with little computational cost. Our method can also
seamlessly integrate existing classification models. Code is
available at https://github.com/Vanixxz/MEDAF.

Introduction
Humans can realize what they have not learned, which provides a valuable basis for actively formulating questions and
seeking information (Markman 1979). But this is quite challenging for artificial intelligence models: they will mistakenly identify samples of an unknown class as a known class,
thereby preventing them from having the ability to think. To
this end, open set recognition (OSR) is proposed to enable
the models to recognize unknown samples while correctly
identifying known samples (Scheirer et al. 2013).
Preliminary attempts on OSR have been made, in which
existing methods can be categorized as discriminative methods and generative methods. Discriminative methods transform OSR into a classical discriminative task by imitating
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5731

