The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

High-Fidelity 3D Head Avatars Reconstruction through Spatially-Varying
Expression Conditioned Neural Radiance Field
Minghan Qin* , Yifan Liu* , Yuelang Xu, Xiaochen Zhao, Yebin Liu † , Haoqian Wang †
Tsinghua University
{qmh21,yf-liu21,xll20,zhaoxc19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

exhibit the insufficient ability to render detailed complex
expressions and the corresponding geometry. As shown
in Fig. 1, these methods typically employ an optional deformation network D to represent face expression motions
and a NeRF F to model head geometry and appearance.
Both D and F are conditioned on the global expression
from 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs). Although recent
methods (Athar et al. 2022; Zielonka, Bolkart, and Thies
2023) focus on better exploiting the global expression in an
elaborately-designed deformation D, they still directly utilize the global expression as the conditioning for NeRF F .
This direct global expression conditioning struggles to provide fine-grained control over the geometry and rendering
at different positions within the 3D space. As a result, these
methods struggle to obtain detailed rendering and accurate
geometry when dealing with complex expressions.
To solve the above limitation, we propose SpatiallyVarying Expression (SVE) as the conditioning. As indicated in Fig. 1(a), the global expression ε from 3DMM stays
constant across 3D space. The global expression ε solely encompasses 3DMM template expressions, limiting D and F
in capturing nuances and spatial intricacies, e.g., eyes, teeth,
wrinkles (as shown in Fig. 3). In contrast, SVE ε′ in Fig. 1(b)
varies across 3D space, encompassing both spatial positional
information and expression information. Therefore, SVE
helps NeRF capture the intricate movement of wrinkles,
eyes, mouth, eyebrows, etc. Specifically, to generate SVE,
we design a simple generation network G to integrate ε with
the spatial positional features. To reduce errors in geometry reconstruction from inadequate constraints and enhance
overall quality, we also introduce a coarse-to-fine training
strategy to enhance the geometry at the coarse stage via the
geometry initialization and improve the rendering quality at
the fine stage by an adaptive importance sampling strategy.
Extensive experiments show that our method achieves significantly superior results by employing the SVE as conditioning in terms of accurate geometry and detailed rendering, especially when dealing with intricate expressions. We
present the contributions of our method as follows:

One crucial aspect of 3D head avatar reconstruction lies in
the details of facial expressions. Although recent NeRF-based
photo-realistic 3D head avatar methods achieve high-quality
avatar rendering, they still encounter challenges retaining intricate facial expression details because they overlook the potential of specific expression variations at different spatial positions when conditioning the radiance field. Motivated by
this observation, we introduce a novel Spatially-Varying Expression (SVE) conditioning. The SVE can be obtained by
a simple MLP-based generation network, encompassing both
spatial positional features and global expression information.
Benefiting from rich and diverse information of the SVE
at different positions, the proposed SVE-conditioned NeRF
can deal with intricate facial expressions and achieve realistic rendering and geometry details of high-fidelity 3D head
avatars. Additionally, to further elevate the geometric and
rendering quality, we introduce a new coarse-to-fine training strategy, including a geometry initialization strategy at
the coarse stage and an adaptive importance sampling strategy at the fine stage. Extensive experiments indicate that
our method outperforms other state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in rendering and geometry quality on mobile phonecollected and public datasets. Code and data can be found
at https://github.com/minghanqin/AvatarSVE.

Introduction
Reconstructing controllable and realistic 3D head avatars is
beneficial in many applications, such as VR/AR, games, and
teleconferencing. The facial expression details are crucial
for realistic 3D head avatars. Current 3D head avatar reconstruction methods can generate controllable head avatars
from monocular videos. However, achieving an accurate geometry of facial expressions and nuanced and individualized
details remains a substantial challenge.
To reconstruct expressive 3D head avatars, some methods (Gafni et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022; Athar et al. 2022;
Zheng et al. 2022; Zielonka, Bolkart, and Thies 2023; Xu
et al. 2023) based on neural radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) achieves the photo-realistic rendering. However, these implicit neural radiance field-based approaches

• We propose a 3D head avatar method based on the
Spatially-Varying Expression conditioned neural radiance field. The proposed Spatially-Varying Expression
(SVE) enables the radiance field to capture intricate expressions and detailed geometry faithfully.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

These authors are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4569

