The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiSCO: Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge for Molecular Conformer Optimization
Danyeong Lee1 , Dohoon Lee2, 3 , Dongmin Bang1, 4 , Sun Kim1, 4, 5, 6
1

Interdisciplinary Program in Bioinformatics, Seoul National University
2
Bioinformatics Institute, Seoul National University
3
BK21 FOUR Intelligence Computing, Seoul National University
4
AIGENDRUG Co., Ltd.
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
6
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{ldy9381, apap7, eugenomics, sunkim.bioinfo}@snu.ac.kr
Abstract

landscape formulated as the Boltzmann distribution (Noé
et al. 2019). Traditional approaches based on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Pracht, Bohle, and Grimme 2020)
stand as the gold standard, yielding precise results by exhaustively exploring the conformational energy landscape.
However, the high level of accuracy they achieve comes
with substantial computational costs, rendering MD simulations unsuitable for high-throughput applications (Hawkins
2017). In contrast, cheminformatics-based approximation
tools such as OMEGA (Hawkins et al. 2010) and ETKDG
(Riniker and Landrum 2015) offer more computational efficiency but often at the expense of accuracy. Additionally,
force field-based methods like MMFF (Halgren 1996), although employed for efficient optimization of conformers,
still fall short in achieving the desired levels of accuracy
(Kanal, Keith, and Hutchison 2018). Recent studies have focused on developing a fast and accurate conformer generation approach that leverages the capabilities of data-driven
machine learning techniques.

The generation of energetically optimal 3D molecular conformers is crucial in cheminformatics and drug discovery.
While deep generative models have been utilized for direct
generation in Euclidean space, this approach encounters challenges, including the complexity of navigating a vast search
space. Recent generative models that implement simplifications to circumvent these challenges have achieved state-ofthe-art results, but this simplified approach unavoidably creates a gap between the generated conformers and the groundtruth conformational landscape. To bridge this gap, we introduce DiSCO: Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge for Molecular Conformer Optimization, a novel diffusion framework
that enables direct learning of nonlinear diffusion processes
in prior-constrained Euclidean space for the optimization of
3D molecular conformers. Through the incorporation of an
SE(3)-equivariant Schrödinger bridge, we establish the rototranslational equivariance of the generated conformers. Our
framework is model-agnostic and offers an easily implementable solution for the post hoc optimization of conformers
produced by any generation method. Through comprehensive
evaluations and analyses, we establish the strengths of our
framework, substantiating the application of the Schrödinger
bridge for molecular conformer optimization. First, our approach consistently outperforms four baseline approaches,
producing conformers with higher diversity and improved
quality. Then, we show that the intermediate conformers generated during our diffusion process exhibit valid and chemically meaningful characteristics. We also demonstrate the robustness of our method when starting from conformers of diverse quality, including those unseen during training. Lastly,
we show that the precise generation of low-energy conformers via our framework helps in enhancing the downstream
prediction of molecular properties. The code is available at
https://github.com/Danyeong-Lee/DiSCO.

Building on this framework, the evolution of deep generative models has made considerable progress in the field of
molecular conformation generation. Previous work (Mansimov et al. 2019) attempted to generate molecular conformers directly in Euclidean space. This direct approach, however, has encountered several challenges, including the necessity for SE(3)-equivariance and the complexity of navigating an expansive search space, heightened by the high degree of freedom inherent in the task. To bypass the need to
address SE(3)-equivariance, alternative approaches (Simm
and Hernández-Lobato 2020; Xu et al. 2021a; Shi et al.
2021; Luo et al. 2021; Ganea et al. 2021) have utilized internal molecular geometries such as interatomic distances
and torsion angles. However, the accumulation of prediction
errors during the reassembly of entire conformer remains
as a major drawback. Also, these approaches are susceptible to challenges such as modeling invalid distance matrices
(e.g., negative values) or violations of the triangle inequality. A subset of recent methodologies has effectively managed SE(3)-equivariance without utilizing intermediate variables, through their specifically designed diffusion process
(Xu et al. 2022) or loss function (Zhu et al. 2022), leading
to improved performance. Yet, the challenge of searching a
vast Euclidean space due to the high degree of freedom remains. To effectively narrow down the search space, Jing et

Introduction
The three-dimensional structure of molecules is a key factor in determining their molecular properties. Therefore, it
is essential to accurately predict the energetically optimal
3D molecular conformations for a variety of applications,
from materials science to pharmaceutical design. The goal
of molecular conformer generation is to sample conformers from each local minimum of the conformational energy
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13365

