The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

1/2 - Approximate MMS Allocation for Separable Piecewise Linear Concave
Valuations
Chandra Chekuri, Pooja Kulkarni, Rucha Kulkarni, Ruta Mehta
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
201 N Goodwin Ave
Urbana, Illinois 61801 USA
chekuri@illinois.edu, poojark2@illinois.edu, ruchark2@illinois.edu, rutameht@illinois.edu
Abstract

Ghodsi et al. 2018; Garg, McGlaughlin, and Taki 2018; Garg
and Taki 2020; Akrami, Garg, and Taki 2023; Akrami and
Garg 2023). This paper studies the problem beyond additive
valuations, particularly for the classical separable-concave
valuations (Vazirani and Yannakakis 2011; Chaudhury et al.
2022) and submodular valuations (Ghodsi et al. 2018; Barman and Krishnamurthy 2020; Uziahu and Feige 2023).
MMS and APS are share based fairness notions, where
each agent is entitled to a bundle worth her fair share. Under
MMS, this fair share of an agent is defined as the maximum
value she can guarantee herself under the classical cut-andchoose mechanism when she is the cutter; she partitions the
item set into n bundles and gets to pick last. Therefore, she
partitions so that the value of the minimum valued bundle is
maximized. Let ΠN (M) denote the set of all allocations of
M among the n agents. If (A1 , . . . , An ) denotes any allocation into n bundles, and vi : 2M → R+ denotes agent i’s
valuation function, then the MMS value of agent i is defined
as,
MMSi =
max
min vi (Aj )

We study fair distribution of a collection of m indivisible
goods among a group of n agents, using the widely recognized fairness principles of Maximin Share (MMS) and Any
Price Share (APS). These principles have undergone thorough investigation within the context of additive valuations.
We explore these notions for valuations that extend beyond
additivity.
First, we study approximate MMS under the separable
(piecewise-linear) concave (SPLC) valuations, an important
class generalizing additive, where the best known factor was
1/3-MMS. We show that 1/2-MMS allocation exists and can
be computed in polynomial time, significantly improving the
state-of-the-art. We note that SPLC valuations introduce an
elevated level of intricacy in contrast to additive. For instance,
the MMS value of an agent can be as high as her value for
the entire set of items. Additionally, the equilibrium computation problem, which is polynomial-time for additive valuations, becomes intractable for SPLC. We use a relax-andround paradigm that goes through competitive equilibrium
and LP relaxation. Our result extends to give (symmetric) 1/2APS, a stronger guarantee than MMS.
APS is a stronger notion that generalizes MMS by allowing
agents with arbitrary entitlements. We study the approximation of APS under submodular valuation functions. We design and analyze a simple greedy algorithm using concave
extensions of submodular functions. We prove that the algorithm gives a 1/3-APS allocation which matches the bestknown factor. Concave extensions are hard to compute in
polynomial time and are, therefore, generally not used in approximation algorithms. Our approach shows a way to utilize it within analysis (while bypassing its computation), and
hence might be of independent interest.

1

(A1 ,...,An )∈ΠN (M) j∈[n]

An MMS allocation is one where every agent i gets
a bundle worth at least MMSi . MMS treats all agents
equally. In some settings it is necessary to consider weighted
agents, where the weight or entitlement of agent
P i is
bi > 0; the weights are normalized to satisfy
i bi =
1. There are multiple natural ways to define a weighted
generalization of MMS. Some notable definitions are the
weighted MMS by (Farhadi et al. 2019), normalized MMS
by (Chakraborty, Segal-Halevi, and Suksompong 2022), the
l-out-of-d-maximin share (Babaioff, Nisan, and TalgamCohen 2019) and its closely related notion pessimistic share,
and the any price share (APS) notion by (Babaioff, Ezra, and
Feige 2021). It is known from their introductory papers that
better than linear (in the number of agents) factor guarantees
cannot be obtained for the weighted and normalized MMS
notions. The same works also give algorithms that match
these lower bounds. (Babaioff, Ezra, and Feige 2021) on
the other hand showed a constant 3/5-factor guarantee with
respect to the APS notion for the additive valuations setting, and (Uziahu and Feige 2023) showed a constant 1/3factor guarantee for APS with submodular valuations. Further, (Babaioff, Ezra, and Feige 2021) show that the APS
value of any agent is equal or better than their pessimistic

Introduction

We consider the problem of fairly allocating a set M of m
indivisible goods among a set N of n agents with heterogeneous preferences under the popular fairness notions of
Maximin share (MMS) (Budish 2011) and Any Price Share
(APS) (Babaioff, Ezra, and Feige 2021). These notions have
been extensively studied for the setting where the agents
have additive valuations (Barman and Krishna Murthy 2017;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9590

