The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transition-Informed Reinforcement Learning for Large-Scale
Stackelberg Mean-Field Games
Pengdeng Li1 , Runsheng Yu2 , Xinrun Wang1 * , Bo An1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
{pengdeng.li, xinrun.wang, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, runshengyu@gmail.com

Abstract

There are several works related to the problem of incentivizing self-interested followers including mind-aware
multi-agent management (M3 RL) (Shu and Tian 2019) and
expensive coordination (Yu et al. 2020). Nevertheless, these
works consider a small number of heterogeneous followers and suffer from the scalability issue when the number
of followers increases. In contrast, Stackelberg mean-field
game (SMFG) provides a powerful tool to model the scenarios with enormous homogeneous self-interested followers.
SMFGs are established with consideration of various constraints and there are analytical results such as the existence
and uniqueness or the explicit form of solution for special
cases (e.g., linear-quadratic) (Bensoussan et al. 2017; Fu and
Horst 2020; Huang and Yang 2020). However, these methods are infeasible in practice due to the following critical
challenges. (1) Classical methods in the previous works typically involve solving a set of differential equations, which
fail as they require exact dynamics parameters (e.g., the transition rate matrix) to derive closed-form solutions in special
cases such as the linear-quadratic model. Moreover, none of
the existing works have tried to solve the SMFGs by employing RL algorithms that can learn the policies without priors
of the environments. (2) Learning by interacting with the
environment is data-inefficient and thus, typically requires
long learning time before achieving desirable performance.
(3) The interaction between the leader and followers is complex, i.e., the leader takes actions under the consideration of
the followers’ rational responses while the followers adapt
their policies given the leader’s policy, which renders the
learning performance unstable, i.e., different initializations
of the leader’s policy could result in dramatically different
learning performance.

Many real-world scenarios including fleet management and
Ad auctions can be modeled as Stackelberg mean-field games
(SMFGs) where a leader aims to incentivize a large number of
homogeneous self-interested followers to maximize her utility. Existing works focus on cases with a small number of heterogeneous followers, e.g., 5-10, and suffer from scalability
issue when the number of followers increases. There are three
major challenges in solving large-scale SMFGs: i) classical
methods based on solving differential equations fail as they
require exact dynamics parameters, ii) learning by interacting
with environment is data-inefficient, and iii) complex interaction between the leader and followers makes the learning
performance unstable. We address these challenges through
transition-informed reinforcement learning. Our main contributions are threefold: i) we first propose an RL framework,
the Stackelberg mean-field update, to learn the leader’s policy
without priors of the environment, ii) to improve the data efficiency and accelerate the learning process, we then propose
the Transition-Informed Reinforcement Learning (TIRL) by
leveraging the instantiated empirical Fokker-Planck equation,
and iii) we develop a regularized TIRL by employing various
regularizers to alleviate the sensitivity of the learning performance to the initialization of the leader’s policy. Extensive
experiments on fleet management and food gathering demonstrate that our approach can scale up to 100,000 followers and
significantly outperform existing baselines.

1

Introduction

Learning to incentivize a large population of homogeneous
self-interested followers is of great importance for extensive
real-world problems. For example, in the e-hailing driver repositioning (EDRP) (Shou and Di 2020), to improve order
response rate, the platform incentivizes enormous drivers
to spread across different areas of the city by taking service charge. Other scenarios include Ad auctions (Guo et al.
2019), electronic toll collection (Qiu, Chen, and An 2019),
and mechanism design for e-commerce (Cai et al. 2018).
These scenarios can be modeled as large-scale SMFGs
where a leader, e.g., the e-hailing or Ad-exchange platform,
incentivizes enormous homogeneous self-interested followers, e.g., taxi drivers or advertisers, to maximize her utility.

In this paper, we address the above challenges and provide
the following three contributions. (1) We propose the first
RL framework, the Stackelberg mean-field update (SMFU),
to learn the leader’s policy without priors of the environments. (2) As the SMFU is a model-free algorithm that is
data-inefficient, which requires an excessive number of interactions with the environment and thus, takes long learning
time to achieve desirable performance, we propose a novel
learning framework, the Transition-Informed Reinforcement
Learning (TIRL), to improve the data efficiency and in turn
accelerate the learning process. Specifically, we first use the
experience tuples generated by interacting with the environ-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17469

