The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Multi-Object Positional Relationships via Emergent Communication
Yicheng Feng* , Boshi An* , Zongqing Lu†
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{fyc813@, boshi.an@stu., zongqing.lu@}pku.edu.cn

Abstract

the message sent by Speaker and must pick out the target
from several candidates.
In existing emergent language studies, agents’ observations are mainly focused on a single object, be it a geometric
object or a categorical image. Some studies involve images
showing more complex scenes, but these studies usually
also involve natural language (Das et al. 2017; Gupta, Lanctot, and Lazaridou 2021). Communicating the relationships
between multiple objects explicitly is understudied. Then,
problems may arise when we consider the development from
communication in tasks like referential games to communication in tasks with more realistic settings, e.g., multi-step
Markov decision process (MDP) tasks, since there the information about multi-object relationships is usually helpful, and sometimes even crucial. So in this paper, we try to
fill this gap and address two questions: Can neural agents
learn to extract the information about multi-object relationships and express it through discrete communication
channels in the referential game? If so, can the learned
protocol help in more complex multi-step MDP tasks? We
focus on positional relationships between two objects in this
paper, because it is one of the most common and fundamental relationships, also usually most useful, and it is not too
complicated, hence suitable as a starting point.
We train agents in the referential game where the observations are images each containing two geometric shapes,
and see whether the agents can communicate the two objects and their positional relationship shown in each image. Since the positional relationship is abstraction information that can have various manifestations in specific images,
we propose to use a random dataset to test generalization,
where each image is generated randomly each time, and the
target image observed by Speaker and Listener is also different in pixel level but the same in abstraction. This is a
stronger dataset than the standard setup, forcing agents to
communicate abstract information to get high accuracy. We
also use two common datasets as baselines, the fixed dataset
where images are fixed and the variation dataset where images are randomly generated but the target image observed
by Speaker and Listener is exactly the same. We find that
agents trained with these two common datasets, though perform well if tested by the corresponding datasets, cannot
generalize in the random dataset. This demonstrates that the
two commonly used datasets cannot well test agents’ ability

The study of emergent communication has been dedicated to
interactive artificial intelligence. While existing work focuses
on communication about single objects or complex image
scenes, we argue that communicating relationships between
multiple objects is important in more realistic tasks, but understudied. In this paper, we try to fill this gap and focus on
emergent communication about positional relationships between two objects. We train agents in the referential game
where observations contain two objects, and find that generalization is the major problem when the positional relationship is involved. The key factor affecting the generalization
ability of the emergent language is the input variation between Speaker and Listener, which is realized by a random
image generator in our work. Further, we find that the learned
language can generalize well in a new multi-step MDP task
where the positional relationship describes the goal, and performs better than raw-pixel images as well as pre-trained image features, verifying the strong generalization ability of discrete sequences. We also show that language transfer from the
referential game performs better in the new task than learning language directly in this task, implying the potential benefits of pre-training in referential games. All in all, our experiments demonstrate the viability and merit of having agents
learn to communicate positional relationships between multiple objects through emergent communication.

Introduction
In order to achieve interactive agents, a major problem to
be solved is to endow artificial agents with the ability to
communicate. Supervised methods are considered incapable
of capturing functional meanings of language (Lazaridou,
Peysakhovich, and Baroni 2017; Kottur et al. 2017). Therefore, a series of studies on emergent communication probe
into this problem by providing agents with simple environments where they learn to communicate with each other
from scratch to accomplish specific tasks (Havrylov and
Titov 2017; Choi, Lazaridou, and de Freitas 2018; Li and
Bowling 2019; Ren et al. 2020). Most of these tasks are
based on referential games (Lewis 1969), where Speaker observes and describes a target object while Listener receives
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17371

