The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Active Learning Guided by Efficient Surrogate Learners
Yunpyo An* 1 , Suyeong Park* 1 , Kwang In Kim2
1

UNIST
POSTECH
{anyunpyo,suyeong}@unist.ac.kr, kimkin@postech.ac.kr
2

Abstract

where labels are sparsely sampled. This approach is particularly effective in the early stages of AL when the number
of labeled instances is small and the learner’s predictions
are unreliable. However, its main limitation is the lack of
consideration for the learner’s progress. As more labels are
acquired, the learner becomes a more reliable estimator of
the underlying ground truth. In such cases, prioritize regions
where the learner struggles could be more advantageous than
covering areas of already established confidence.
To address this limitation, it is also essential to identify instances where the learner’s predictions require deeper investigation. This entails selecting instances with the high degree
of uncertainty in the learner’s predictions. However, in the
early learning stages, the learner may not have a comprehensive understanding of the problem, and uncertainty estimates
can be unreliable. Another significant challenge is the resulting redundancy in labeling. Given the computational intensity of training neural networks, updating the model for each
new data instance is impracticable. Consequently, prevailing
AL algorithms often adopt a batch-based strategy, wherein
each AL iteration involves collectively choosing a set of
data points for annotation. If not carefully managed, this
can result in spatial aggregations where uncertainty spreads
to neighboring instances. However, addressing uncertainties
within these aggregations can frequently be achieved by annotating only one or a handful of instances and subsequently
retraining the learner. Existing approaches have attempted
to address this issue through additional data diversification
techniques (Nguyen and Smeulder 2004; Sinha et al. 2019).
In this paper, we introduce a novel AL algorithm that
integrates these two essential objectives into a unified approach, using a single surrogate model for the neural network learner. Our algorithm operates in a batch mode,
wherein the primary neural network learner is trained exclusively when a batch of labels is amassed. However, it mimics
the continuous learning trajectory akin to that of the neural learner by harnessing an efficient Gaussian process (GP)
learner, which is refreshed each time a new label is incorporated. By adopting well-established Bayesian techniques,
our algorithm provides a rigorous framework for effectively
and efficiently identifying influential points: At each stage,
a new data instance is selected to maximize the resulting
information gain over the entire dataset. Furthermore, our
model rapidly identifies the most uncertain data points by

Re-training a deep learning model each time a single data
point receives a new label is impractical due to the inherent
complexity of the training process. Consequently, existing active learning (AL) algorithms tend to adopt a batch-based approach where, during each AL iteration, a set of data points
is collectively chosen for annotation. However, this strategy
frequently leads to redundant sampling, ultimately eroding
the efficacy of the labeling procedure. In this paper, we introduce a new AL algorithm that harnesses the power of a Gaussian process surrogate in conjunction with the neural network
principal learner. Our proposed model adeptly updates the
surrogate learner for every new data instance, enabling it to
emulate and capitalize on the continuous learning dynamics
of the neural network without necessitating a complete retraining of the principal model for each individual label. Experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that this
approach yields significant enhancements, either rivaling or
aligning with the performance of state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning heavily relies on a substantial
amount of labeled data. However, creating extensive datasets
poses challenges, particularly for problems demanding significant labeling efforts. As a result, the utilization of deep
learning is constrained to domains with feasible labeling
resources. Active learning (AL) seeks to surpass this constraint by strategically selecting the most informative data
instances for labeling within a predetermined labeling budget (Ren et al. 2020; Settles 2009; Aggarwal et al. 2015).
Typically, in AL, a baseline learner is initially provided
with a dataset where only a small or no subset is labeled.
Throughout the learning process, AL algorithms analyze the
data distribution and the learner’s progress to recommend
specific data instances for labeling. The effectiveness of AL
hinges on accurately identifying both difficult (or uncertain)
data points, as well as those wielding substantial influence
over the learner’s overall decisions once labeled. Identifying
influential data requires capturing the global shape of the underlying data distribution. For this, existing AL algorithms
primarily focus on achieving diversity by populating areas
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10874

