The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cached Transformers: Improving Transformers with Differentiable Memory
Cache
Zhaoyang Zhang1 , Wenqi Shao1 , Yixiao Ge2 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Jinwei Gu1 , Ping Luo3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Tencent Inc.
3
The University of Hong Kong
{zhaoyangzhang@link., wqshao@link., xgwang@ee., jwgu@}cuhk.edu.hk, geyixiao831@gmail.com, pluo@cs.hku.hk
(%)
84

Abstract
This work introduces a new Transformer model called
Cached Transformer, which uses Gated Recurrent Cached
(GRC) attention to extend the self-attention mechanism with
a differentiable memory cache of tokens. GRC attention enables attending to both past and current tokens, increasing the
receptive field of attention and allowing for exploring longrange dependencies. By utilizing a recurrent gating unit to
continuously update the cache, our model achieves significant
advancements in six language and vision tasks, including language modeling, machine translation, ListOPs, image classification, object detection, and instance segmentation. Furthermore, our approach surpasses previous memory-based techniques in tasks such as language modeling and displays the
ability to be applied to a broader range of situations.

82
80
78

ViT
PVT
Cached PVT (ours)
PVTv2
Cached PVTv2 (ours)
Swin
CvT

76
5

Introduction
The design of Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), a deep
model stacking self-attention and feed-forward layers, has
achieved remarkable progress in various tasks. Compared
to the traditional deep models, a key characteristic of
Transformer is the self-attention mechanism, which enables
global receptive field and allows each token to access all the
other tokens in a data batch, providing a flexible scheme
to capture contextual representation (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Carion et al. 2020) . Such paradigm
is however in a complexity square to sequence length, thus
not suitable to model long-term dependencies. In this work,
we aim to extend the conventional transformer models using
attention with a long-term token representation in a memory cache, which enables larger and longer receptive field at
minimal additional computations.
Capturing long-range relationships between tokens and
samples is crucial for various tasks due to several reasons.
(i) In sequential data such as language sentences, there can
exist dependencies between tokens that are far away from
each other. For example, an event or character can be referred to from time to time across multiple paragraphs in an
article. Failing to capture such dependencies can result in
poor performance in natural language processing tasks. (ii)
Modeling cross-sample relationships can also be useful for
non-sequential data like images. For example, incorporating

10

15

20

25 (G)

Figure 1: Performance-Complexity Curve: Top-1 accuracy
(%) comparisons on ImageNet with respect to model capacity (FLOPs) using vision transformers (Parameter-efficiency
curves).Curves of our cached models are consistently on top
of their corresponding baselines (PVT and PVTv2), indicating the effectiveness of GRC-cached models considering
both complexity and accuracy.
a memory module that stores prototypical feature representations can enable instance-invariant feature learning, leading to improved performance in vision tasks (Long et al.
2022; Deng et al. 2022). Furthermore, other studies (Wang
et al. 2020b; Zhong et al. 2019) have demonstrated that using cross-batch memory to store previous embeddings can
be beneficial for visual representation learning. (iii) Longerrange attention has also been shown to enhance the representation learning ability of models, as demonstrated in works
like (Dai et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2022; Tay et al. 2021b).
However, longer dependency modeling makes computations more expensive. For example, the vanilla Transformer
has O(T 2 ) computational complexity in each attention module when handling a token sequence of length T . Although
some works apply efficient alternatives, such as low-rank decomposition (Wang et al. 2020a; Zhu et al. 2021), blockbased sparsification (Zaheer et al. 2020), and local sensitive hashing (Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020), they still
have complexity linear to the token length (O(T )) and thus
unable to efficiently capture sparse long-range dependency.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16935

