The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ViLT-CLIP: Video and Language Tuning CLIP with Multimodal Prompt
Learning and Scenario-Guided Optimization
Hao Wang, Fang Liu* , Licheng Jiao, Jiahao Wang, Zehua Hao, Shuo Li
Lingling Li, Puhua Chen, Xu Liu
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
Joint International Research Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Computation,
School of Artificial Intelligent, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, P.R. China
stuhaowang@163.com, f63liu@163.com, lchjiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

enables the model to learn more. 3) The large noise in videos
makes video-text pertaining challenging to play a significant role. How to transfer the capabilities of large-scale pretrained models and effectively adapt them to video-based
tasks is a crucial research question.
It is essential for advancing video understanding and unlocking the potential of pre-trained models in video tasks.
However, recent studies in this domain encounter a trade-off.
Freezing encoders to maintain zero-shot capability will reduce the downstream supervised accuracy. Adapting image
encoders to different downstream tasks by fine-tuning them
end-to-end requires the development of numerous models
for each task, which yields significant resource requirements. Fine-tuning the pre-trained model to achieve strong
supervised performance causes low zero-shot generalization. Moreover, fine-tuning the pre-trained model to achieve
strong supervised performance results or dumping the text
encoder will lose the “Zero-Shot” generalization ability of
the pre-training model. In contrast, CLIP provides a more
versatile approach by utilizing relevant “prompts” for adapting to downstream tasks. This method eliminates the need
for domain experts with extensive expertise, as it can be applied to various domains and tasks by learning to formulate
and adjust solutions.
Therefore, recent video-based approaches typically freeze
the encoder and adopt the CLIP representations along with
additional learnable components. These components include
a transformer-based temporal module (Ju et al. 2022), new
cross-frame communication attention for video temporal
modeling and a video-specific prompting technique (Ni et al.
2022), textual or visual prompts (Wang et al. 2021), a spatial
adaptation, temporal adaptation, and joint adaptation module (Yang et al. 2023), that are learned while keeping the
CLIP backbone frozen or adapting the CLIP encoders as
well. These are designed to adapt CLIP while learning them
quickly. However, these designs tend to drop CLIP’s original generalization capability (Rasheed et al. 2023). Moreover, adapting representations in a single branch of CLIP
is sub-optimal since stands difficult to flexibly and dynamically adjust both representation spaces on video tasks and
alignment between the vision and language representations
is lacking (Khattak et al. 2023).
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we propose
a video and language tuning CLIP with multi-modal prompt

Pre-trained vision-language(V-L) models such as CLIP have
demonstrated impressive Zero-Shot performance in many
downstream tasks. Since adopting contrastive video-text pairs
methods like CLIP to video tasks is limited by its high cost
and scale, recent approaches focus on efficiently transferring the image-based CLIP to the video domain. A major
finding is that fine-tuning the pre-trained model to achieve
strong fully supervised performance leads to low zero-shot,
few-shot, and base to novel generalization. Instead, freezing the backbone network to maintain generalization ability
weakens fully supervised performance. Otherwise, no single
prompt tuning branch consistently performs optimally. In this
work, we proposed a multimodal prompt learning scheme
that balances supervised and generalized performance. Our
prompting approach contains three sections: 1) Independent
prompt on both the vision and text branches to learn the language and visual contexts. 2) Inter-modal prompt mapping
to ensure mutual synergy. 3) Reducing the discrepancy between the hand-crafted prompt (a video of a person
doing [CLS]) and the learnable prompt to alleviate the
forgetting about essential video scenarios. Extensive validation of fully supervised, zero-shot, few-shot, base-to-novel
generalization settings for video recognition indicates that the
proposed approach achieves competitive performance with
less commute cost.

Introduction
Vision language pre-training models like CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021) are trained using
millions of image-text pairs crawled from the Internet without labels. The models can learn semantic representations
from large amounts of unlabeled data while having demonstrated excellent “zero-shot” generalization for various image classification tasks (Li et al. 2023). However, adopting
such massive training to video-level tasks faces the following difficulties: 1) The availability of equivalent video-text
datasets is comparatively limited, and preparing such videotext pairs data with complex annotation requires drives a
monumental cost in contrast to image-text pairs (Jia et al.
2021). 2) Solving video tasks demands more computational
power. Given the same budget, training on image-text pairs
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5390

