The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Rank in Generative Retrieval
Yongqi Li1 , Nan Yang2 , Liang Wang2 , Furu Wei2 , Wenjie Li1 ,
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Microsoft
liyongqi0@gmail.com, {nanya,wangliang,fuwei}@microsoft.com, cswjli@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

language models to generate identifier strings of passages as
an intermediate target for retrieval. An identifier is a distinctive string to represent a passage, such as Wikipedia titles
to Wikipedia passages. The predicted identifiers are then
mapped to ranked passages as the retrieval results. In this
manner, generative retrieval treats passage retrieval as a standard sequence-to-sequence task, maximizing the likelihood
of the passage identifiers given the input query, distinct from
previous learning-to-rank approaches.
There are two main approaches to generative retrieval regarding the identifier types. One approach, exemplified by the
DSI system and its variants (Tay et al. 2022), assigns a unique
numeric ID to each passage, allowing predicted numeric IDs
to directly correspond to passages on a one-to-one basis.
However, this approach requires memorizing the mappings
from passages to their numeric IDs, making it ineffective
for large corpus sets. The other approach (Bevilacqua et al.
2022) takes text spans from the passages as identifiers. While
the text span-based identifiers are effective in the large-scale
corpus, they no longer uniquely correspond to the passages.
In their work, a heuristic-based function is employed to rank
all the passages associated with the predicted identifiers. Following this line, Li et al. proposed using multiview identifiers,
which have achieved comparable results on commonly used
benchmarks with large-scale corpus. In this work, we follow
the latter approach to generative retrieval.
Despite its rapid development and substantial potential,
generative retrieval remains constrained. It relies on a heuristic function to convert predicted identifiers into a passage
rank list, which requires sensitive hyperparameters and exists
outside the learning framework. More importantly, generative
retrieval generates identifiers as an intermediate goal rather
than directly ranking candidate passages. This disconnect
between the learning objective of generative retrieval and the
intended passage ranking target brings a learning gap. Consequently, even though the autoregressive model becomes
proficient in generating accurate identifiers, the predicted
identifiers cannot ensure an optimal passage ranking order.
Tackling the aforementioned issues is challenging, as they
are inherent to the novel generative paradigm in text retrieval.
However, a silver lining emerges from the extensive evolution of the adeptness learning-to-rank paradigm, which
has demonstrated adeptness in optimizing the passage ranking objective. Inspired by this progress, we propose to en-

Generative retrieval stands out as a promising new paradigm
in text retrieval that aims to generate identifier strings of relevant passages as the retrieval target. This generative paradigm
taps into powerful generative language models, distinct from
traditional sparse or dense retrieval methods. However, only
learning to generate is insufficient for generative retrieval.
Generative retrieval learns to generate identifiers of relevant
passages as an intermediate goal and then converts predicted
identifiers into the final passage rank list. The disconnect between the learning objective of autoregressive models and
the desired passage ranking target leads to a learning gap. To
bridge this gap, we propose a learning-to-rank framework for
generative retrieval, dubbed LTRGR. LTRGR enables generative retrieval to learn to rank passages directly, optimizing
the autoregressive model toward the final passage ranking
target via a rank loss. This framework only requires an additional learning-to-rank training phase to enhance current
generative retrieval systems and does not add any burden
to the inference stage. We conducted experiments on three
public benchmarks, and the results demonstrate that LTRGR
achieves state-of-the-art performance among generative retrieval methods. The code and checkpoints are released at
https://github.com/liyongqi67/LTRGR.

Introduction
Text retrieval is a crucial task in information retrieval and has
a significant impact on various language systems, including
search ranking (Nogueira and Cho 2019) and open-domain
question answering (Chen et al. 2017). At its core, text retrieval involves learning a ranking model that assigns scores
to documents based on a given query, a process known as
learning to rank. This approach has been enduringly popular
for decades and has evolved into point-wise, pair-wise, and
list-wise methods. Currently, the dominant implementation is
the dual-encoder approach (Lee, Chang, and Toutanova 2019;
Karpukhin et al. 2020), which encodes queries and passages
into vectors in a semantic space and employs a list-wise loss
to learn the similarities.
An emerging alternative to the dual-encoder approach in
text retrieval is generative retrieval (Tay et al. 2022; Bevilacqua et al. 2022). Generative retrieval employs autoregressive
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8716

