The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PTUS: Photo-Realistic Talking Upper-Body Synthesis via 3D-Aware Motion
Decomposition Warping
Luoyang Lin1 , Zutao Jiang2 , Xiaodan Liang1, 2, 3 * , Liqian Ma4 , Michael C. Kampffmeyer5 ,
Xiaochun Cao1 *
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
DarkMatter AI Research, Guangzhou, China
4
ZMO AI Inc.
5
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
{cooluoluoluo, taozujiang, xdliang328}@gmail.com, liqianma.scholar@outlook.com, michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no,
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Talking upper-body synthesis is a promising task due to its
versatile potential for video creation and consists of animating the body and face from a source image with the motion from a given driving video. However, prior synthesis
approaches fall short in addressing this task and have been
either limited to animating heads of a target person only, or
have animated the upper body but neglected the synthesis of
precise facial details. To tackle this task, we propose a Photorealistic Talking Upper-body Synthesis method via 3D-aware
motion decomposition warping, named PTUS, to both precisely synthesize the upper body as well as recover the details of the face such as blinking and lip synchronization. In
particular, the motion decomposition mechanism consists of
a face-body motion decomposition, which decouples the 3D
motion estimation of the face and body, and a local-global
motion decomposition, which decomposes the 3D face motion into global and local motions resulting in the transfer
of facial expression. The 3D-aware warping module transfers the large-scale and subtle 3D motions to the extracted
3D depth-aware features in a coarse-to-fine manner. Moreover, we present a new dataset, Talking-UB, which includes
upper-body images with high-resolution faces, addressing the
limitations of prior datasets that either consist of only facial
images or upper-body images with blurry faces. Experimental
results demonstrate that our proposed method can synthesize
high-quality videos that preserve facial details, and achieves
superior results compared to state-of-the-art cross-person motion transfer approaches. Code and collected dataset are released in https://github.com/cooluoluo/PTUS.

Figure 1: Talking upper-body synthesis results produced by
our method trained on the Talking-UB dataset. Our method
can transfer both large-scale motions, such as body movement, as well as subtle facial expressions, such as eye blinking and mouth motion, from the driving video to the source
image.

while preserving the appearance information of the person
in the source image (Wang, Mallya, and Liu 2021; Siarohin
et al. 2021; Hong et al. 2022). These synthesis approaches
either focus only on facial animations (Wang, Mallya, and
Liu 2021; Hong et al. 2022), known as talking head synthesis
approaches (Fig. 2a), or on body motions without considering facial details (Siarohin et al. 2019b), known as full-body
animation approaches (Fig. 2b). This limits their applicability in practical applications, such as news reporting, in which
both body motion and facial details matter, giving rise to the
challenging talking upper-body synthesis task (Fig. 2c). This
task extends the talking head synthesis task to include upperbody motion, as well as facial expressions.
To tackle the talking head problem, warping-based algorithms (Kewei et al. 2022; Hong et al. 2022; Wang, Mallya,
and Liu 2021; Doukas, Zafeiriou, and Sharmanska 2021)
that learn a dense motion field to warp the source image

Introduction
Image animation is a challenging problem in video creation
and finds practical applications in settings such as video conferencing, news reports, and role-playing video games. This
has given rise to a multitude of synthesis methods that, based
on a source image and a driving video, aim to transfer the
motion of the person in the driving video to the source image
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3441

