The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data-Free Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Bowen Tang1 * , Jing Zhang1† * , Long Yan1 * , Qian Yu1 , Lu Sheng1 , Dong Xu2
1

School of Software, Beihang University
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
tbw.broHan@qq.com, {zhang jing, yanlong, qianyu, lsheng}@buaa.edu.cn, dongxu@hku.hk
2

Abstract

pose significant obstacles to the seamless transfer of knowledge from large-scale datasets to novel downstream tasks
and concepts. These challenges impede the widespread utilization of deep learning models and limit their potential impact in various fields.
Inspired by the mounting concerns regarding data and
model privacy issues, particularly in the context of knowledge transfer to new concepts, this paper addresses the problem of data-free zero-shot learning without access to any
real data. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) addresses the challenge
of recognizing new classes by leveraging semantic knowledge transferred from base classes. Despite the notable advancements in ZSL, most ZSL methods often require access to labeled images from base classes, either for aligning visual-semantic embeddings or training conditional generative models (Xian et al. 2018a,b; Narayan et al. 2020).
Unfortunately, obtaining real data from base classes is often impractical in real-world applications due to privacy or
copyright restrictions. Moreover, existing approaches heavily rely on manually annotated attributes, which present
challenges in terms of scalability and the difficulty of annotation (Farhadi et al. 2009; Gan et al. 2015; Shigeto et al.
2015; Romera-Paredes and Torr 2015).
The recent progress in large-scale pre-trained visionlanguage models, such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021),
have demonstrated impressive zero-shot generalization abilities. These models achieve this capability through extensive
training on vast collections of image-caption pairs without
the requirement of manually annotated attributes. However,
effectively transferring the knowledge from these models,
which are trained on weakly aligned image-caption pairs,
to downstream fine-grained zero-shot classification tasks remains challenging and sub-optimal. This is primarily due
to the discrepancy in class granularity between the pretrained models and the specific classification tasks at hand.
Propmt tuning deals with this issue by adding learnable
prompts to the inputs. However the recent prompt tuning
methods (Zhou et al. 2022b; Bahng et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2022a) still suffer from single-side alignment and rely on the
access to the real images.
To this end, this paper addresses a challenging and
practical problem dubbed as data-free zero-shot learning
(DFZSL). In this setting, the only available resource for
zero-shot classification is a pre-trained base classes classi-

Deep learning models have the ability to extract rich knowledge from large-scale datasets. However, the sharing of data
has become increasingly challenging due to concerns regarding data copyright and privacy. Consequently, this hampers
the effective transfer of knowledge from existing data to novel
downstream tasks and concepts. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) approaches aim to recognize new classes by transferring semantic knowledge learned from base classes. However, traditional
generative ZSL methods often require access to real images
from base classes and rely on manually annotated attributes,
which presents challenges in terms of data restrictions and
model scalability. To this end, this paper tackles a challenging
and practical problem dubbed as data-free zero-shot learning (DFZSL), where only the CLIP-based base classes data
pre-trained classifier is available for zero-shot classification.
Specifically, we propose a generic framework for DFZSL,
which consists of three main components. Firstly, to recover
the virtual features of the base data, we model the CLIP features of base class images as samples from a von Mises-Fisher
(vMF) distribution based on the pre-trained classifier. Secondly, we leverage the text features of CLIP as low-cost semantic information and propose a feature-language prompt
tuning (FLPT) method to further align the virtual image features and textual features. Thirdly, we train a conditional generative model using the well-aligned virtual image features
and corresponding semantic text features, enabling the generation of new classes features and achieve better zero-shot
generalization. Our framework has been evaluated on five
commonly used benchmarks for generalized ZSL, as well as
11 benchmarks for the base-to-new ZSL. The results demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our approach. Our
code is available in https://github.com/ylong4/DFZSL.

Introduction
The power of deep learning models lies in their ability to
extract rich knowledge, including visual features and semantic information, from large-scale datasets. However, the
sharing of data across different companies, institutions, and
countries has become increasingly challenging and sensitive. Concerns related to data copyright and privacy, particularly in sensitive domains such as health and security,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.

5108

