The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Trash to Treasure: Low-Light Object Detection via
Decomposition-and-Aggregation
Xiaohan Cui1 , Long Ma1 , Tengyu Ma1 , Jinyuan Liu2 , Xin Fan1 , Risheng Liu1 *
1

School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology
School of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
malone94319@gmail.com, atlantis918@hotmail.com, {cuixiaohan1230, matengyu}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {xin.fan,
rsliu}@dlut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

divided into two categories. The mainstream one is to cascade enhancer and detector, the other is to specificallydesign the low-light detector.
For the enhancer-introduced schemes, the well-known
UG2+ Challenge competition is a landmark event to drive
research for low-light face detection. The cascade of enhancement and detection is the most common solution
in the two consecutive championship schemes, e.g., the
CAS-Newcastle team adopted this cascaded scheme (Yuan
et al. 2019), which illustrates the significance of researching the cascaded pattern. In addition, the latest enhancement
schemes (e.g., (Guo et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022a; Ma et al.
2022b; Xue et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023, 2021, 2022a)), and
the work (Lv, Li, and Lu 2021) are no longer satisfied with
the improvement of visual quality and try to apply the welldesigned enhancer to the detection task to verify the effectiveness of the algorithm. For example, the improvement of
detection performance on the Dark Face (Yang et al. 2020b;
Liu et al. 2021b) dataset is a crucial experiment to demonstrate enhanced performance. However, these works often
bring limited performance improvement, and it is even better
to directly detect low light images. An intuitive explanation
is that these enhancements are designed for human-friendly
visual quality (Lore, Akintayo, and Sarkar 2017; Wei et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018), and are difficult to apply to machine vision tasks focused on high-level semantic
information, e.g., object detection. Certain methods produce
black edges, retain dark noisy areas, or enhance contrast to
improve the overall visual quality, but these enhancements
can have a negative impact on the performance of object detection.
The other type of scheme makes an effort to start from the
perspective of designing detectors in an end-to-end manner.
Through a bidirectional low-level adaptation and multi-task
high-level adaptation scheme, HLA (Wang, Yang, and Liu
2021; Wang et al. 2022) proposed a joint high-low adaptation framework. This method converted a face detector
trained under normal light into a face detector under low
light. While domain adaptation methods can mitigate the
issue of having a limited number of labeled datasets, their
performance improvements were often modest. The method
proposed in REG (Liang et al. 2021) is to seamlessly couple
a cycle exposure generation module and a multiple exposure
detection module, which improved the detection effects by

Object detection in low-light scenarios has attracted much attention in the past few years. A mainstream and representative scheme introduces enhancers as the pre-processing for
regular detectors. However, because of the disparity in task
objectives between the enhancer and detector, this paradigm
cannot shine at its best ability. In this work, we try to arouse
the potential of enhancer + detector. Different from existing works, we extend the illumination-based enhancers (our
newly designed or existing) as a scene decomposition module, whose removed illumination is exploited as the auxiliary
in the detector for extracting detection-friendly features. A
semantic aggregation module is further established for integrating multi-scale scene-related semantic information in the
context space. Actually, our built scheme successfully transforms the “trash” (i.e., the ignored illumination in the detector) into the “treasure” for the detector. Plenty of experiments
are conducted to reveal our superiority against other state-ofthe-art methods. The code will be public if it is accepted.

Introduction
Object detection is a representative, familiar vision task both
in industrial and academic communities. Along with the development of deep learning techniques (Liu et al. 2023a,b),
object detection in the regular environment has achieved
prominent achievements. However, in specific settings, such
as salient object detection (Piao et al. 2019, 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020) and low-light object detection, there remains immense potential for research and optimization. Especially,
images taken in low light conditions (e.g., nighttime) usually contain complex degradation to heavily limit the performance of regular detectors (He et al. 2016; Jin et al. 2021;
Tang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021d; Tang et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2021a, 2020). This degradation can be due to factors such
as noise, low contrast, and insufficient illumination, which
can reduce the visibility of objects and make them hard to
detect. In the following, we will review existing works and
introduce our contributions.

Related Works
In the past few decades, various schemes have emerged for
handling low-light object detection, which can be roughly
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1417

