The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SeqGPT: An Out-of-the-Box Large Language Model for
Open Domain Sequence Understanding
Tianyu Yu1 * , Chengyue Jiang2 * , Chao Lou2 * , Shen Huang4 *
Xiaobin Wang4 , Wei Liu2 , Jiong Cai2 , Yangning Li1 , Yinghui Li1 , Kewei Tu2
Hai-Tao Zheng1 , Ningyu Zhang3 , Pengjun Xie4 , Fei Huang4 , Yong Jiang4†
1

Tsinghua University
ShanghaiTech University
3
Zhejiang University
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
yiranytianyu@gmail.com {jiangchy,louchao}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{pangda,xuanjie.wxb,yongjiang.jy}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract

named entity recognition (NER) and triplets in relation extraction (RE), numerous attempts (Qin et al. 2023; Wei et al.
2023; Wadhwa, Amir, and Wallace 2023; Ashok and Lipton 2023) have been made to apply LLMs to open-domain
NLU tasks through the application of prompt engineering,
mainly due to the LLMs’ exceptional ability of generalization and instruction-following (Figure 1). However, the direct application of LLMs comes with notable drawbacks.
Instruction-following necessitates the use of a sufficiently
large model (Kaplan et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2022b), for example, GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020) has 175B parameters, which
can lead to considerable inference costs and challenges in
customization (Hu et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022a,b). In addition, prompt engineering is crucial to achieve promising performance and ensure adherence to output format standards.
However, it is highly empirical and the models may not consistently abide by it (Chase 2022; Gravitas 2023).

Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive
abilities for open-domain NLP tasks. However, LLMs are
sometimes too footloose for natural language understanding (NLU) tasks which always have restricted output and input format. Their performances on NLU tasks are highly related to prompts or demonstrations and are shown to be poor
at performing several representative NLU tasks, such as event
extraction and entity typing. To this end, we present SeqGPT,
a bilingual (i.e., English and Chinese) open-source autoregressive model specially enhanced for open-domain natural
language understanding. We express all NLU tasks with two
atomic tasks, which define fixed instructions to restrict the
input and output format but still “open” for arbitrarily varied label sets. The model is first instruction-tuned with extremely fine-grained labeled data synthesized by ChatGPT
and then further fine-tuned by 233 different atomic tasks from
152 datasets across various domains. The experimental results show that SeqGPT has decent classification and extraction ability, and is capable of performing language understanding tasks on unseen domains. We also conduct empirical studies on the scaling of data and model size as well
as on the transfer across tasks. Our models are accessible at
https://github.com/Alibaba-NLP/SeqGPT.

1

To perform NLU tasks more effectively, some researchers (Wang et al. 2022a, 2023a; Lu et al. 2023; Chen
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) have focused on continuing to train moderate-sized foundation models (approximately 10B parameters, e.g., BLOOM-7B1 (Scao et al.
2023)), which not only improve computational friendliness
but also deliver competitive capabilities, in a manner of
unifying various tasks. Data consumed in the training procedure can be sourced from either an aggregation of existing close-domain datasets (Wang et al. 2022a, 2023a)
or open-domain but noisy datasets generated through approaches such as weak supervision (Lu et al. 2023) and interaction with LLMs (Wang et al. 2023b). The extra training purportedly empowers moderate-sized models to surpass their large-scale counterparts in zero-shot performance
across various NLU benchmarks. These tuned models can
also provide a stable standard output interface, making evaluation and downstream application convenient.

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have demonstrated their impressive ability across various
NLP tasks (Kaplan et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2022b; Chung
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023c,d,b). Regarding natural language understanding (NLU) tasks, although the next-wordprediction approach utilized by language models implies little bias to the task-specific output structures, such as spans in
*

Equal first authorship.
Corresponding authors.
This work was conducted when Tianyu Yu, Chengyue Jiang, Chao
Lou, Wei Liu, Jiong Cai, Yangning Li and Yinghui Li were interning at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

Our research is in the line of enhancing the NLU ability
of LLMs via training but involves a broader range of NLU
tasks and incorporates a greater diversity of open-domain

19458

