The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Asynchronous Federated Learning with Prospective Momentum
Aggregation and Fine-Grained Correction
Yu Zang1 , Zhe Xue1 * , Shilong Ou1 , Lingyang Chu2 , Junping Du1 , Yunfei Long1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
zyzy@bupt.edu.cn, xuezhe@bupt.edu.cn, osl@bupt.edu.cn, chul9@mcmaster.ca, junpingd@bupt.edu.cn,
longyunfei@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract

Many existing FL methods use a synchronous communication scheme, which requires the participation of a certain
percentage of clients in each round of aggregation (McMahan et al. 2017; Zang et al. 2023; Long et al. 2023; Guan
et al. 2021; Li, Li, and Xue 2022). This may cause high
communication cost and low scalability, especially when the
number of clients is large or when the clients have different
computing power or network conditions. Furthermore, synchronous federated learning (SFL) might not be well-suited
for application scenarios involving heterogeneous devices.
These scenarios often display dynamic attributes, including
variations in device availability and device capabilities (Li
et al. 2020a; Zhuo and Li 2021; Zhuang et al. 2020). Such
attributes can lead to imbalanced and inefficient communication between clients and the server, ultimately diminishing the overall performance and robustness of FL models.
To overcome these limitations, AFL has been proposed as
an alternative communication scheme, which allows clients
to communicate with the server at their own pace without
waiting for others (Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2019). AFL can
enhance the flexibility and scalability of FL by adapting to
various client conditions and reducing communication bottlenecks, making it better suited to meet the challenges of
practical application scenarios.

Asynchronous federated learning (AFL) is a distributed machine learning technique that allows multiple devices to collaboratively train deep learning models without sharing local
data. However, AFL suffers from low efficiency due to poor
client model training quality and slow server model convergence speed, which are a result of the heterogeneous nature
of both data and devices. To address these issues, we propose
Efficient Asynchronous Federated Learning with Prospective Momentum Aggregation and Fine-Grained Correction
(FedAC). Our framework consists of three key components.
The first component is client weight evaluation based on
temporal gradient, which evaluates the client weight based
on the similarity between the client and server update directions. The second component is adaptive server update
with prospective weighted momentum, which uses an asynchronous buffered update strategy and a prospective weighted
momentum with adaptive learning rate to update the global
model in server. The last component is client update with finegrained gradient correction, which introduces a fine-grained
gradient correction term to mitigate the client drift and correct
the client stochastic gradient. We conduct experiments on real
and synthetic datasets, and compare with existing federated
learning methods. Experimental results demonstrate effective
improvements in model training efficiency and AFL performance by our framework.

While AFL has shown promising results in enhancing the
flexibility and scalability of FL, it still faces some challenges
in achieving high efficiency and performance, particularly
in dealing with data heterogeneity and device heterogeneity (Xu et al. 2021). In order to improve the efficiency and
performance of AFL, various approaches have been proposed (Zhang et al. 2021; Li and Wang 2022; He et al. 2022;
Koloskova, Stich, and Jaggi 2022; Jiang et al. 2022). These
predominantly target three key facets: mitigated client staleness, accelerated server convergence speed, and improved
client training quality. First, mitigated client staleness aims
to assign proper weights to different clients based on their
contribution to the global model. This can help alleviate
the adverse impact of device heterogeneity on AFL and enhance the efficiency of updating the global model (Chen,
Sun, and Jin 2019; Shi et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022b). Second, the goal of accelerated server convergence speed is to employ suitable aggregation strategies,
which helps mitigate the impact of straggler devices. This
reduces communication rounds during model convergence,

Introduction
In today’s data-sensitive world, where privacy is paramount,
federated learning (FL) emerges as a promising paradigm.
It enables multiple devices to train deep learning models in
parallel without sharing local data (Li et al. 2020b; Kairouz
et al. 2021). This innovative approach not only safeguards
user privacy but also presents unprecedented opportunities
for achieving data-driven intelligence. In FL, each device
(also called a client) trains a local model on its own data and
periodically communicates with a central server to aggregate
the local models into a global model. The server then broadcasts the updated global model to the clients for the next
round of training. This process is repeated until the global
model converges or meets some predefined criteria.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16642

