The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Collaborative Tooth Motion Diffusion Model in Digital Orthodontics
Yeying Fan1 , Guangshun Wei2 , Chen Wang1 , Shaojie Zhuang1 , Wenping Wang2,3 ,
Yuanfeng Zhou1 *
1

School of Software, Shandong University, China
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, China
3
Texas A&M University, USA
fyy@mail.sdu.edu.cn, guangshunwei@gmail.com, chen.wang@mail.sdu.edu.cn, shjie.zhuang@gmail.com,
wenping@tamu.edu, yfzhou@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Tooth motion generation is an essential task in digital orthodontic treatment for precise and quick dental healthcare,
which aims to generate the whole intermediate tooth motion
process given the initial pathological and target ideal tooth
alignments. Most prior works for multi-agent motion planning problems usually result in complex solutions. Moreover,
the occlusal relationship between upper and lower teeth is
often overlooked. In this paper, we propose a collaborative
tooth motion diffusion model. The critical insight is to remodel the problem as a diffusion process. In this sense, we
model the whole tooth motion distribution with a diffusion
model and transform the planning problem into a sampling
process from this distribution. We design a tooth latent representation to provide accurate conditional guides consisting of
two key components: the tooth frame represents the position
and posture, and the tooth latent shape code represents the
geometric morphology. Subsequently, we present a collaborative diffusion model to learn the multi-tooth motion distribution based on inter-tooth and occlusal constraints, which are
implemented by graph structure and new loss functions, respectively. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments
demonstrate the superiority of our framework in the application of orthodontics compared with state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Our goal is to generate a tooth motion process of
the intermediate tooth alignments (orange) given the initial
alignment (blue) and the target alignment (blue). It shows
the sampling process from the predicted motion distribution
is first from a random normal distribution (leftmost column)
and gradually denoised using a learned denoiser into the final predictions (rightmost column).

processing task (Cui et al. 2021; Qiu et al. 2022; Ma et al.
2020; Cui et al. 2022) and the tooth alignment target prediction (Li et al. 2020a; Wei et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022).
Due to its complexity and challenge, the data-driven tooth
motion generation method remains a blank area.
Previous approaches formulate tooth motion generation
task as a multi-agent motion planning problem by using traditional path planning algorithms such as A-Star (Li and
Yang 2011), particle swarm (Ma et al. 2021), genetic (Li, Li,
and Li 2009) and artificial bee colony algorithms (Li et al.
2020b), which require solving complex optimizations and
separate treatment of the upper and lower jaw, resulting in
the ignorance of the occlusal relationship. Some data-driven
tooth alignment target prediction methods (Wei et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2022) generate the tooth motion process in an
iterative manner. However, these methods directly employ
tooth point cloud data with numerous parameters, leading to
limited tooth motion steps and error accumulation. Instead,
we remodel the tooth motion generation problem as a distribution fitting problem, which samples the motion from the
learned distribution with the given initial and target alignments, as shown in Fig. 1. We aim to directly model the motion distribution of the entire process.
Diffusion-based generative models have achieved remarkable success in path planning (Janner et al. 2022), human

Introduction
The tooth motion generation is a key task in digital orthodontics, which significantly assists dentists in efficiently
making diagnoses or treatment plans. Specifically, given the
initial pathological and target ideal tooth alignments, we
need to generate the motion process that transforms the tooth
alignment from the initial to the target state, as shown in
Fig. 1. At the same time, the tooth motion generation needs
to meet the requirements of no collision, reasonable interaction among multi-tooth, shortest and smooth transition
paths, simultaneously. The whole process of tooth motion
generation is time-consuming and laborious, and the quality
of tooth motion generation relies heavily on the subjective
experience of dentists and technicians. Therefore, developing an automatic and data-driven tooth motion generation
method is essential. However, existing data-driven digital
orthodontics methods mainly focus on the basic tooth data
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1679

