The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Class of Topological Pseudodistances for Fast Comparison of Persistence
Diagrams
Rolando Kindelan Nuñez1 , Mircea Petrache2 , Mauricio Cerda1 * , Nancy Hitschfeld1 *
1

Universidad de Chile
2
UC Chile
{rkindela, nancy}@dcc.uchile.cl, mpetrache@mat.uc.cl, mauricio.cerda@uchile.cl

Abstract

topological information in TDA are Persistence Diagrams
(PDs) (Edelsbrunner and Harer 2010; Zomorodian 2009) or
Persistence Barcodes (Ghrist 2008; Carlsson 2009). TDA
methods are being applied in a growing variety of fields,
including time-series analysis (Seversky, Davis, and Berger
2016; Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017) (Venkataraman, Ramamurthy, and Turaga 2016; Umeda 2017), text data analysis (Wagner and Dłotko 2014; Rawson et al. 2022), molecular chemistry (Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017), climate understanding (Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017), atmospheric
data analysis (Kuhn et al. 2017; Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf
2017), scientific visualization (Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf
2017), cosmology (Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017), combustion simulations (Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017), computational fluid dynamics (Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017),
neurosciences (Sizemore et al. 2019), human motion understanding (Lamar et al. 2016; Hossny et al. 2016; Venkataraman, Ramamurthy, and Turaga 2016), medical applications
(Garside et al. 2019), volcanic eruption analysis (Kuhn et al.
2017; Carr, Garth, and Weinkauf 2017). In the above TDA
applications, TDA has been used as a preprocessing stage for
conventional Machine Learning (ML) algorithms (Ŝkraba
2018), preserving interpretability, or, more rarely, as a tool
to interpret the shape of clouds manipulated via Deep Learning algorithms. The overall idea is to apply persistent homology for each sample and obtain its persistence diagram.
Then the space of persistence diagrams, endowed with a
suitable metric or pseudometric is used as a replacement,
or as an enrichment, of the original dataset. A problem with
comparison metrics between PDs is that they are computationally expensive, especially for PDs coming from H j homology with j > 0, which are a special type of point
clouds in R2 . Computing the distance between two such
PDs is treated as a matching problem between points in the
plane, with stability and theoretical bounds based on the link
with optimal transport distances like Wasserstein Distances
(WDs) (Dobrushin 1970; Cohen-Steiner et al. 2010; Panaretos and Zemel 2019; Bubenik and Elchesen 2022). Since
WD computation for point clouds in dimension d ≥ 2 have
O(n3 )-complexity (Munkres 1957), where n is the number
of points, PD comparison is often a bottleneck in ML data
processing pipelines.

Persistence diagrams (PD)s play a central role in topological
data analysis, and are used in an ever increasing variety of
applications. The comparison of PD data requires computing
comparison metrics among large sets of PDs, with metrics
which are accurate, theoretically sound, and fast to compute.
Especially for denser multi-dimensional PDs, such comparison metrics are lacking. While on the one hand, Wassersteintype distances have high accuracy and theoretical guarantees,
they incur high computational cost. On the other hand, distances between vectorizations such as Persistence Statistics
(PS)s have lower computational cost, but lack the accuracy
guarantees and in general they are not guaranteed to distinguish PDs (i.e. the two PS vectors of different PDs may
be equal). In this work we introduce a class of pseudodistances called Extended Topological Pseudodistances (ETD)s,
which have tunable complexity, and can approximate Sliced
and classical Wasserstein distances at the high-complexity
extreme, while being computationally lighter and close to
Persistence Statistics at the lower complexity extreme, and
thus allow users to interpolate between the two metrics. We
build theoretical comparisons to show how to fit our new distances at an intermediate level between persistence vectorizations and Wasserstein distances. We also experimentally
verify that ETDs outperform PSs in terms of accuracy and
outperform Wasserstein and Sliced Wasserstein distances in
terms of computational complexity.

Introduction
The processing and extraction of information from large
datasets has become increasingly challenging due to the high
dimensionality and noisiness of datasets. An important toolbox for describing the shape of complex data with noise robustness bounds is offered by the emerging research field
of Topological Data Analysis (TDA) (Carlsson 2009; Edelsbrunner and Harer 2010; Cohen-Steiner, Edelsbrunner, and
Harer 2007; Cohen-Steiner et al. 2010), which focuses on
quantifying topological and geometric shape statistics of
point clouds and other datasets.
An important advantage of TDA compared to other methods is the improved interpretability, based on insights from
algebraic topology. The principal approach to encoding
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13202

