The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Domain Generalization with Vital Phase Augmentation
Ingyun Lee, Wooju Lee, Hyun Myung*
Urban Robotics Lab, School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{iglee, dnwn24, hmyung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
I

Deep neural networks have shown remarkable performance
in image classification. However, their performance significantly deteriorates with corrupted input data. Domain generalization methods have been proposed to train robust models against out-of-distribution data. Data augmentation in the
frequency domain is one of such approaches that enable a
model to learn phase features to establish domain-invariant
representations. This approach changes the amplitudes of the
input data while preserving the phases. However, using fixed
phases leads to susceptibility to phase fluctuations because
amplitudes and phase fluctuations commonly occur in outof-distribution. In this study, to address this problem, we
introduce an approach using finite variation of the phases
of input data rather than maintaining fixed phases. Based
on the assumption that the degree of domain-invariant features varies for each phase, we propose a method to distinguish phases based on this degree. In addition, we propose a method called vital phase augmentation (VIPAug) that
applies the variation to the phases differently according to
the degree of domain-invariant features of given phases. The
model depends more on the vital phases that contain more
domain-invariant features for attaining robustness to amplitude and phase fluctuations. We present experimental evaluations of our proposed approach, which exhibited improved
performance for both clean and corrupted data. VIPAug
achieved SOTA performance on the benchmark CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 datasets, as well as near-SOTA performance
on the ImageNet-100 and ImageNet datasets. Our code is
available at https://github.com/excitedkid/vipaug.

Orignial

Amplitude

Phase

Corrupted

Amplitude

Phase

II

III
Reconstructed (a)

Reconstructed (b)

Figure 1. Amplitude and phase of original and blur images,
with reconstructed images. Amplitude and phase fluctuations can be observed in II compared with I. III-(a) retains
vital phases of the original image and sets other phases to 0.
In contrast, III-(b) retains the non-vital phases at the same
ratio and sets other phases to 0. In III, the amplitude of the
original image is kept unchanged. The amplitude and nonvital phases are shown to contain less domain-invariant features.

Introduction
datasets may differ in the real world, deep learning models cannot be trained to compensate for all of the potential
types of data corruption. To address this challenge, domain
generalization methods have been developed to train models to be more robust to out-of-distribution (OOD) data (Lee
and Myung 2022). These techniques aim to minimize any
deterioration in performance on clean data while improving
the performance of deep learning models on corrupted data.
Data augmentation methods have also been proposed
to improve domain generalization. Some of these approaches (Chen et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021) based on the frequency domain show that phases contain domain-invariant
features. To make the models depend on the phases, only the
amplitudes of the input data are varied with several differ-

Deep learning is being actively explored for various applications in computer vision such as image classification and
object detection (He et al. 2016; Tan and Le 2019; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). The rapid development of deep learning methods has led to performance that can surpass that of
human effort on some tasks. For example, deep neural networks (DNNs) can achieve high accuracy on image classification tasks with in-distribution data. However, the realworld performance of DNNs can be poor compared with
that of manual classification by humans (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). Because the distributions of train and test
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2892

