The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stitching Sub-trajectories with Conditional Diffusion Model
for Goal-Conditioned Offline RL
Sungyoon Kim, Yunseon Choi, Daiki E. Matsunaga, Kee-Eung Kim
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{sykim, yschoi, dematsunaga}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Offline Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (Offline
GCRL) is an important problem in RL that focuses on acquiring diverse goal-oriented skills solely from pre-collected
behavior datasets. In this setting, the reward feedback is typically absent except when the goal is achieved, which makes
it difficult to learn policies especially from a finite dataset
of suboptimal behaviors. In addition, realistic scenarios involve long-horizon planning, which necessitates the extraction of useful skills within sub-trajectories. Recently, the conditional diffusion model has been shown to be a promising approach to generate high-quality long-horizon plans for
RL. However, their practicality for the goal-conditioned setting is still limited due to a number of technical assumptions
made by the methods. In this paper, we propose SSD (Subtrajectory Stitching with Diffusion), a model-based offline
GCRL method that leverages the conditional diffusion model
to address these limitations. In summary, we use the diffusion model that generates future plans conditioned on the target goal and value, with the target value estimated from the
goal-relabeled offline dataset. We report state-of-the-art performance in the standard benchmark set of GCRL tasks, and
demonstrate the capability to successfully stitch the segments
of suboptimal trajectories in the offline data to generate highquality plans.

1

Sub-trajectories

Target
value

Conditional Diffusion Model

Figure 1: Our approach uses a diffusion model conditioned on the goal and return-to-go that generates subtrajectories. These sub-trajectories are then be stitched together to achieve the goal.

stitch valuable parts of the behavior in the dataset to generate plans that constitute a policy that achieves a diverse set
of goals. However, especially with sub-optimal behaviors in
the dataset, the sparse nature of the rewards makes it challenging to accurately capture the valuable parts and integrate
them appropriately.
The challenge originating from the sparse rewards becomes more pronounced when agents are tasked with long
planning horizons, exemplified by many practical scenarios
such as a service robot that needs to carry out a long sequence of complex manipulations to accomplish the goal.
While current deep RL algorithms excel at learning policies for short-horizon tasks, they struggle to effectively reason over extended planning horizons (Shah et al. 2022).
Recently, diffusion-based planning methods have been introduced as a promising approach to generate high-quality
long-horizon plans (Janner et al. 2022; Ajay et al. 2023).
However, some of the technical assumptions made by the
methods make them hard to be used directly for GCRL. For
example, Diffuser (Janner et al. 2022) relies on inpainting,
where the last state in the trajectory is set to the goal in order
to generate behaviors that terminate at the goal location. If
the length of the plan is conservatively set to be longer than
the length of the optimal plan, it would end up generating
excessively long trajectories in the aforementioned tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach named SSD

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) (Lange,
Gabel, and Riedmiller 2012; Levine et al. 2020), which
aims to train agents from pre-collected datasets without
any further interaction with the environment, has emerged
as a promising paradigm in RL, in that it addresses the
safety issue associated with exploring directly in the environment. One of the most important factors towards successfully training the agent is to stitch together the segments of
sub-optimal behaviors in the dataset to generate high-quality
behaviors (Kumar et al. 2022).
This stitching behavior becomes even more important
when we consider Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL), where the agent aims to learn a policy that
achieves specified goals. In contrast to traditional RL where
the policy is solely conditioned on states, a GCRL policy is
additionally conditioned on goals. Thus, a GCRL agent is
tasked with learning a goal-conditioned policy prepared for
diverse goals. In order to do so, it is essential to be able to

13160

