The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CFEVER: A Chinese Fact Extraction and VERification Dataset
Ying-Jia Lin, Chun-Yi Lin, Chia-Jen Yeh, Yi-Ting Li,
Yun-Yu Hu, Chih-Hao Hsu, Mei-Feng Lee, Hung-Yu Kao
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
yingjia.lin.public@gmail.com, hykao@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Abstract

Claim: 尼克·貝爾格在 2004 年前往中東尋找生
意商機。(Nick Berg traveled to the Middle East in
2004 looking for business opportunities.)

We present CFEVER, a Chinese dataset designed for Fact
Extraction and VERification. CFEVER comprises 30,012
manually created claims based on content in Chinese
Wikipedia. Each claim in CFEVER is labeled as “Supports”,
“Refutes”, or “Not Enough Info” to depict its degree of factualness. Similar to the FEVER dataset, claims in the “Supports” and “Refutes” categories are also annotated with corresponding evidence sentences sourced from single or multiple pages in Chinese Wikipedia. Our labeled dataset holds
a Fleiss’ kappa value of 0.7934 for five-way inter-annotator
agreement. In addition, through the experiments with the
state-of-the-art approaches developed on the FEVER dataset
and a simple baseline for CFEVER, we demonstrate that our
dataset is a new rigorous benchmark for factual extraction
and verification, which can be further used for developing
automated systems to alleviate human fact-checking efforts.
CFEVER is available at https://ikmlab.github.io/CFEVER.

Evidence:
[wiki/尼克·貝爾格 (Nick Berg)]
他在 2004 年 3 月前往伊拉克 尋找通訊生意商機，自
2004 年 4 月 9 日失蹤。(He went to Iraq in March
2004 to search for communication business opportunities and has been missing since April 9, 2004.)
[wiki/伊拉克 (Iraq)]
伊拉克共和國，通稱伊拉克，位於西亞—中東地區
的共和國。(The Republic of Iraq, commonly known
as Iraq, is a republic located in West Asia the Middle East.)
Verdict: Supports

Introduction
Fact verification involves assessing the truthfulness of
claims presented in text or speech. In recent years, the popularization of media platforms has accelerated the spread of
misinformation, making fact verification a critical task to
prevent the public from being exposed to false information.
However, the process of fact verification typically involves
extensive searches and assessments from many potential
sources conducted by journalists, which is time-consuming
and labor-intensive (Guo, Schlichtkrull, and Vlachos 2022).
Consequently, it is imperative to develop automated fact verification systems to speed up the verification process.
In recent years, researchers have been building factverification systems with deep neural networks (Ma et al.
2016), where the models are provided with a claim and required to determine whether the claim is true or false. A
well-established dataset for fact verification is FEVER (Fact
Extraction and VERification) (Thorne et al. 2018a) and its
shared task (Thorne et al. 2018b). FEVER asks models to extract factual sentences as evidence from the fixed Wikipedia
database and provide a verdict for a given claim. Therefore, the task serves for both verification and evidence extraction for claims. Though FEVER has been widely used

Table 1: An example from the CFEVER dataset. Underlined
words indicate knowledge that should be verified from other
pages in Wikipedia.

as a benchmark for fact verification, the dataset and most of
the other fact verification datasets (Wang 2017; Hanselowski
et al. 2019; Schuster, Fisch, and Barzilay 2021) are created
in English. The dissemination of rumors and fake news is a
serious problem in East Asia, especially in China. Compared
to English, text written in Chinese tends to be more ambiguous and nuanced, making it more difficult for people to identify misinformation. Therefore, it is critical to create a clean
and high-quality dataset as supervised data for Chinese fact
verification. To achieve this goal, Hu et al. (2022) proposed
the CHEF dataset from the sources of the fact-checking and
news websites. However, compared to English fact verification datasets (Augenstein et al. 2019; Kotonya and Toni
2020), the size of CHEF is relatively small, making training
and evaluating fact verification systems challenging. A potential alternative for building Chinese fact verification systems is to take advantage of the multilingual fact-checking
dataset (Nielsen and McConville 2022). Nevertheless, the
Chinese claims in the dataset are still limited in size.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18626

