The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Embedding-Unleashing Video Polyp Segmentation Framework
via Region Linking and Scale Alignment
Zhixue Fang1 , Xinrong Guo1 , Jingyin Lin1 , Huisi Wu1 * , Jing Qin2
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic polyp segmentation from colonoscopy videos is a
critical task for the development of computer-aided screening and diagnosis systems. However, accurate and real-time
video polyp segmentation (VPS) is a very challenging task
due to low contrast between background and polyps and
frame-to-frame dramatic variations in colonoscopy videos.
We propose a novel embedding-unleashing framework consisting of a proposal-generative network (PGN) and an
appearance-embedding network (AEN) to comprehensively
address these challenges. Our framework, for the first time,
models VPS as an appearance-level semantic embedding process to facilitate generate more global information to counteract background disturbances and dramatic variations. Specifically, PGN is a video segmentation network to obtain segmentation mask proposals, while AEN is a network we specially designed to produce appearance-level embedding semantics for PGN, thereby unleashing the capability of PGN in
VPS. Our AEN consists of a cross-scale region linking (CRL)
module and a cross-wise scale alignment (CSA) module. The
former screens reliable background information against background disturbances by constructing linking of region semantics, while the latter performs the scale alignment to resist
dramatic variations by modeling the center-perceived motion dependence with a cross-wise manner. We further introduce a parameter-free semantic interaction to embed the
semantics of AEN into PGN to obtain the segmentation results. Extensive experiments on CVC-612 and SUN-SEG
demonstrate that our approach achieves better performance
than other state-of-the-art methods. Codes are available at
https://github.com/zhixue-fang/EUVPS.

Figure 1: Challenges in VPS, including background disturbances (a)-(c) and dramatic variations (d)-(f). (a)-(c) low
contrast between background and polyps. (d) position variation. (e) size variation. (f) shape variation. Note that (a)-(f)
are strictly adjacent two frames from SUN-SEG.

automatic polyp segmentation from colonoscopy videos is
highly demanded in clinical practice.
Recently, many deep learning methods have achieved remarkable success in image polyp segmentation (IPS) (Fan
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021b,a, 2022; Zhou et al. 2023). However, these methods still struggle to localize the exact location of polyps due to the low contrast between the polyp and
the background (Li et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023), as shown
in Figure 1 (a-c). In addition, real-world clinical diagnosis
is a dynamic procedure, which presents dramatic variations
of polyps in consecutive frames in a video, as shown in Figure 1 (d-f). The existing image-based methods cannot effectively deal with these variations in a real-time manner. To the
end, recently, some video polyp segmentation (VPS) methods (Puyal et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2021a, 2022; Li et al. 2022)
have been proposed, aiming at capturing both static semantics and frame-to-frame dynamic semantics to improve the
segmentation performance.
These VPS methods employ hybrid 2D/3D architectures
(Puyal et al. 2020) or normalized self-attention mechanisms
(Ji et al. 2021a, 2022) to highlight temporal information be-

Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC), a gastrointestinal malignancy, is
the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide (Center et al. 2009). Fortunately, regular screening for polyps,
which are precursors to CRC, is an effective CRC prevention
method. Colonoscopy is a commonly used technique to assist doctors in screening and removing polyps. However, the
entire diagnostic process largely relies on the doctor’s experience, and lack of experience may lead to missed screening
of precancerous lesions. Therefore, accurate and real-time
* Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1744

