The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Domain Contrastive Learning for Time Series Clustering
Furong Peng1, 2 , Jiachen Luo1, 2 , Xuan Lu3 * , Sheng Wang4 , Feijiang Li1, 2
1
Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University
3
College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Shanxi University
4
School of Automation, Zhengzhou University of Aeronautics
pengfr@sxu.edu.cn, luojike1418743@gmail.com, xuanlu@sxu.edu.cn,wangsheng1910@zua.edu.cn, fjli@sxu.edu.cn
2

Time Domain

Abstract
Most deep learning-based time series clustering models concentrate on data representation in a separate process from
clustering. This leads to that clustering loss cannot guide feature extraction. Moreover, most methods solely analyze data
from the temporal domain, disregarding the potential within
the frequency domain.
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel end-toend Cross-Domain Contrastive learning model for time series Clustering (CDCC). Firstly, it integrates the clustering
process and feature extraction using contrastive constraints
at both cluster-level and instance-level. Secondly, the data
is encoded simultaneously in both temporal and frequency
domains, leveraging contrastive learning to enhance withindomain representation. Thirdly, cross-domain constraints are
proposed to align the latent representations and category distribution across domains. With the above strategies, CDCC
not only achieves end-to-end output but also effectively integrates frequency domains. Extensive experiments and visualization analysis are conducted on 40 time series datasets
from UCR, demonstrating the superior performance of the
proposed model.

Cross Domain

Time
Encoder

FFT

Frequency Domain

Frequency
Encoder

Data Augumentation Data Encoding
Data
Augmentation

Positive pair

Negative
pair

Constrative Learning
Instance-wise
projector

Cluster-wise
projector

Figure 1: The framework of cross domain contrastive learning for time series clustering.

Introduction
Data clustering, a technique for exploring data structure, has
attracted significant attention (Li et al. 2018, 2019). Unlike
image or text processing, the temporal variation of the series should be fully considered for similarity measurement,
especially when data are distorted or shifted. Various methods have been proposed, such as Dynamic Time Wrapping
(DTW) (Wang et al. 2018), Longest Common Subsequence
(LCSS) (Górecki 2014), and Pearson correlation coefficient
(Rodgers and Nicewander 1988). However, these methods
have limitations in handling abnormalities, sensitivity, or
complexity for long-term series clustering.
Along with similarity measurement, feature extraction is
also crucial in time series clustering. For example, Zerveas
et al. (Zerveas et al. 2021) utilized the transformer to extract features in an unsupervised manner, achieving superior
results compared to some supervised methods. Tiano et al.
(Tiano, Bonifati, and Ng 2021) proposed extracting statistical features for clustering. However, the extracted features

may not be beneficial for clustering tasks (Q1) if the representation learning is separated from the clustering process.
Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2021a) proposed an unsupervised model
for clustering incomplete time series by integrating the Kmeans objective into an encoder-decoder network. The integration operation enhances the quality of clustering. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that these methods only analyze
time series data from the temporal domain but ignore utilizing the frequency domain information (Q2), which captures
periodic patterns better and is more resilient against noise
and outliers. (Aghabozorgi, Seyed Shirkhorshidi, and Ying
Wah 2015).
To address these issues, a Cross-Domain Contrastive
learning model for time series Clustering (CDCC) is proposed in this paper. Initially, the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) (Brigham and Morrow 1967) is utilized to derive
the frequency spectrum data, and augmentation techniques
are applied to enhance both the temporal and spectrum
data. Then, encoding networks in both domains are used
for feature extraction. Instance-level and cluster-level con-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8921

