The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CaMIL: Causal Multiple Instance Learning for Whole Slide Image Classification
Kaitao Chen1 , Shiliang Sun1 * , Jing Zhao1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
51215901053@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, shiliangsun@gmail.com, jzhao@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

the multiple instance learning (MIL) formulation (Shi et al.
2020; Xiang et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2022; Shao et al. 2021).
In the MIL paradigm, a WSI acts as the bag, while thousands of patches act as instances. A bag is considered positive if it contains at least one positive instance. The popular
MIL method can be divided into three stages: 1) extracting
instance-level features via a deep neural network, 2) aggregating instance-level features into a bag-level feature via a
specific aggregator, and 3) training the classifier with bag
labels for prediction in a fully supervised manner. Current
research mainly focuses on improving aggregators and enhancing the instance-level weakly supervised signal beyond
the bag-level supervision (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018;
Qu et al. 2022c). Some work focuses on extracting superior
features in the first stage, such as through self-supervised
learning and multi-scale learning (Chen and Krishnan 2022;
Chen et al. 2022; Li, Li, and Eliceiri 2021).
Currently, MIL for WSI classification has been equipped
with excellent instance feature extractors and aggregators,
but it is prone to learn spurious associations. The spurious
association is implicit and even unobserved, but it does impair the performance of the model, which has been demonstrated in many tasks (Yang et al. 2021; Tang, Huang, and
Zhang 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Ding et al. 2022). As for the
WSI classification, instances in a bag exhibit high similarity
because they are extracted from the same WSI and share
similar tissue structures. However, significant differences
exist between slides, including differences caused by imaging instruments, staining colors, or tissue types. As shown in
Figure 1, the difference in color between the two samples is
significant, but it is difficult to distinguish between tumors
and normal cells in Figure 1b. Unfortunately, the model may
make mistakes by distinguishing positive and negative bags
based on superficial differences among slides (learned from
the spurious association) rather than essential differences between the tumor and normal tissue (learned by eliminating
the spurious association).
We formally define this spurious association as a challenge in MIL from the causal view. To explore spurious associations, we propose a causal graph based on the structural
causal model (Glymour, Pearl, and Jewell 2016) to depict
the problem, shown in Figure 1c. The variables we study are
denoted as nodes in the graph, including instance-level feature X, bag-level feature Z, model prediction Y , and un-

Whole slide image (WSI) classification is a crucial component in automated pathology analysis. Due to the inherent
challenges of high-resolution WSIs and the absence of patchlevel labels, most of the proposed methods follow the multiple instance learning (MIL) formulation. While MIL has been
equipped with excellent instance feature extractors and aggregators, it is prone to learn spurious associations that undermine the performance of the model. For example, relying
solely on color features may lead to erroneous diagnoses due
to spurious associations between the disease and the color
of patches. To address this issue, we develop a causal MIL
framework for WSI classification, effectively distinguishing
between causal and spurious associations. Specifically, we
use the expectation of the intervention P (Y |do(X)) for bag
prediction rather than the traditional likelihood P (Y |X). By
applying the front-door adjustment, the spurious association
is effectively blocked, where the intervened mediator is aggregated from patch-level features. We evaluate our proposed
method on two publicly available WSI datasets, Camelyon16
and TCGA-NSCLC. Our causal MIL framework shows outstanding performance and is plug-and-play, seamlessly integrating with various feature extractors and aggregators.

1

Introduction

Whole slide scanning enables the digital preservation of
pathology tissues as whole slide images (WSIs), which is
an essential component of modern digital pathology’s automated analysis (Wang et al. 2019; Qu et al. 2022a,b). The
use of deep learning models for automated WSI diagnostics holds immense potential (Qu et al. 2022c; Li, Li, and
Eliceiri 2021; Campanella et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2022;
Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018; Lu et al. 2021; Hou et al.
2016). However, due to extremely high resolutions and a
huge amount of memory, two challenges have arisen for
deep learning methods. Firstly, it is infeasible to input WSIs
directly into a neural network. Secondly, WSIs lack patchlevel annotations because lesion areas need to be labeled
by expert pathologists, which is a time-consuming process,
especially when dealing with giant sizes. To address these
issues, several weakly supervised methods for WSI classification have been proposed, with most methods following
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1120

