The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Orthogonal Dictionary Guided Shape Completion Network for Point Cloud
Pingping Cai, Deja Scott, Xiaoguang Li, Song Wang
University of South Carolina, USA
{pcai,ds17,xl22}@email.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
Point cloud shape completion, which aims to reconstruct the
missing regions of the incomplete point clouds with plausible shapes, is an ill-posed and challenging task that benefits
many downstream 3D applications. Prior approaches achieve
this goal by employing a two-stage completion framework,
generating a coarse yet complete seed point cloud through
an encoder-decoder network, followed by refinement and upsampling. However, the encoded features suffer from information loss of the missing portion, leading to an inability of
the decoder to reconstruct seed points with detailed geometric clues. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel Orthogonal
Dictionary Guided Shape Completion Network (ODGNet).
The proposed ODGNet consists of a Seed Generation U-Net,
which leverages multi-level feature extraction and concatenation to significantly enhance the representation capability of
seed points, and Orthogonal Dictionaries that can learn shape
priors from training samples and thus compensate for the information loss of the missing portions during inference. Our
design is simple but to the point, extensive experiment results indicate that the proposed method can reconstruct point
clouds with more details and outperform previous state-ofthe-art counterparts. The implementation code is available at
https://github.com/corecai163/ODGNet.

(a) Input

(b) SnowFlake

(c) Ours

(d) Ground Truth

Figure 1: The point cloud completion results from different
methods. We see that the previous method, SnowFlake (Xiang et al. 2021), cannot reconstruct the detailed shape for
the missing portion, while our proposed method can infer a
plausible shape.

points. Moreover, this completion task is regarded as an illposed inverse problem. In other words, a single incomplete
input can correspond to multiple plausible outputs, further
complicating the inference of possible geometric details for
the missing portion.
Early traditional methods for solving this ill-posed problem relied on shape priors or hand-crafted geometric regularities (Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013; Lozes, Elmoataz,
and Lézoray 2014; Hu, Fu, and Guo 2019; Pauly et al.
2008). However, these approaches have been overshadowed
by deep learning-based methods. Previous state-of-the-art
(SOTA) deep learning solutions follow the two-stage completion framework (Wenxiao Zhang 2020; Yan et al. 2022;
Xiang et al. 2021, 2022; Pan et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021;
Zhou et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Yu et al.
2023), where it first generates coarse but complete seed point
clouds via an encoder-decoder network, and then employs
an upsampling network to upsample and refine them. However, the encoded features derived from incomplete inputs
represent only partial information and lack detailed geometric features for the missing parts. As a result, the seed points
generated by the decoder may possess limited representation
capability, which can potentially bottleneck the subsequent
upsampling performance. Simply increasing the complexity of the upsampling network, as done by many previous
works (e.g., SnowFlakeNet), might bring only limited benefit to the final performance, as illustrated in Figure 1, if the
seed point clouds fail to adequately represent the underlying
point-cloud shape.
Thus, in this paper, we present a ”simple but straightforward” network, ODGNet, that mitigates the bottleneck
observed in previous techniques and significantly improves

Introduction
Point cloud is an efficient data structure for representing
3D objects in the form of a set of point coordinates. Despite its advantages, raw point clouds collected by existing
3D sensors often suffer from sparsity and incompleteness
(Geiger et al. 2013), which significantly hinders their usability in downstream applications like autonomous driving
(Zeng et al. 2018; Li et al. 2021), object detection (Zhou
and Tuzel 2018; Shi and Rajkumar 2020), and segmentation (Zhang et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2022). Therefore, inferring and reconstructing the missing regions of the incomplete point cloud is an inevitable and essential task in 3D
computer vision. However, this point cloud completion task
is extremely challenging. The successful reconstruction of
correct shapes in the missing portions relies on a combination of high-level semantic understanding of the target object
and low-level spatial and geometric relationships of nearby
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

864

