The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Let All Be Whitened: Multi-Teacher Distillation for Efficient Visual Retrieval
Zhe Ma1 , Jianfeng Dong2,4 * , Shouling Ji1 , Zhenguang Liu1 * , Xuhong Zhang1 , Zonghui Wang1 * ,
Sifeng He3 , Feng Qian3 , Xiaobo Zhang3 , Lei Yang3
1
Zhejiang University,
Zhejiang Gongshang University,
3
Ant Group,
4
Zhejiang Key Lab of E-Commerce
{mz.rs, sji, zhangxuhong, zhwang}@zju.edu.cn, {dongjf24, liuzhenguang2008, hsf215kg}@gmail.com,
{youzhi.qf, yl149505}@antgroup.com, ayou.zxb@antfin.com
2

Abstract

GeM
AP-GeM
SOLAR
DELG
DOLG

Visual retrieval aims to search for the most relevant visual
items, e.g., images and videos, from a candidate gallery with a
given query item. Accuracy and efficiency are two competing
objectives in retrieval tasks. Instead of crafting a new method
pursuing further improvement on accuracy, in this paper we
propose a multi-teacher distillation framework Whiten-MTD,
which is able to transfer knowledge from off-the-shelf pretrained retrieval models to a lightweight student model for efficient visual retrieval. Furthermore, we discover that the similarities obtained by different retrieval models are diversified
and incommensurable, which makes it challenging to jointly
distill knowledge from multiple models. Therefore, we propose to whiten the output of teacher models before fusion,
which enables effective multi-teacher distillation for retrieval
models. Whiten-MTD is conceptually simple and practically
effective. Extensive experiments on two landmark image retrieval datasets and one video retrieval dataset demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method, and its good balance of retrieval performance and efficiency. Our source code
is released at https://github.com/Maryeon/whiten mtd.

1.0

0.5

GeM
AP-GeM
SOLAR
DELG
DOLG

0.0

0.5

(a) Without whitening.

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

(b) With whitening.

Figure 1: Cosine similarity distributions of five existing
landmark image retrieval models on GLDv2-clean dataset.
Their similarity distributions are clearly different, making
the similarities between different models incommensurable.
Such discrepancy can be alleviated through whitening their
output features.

available, it motivates us to make a complementary integration of them, in other words, take their essence and discard
the dregs. On the other hand, despite the significant performance improvement boosted by DNNs, a major concern is
their heavy overhead of computation. A compact and efficient retrieval model is required for large-scale scenarios.
In this work, we jointly take the two considerations by aggregating multiple cumbersome pre-trained retrieval models
into a more efficient one. To this end, we resort to knowledge
distillation (Hinton et al. 2014; Passalis and Tefas 2018;
Beyer et al. 2022), which is a technique proposed to transfer the knowledge from a large model or an ensemble of
large models (teachers) to a small model (student) to reduce
computation overhead, without significant loss in performance. We propose a multi-teacher distillation framework
for efficient visual retrieval, where off-the-shelf pre-trained
retrieval models are regarded as teachers and distilled to a
more lightweight student model.
The keys to multi-teacher distillation are the knowledge
to be transferred from teachers to a student, and the fusion strategy to combine the knowledge from teachers. The
knowledge used in existing works can be categorized into
feature-based (Hinton et al. 2014; Romero et al. 2015;
Beyer et al. 2022) and relation-based (Yim et al. 2017;
Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2019; Park et al. 2019; Passalis,

Introduction
Visual retrieval, such as image retrieval and video retrieval,
is a long-standing problem in the computer vision community, which aims to search for the most similar items to a
given query from a large number of candidates (Radenović,
Tolias, and Chum 2018; Revaud et al. 2019; Noh et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2021). It supports a wide range of applications
including instance matching (Cao, Araujo, and Sim 2020;
Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2018; Revaud et al. 2019),
fine-grained recognition (Dong et al. 2021), product recommendation (Kim et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2018), etc.
Recent visual retrieval methods have been dominated by
the Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (He et al. 2016; Vaswani
et al. 2017) based solutions. Given an overview of recent developments on visual retrieval problems (Chen et al. 2023;
Shen, Hong, and Hao 2020), there are two considerations
that must be taken into account. On the one hand, with the
large amounts of pre-trained retrieval models being publicly
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4126

