The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bayesian Inference with Complex Knowledge Graph Evidence
Armin Toroghi1 , Scott Sanner1,2
1

Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Vector Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Toronto
armin.toroghi@mail.utoronto.ca, ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract

for AI agents presents significant challenges due to their inherent incompleteness and noisiness (Pujara, Augustine, and
Getoor 2017). These challenges have motivated extensive research about different methodologies for performing reasoning and inference over KGs. To date, most existing works
have devoted their focus to inference using atomic level observations, i.e. observations that involve KG triples, for tasks
such as KG completion (Bordes et al. 2013), or entity classification (Steenwinckel et al. 2022). However, more complex
tasks such as query answering (QA) (Ojokoh and Adebisi
2018) or interactive recommendation (He, Parra, and Verbert
2016) that can potentially leverage KG content may generally require more complex combinations of logical operators
(conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨), negation (¬)) and quantifiers (existential (∃), universal (∀)) over atomic KG triples.
Concrete examples of such complex evidence involving
logical operators can be observed in the task of KG-based
query answering (KGQA) (Zhang et al. 2018; Jain 2016)
with queries such as “which diseases cause fever (∧) are
transmitted by an (∃) insect endemic to New Zealand (∨)
Australia”. Or in interactive movie recommendation (Sun
and Zhang 2018), a user may ask for a “Korean (∧) action movie (∧) featuring a (∃) female actress practicing
a (∃) martial art”. Although works in KGQA have proposed frameworks to answer complex KG-based queries involving logical operators (Arakelyan et al. 2020; Ren, Hu,
and Leskovec 2020), their methodologies only operate in a
single-shot manner, leaving open the question of how to reason over KGs in a sequentially interactive setting. Note that
in both above examples, additional evidence could be provided in an incremental setting, e.g., information about the
presence of other symptoms for narrowing down the answer
in the KGQA example, or user critiques regarding different
genres of recommended movies to narrow down the set of
preferred items in the interactive recommendation example.
The sequential inference required in such applications has
a high resemblance to the belief tracking problem for which
Bayesian Inference methods have been extensively leveraged (Roumeliotis and Bekey 2000; Henderson 2015). Inspired by this similarity, we cast the problem of reasoning over unobserved KG entities with incremental complex evidence as a Bayesian filtering problem, and propose a novel framework for Bayesian Inference with Complex Knowledge Graph Evidence (BIKG) which is based on

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) provide a widely used format for
representing entities and their relationships and have found
use in diverse applications including question answering and
recommendation. A majority of current research on KG inference has focused on reasoning with atomic facts (triples) and
has disregarded the possibility of making complex evidential observations involving logical operators (negation, conjunction, disjunction) and quantifiers (existential, universal).
Further, while the application of complex evidence has been
explored in KG-based query answering (KGQA) research, in
many practical online settings, observations are made sequentially. For example, in KGQA, additional context may be incrementally suggested to narrow down the answer. Or in interactive recommendation, user critiques may be expressed
sequentially in order to narrow down a set of preferred items.
Both settings are indicative of information filtering or tracking tasks that are reminiscent of belief tracking in Bayesian
inference. In fact, in this paper, we precisely cast the problem of belief tracking over unknown KG entities given incremental complex KG evidence as a Bayesian filtering problem. Specifically, we leverage Knowledge-based Model Construction (KBMC) over the logical KG evidence to instantiate a Markov Random Field (MRF) likelihood representation
to perform closed-form Bayesian inference with complex KG
evidence (BIKG). We experimentally evaluate BIKG in incremental KGQA and interactive recommendation tasks demonstrating that it outperforms non-incremental methodologies
and leads to better incorporation of conjunctive evidence vs.
existing complex KGQA methods like CQD that leverage
fuzzy T-norm operators. Overall, this work demonstrates a
novel, efficient, and unified perspective of logic, KGs, and
online inference through the lens of closed-form BIKG.

Introduction
Effective storage and utilization of information from different sources is a central problem in AI. In recent years,
the use of Knowledge Graphs (KG) for storing and representing relational and interconnected domain knowledge
has garnered substantial interest in various domains ranging from healthcare (Rastogi and Zaki 2020) to recommendation (Guo et al. 2020). Despite the considerable advantages offered by KGs, leveraging them as knowledge bases
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20550

