The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Nonparametric Regression under Poisoning Attack
Puning Zhao, Zhiguo Wan*
Zhejiang Lab
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{pnzhao,wanzhiguo}@zhejianglab.com

trimmed mean, median-of-means and M -estimators. In recent years, many new methods are proposed for high dimensional problems with optimal statistical rates. These methods are summarized in (Steinhardt 2018; Diakonikolas and
Kane 2019, 2023). For example, (Diakonikolas et al. 2016,
2017; Hopkins and Li 2018; Cheng et al. 2019) have solved
some basic problems such as mean and covariance estimation. The idea of these research can then be used in machine
learning problems with poisoning attack, which means that
some training samples are modified by adversaries. (Bakshi
and Prasad 2021; Diakonikolas, Kong, and Stewart 2019)
designed some robust methods for linear regression. (Diakonikolas et al. 2019; Steinhardt, Koh, and Liang 2017)
proposed a meta algorithm for robust learning with parametric models. There are also several other works that focus on
general robust empirical risk minimization problems (Prasad
et al. 2020; Jambulapati et al. 2021).
Despite these previous works toward robust learning
problems, most of them focus on parametric models. However, for nonparametric methods such as kernel (Nadaraya
1964) and k nearest neighbor estimator, defense strategies against poisoning attack still need further exploration
(Salibian-Barrera 2022). Actually, designing robust techniques is indeed more challenging for nonparametric methods than parametric one. For parametric models, the parameters are estimated using full dataset, while nonparametric
methods have to rely on local training data around the query
point. Even if the ratio of attacked samples among the whole
dataset is small, the local anomaly ratio in the neighborhood
of the query point can be large. As a result, the estimated
function value at such query point can be totally wrong. Despite such difficulty, in many real scenarios, due to problem
complexity or lack of prior knowledge, parametric models
are not always available. Therefore, we hope to explore effective schemes to overcome the robustness issue of nonparametric regression.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical study about robust
nonparametric regression problem under poisoning attack.
In particular, we hope to investigate the theoretical limit of
this problem, and design a method to achieve this limit. Towards this goal, we make the following contributions:
Firstly, we propose and analyze an estimator that minimizes a weighted Huber loss, which is quadratic with small
input, and linear with large input. Such design achieves a

Abstract
This paper studies robust nonparametric regression, in which
an adversarial attacker can modify the values of up to q samples from a training dataset of size N . Our initial solution is
an M-estimator based on Huber loss minimization. Compared
with simple kernel regression, i.e. the Nadaraya-Watson estimator, this method can significantly weaken the impact of
malicious samples on the regression performance. We provide the convergence rate as well as the corresponding minimax lower bound. The result shows that, with proper bandwidth selection, ℓ∞ error is minimax optimal. The ℓ2 error is
optimal with relatively small q, but is suboptimal with larger
q. The reason is that this estimator is vulnerable if there are
many attacked samples concentrating in a small region. To
address this issue, we propose a correction method by projecting the initial estimate to the space of Lipschitz functions.
The final estimate is nearly minimax optimal for arbitrary q,
up to a ln N factor.

Introduction
In the era of big data, it is common for some samples to
be corrupted due to various reasons, such as transmission
errors, system malfunctions, malicious attacks, etc. The values of these samples may be altered in any way, rendering
many traditional machine learning techniques less effective.
Consequently, evaluating the effects of these corrupted samples, and making corresponding robust strategies, have become critical tasks in the research community (Natarajan
et al. 2013; Van Rooyen and Williamson 2017; Song et al.
2022).
Among all types of data contamination, adversarial attack
is of particular interest in recent years (Biggio, Nelson, and
Laskov 2012; Xiao et al. 2015; Jagielski et al. 2018; Szegedy
et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry
et al. 2018; Mao et al. 2019), in which there exists a malicious adversary who aims at deteriorating our model performance. With this goal, the attacker alters the values of some
samples using a carefully designed strategy. To cope with
these attacks, robust statistics comes into being, which has
been widely discussed in existing literatures (Huber 1981;
Maronna et al. 2019). Several commonly used methods are
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17007

