The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Point2Real: Bridging the Gap between Point Cloud and
Realistic Image for Open-World 3D Recognition
Hanxuan Li1,2 , Bin Fu1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences(CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{lihanxuan21s, fubin21b, wangruiping, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

Recognition in open-world scenarios is an important
and challenging field, where Vision-Language Pre-training
paradigms have greatly impacted the 2D domain. This inspires a growing interest in introducing 2D pre-trained models, such as CLIP, into the 3D domain to enhance the ability
of point cloud understanding. Considering the difference between discrete 3D point clouds and real-world 2D images, reducing the domain gap is crucial. Some recent works project
point clouds onto a 2D plane to enable 3D zero-shot capabilities without training. However, this simplistic approach
leads to an unclear or even distorted geometric structure, limiting the potential of 2D pre-trained models in 3D. To address the domain gap, we propose Point2Real, a training-free
framework based on the realistic rendering technique to automate the transformation of the 3D point cloud domain into
the Vision-Language domain. Specifically, Point2Real leverages a shape recovery module that devises an iterative ballpivoting algorithm to convert point clouds into meshes, narrowing the gap in shape at first. To simulate photo-realistic
images, a set of refined textures as candidates is applied
for rendering, where the CLIP confidence is utilized to select the suitable one. Moreover, to tackle the viewpoint challenge, a heuristic multi-view adapter is implemented for feature aggregation, which exploits the depth surface as an effective indicator of view-specific discriminability for recognition. We conduct experiments on ModelNet10, ModelNet40,
and ScanObjectNN datasets, and the results demonstrate that
Point2Real outperforms other approaches in zero-shot and
few-shot tasks by a large margin.

1

Project

Point2Real

Source
Point Cloud Domain

𝑮𝑨𝑷𝑷𝟐𝑹

𝑮𝑨𝑷𝒑𝒐𝒊𝒏𝒕

𝑮𝑨𝑷𝒑𝒓𝒐𝒋𝒆𝒄𝒕

Target
Vision-Language Domain

𝑮𝑨𝑷𝑷𝟐𝑹 < 𝑮𝑨𝑷𝒑𝒓𝒐𝒋𝒆𝒄𝒕 < 𝑮𝑨𝑷𝒑𝒐𝒊𝒏𝒕

Figure 1: The Effect of Point2Real in Reducing Domain Gap.
Assuming different types of visual data, such as the 3D
Point Cloud domain and the 2D Vision-Language domain,
as points in a domain manifold, the distance of the shortest geodesic path connecting them represents the domain
gap. Converting point clouds into realistic rendering images,
Point2Real can reduce this gap to GAPP 2R , which is better
than projection.

to transfer similar paradigms to 3D. However, compared
to the billions of data used to train 2D Vision-Language
models, 3D annotated data is extremely scarce currently.
Hence, to realize open-world 3D recognition, introducing
pre-trained 2D models into the 3D domain is more practical than training a 3D large-scale model from scratch.
Point cloud data is unordered, sparse, and discrete, which
is different from the grid-based natural images used in 2D
pre-training. There is a huge domain gap between the point
cloud domain and the 2D Vision-Language domain, which
hinders the direct transfer from 2D pre-trained models to the
3D domain. Some efforts have been made to reduce the domain gap through the depth maps of point clouds. Pioneer
work (Zhang et al. 2022) projects point clouds into depth
maps to obtain CLIP-recognizable images. Calculating the
similarity with depth maps and CLIP-encoded 3D category
texts, this framework can achieve zero-shot transfer capability without training on 3D datasets. The following works
(Zhu et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023) aim to refine the gen-

Introduction

In the field of 3D point cloud understanding, the open-world
setting has been receiving increasing attention(Ha and Song
2023; Zhang, Dong, and Ma 2023). Open-world scenarios are filled with categories unseen in the datasets, which
poses huge challenges for the traditional method trained
on close-set. Similar open-world problems also exist in the
2D domain, and these problems have been significantly
mitigated with the development of Vision-Language Pretraining. Methods like CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) align visual and textual modalities to equip the model with strong
zero-shot transfer capabilities, which sparks the motivation
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3055

