The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dissenting Explanations:
Leveraging Disagreement to Reduce Model Overreliance
Omer Reingold* , Judy Hanwen Shen* , Aditi Talati*
Stanford University
{reingold, atalati, jhshen}@stanford.edu

Abstract

Srinivas, and Lakkaraju 2022; Krishna et al. 2022). While
multiple explanations for the same model question the validity of explainability tools, diverse and even conflicting
explanations for the same decision might better calibrate
trust and illustrate uncertainty in a model-aided decisionmaking setting. Instead of rejecting explanations altogether,
the existence of multiple plausible explanations motivates
the perspective that explanations can be treated as arguments
supporting a given model recommendation in the decisionmaking process.
With the framework of explanations as arguments, we
may naturally construct a courtroom analogy, in which human decision makers are the judges deciding whether the
model prediction is trustworthy. When a singular explanation is provided, a decision-maker may be unduly influenced
to trust the prediction. Indeed, Bansal et al. (2021) show that
when explanations are provided, humans are more likely to
follow a model decision regardless of whether the model is
correct. Thus, while an explanation provides a supporting
argument for a prediction, we must also provide alternative
arguments, arguing against the model prediction, in order
to accommodate meticulous human decision-making. In the
context of a consequential legal decision, presenting both
sides amounts to procedural due process.
In this paper, we introduce the notion of dissenting explanations: explanations for an opposing model prediction to
some reference model. To illustrate the importance of these
explanations, we focus, from human study to proposed techniques, on a single task: deceptive hotel reviews classification. We perform a study to show that, on this difficultto-verify task, dissenting explanations indeed reduce model
overreliance without reducing the accuracy of the human
predictions. Finally, since dissenting explanations are a useful tool for reducing overreliance, even outside the context
of existing model multiplicity, we develop methods to induce predictive multiplicity and create dissenting explanations. We present techniques for generating global disagreement with respect to any black-box model, as well as local
disagreement on any instance; these methods achieve disagreement without sacrificing model accuracy 1 .

While modern explanation methods have been shown to be
inconsistent and contradictory, the explainability of blackbox models nevertheless remains desirable. When the role
of explanations extends from understanding models to aiding
decision making, the semantics of explanations is not always
fully understood – to what extent do explanations “explain”
a decision and to what extent do they merely advocate for
a decision? Can we help humans gain insights from explanations accompanying correct predictions and not over-rely
on incorrect predictions advocated for by explanations? With
this perspective in mind, we introduce the notion of dissenting explanations: conflicting predictions with accompanying
explanations. We first explore the advantage of dissenting explanations in the setting of model multiplicity, where multiple
models with similar performance may have different predictions. Through a human study on the task of identifying deceptive reviews, we demonstrate that dissenting explanations
reduce overreliance on model predictions, without reducing
overall accuracy. Motivated by the utility of dissenting explanations we present both global and local methods for their
generation.

Introduction
The development of increasingly capable AI systems has
motivated the adoption of AI-assisted decision-making. In
high-stakes settings such as loan approval and patient diagnosis, it is imperative for humans to understand how any
given model came to its decision. However, with the success
of deep learning, many large state-of-the-art models are not
easily interpretable. Thus, explainability (XAI) methods are
crucial for providing justification for the decisions of blackbox models. Such explanations justify a model’s prediction
on a singular input example, and their goal is to provide accurate information while also being succinct and easy for
humans to parse (Burkart and Huber 2020).
Wang and Yin (2021) list the desiderata of explanations
as (1) model understanding, (2) helping people recognize
model uncertainty, and (3) calibrating trust for AI models.
Towards the goal of understanding a single model, recent
works have shown that explanations generated from different methods based on the same instance can conflict (Han,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Full paper with appendices available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2307.07636

21537

