The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Curriculum-Enhanced Residual Soft An-Isotropic Normalization for
Over-Smoothness in Deep GNNs
Jin Li1, 2 , Qirong Zhang1 , Shuling Xu1 , Xinlong Chen1 , Longkun Guo1, 3 , Yang-Geng Fu1*
1

College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
2
AI Thrust, Information Hub, HKUST (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
3
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Networks,
Shandong Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan, China
{jslijin2015, shuling xu}@outlook.com, {jiusizhang1, fjxinlong, longkun.guo}@gmail.com, fu@fzu.edu.cn
Abstract
Despite Graph neural networks’ significant performance gain
over many classic techniques in various graph-related downstream tasks, their successes are restricted in shallow models due to over-smoothness and the difficulties of optimizations among many other issues. In this paper, to alleviate the
over-smoothing issue, we propose a soft graph normalization
method to preserve the diversities of node embeddings and
prevent indiscrimination due to possible over-closeness. Combined with residual connections, we analyze the reason why
the method can effectively capture the knowledge in both input
graph structures and node features even with deep networks.
Additionally, inspired by Curriculum Learning that learns easy
examples before the hard ones, we propose a novel labelsmoothing-based learning framework to enhance the optimization of deep GNNs, which iteratively smooths labels in an
auxiliary graph and constructs many gradual non-smooth tasks
for extracting increasingly complex knowledge and gradually
discriminating nodes from coarse to fine. The method arguably
reduces the risk of overfitting and generalizes better results. Finally, extensive experiments are carried out to demonstrate the
effectiveness and potential of the proposed model and learning
framework through comparison with twelve existing baselines
including the state-of-the-art methods on twelve real-world
node classification benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020) are widely
used state-of-the-art techniques to solve many tasks on graph
(e.g., semi-supervised node classification (Feng et al. 2020),
link prediction (Yun et al. 2021), graph classification (Xie
et al. 2022), and community detection (Liu et al. 2021), etc).
Also, GNNs have achieved outstanding results recently in
many domains including texts (Fei, Zhang, and Zhou 2021),
images (Guan et al. 2022), traffic (Choi et al. 2022), molecule
(Han et al. 2022), and even electroencephalogram (i.e., EEG)
(Demir et al. 2021) compared to classic methods (e.g., CNN
and RNN). They are previously derived in spectral domain
based on the eigen-decomposition of graph Laplacian (e.g.,
Spectral-CNN (Bruna et al. 2014) and ChebNet (Defferrard,
Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016)). Graph Convolutional
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13528

Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) is proposed to
accelerate it via a linear approximation of universal filters
on graph signals and also give an intuitive interpretation
on spatial domain, i.e., message passing, which is further
developed by SGC (Wu et al. 2019), GAT (Veličković et al.
2018), GIN (Xu et al. 2019), and MPNN (Gilmer et al. 2017).
More recently, some deep GNNs (Chen et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2019) are proposed to further improve the expressive
power of GNNs in light of successes of other deep neural
networks, e.g., CNN and RNN. But unfortunately, GNNs are
not easy to go deep and often suffer from severe performance
degradation due to, e.g., over-smoothness (Liu, Gao, and Ji
2020), difficulty in optimization (Yang et al. 2020), memory
limitation (Li et al. 2021), time consumption (Li et al. 2021),
and over-squashing (Topping et al. 2022). In this paper, we
mainly focus on the first two problems, i.e., improvements
will be devised with respect to the following two aspects: 1)
structures; and 2) the learning process.
In order to alleviate over-smoothness, various kinds of
techniques (Chen et al. 2022) are proposed to prevent overcloseness of node embeddings or reduce the extent of aggregations including graph normalization (Zhou et al. 2021),
residual connections (Chen et al. 2020), and random dropping (Huang et al. 2020), etc. Existing graph normalization
techniques directly operate with norms, means, variances
or distances of embeddings, and can effectively reduce the
over-closeness. However, it’s still unclear what or how much
knowledge they can preserve in deep layers via only these
numeric-related operations. Some residual connections methods are proven to keep useful feature semantics as GNNs go
deep, but they may risk missing structural knowledge, e.g.,
GCNII (Chen et al. 2020). Random dropping approaches are
devised mainly for regularization without theoretical guarantees for alleviating information loss in over-smoothness
and seldom perform competitively compared to other stateof-the-arts.
Thus for structures, we propose R-SoftGraphAIN, a residual connections-based soft graph normalization layer, which
can be viewed as a combination of a novel soft graph normalization operation and two improved residual connections.
Compared to Pairnorm (Zhao and Akoglu 2020), it can normalize embeddings in an an-isotropic manner instead of
equally treating all nodes. Compared to GCNII, it can be

