The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimize & Reduce: A Top-Down Approach for Image Vectorization
Or Hirschorn* , Amir Jevnisek* , Shai Avidan
Tel-Aviv University, Israel
orhirschorn@mail.tau.ac.il, amirjevn@mail.tau.ac.il, avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

MSE vs Number of Vector Shapes

Abstract
4

Vector image representation is a popular choice when editability and flexibility in resolution are desired. However,
most images are only available in raster form, making
raster-to-vector image conversion (vectorization) an important task. Classical methods for vectorization are either
domain-specific or yield an abundance of shapes which limits
editability and interpretability. Learning-based methods, that
use differentiable rendering, have revolutionized vectorization, at the cost of poor generalization to out-of-training distribution domains, and optimization-based counterparts are
either slow or produce non-editable and redundant shapes.
In this work, we propose Optimize & Reduce (O&R), a topdown approach to vectorization that is both fast and domainagnostic. O&R aims to attain a compact representation of
input images by iteratively optimizing Bézier curve parameters and significantly reducing the number of shapes, using a devised importance measure. We contribute a benchmark of five datasets comprising images from a broad spectrum of image complexities - from emojis to natural-like
images. Through extensive experiments on hundreds of images, we demonstrate that our method is domain agnostic and
outperforms existing works in both reconstruction and perceptual quality for a fixed number of shapes. Moreover, we
show that our algorithm is ×10 faster than the state-of-the-art
optimization-based method. Our code is publicly available:
https://github.com/ajevnisek/optimize-and-reduce

LIVE
DiffVG
Ours

MSE

3
2
1
0

8

16
32
number of vector shapes

64

- Runtime indicated by marker-size (↓ better)
Figure 1: Optimize & Reduce: A fast Top-Down approach
for raster to vector image conversion, aiming at a low budget of shapes for vectorization. Our method (green circles)
achieves lowest MSE error (y-axis) for all shape counts (xaxis) with a low runtime cost (size of circle).

time aspects. Furthermore, our method surpasses DiffVG (Li
et al. 2020) in terms of minimizing MSE.
Vector images are an appealing image representation for
those seeking infinite resolution and editability. Vector Images are made up of lines and shapes with clear mathematical formulations. A graphical renderer processes the mathematical formulations and renders the image at any specified resolution. This resolution-free property makes them
suitable for cases where the image is presented in multiple
resolutions, such as commercial logos. A single vector image can be resized to fit the resolution of a business card, a
header image in a formal letter, a T-shirt, or a billboard.
The task of vectorization has been studied extensively
for many decades (Jimenez and Navalon 1982). We identify two primary drawbacks of classical algorithms for vectorization. First, they are often tailored to a specific domain
of images such as fonts (Itoh and Ohno 1993), line drawings (Chiang, Tue, and Leu 1998; Noris et al. 2013), cartoons (Zhang et al. 2009) or cliparts (Favreau, Lafarge, and
Bousseau 2017; Dominici et al. 2020). Second, they yield
an abundance of shapes making the representation complex.
For instance, Potrace (Selinger 2003) generates thousands of

Introduction
Vectorization refers to the process of transforming a raster
image into a vector image. While it is possible to create a
vector image with a shape for each pixel, ensuring a perfect reconstruction, this approach lacks compactness and editability. The question arises: can we achieve compact vectorization without compromising quality?
This paper aims to achieve vectorization while minimizing shape count. We show in Figure 1 the tradeoff between shape count and Mean Squared Error (MSE) for
our method and two comparative techniques. Our approach
demonstrates better performance compared to the state-ofthe-art LIVE method (Ma et al. 2022) in both MSE and run* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2148

