The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PMET: Precise Model Editing in a Transformer
Xiaopeng Li, Shasha Li* , Shezheng Song, Jing Yang, Jun Ma, Jie Yu∗
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073 China
xiaopeng.lyy@gmail.com, {shashali, ssz614, yj, majun}@nudt.edu.cn, yangjing2036@126.com

Abstract

cost (Meng et al. 2022b; Mitchell et al. 2022a; Yao et al.
2023). Model editing aims to modify the internal knowledge
of LLMs without resorting to vanilla training or fine-tuning.
The success rates of model editing in edited-knowledge and
in knowledge related to the edited-knowledge are assessed
separately based on efficacy and generalization, while the
preservation of irrelevant edited-knowledge is measured by
specificity (also known as locality) (Mitchell et al. 2022a).
For the purpose of uniformity, we collectively refer to efficacy and generalization as reliability. Additionally, two
metrics are employed to evaluate the generative capacity
of the post-edited model: fluency and consistency (Meng
et al. 2022a). Model editing methods can be classified into
two categories based on whether the original model weights
are modified: weight-preserved and weight-modified methods (Yao et al. 2023). Weight-preserved methods often require additional content, whereas weight-modified methods
directly edit model weights without the need for extra content, making them a more lightweight alternative.

Model editing techniques modify a minor proportion of
knowledge in Large Language Models (LLMs) at a relatively
low cost, which have demonstrated notable success. Existing
methods assume Transformer Layer (TL) hidden states are
values of key-value memories of the Feed-Forward Network
(FFN). They usually optimize the TL hidden states to memorize target knowledge and use it to update the weights of
the FFN in LLMs. However, the information flow of TL hidden states comes from three parts: Multi-Head Self-Attention
(MHSA), FFN, and residual connections. Existing methods
neglect the fact that the TL hidden states contains information
not specifically required for FFN. Consequently, the performance of model editing decreases. To achieve more precise
model editing, we analyze hidden states of MHSA and FFN,
finding that MHSA encodes certain general knowledge extraction patterns. This implies that MHSA weights do not require updating when new knowledge is introduced. Based on
above findings, we introduce PMET, which simultaneously
optimizes Transformer Component (TC, namely MHSA and
FFN) hidden states, while only using the optimized TC hidden states of FFN to precisely update FFN weights. Our experiments demonstrate that PMET exhibits state-of-the-art
performance on both the COUNTERFACT and zsRE datasets.
Our ablation experiments substantiate the effectiveness of our
enhancements, further reinforcing the finding that the MHSA
encodes certain general knowledge extraction patterns and indicating its storage of a small amount of factual knowledge.
Our code is available at https://github.com/xpq-tech/PMET.

The weight-modified approaches include learning-based
(Mitchell et al. 2022a) and optimization-based methods
(Meng et al. 2022b). Learning-based methods utilize gradient information to update the weights, but they suffer from
poor knowledge generalization and are prone to overfitting.
The optimization-based method ROME (Meng et al. 2022a)
alleviates this by solving a optimization problem and updates FFN weights incrementally. The subsequent MEMIT
(Meng et al. 2022b) further improves ROME, enabling mass
editing in a single operation and demonstrating impressive
editing performance. In detail, ROME and MEMIT view
FFN as key-value memories (Geva et al. 2021), where the
hidden states before and after passing through FFN weight
W can be considered as keys k and values v, satisfying
W k = v. ROME and MEMIT extract TC (Transformer
Component, namely MHSA and FFN) hidden states as keys
and optimizes TL (Transformer Layer) hidden states as values, ultimately obtaining the desired weights by solving
a least square problem. However, the information flow of
TL hidden states comes from three parts: Multi-Head SelfAttention (MHSA), FFN, and residual connections. Both
ROME and MEMIT uses optimized TL hidden states as the
values (i.e., target knowledge representations) for updating
FFN weights, which overlooks the irrelevant information
within the TL hidden states that is not required by FFN,

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), as an emerging form of
knowledge base (Petroni et al. 2019; Heinzerling and Inui
2021; Cao et al. 2021), are extensively employed worldwide, primarily addressing queries through knowledge recall. Nonetheless, these models are often criticized for furnishing erroneous information (Ji et al. 2023; Zhao et al.
2023). The cost of fine-tuning or training from scratch to
correct the minor proportion of erroneous knowledge is frequently deemed impractical. Fortunately, recent model editing techniques have demonstrated the ability to modify minor proportion of knowledge in LLMs with relatively low
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18564

