The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PerFedRLNAS: One-for-All Personalized Federated Neural Architecture Search
Dixi Yao* , Baochun Li
University of Toronto
dixi.yao@mail.utoronto.ca, bli@ece.toronto.edu

Abstract

Representation

Representation

Head

Classifier

FedAvg Local Training FedRep

FedBABU

Whole
Model

Personalized federated learning is a new paradigm to address
heterogeneous problems (e.g. issues with non-i.i.d. data) in
federated learning. However, existing personalized federated
learning methods lack standards for how personalized and
shared parts of the models are designed. Sometimes, manual design can even lead to worse performance than nonpersonalization. As a result, we propose a new algorithm for
personalized federated neural architecture search, called PerFedRLNAS, to automatically personalize the architectures and
weights of models on each client. With such an algorithm, we
can solve the issues of low efficiency as well as failure to adapt
to new search spaces in previous federated neural architecture
search work. We further show that with automatically assigning different client architectures can solve heterogeneity of
data distribution, efficiency and memory in federated learning.
In our experiments, we empirically show that our framework
shows much better performance with respect to personalized
accuracy and overall time compared to state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, PerFedRLNAS has a good generalization
ability to new clients, and is easy to be deployed in practice.

Whole
Model

Shared parts
Personalized parts
Never-trained parts

Figure 1: Summary of shared and personalized parts of a
model in four typical methods in personalized FL.

Introduction
Federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017) (FL) has emerged
as an important paradigm in distributed machine learning,
where a large number of clients participate in a collaborative training session while keeping their data private. In federated learning, clients may have different computational
speed and different data distributions, and such heterogeneity
may significantly affect the performance of federated learning (Caldas et al. 2018), especially with the conventional
federated averaging (FedAvg) algorithm (Oh, Kim, and Yun
2022). As a result, personalized federated learning (Tan et al.
2023) (PFL) emerged as a new paradigm to address such
heterogeneity and achieve better performance. The objective
of personalized federated learning is to train a personalized
model for each client (Collins et al. 2021; Fallah, Mokhtari,
and Ozdaglar 2020).
Though many solutions have been proposed for personalized federated learning, each of them has its own definition
of the parts of the model to be personalized. Such a lack
* Dixi Yao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16398

of conventional wisdom and standards may confuse users
when they choose their solutions. Under different settings of
federated learning, users need to choose different manually
defined personalization policy to reach optimal results. For
instance, Figure 1 includes several typical methods of personalized federated learning, and summarizes how they defined
shared and personalized parts of the models. Different methods have different manually set definitions of which parts
we should share or personalize. Such manual design led to
varying performance across these methods, and even with an
abundance of existing work, failed to answer two questions
adequately: (1) Why personalizing models can solve such a
heterogeneous problem in federated learning? (2) Since there
are so many personalization policies, is there a standard and
automated way of deciding personalized and shared parts of
the models on clients to achieve optimal performance?
Apart from conventional personalized federated learning
methods, new methods leveraging automated machine learning (AutoML) are proposed to seek for automatic ways to
achieve better performance. Federated Neural Architecture
Search (FedNAS) (He, Annavaram, and Avestimehr 2020)
was proposed to directly conduct neural architecture search
(NAS) in the federated learning setting, with which each
client can obtain a model of a different structure along with
different weights. However, previous work either search for
only a global neural architecture shared among all or manually defined clusters of the clients instead of personalized
architecture for each client (Yao et al. 2021; Garg, Saha, and
Dutta 2021; Laskaridis, Fernandez-Marques, and Dudziak
2022) or incrementally carry out a neural architecture search
on each client (He, Annavaram, and Avestimehr 2020; Mushtaq et al. 2021). Such simple replacements of fixed models in
conventional personalized federated learning with an NAS supernet still cannot provide an insight on personalizing models
without manual settings.

