The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Delving into Multimodal Prompting for Fine-Grained Visual Classification
Xin Jiang1 * , Hao Tang1 * , Junyao Gao2 , Xiaoyu Du1 , Shengfeng He3 , Zechao Li1†
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Tongji University, China
3
Singapore Management University, Singapore
{xinjiang, tanghao0918, duxy, zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn, junyaogao@tongji.edu.cn, shengfenghe7@gmail.com

Abstract

these challenges, deep learning methods (Yu et al. 2018;
Xu et al. 2021; Gu and Feng 2023; Tang et al. 2023; Gu
et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023) have been proposed for FGVC,
falling into two main categories: feature-encoding methods
and part-localization methods. Part-localization methods, in
particular, have garnered significant interest due to their consistency with human recognition intuition, as fine-grained
subcategory-specific discrepancies (Dong et al. 2023) often
reside in the unique properties of object parts.
Although CNN-based models have achieved satisfactory
performance for FGVC in a weakly-supervised manner, a
prominent drawback persists: CNNs tend to focus solely
on a small, irrelevant region within an image, resulting in
the captured subcategory-specific discrepancies that lack robustness and discriminability. Recently, vision transformers like ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021a), have recorded remarkable performance in the image classification tasks and
are actively being employed in FGVC (He et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2023). Compared to CNNs, ViT’s patch-by-patch processing lends itself well to FGVC as each image patch can
be regarded as a local part. Additionally, the inherent selfattention mechanism in ViT enables the modeling of longrange dependencies in the entire image. However, due to the
relatively limited size of FGVC datasets, these CNN-based
and ViT-based methods often exhibit erratic behavior during
optimization and heavily rely on visual representations from
a predefined closed set during inference, which hampers the
full exploitation of these models’ potential for FGVC.
The human visual perception system possesses a unique
mechanism of top-down cognitive penetrability (Maier
and Abdel Rahman 2019) in which prior linguistic knowledge (Li et al. 2023), such as appearance descriptions, is instinctively used to adaptively adjust ongoing visual perceptual processing to stimulus features relevant to object categories, thereby facilitating the recognition of fine-grained
objects. Recently, large-scale vision-language (VL) models have been developed to connect visual representation
with high-level language descriptions, showing potential for
adaptation to various vision tasks. Thus, it raises the question of whether the cross-modal description ability in the VL
models can be effectively utilized for FGVC tasks. Recent
studies (Bahng et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2022) have already confirmed the possibility of utilizing the knowledge from the
CLIP model via prompt techniques (Zhou et al. 2022b,a)

Fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) involves categorizing fine subdivisions within a broader category, which poses
challenges due to subtle inter-class discrepancies and large
intra-class variations. However, prevailing approaches primarily focus on uni-modal visual concepts. Recent advancements in pre-trained vision-language models have demonstrated remarkable performance in various high-level vision
tasks, yet the applicability of such models to FGVC tasks
remains uncertain. In this paper, we aim to fully exploit
the capabilities of cross-modal description to tackle FGVC
tasks and propose a novel multimodal prompting solution,
denoted as MP-FGVC, based on the contrastive languageimage pertaining (CLIP) model. Our MP-FGVC comprises
a multimodal prompts scheme and a multimodal adaptation scheme. The former includes Subcategory-specific Vision Prompt (S S VP) and Discrepancy-aware Text Prompt
(DATP), which explicitly highlights the subcategory-specific
discrepancies from the perspectives of both vision and language. The latter aligns the vision and text prompting elements in a common semantic space, facilitating cross-modal
collaborative reasoning through a Vision-Language Fusion
Module (VLFM) for further improvement on FGVC. Moreover, we tailor a two-stage optimization strategy for MPFGVC to fully leverage the pre-trained CLIP model and expedite efficient adaptation for FGVC. Extensive experiments
conducted on four FGVC datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our MP-FGVC.

Introduction
Fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) is a significant
task in the field of computer vision that aims to categorize
distinct subcategories within a given supercategory. Unlike
traditional classification tasks, FGVC faces the challenges
of subtle inter-class variations caused by similar subordinate
categories, as well as large intra-class variations due to factors such as location, scale, and deformation. Recognizing
these subtle differences between subcategories, such as distinguishing bird subcategories based on characteristics like
eye shape, flipper appearance, and coloration of the tail region, is a key aspect of human visual perception. To address
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2570

