The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Regret Analysis of Repeated Delegated Choice
MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Mohammad Mahdavi, Keivan Rezaei, Suho Shin
University of Maryland, College Park
{hajiagha,mahdavi,krezaei,suhoshin}@umd.edu

Abstract

nounces a set of eligible solutions before the agent proposes,
and only accepts the eligible solution.
To provide a concrete example, consider (online) labor
market or crowdsourcing platform such as Upwork. We have
a task requester (principal) who regularly visits the platform
(agent) and tries to solve a series of tasks. The platform has
a pool of workers (solutions). At each time the requester
visits, the platform recommends some set of workers, and
the requester selects a single worker to commit to the task.
Obviously, the task requester wants to hire a qualified worker.
The platform, on the other hand, aims to maximize its longterm revenue by recommending workers who solve tasks
quickly, even if their quality is not high, allowing them to
be assigned to other tasks promptly. This misalignment of
utility may lead to the platform strategically recommending
unqualified workers. To mitigate this, the requester sets restrictions, such as requiring certificates in specific areas like
a foreign language or web development, when requesting
worker recommendations. We refer to Appendix A in the full
paper for more examples on motivations.
If the task requester is fully aware of the set of workers
that the platform has, then she can directly impose a strong
restriction to make the platform recommend the specific workers she wants. In practice, however, such information is not
feasible priorly, instead, the requester needs to learn the distribution of existing workers in the repeated interaction. The
fundamental question here is, how the requester should dynamically determine which sort of restriction to impart at
each round, in order to maximize cumulative utility over the
set of tasks. Furthermore, one may ask what happens if the
platform also tries to strategize across the rounds to deceive
the requester, and what if the quality of each worker is not
fixed in advance, but rather is given from a latent distribution.
This work introduces the repeated delegated choice problem, which focuses on how the principal can design an efficient delegation mechanism. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study to explore an online learning extension of
the delegated choice problem presented by (Armstrong and
Vickers 2010; Kleinberg and Kleinberg 2018; Hajiaghayi,
Rezaei, and Shin 2023). In our model, the principal lacks
initial information about the solutions’ distribution. Instead,
through repeated announcements of eligible sets that may
screen out some solutions, the principal aims to learn the
solutions’ distributions in a sample-efficient manner. The

We present a study on a repeated delegated choice problem,
which is the first to consider an online learning variant of
Kleinberg and Kleinberg, EC’18. In this model, a principal interacts repeatedly with an agent who possesses an exogenous
set of solutions to search for efficient ones. Each solution can
yield varying utility for both the principal and the agent, and
the agent may propose a solution to maximize its own utility
in a selfish manner. To mitigate this behavior, the principal
announces an eligible set which screens out a certain set of solutions. The principal, however, does not have any information
on the distribution of solutions nor the number of solutions
in advance. Therefore, the principal dynamically announces
various eligible sets to efficiently learn the distribution. The
principal’s objective is to minimize cumulative regret compared to the optimal eligible set in hindsight. We explore two
dimensions of the problem setup, whether the agent behaves
myopically or strategizes across the rounds, and whether the
solutions yield deterministic or stochastic utility. We obtain
sublinear regret upper bounds in various regimes, and derive
corresponding lower bounds which implies the tightness of
the results. Overall, we bridge a well-known problem in economics to the evolving area of online learning, and present a
comprehensive study in this problem.

1

Introduction

Delegation is perhaps one of the most frequent economic interactions one may see around in real life (Holmstrom 1980;
Bendor, Glazer, and Hammond 2001; Amador and Bagwell
2013). Abstractly speaking, consider a principal with less
information who tries to find an optimal solution from an
agent with expertise, but there’s an information asymmetry
such that she1 cannot directly access the solutions that the
agent possesses (Alonso and Matouschek 2008; Kleinberg
and Kleinberg 2018; Kleiner 2022; Hajiaghayi, Rezaei, and
Shin 2023). Instead, she requires the agent to propose a set of
solutions and then commits to the final one among them. The
principal and the agent, however, may have misaligned utility
for the solution selected, and thus the agent may propose a
solution in a selfish manner. To cope with it, the principal anCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Feminine pronouns (masculine) hereafter denote the principal
(agent).

9757

