The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DanceAnyWay: Synthesizing Beat-Guided 3D Dances with Randomized Temporal
Contrastive Learning
Aneesh Bhattacharya1,2 , Manas Paranjape1 , Uttaran Bhattacharya3 , Aniket Bera1
1

Purdue University, USA
IIIT Naya Raipur, India
3
Adobe Research, USA
{bhatta95, mparanja, aniketbera}@purdue.edu, ubhattac@adobe.com
2

Abstract

generating dancing digital characters for applications such
as character design (Mascarenhas et al. 2018), storyboard
visualization for consumer media (Kucherenko et al. 2020;
Watson et al. 2019), building metaverse tools (Omniverse
2021) and even advancing our understanding of the relationships between music and dance (Brown and Parsons 2008).
Prior methods in dance generation can adapt to different dance genres but may encounter temporal inconsistencies (Fan, Xu, and Geng 2012) and motion freezing and instability (Li et al. 2021a). Using seed poses is a common approach to enforce plausibility (Li et al. 2021a; Zhuang et al.
2022; Li et al. 2020). However, they only provide the initial dance characteristics and become less relevant over time
when generating long dance sequences. Diffusion-based approaches (Tseng, Castellon, and Liu 2023) offer better control in the generative process but come at the cost of slow inference speed and heavy parameter tuning for novel datasets.
Other approaches tokenize the dance sequences into a finite,
learnable set of quantized vectors (Siyao et al. 2022), which
can generate long sequences with minimal tuning but tradeoff on the fine-grained diversity of the generated dances.
Different from these approaches, we make two key observations. First, dancers often exhibit bursts or drops of energy
at the audio beats. Therefore, the dance steps at the audio
beats provide a coarse structure of the dance. Second, we can
forego tokenization and explicitly enforce temporal diversity
in the generative process to get long dance sequences in the
continuous space without freezing or collapsing to repetitive
patterns. In this paper, we introduce our method DanceAnyWay (Fig. 1), built on these observations, to generate plausible 3D dances from audio. We learn the correlation between
the dance motions and the audio at two temporal levels: a
coarser beat level, which corresponds to the dance poses
at the audio beat frames, and a finer repletion level, which
corresponds to the dance poses at all the other frames. Further, we perform a randomized temporal contrastive loss between segments at the repletion level to enforce diversity of
motion between segments that are arbitrarily far from each
other. By explicitly learning the correlation between the audio and the dance poses at the beat frames, we can generate plausible beat pose sequences representing the underlying dance characteristics for the entirety of the audio. Given
these beat poses, we can generate the remaining or repletion
poses while ensuring they are sufficiently diverse.

We present DanceAnyWay, a generative learning method to
synthesize beat-guided dances of 3D human characters synchronized with music. Our method learns to disentangle the
dance movements at the beat frames from the dance movements at all the remaining frames by operating at two hierarchical levels. At the coarser “beat” level, it encodes the
rhythm, pitch, and melody information of the input music
via dedicated feature representations only at the beat frames.
It leverages them to synthesize the beat poses of the target dances using a sequence-to-sequence learning framework.
At the finer “repletion” level, our method encodes similar
rhythm, pitch, and melody information from all the frames of
the input music via dedicated feature representations. It generates the full dance sequences by combining the synthesized
beat and repletion poses and enforcing plausibility through
an adversarial learning framework. Our training paradigm
also enforces fine-grained diversity in the synthesized dances
through a randomized temporal contrastive loss, which ensures different segments of the dance sequences have different movements and avoids motion freezing or collapsing
to repetitive movements. We evaluate the performance of
our approach through extensive experiments on the benchmark AIST++ dataset and observe improvements of about
7% − 12% in motion quality metrics and 1.5% − 4% in
motion diversity metrics over the current baselines, respectively. We also conducted a user study to evaluate the visual quality of our synthesized dances. We note that, on
average, the samples generated by our method were about
9−48% more preferred by the participants and had a 4−27%
better five-point Likert-scale score over the best available
current baseline in terms of motion quality and synchronization. Our source code and project page are available at
https://github.com/aneeshbhattacharya/DanceAnyWay.

Introduction
Dancing is a central human behavior observed across societies and cultures (LaMothe 2019). Being simultaneously a
form of expression and communication, the space of dance
motions is dense, diverse, and, at the same time, temporally
cohesive and structured (Tseng, Castellon, and Liu 2023).
The complexity of dance motions and their pervasiveness
in our socio-cultural fabric has led to extensive research on
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

783

