The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Local-Ascending-Global Learning Strategy for Brain-Computer Interface
Dongrui Gao1,2 * , Haokai Zhang1 * , Pengrui Li1,2 , Tian Tang1 , Shihong Liu1 , Zhihong Zhou1 ,
Shaofei Ying2 , Ye Zhu1 †, Yongqing Zhang1†
2

1
School of Computer Science, Chengdu University of Information Technology, Chengdu, 610225, China
School of Life Sciences and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731,
China
gdr1987@cuit.edu.cn, 1326036086@qq.com, 925189684@qq.com, 2741187967@qq.com, 1585538946@qq.com,
zhouzhihong201802@163.com, shaofei9629@163.com, zhuye@cuit.edu.cn, zhangyq@cuit.edu.cn

Abstract

and Kim 2022; Zhang et al. 2021b). Among these, EEG,
known for its non-invasiveness and high temporal resolution, is widely employed (Zhou et al. 2023).

Neuroscience research indicates that the interaction among
different functional regions of the brain plays a crucial role in
driving various cognitive tasks. Existing studies have primarily focused on constructing either local or global functional
connectivity maps within the brain, often lacking an adaptive approach to fuse functional brain regions and explore latent relationships between localization during different cognitive tasks. This paper introduces a novel approach called
the Local-Ascending-Global Learning Strategy (LAG) to uncover higher-level latent topological patterns among functional brain regions. The strategy initiates from the local connectivity of individual brain functional regions and develops
a K-Level Self-Adaptive Ascending Network (SALK) to dynamically capture strong connectivity patterns among brain
regions during different cognitive tasks. Through the step-bystep fusion of brain regions, this approach captures higherlevel latent patterns, shedding light on the progressively adaptive fusion of various brain functional regions under different cognitive tasks. Notably, this study represents the first exploration of higher-level latent patterns through progressively
adaptive fusion of diverse brain functional regions under different cognitive tasks. The proposed LAG strategy is validated using datasets related to fatigue (SEED-VIG), emotion
(SEED-IV), and motor imagery (BCI C IV 2a). The results
demonstrate the generalizability of LAG, achieving satisfactory outcomes in independent-subject experiments across all
three datasets. This suggests that LAG effectively characterizes higher-level latent patterns associated with different cognitive tasks, presenting a novel approach to understanding
brain patterns in varying cognitive contexts.

Recent breakthroughs in decoding dynamic changes in
brain functions have been achieved through learning strategies that incorporate psychological and biological prior
knowledge combined with graph networks. Conventional
graph neural networks often utilize prior graph structures like Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (COR) (Mukaka
2012), Phase Locking Value (PLV) (Vinck et al. 2011) and
Partial Directed Coherence (PDC) (Sameshima and Baccalá
1999) for learning correlations between channels. One study
based on mental fatigue used three frequency domain measures to estimate the functional connectivity of the brain (Qi
et al. 2020). However, these methods may have limitations
in capturing the complexity of the brain under various cognitive tasks, emphasizing the need for exploring local circuits
within each brain region and functional connectivity among
different regions. Therefore, the study for the learning of
local circuits in each brain region and the functional connectivity of different brain regions is lacking. In addition,
brain activity in different states requires the joint work of
all brain regions, and thus the internal functional changes of
each brain region may have a certain activating or suppressing effect on other brain regions. It has been shown that the
functional relationships between brain regions are highly localized and sparse, so a new sparse-constrained method for
improving Dynamic Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
(DGCNN) has been proposed for further exploring the functional relationships between local brain regions (Zhang et al.
2023). However, these methods may eliminate too many important features in localized brain regions when exploring
functional relationships between brain regions.

Introduction
Brain-computer interface (BCI) technology, as an advanced
system, enables the bidirectional transformation of human brain information and computer signals, facilitating
direct communication (Zhang et al. 2021a). Various signal sources and modalities, including electroencephalogram
(EEG), functional Near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), and
Electromyography (EMG), are utilized for the evaluation
and analysis of brain signals (Gao et al. 2023a; Kwak, Song,

Therefore, an advanced learning strategy for efficiently
fitting connectivity within the brain and between various
brain functional regions has become a hot research topic.
Some works have proposed to learn dynamically changing brain functional networks by developing advanced local and global adjacency matrices (Gao et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023a). It has been found that the functional relationships
between electrodes may be highly localized and sparse,
thus Sparse Dynamic Graph Convolutional Neural Network
(SparseDGCNN) was proposed to learn the dynamic fea-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Ye Zhu, Yongqing Zhang
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10039

