The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Diffusion-Based Framework for Multi-Class Anomaly Detection
Haoyang He1 * , Jiangning Zhang1,2 * , Hongxu Chen1 , Xuhai Chen1 , Zhishan Li1 ,
Xu Chen2 , Yabiao Wang2 , Chengjie Wang2 , Lei Xie1†
1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{haoyanghe,186368,chenhongxu,22232044,zhishanli}@zju.edu.cn,
{cxxuchen,caseywang,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com, leix@iipc.zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Reconstruction-based approaches have achieved remarkable
outcomes in anomaly detection. The exceptional image reconstruction capabilities of recently popular diffusion models
have sparked research efforts to utilize them for enhanced reconstruction of anomalous images. Nonetheless, these methods might face challenges related to the preservation of image categories and pixel-wise structural integrity in the more
practical multi-class setting. To solve the above problems,
we propose a Difusion-based Anomaly Detection (DiAD)
framework for multi-class anomaly detection, which consists of a pixel-space autoencoder, a latent-space SemanticGuided (SG) network with a connection to the stable diffusion’s denoising network, and a feature-space pre-trained
feature extractor. Firstly, The SG network is proposed for
reconstructing anomalous regions while preserving the original image’s semantic information. Secondly, we introduce
Spatial-aware Feature Fusion (SFF) block to maximize reconstruction accuracy when dealing with extensively reconstructed areas. Thirdly, the input and reconstructed images
are processed by a pre-trained feature extractor to generate
anomaly maps based on features extracted at different scales.
Experiments on MVTec-AD and VisA datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach which surpasses the stateof-the-art methods, e.g., achieving 96.8/52.6 and 97.2/99.0
(AUROC/AP) for localization and detection respectively on
multi-class MVTec-AD dataset. Code is available at https:
//lewandofskee.github.io/projects/diad.

Figure 1: A analysis of different diffusion models for multiclass anomaly detection. The image above shows various
denoising network architectures, while the images below
demonstrate the results reconstructed by different methods
for the same input image. a) DDPM suffers from categorical
errors. b) LDM exhibits semantic errors. c) Our approach effectively reconstructs the anomalous regions while preserving the semantic information of the original image.

The current mainstream unsupervised anomaly detection
methods can be divided into three categories: synthesizingbased (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021a; Li et al. 2021),
embedding-based (Defard et al. 2021; Roth et al. 2022; Xie
et al. 2023) and reconstruction-based (Liu et al. 2022; Liang
et al. 2023) methods. The core of the reconstruction-based
method is that during training, the model only learns from
normal images. During testing, the model reconstructs abnormal images into normal ones using the trained model.
Therefore, by comparing the reconstructed image with the
input image, we can determine the location of anomalies. Traditional reconstruction-based methods, including
AEs (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021b), VAEs (Kingma
and Welling 2022), and GANs (Liang et al. 2023; Yan
et al. 2021) can learn the distribution of normal samples
and reconstruct abnormal regions during the testing phase.
However, these models have limited reconstruction capabilities especially large-scale defects or disappearances. Hence,
models with stronger reconstruction capability are required
to effectively tackle multi-class anomaly detection.
Recently, the diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Rombach et al. 2022; Zhang and Agrawala 2023)
have demonstrated their powerful image-generation capability. However, directly using current mainstream diffusion

Introduction
Anomaly detection is a crucial task in computer vision and
industrial applications (Tao et al. 2022; Salehi et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2023), which goal of visual anomaly detection
is to determine anomalous images and locate the regions
of anomaly accurately. Existing anomaly detection models (Liznerski et al. 2021; Yi and Yoon 2020; Yu et al.
2021) mostly correspond to one class, which requires a large
amount of storage space and training time as the number of
classes increases. There is a critical requirement for a robust
unsupervised multi-class anomaly detection model.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8472

