The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Occluded Person Re-identification via Saliency-Guided Patch Transfer
Lei Tan1 * , Jiaer Xia1 * , Wenfeng Liu1 , Pingyang Dai1 , Yongjian Wu2 , Liujuan Cao1†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China.
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, China.
{tanlei, xiajiaer, wenfengliu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {pydai, caoliujuan}@xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com

Abstract

Identity

While generic person re-identification has made remarkable
improvement in recent years, these methods are designed
under the assumption that the entire body of the person is
available. This assumption brings about a significant performance degradation when suffering from occlusion caused
by various obstacles in real-world applications. To address
this issue, data-driven strategies have emerged to enhance
the model’s robustness to occlusion. Following the random
erasing paradigm, these strategies typically employ randomly
generated noise to supersede randomly selected image regions to simulate obstacles. However, the random strategy
is not sensitive to location and content, meaning they cannot mimic real-world occlusion cases in application scenarios. To overcome this limitation and fully exploit the real
scene information in datasets, this paper proposes a more
intuitive and effective data-driven strategy named SaliencyGuided Patch Transfer (SPT). Combined with the vision
transformer, SPT divides person instances and background
obstacles using salient patch selection. By transferring person
instances to different background obstacles, SPT can easily
generate photo-realistic occluded samples. Furthermore, we
propose an occlusion-aware Intersection over Union (OIoU)
with mask-rolling to filter the more suitable combination and
a class-ignoring strategy to achieve more stable processing.
Extensive experimental evaluations conducted on occluded
and holistic person re-identification benchmarks demonstrate
that SPT provides a significant performance gain among different ViT-based ReID algorithms on occluded ReID.

Occlusion

Output

(a) Occlusion caused by the obstacle

Identity

Occlusion

Output

(b) Occlusion caused by another person

Figure 1: Examples of Saliency-Guided Patch Transfer on
Occluded-Duke. Here, we show two types of occluded samples: occlusion caused by obstacles and occlusion caused
by the person. Owing to its sensitivity to content and location, SPT can effectively enhance the robustness of ViT
algorithms in occluded person re-identification.

et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020). Despite this, the assumption
of a fully visible body often neglects the presence of occlusions, which are common in practical applications. Inevitable occlusions caused by different obstacles in real application scenarios make the generic ReID methods suffer
significant performance degradation. Consequently, there is
a growing need to explore occluded person re-identification
to address the corresponding issue.
To fulfill the demand for occlusion cases, both modeldriven (Qian et al. 2018; Tan et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a)
and data-driven (Huang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022b) strategies have emerged. The model-driven approach places particular emphasis on the alignment strategy, utilizing body cues provided by additional networks or
weakly supervised modules to achieve high performance in
occluded ReID. However, the limited availability of occlusion data has prevented these modules from fully unleashing
their potential. Meanwhile, data-driven strategies (Huang
et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b) have made
progress in occluded ReID by constructing images with occlusion to enhance the network’s robustness. Following the
random erasing paradigm (Zhong et al. 2020), these strate-

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match individuals
across non-overlapping camera views, and it has extensive
applications in security and surveillance systems. In recent
years, impressive advances have been made in this area,
spanning academia and industry (Ye et al. 2021; Fu et al.
2022; Zhang and Wang 2023; Tan et al. 2023). However,
most generic person re-identification methods operate under
the assumption that the entire body of a person is visible,
which has motivated researchers to explore methods that can
effectively integrate information from all body parts (Sun
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5070

