The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

V2Meow: Meowing to the Visual Beat via Video-to-Music Generation
Kun Su* †3 , Judith Yue Li* 1 , Qingqing Huang†4 , Dima Kuzmin1 , Joonseok Lee1,5 ,
Chris Donahue2,6 , Fei Sha1 , Aren Jansen1 , Yu Wang†7 , Mauro Verzetti2 , Timo Denk2
1

Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA
Google DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA
3
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
4
ByteDance, San Jose, CA, USA
5
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
6
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
7
Music and Audio Research Laboratory, New York University, NY, USA
{judithyueli, dimakuzmin, joonseok, chrisdonahue, fsha, arenjansen, verzetti, timodenk}@google.com, suk4@uw.edu
2

Abstract

audio generation. It utilizes a masked language model pretrained on tokenized audio encodings (Chung et al. 2021)
to capture long-term structures and the discrete neural audio codec (Zeghidour et al. 2021a) for high-quality synthesis. Music language models like MusicLM (Agostinelli et al.
2023) have further demonstrated that autoregressive models
can generate music conditioned on text prompts (Agostinelli
et al. 2023; Copet et al. 2023) or input vocals (Donahue
et al. 2023). However, the challenge persists in videoconditioned music generation, where a gap exists between
the coarser global video signature and the aforementioned
high-resolution audio representations or audio codecs for
waveform generation.
Most existing work on video-to-music generation focuses
on modeling the audiovisual correspondence between domain specific video representation and symbolic representation of music. For example, dance-to-music literature (Zhu
et al. 2022a,b; Yu et al. 2023) relies on modeling music
rhythms, style from annotated human motion, other works
focuses on generating natural sound that is faithful to the
physical motion in the silent video (Su, Liu, and Shlizerman
2020a; Gan et al. 2020; Owens et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2020; Su et al. 2023), for example, reconstructing instrumental music from silent instrument performance
videos. As a result, the input video types are restricted to certain visual scenarios, and cannot be generalized to arbitrary
video input types, e.g., a cat video or slideshows of images.
In contrast, we propose to learn a general audiovisual correspondence directly from paired video frames and music
waveform data. Specifically, we bridge the gap between the
coarser video representation and the high-resolution audio
representation through finding the video-audio aligned lowresolution representation space. This approach allows us to
generalize to a wide range of video input types, and leverage
the vast amount of parallel music and video data available on
the internet for scaling.
We introduce V2Meow, a high-fidelity music audio waveform generator conditioned on diverse video inputs. Draw-

Video-to-music generation demands both a temporally localized high-quality listening experience and globally aligned
video-acoustic signatures. While recent music generation
models excel at the former through advanced audio codecs,
the exploration of video-acoustic signatures has been confined to specific visual scenarios. In contrast, our research
confronts the challenge of learning globally aligned signatures between video and music directly from paired music and videos, without explicitly modeling domain-specific
rhythmic or semantic relationships. We propose V2Meow,
a video-to-music generation system capable of producing
high-quality music audio for a diverse range of video input types using a multi-stage autoregressive model. Trained
on 5k hours of music audio clips paired with video frames
mined from in-the-wild music videos, V2Meow is competitive with previous domain-specific models when evaluated
in a zero-shot manner. It synthesizes high-fidelity music audio waveforms solely by conditioning on pre-trained generalpurpose visual features extracted from video frames, with
optional style control via text prompts. Through both qualitative and quantitative evaluations, we demonstrate that our
model outperforms various existing music generation systems
in terms of visual-audio correspondence and audio quality.
Music samples are available at tinyurl.com/v2meow.

Introduction
Recent advancements in high-resolution neural audio
codecs (Zeghidour et al. 2021a; D’efossez et al. 2022; Kumar et al. 2023) have introduced novel possibilities for directly generating high-quality music waveforms comparable to human-made music (Borsos et al. 2022; Agostinelli
et al. 2023). Notably, AudioLM (Borsos et al. 2022) employs a multi-stage autoregressive modeling approach for
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done while at Google.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4952

