The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Large Language Model for Graph Data Understanding
in Online Job Recommendations
Likang Wu1,2 , Zhaopeng Qiu2 , Zhi Zheng1,2 , Hengshu Zhu2 ∗ , Enhong Chen1 ∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Career Science Lab, BOSS Zhipin
{wulk,zhengzhi97}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhpengqiu,zhuhengshu}@gmail.com, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

problem using paired data for training (Qin et al. 2018; Shen
et al. 2018). However, online recruitment platforms often
suffer from sparse interaction data, with job postings attracting only a few candidates on average (Ramanath et al. 2018).
To address this, recent studies (Bian et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2022) have explored the use of behavior graphs to capture
high-order interactions and alleviate the sparse interaction
issue. These behavior graphs leverage message passing to
enhance the understanding of user preferences.
Unlike many general recommendation tasks, it is easy to
find that textual understanding forms the backbone of job
recommendation, and behavior modeling contributes to the
personalized module. In our work, we strive to overcome
the accuracy limitations of job recommenders by enhancing the semantic richness of textual representations. Inspired
by several recent successful recommendations based on text
pre-training (Wu et al. 2023), we introduce a large language
model (LLM) as the foundational framework for job recommendation that directly generates targets. Adopting this approach is not only beneficial but also intuitive. For instance,
out-of-distribution items usually appear in recruitment markets since new job demands are constantly emerging, such as
prompt engineers for generative models. This issue is more
complex than traditional cross-domain tasks (Zhao et al.
2023; Jiang et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023). The powerful semantic mining ability and extensive external knowledge of
LLMs augment the generation and associative power of recommenders, which is able to generate reasonable recommendation results for the hard OOD items.
However, the existing learning schema of LLM recommender cannot understand the non-textual behavior graph
which weakens the personalized recommendation ability for
different job seekers. To tackle this challenge, we propose
a meta-path prompt constructor to encode the interaction information of graph into the natural language prompt. Specifically, in such a heterogeneous behavior graph, each metapath composed of various types of nodes and edges can be
transferred into a description naturally since each type indicates a specific and meaningful interaction, e.g., interview,
conversation, etc. Along this line, for each job seeker, the
LLM captures the high-order interaction feature to augment
her personality with the meta-path prompt.
Based on the above analysis, we explore the inclusion
of graph data understanding in large language model-based

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language processing tasks, demonstrating their exceptional capabilities in various domains. However, their potential for graph semantic mining in job recommendations remains largely unexplored. This paper focuses on unveiling
the capability of large language models in understanding behavior graphs and leveraging this understanding to enhance
recommendations in online recruitment, including promoting
out-of-distribution (OOD) applications. We present a novel
framework that harnesses the rich contextual information and
semantic representations provided by large language models to analyze behavior graphs and uncover underlying patterns and relationships. Specifically, we propose a meta-path
prompt constructor that aids LLM recommender in grasping
the semantics of behavior graphs for the first time and design
a corresponding path augmentation module to alleviate the
prompt bias introduced by path-based sequence input. By facilitating this capability, our framework enables personalized
and accurate job recommendations for individual users. We
evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on comprehensive
real-world datasets and demonstrate its ability to improve the
relevance and quality of recommended results. This research
not only sheds light on the untapped potential of large language models but also provides valuable insights for developing advanced recommendation systems in the recruitment
market. The findings contribute to the growing field of natural language processing and offer practical implications for
enhancing job search experiences.

Introduction
Online recruitment recommendations aim to suggest relevant job opportunities to job seekers based on their preferences and qualifications, improving the chances of matching
the right employment. With the exponential growth of online
recruitment platforms and the need for efficient and personalized job search experiences, the development of effective
job recommendation systems has become crucial.
In online recruitment systems, job postings and resumes
are written in natural language. Traditional approaches have
treated job-resume matching as a supervised text-matching
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding Author.
†
During the BOSS Zhipin internship period.

9178

