The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

WaveNet: Tackling Non-stationary Graph Signals via Graph Spectral Wavelets
Zhirui Yang1 , Yulan Hu1,2 , Sheng Ouyang1,2 , Jingyu Liu1 , Shuqiang Wang3 , Xibo Ma4,* ,
Wenhan Wang5 , Hanjing Su5 , Yong Liu1,*
1
Renmin University of China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
5
Tencent Inc.
{yangzhirui,huyulan,ouyangsheng,liujy1016}@ruc.edu.cn, sq.wang@siat.ac.cn, xibo.ma@ia.ac.cn,
{wangwenhan88,hanjingsu}@gmail.com, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Zhang et al. 2020; Rong et al. 2020). The latter utilizes the
laplacian matrix of the graph for spectral analysis, designing networks by mapping the feature matrix to the spectral domain through graph Fourier transform. While spatial GNNs have demonstrated promising results on homogeneous graphs, they’re still tricky to deal with heterogeneous graphs. This is because the message passing paradigm
is based on the homogeneity hypothesis, which means the
same class nodes mostly links with same class neighbors.
However, in the case of a heterogeneous graph, aggregating the information from neighbor nodes will destroy the
model’s expressive ability (Zhu et al. 2021). Spectral GNNs
focus on dealing heterogeneous graph via designing a filter
in the spectral domain of the graph Laplacian matrix (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016; Chien et al. 2021). The effectiveness of these filters
directly impacts the performance of downstream tasks. And
most methods rely on truncated polynomial bases encounter
difficulties in fitting high-frequency spectral signals (Feng
et al. 2022). We aim to improve this situation by using nonpolynomial bases.
Wavelets, as a powerful mathematical tool for analyzing
time-varying non-stationary signals, have received extensive
attention in signal processing and feature extraction (Guo
et al. 2022). Wavelet bases are mostly composed of signals with finite energy, which gives them a natural advantage over polynomial bases when the signal changes drastically (Boggess and Narcowich 2015). However, existing
wavelet-based GNNs model usually utilize Chebyshev polynomials to approximate wavelets transform matrix (Hammond, Vandergheynst, and Gribonval 2011; Xu et al. 2019a;
Donnat et al. 2018). However, this approach constrains the
wavelet’s ability to fit high-frequency graph spectral signals, resulting in previous work not achieving significant
improvements. In wavelet analysis, Multi-Resolution Analysis (MRA) establishes a connection between time and frequency domains information. Therefore, we perform MRA
on graph spectral signals, and employ non-polynomial bases
(wavelets) to capture finer changes of spectral signal.
On the other hand, we have found through experiments
that in polynomial-based methods, the main contributing
bases are often limited to only the first few terms (usually orders 5 to 10 as Figure 1 left 2 figures showing),

In the existing spectral GNNs, polynomial-based methods occupy the mainstream in designing a filter through the Laplacian matrix. However, polynomial combinations factored by
the Laplacian matrix naturally have limitations in message
passing (e.g., over-smoothing). Furthermore, most existing
spectral GNNs are based on polynomial bases, which struggle to capture the high-frequency parts of the graph spectral signal. Additionally, we also find that even increasing the polynomial order does not change this situation,
which means polynomial-based models have a natural deficiency when facing high-frequency signals. To tackle these
problems, we propose WaveNet, which aims to effectively
capture the high-frequency part of the graph spectral signal from the perspective of wavelet bases through reconstructing the message propagation matrix. We utilize MultiResolution Analysis (MRA) to model this question, and our
proposed method can reconstruct arbitrary filters theoretically. We also conduct node classification experiments on
real-world graph benchmarks and achieve superior performance on most datasets. Our code is available at https://
github.com/Bufordyang/WaveNet

1

Introduction

Graph, as an abstract data structure, can efficiently represent
complex relational structures between information. Therefore, it has been widely used in real-life scenarios. With
the advent of the deep learning era in artificial intelligence,
graph neural networks (GNNs) are specifically designed to
address graph-related problems such as traffic network prediction (Bogaerts et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2020a), social network recommendation (Do et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022),
molecular structure analysis (Jiang et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2019), and more (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019b).
Since a graph is composed of vertices set and edges set,
existing GNN methods can be roughly divided into spatial domain GNNs and spectral domain GNNs. The former
mainly learn node representations through message passing
paradigm or attention network structure (Wu et al. 2021;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9287

