The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Explicit Contact for Implicit Reconstruction of Hand-Held Objects from
Monocular Images
Junxing Hu1,2 , Hongwen Zhang3 , Zerui Chen4 , Mengcheng Li5 ,
Yunlong Wang2 , Yebin Liu5 , Zhenan Sun1,2 *
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
4
Inria, DI ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University
5
Tsinghua University
junxing.hu@cripac.ia.ac.cn, znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing hand-held objects from monocular RGB images is an appealing yet challenging task. In this task, contacts
between hands and objects provide important cues for recovering the 3D geometry of the hand-held objects. Though recent works have employed implicit functions to achieve impressive progress, they ignore formulating contacts in their
frameworks, which results in producing less realistic object
meshes. In this work, we explore how to model contacts in an
explicit way to benefit the implicit reconstruction of handheld objects. Our method consists of two components: explicit contact prediction and implicit shape reconstruction. In
the first part, we propose a new subtask of directly estimating 3D hand-object contacts from a single image. The partlevel and vertex-level graph-based transformers are cascaded
and jointly learned in a coarse-to-fine manner for more accurate contact probabilities. In the second part, we introduce
a novel method to diffuse estimated contact states from the
hand mesh surface to nearby 3D space and leverage diffused
contact probabilities to construct the implicit neural representation for the manipulated object. Benefiting from estimating the interaction patterns between the hand and the object,
our method can reconstruct more realistic object meshes, especially for object parts that are in contact with hands. Extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks show that
the proposed method outperforms the current state of the
arts by a great margin. Our code is publicly available at
https://junxinghu.github.io/projects/hoi.html.

Figure 1: Given an RGB image, the proposed method predicts hand-object contacts and recovers the 3D geometry of
the object. The insight is that the contacts could provide effective cues for the hand-held object reconstruction.

2021a), and their joint reconstruction (Hasson et al. 2019,
2020; Karunratanakul et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2022, 2023b; Ye, Gupta, and Tulsiani 2022). However,
this task remains very challenging due to the complexity of
hand poses and the diversity of interacting objects.
As hand-held objects involve the grasp configuration between hands and objects, the contacts play essential roles in
modeling their interactions. To improve the interaction, current methods model the contact in different representations,
including using contacts to optimize meshes (Hasson et al.
2019), the contact potential field (Yang et al. 2021), or the
grasping field (Karunratanakul et al. 2020). However, these
methods only model contacts as an additional loss function,
which miss the chance to construct and exploit contact priors
to simplify the 3D reconstruction problem.
Our key observation is that the contacts between hands
and objects provide important cues for recovering the handheld object. Modeling contacts between them can compensate for the lack of 3D information in monocular images
and makes it easier to infer the shape of the object, especially for parts that are in contact with hands as shown
in Fig. 1. Though previous methods have included contact

Introduction
Reconstructing human-object interaction from monocular
images is essential to understand the interactions between
humans and the physical world. Toward this goal, recent
progress has been achieved in the individual reconstruction
of the body (Kocabas et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020, 2023),
hands (Romero, Tzionas, and Black 2017; Kulon et al. 2020;
Baek, Kim, and Kim 2019; Hampali et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2021; Boukhayma, Bem, and Torr 2019; Li et al. 2022), objects (Chen and Zhang 2019; Mescheder et al. 2019; Park
et al. 2019; Groueix et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018; Peng et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2220

