The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Voxel or Pillar: Exploring Efficient Point Cloud Representation
for 3D Object Detection
Yuhao Huang, Sanping Zhou, Junjie Zhang, Jinpeng Dong, Nanning Zheng*
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{hyh950623@stu, spzhou@mail, hooz1009@stu, djp1235a@stu, nnzheng@mail}.xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Efficient representation of point clouds is fundamental for
LiDAR-based 3D object detection. While recent grid-based
detectors often encode point clouds into either voxels or pillars, the distinctions between these approaches remain underexplored. In this paper, we quantify the differences between
the current encoding paradigms and highlight the limited vertical learning within. To tackle these limitations, we introduce
a hybrid Voxel-Pillar Fusion network (VPF), which synergistically combines the unique strengths of both voxels and
pillars. Specifically, we first develop a sparse voxel-pillar encoder that encodes point clouds into voxel and pillar features
through 3D and 2D sparse convolutions respectively, and then
introduce the Sparse Fusion Layer (SFL), facilitating bidirectional interaction between sparse voxel and pillar features.
Our efficient, fully sparse method can be seamlessly integrated into both dense and sparse detectors. Leveraging this
powerful yet straightforward framework, VPF delivers competitive performance, achieving real-time inference speeds on
the nuScenes and Waymo Open Dataset.

Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods have been
widely adopted in autonomous driving and robot navigation systems, as point clouds from LiDAR sensors reflect
geometric information explicitly and are rarely affected by
weather conditions. Unlike 2D images, point clouds are
sparse and non-uniformly distributed, which poses two challenges for 3D object detection: constructing efficient detection network and establishing robust object representation
from points with varying distributions.
There are several paradigms for point cloud representations. Range-view-based methods (Meyer et al. 2019; Bewley et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2021) convert point clouds into
compact 2.5D range images and apply well-studied 2D detectors (Ren et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2017a) to predict 3D
boxes. While efficient, these methods may distort the geometry of 3D point clouds, and introduce the scale variance
problems (Li et al. 2019). Alternatively, point-based detectors (Qi et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li 2018; Yang et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2022) extract point-wise features with

Figure 1: Recall vs. Vertical Density comparison. For both
dense and sparse detectors (Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl
2021; Guangsheng Shi 2022; Chen et al. 2023), pillar-based
representations show enhanced recall under low vertical
densities, while voxel-based representations tend to excel in
high-density scenarios. Notably, our hybrid representation
offers consistent improvements across different situations.

PointNet series directly (Qi et al. 2017a,b), and benefit from
flexible receptive fields. Nevertheless, they suffer from the
time-consuming spherical query and aggressive downsampling strategy. Finally, grid-based methods (Yin, Zhou, and
Krahenbuhl 2021; Hu et al. 2022; Guangsheng Shi 2022;
Shi et al. 2020a; He et al. 2022) quantize the point cloud
into regular voxels or pillars and generate bounding boxes
in 2D Bird’s Eye View (BEV), achieving notable balance in
both performance and efficiency.
While both the voxel and pillar are prevalent representations in grid-based methods, their distinctions are rarely

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2426

