The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FocalDreamer: Text-Driven 3D Editing via Focal-Fusion Assembly
Yuhan Li1 , Yishun Dou2 , Yue Shi 1 , Yu Lei 1 , Xuanhong Chen 1 , Yi Zhang 1 , Peng Zhou 1 ,
Bingbing Ni1†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Huawei
{melodious, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

(c) Fine-grained Control (b) Instance Reuse (a) Editing Process

1

Abstract
While text-3D editing has made significant strides in leveraging score distillation sampling, emerging approaches still fall
short in delivering separable, precise and consistent outcomes
that are vital to content creation. In response, we introduce
FocalDreamer, a framework that merges base shape with editable parts according to text prompts for fine-grained editing
within desired regions. Specifically, equipped with geometry
union and dual-path rendering, FocalDreamer assembles independent 3D parts into a complete object, tailored for convenient instance reuse and part-wise control. We propose geometric focal loss and style consistency regularization, which
encourage focal fusion and congruent overall appearance.
Furthermore, FocalDreamer generates high-fidelity geometry and PBR textures which are compatible with widely-used
graphics engines. Extensive experiments have highlighted the
superior editing capabilities of FocalDreamer in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

1

Introduction

Art reflects the figments of human imagination and creativity. Recently, the rapid development of neural generative
models (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021) has significantly lowered the barriers for humans to engage in artistic creation
with just a few words. However, these black-box models also
deprive humans of a significant portion of control, which
means the generation isn’t often aligned with expectations.
In this work, we take a step towards precise editing for 3D
creation, enabling networks to naturally expand user’s intentions, rather than controlling the entire generative process.
In the realms of animation, gaming, and the recent advance of virtual augmented reality, 3D models and scenes
are commonly constructed as an assembly of semantically
distinct base parts, which support the practice of rendering
multiple copies of the same part across scenes with different
transform matrices, called geometry instancing or instance
reuse (Fig. 1). We believe that an ideal 3D editing workflow
should possess the following good properties:

Input Base Mesh

Editing Result

PBR Material

Part reuse on wood Part reuse over dog Part reuse over rose

Metallic and silver Shiny with dark edge

Wooden

(d) Editorial Capability Comparison

Figure 1: Given the prompt “a butterfly over a tree stump”,
our method delivers high-fidelity geometry and photorealistic appearance using PBR materials. Lines (b-c) showcase
FocalDreamer’s capability for separable and precise edits.
tating for instance reuse and part-wise post-processing,
grounded in widespread understanding.
• Precise. It should provide fine-grained and local editing,
enabling precise control in the desired area (Zhuang et al.
2023), while maintaining other regions untouched.
• Consistent. After the editing process, the resultant shape
should respect the characteristics of the source shape in
harmonious appearance (Xie et al. 2023), while visually
adhering to the text specifications.

• Separable. Given a base shape, it should produce structurally separate parts (Li, Niu, and Xu 2020) faciliCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

Emerging approaches in text-3D editing have achieved
noteworthy development, yet they often fall short in deliv-

3279

