The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Running Time Analysis of
Interactive Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms
Tianhao Lu, Chao Bian, Chao Qian
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{luth, bianc, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

population-based nature makes EAs highly appropriate for
solving MOPs, which have become a popular tool in various
real-world MOP situations (Deb et al. 2002; Zhang and Li
2007; Beume, Naujoks, and Emmerich 2007).
After the optimization of multi-objective EAs (MOEAs),
a decision maker (DM) needs to select one solution from the
generated set of non-dominated solutions based on her (or
his) preference. However, the paradigm of finding a large
set of solutions at first and then selecting an appropriate one
may be inefficient and time-consuming under some circumstances, especially when the number of objectives is large
or DM has some subjective preference information. Specifically, when the number of objectives increases, the objective space gets increasingly complex, making it hard to find
solutions with good convergence and spread; when the subjective preference of DM is known, such information can
actually give a directional bias for the search, while MOEAs
usually ignore it and simply search the whole solution space
equally, resulting in the waste of computing resources in
inessential regions.
Interactive MOEAs (iMOEAs) (Takagi 2001) is thus proposed, which integrates decision making into the optimization process. That is, in the population update procedure of
each generation, the DM is used to select the preferred solution out of two incomparable solutions. The preference
information provided by the DM can be a utility function (Gong et al. 2011; Köksalan and Karahan 2010), which
outputs a function value to indicate the quality of a solution based on the solution’s objective vector; a reference
point (Huber, Geiger, and Sevaux 2015; Thiele et al. 2009),
which represents the DM’s favorite objective vector and
prefers a solution with objective vector closer to it; and a
surrogate model (Li 2019), which directly selects a preferred
solution by using a machine learning model, e.g., neural network. Due to their fast convergence and the ability to reflect
the DM’s preference, iMOEAs have achieved many successful real-world applications, e.g., aircraft design (Bandte and
Malinchik 2004), software design (Ramı́rez, Romero, and
Ventura 2018), and land use planning (Janssen et al. 2008).
In contrast to wide applications, the theoretical foundation of MOEAs as well as iMOEAs is still underdeveloped,
which is mainly due to the sophisticated behaviors of EAs
and the hardness of MOPs. The running time analysis, the
essential theoretical aspect, of MOEAs starts from analyzing

Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are widely used for multiobjective optimization due to their population-based nature.
Traditional multi-objective EAs (MOEAs) generate a large
set of solutions to approximate the Pareto front, leaving a
decision maker (DM) with the task of selecting a preferred
solution. However, this process can be inefficient and timeconsuming, especially when there are many objectives or the
subjective preference of DM is known. To address this issue, interactive MOEAs (iMOEAs) integrate decision making into the optimization process, i.e., update the population
with the help of the DM. In contrast to their wide applications, there have existed only two pieces of theoretical works
on iMOEAs, which only considered interactive variants of the
two simple single-objective algorithms, RLS and (1+1)-EA.
This paper provides the first running time analysis (the essential theoretical aspect of EAs) for practical iMOEAs. Specifically, we prove that the expected running time of the welldeveloped interactive NSGA-II (called R-NSGA-II) for solving the OneMinMax and OneJumpZeroJump problems are
all asymptotically faster than the traditional NSGA-II. Meanwhile, we present a variant of OneMinMax, and prove that RNSGA-II can be exponentially slower than NSGA-II. These
results provide theoretical justification for the effectiveness
of iMOEAs while identifying situations where they may fail.
Experiments are also conducted to validate the theoretical results.

Introduction
Multi-objective optimization (MOP) (Steuer 1986) requires
to optimize several objective functions simultaneously,
which appears in various real-world applications. Since
these functions usually conflict with each other, there does
not exist a solution which can outperform any other solution
in every objective function. Therefore, the goal of MOP is
to identify a set of solutions that represent diverse optimal
trade-offs between objective functions, referred to as Pareto
optimal solutions.
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) (Bäck 1996) are a large
class of randomized heuristic optimization algorithms, inspired by natural evolution. They keep a set of solutions
(called population) and iteratively improve it by generating offspring solutions and selecting better ones. The
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20777

