The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unveiling the Significance of Toddler-Inspired Reward Transition
in Goal-Oriented Reinforcement Learning
Junseok Park1 , Yoonsung Kim1 * , Hee Bin Yoo1* , Min Whoo Lee1 , Kibeom Kim1 , Won-Seok Choi1 ,
Minsu Lee1,2† , Byoung-Tak Zhang1,2,†
1
Seoul National University
AI Institute of Seoul National University (AIIS)
{jspark, yskim, hbyoo, mwlee, kbkim, wchoi, mslee, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

can guide the agent faster but might inadvertently focus them
on immediate outcomes, missing out on the bigger picture or
long-term strategies (Laud 2004).
Given these intricacies, simply sticking to one type of
feedback might not capture the essence of learning. Drawing inspiration from toddler developmental stages, blending both feedback types could provide richer insights. The
transition toddlers make from free exploration – akin to
sparse feedback – to specific, goal-driven learning – similar to dense feedback in RL – offers a unique perspective,
as shown in Figure 1-(a). With this perspective, our paper
addresses the following question: “How does reward transition that proceeds in a sparse-to-dense manner, inspired by
toddler learning, affect the learning of agents?” Through
a series of experiments, including egocentric navigation
and robotic arm manipulation tasks, we aim to explore the
Toddler-Inspired Sparse to Potential-based Dense (S2D)
Reward Transition. Our goal is not only to explore its efficacy but also to delve into the underpinning reasons by analyzing its comparative advantages against other rewards or
prevalent strategies in the field of RL.
Taking the concept of “reward transition in learning” further, we consider visualizing the learning parameters as a topographical map. One type of such landscape representation,
a policy loss landscape provides an intuitive visualization of
learning dynamics in RL (Li et al. 2018). On this map, each
point corresponds to a set of learning parameters, and its
altitude signifies the loss value. As in any landscape, some
areas are rugged, featuring steep mountains or deep valleys,
indicating challenging learning regions. Understanding the
notion of smoothness of loss landscape is vital in neural
network-based learning. Smooth terrains in this landscape,
devoid of abrupt pitfalls, enable quicker and more reliable
convergence through gradient descent.
Critically, smoother landscapes often promote wide minima, which are associated with better generalization of
learned policies to novel situations in dynamic environments (Keskar et al. 2017). Empirically, we observed that
employing the Sparse-to-Dense (S2D) Reward Transition
made this terrain smoother by reducing the depth of local
minima, as illustrated in Figure 1-(b).
Our study contributes to a deeper understanding of the
intricate balance between exploration and exploitation and
provides insight into designing reward structures in RL.

Toddlers evolve from free exploration with sparse feedback
to exploiting prior experiences for goal-directed learning
with denser rewards. Drawing inspiration from this ToddlerInspired Reward Transition, we set out to explore the implications of varying reward transitions when incorporated into
Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks. Central to our inquiry is
the transition from sparse to potential-based dense rewards,
which share optimal strategies regardless of reward changes.
Through various experiments, including those in egocentric
navigation and robotic arm manipulation tasks, we found that
proper reward transitions significantly influence sample efficiency and success rates. Of particular note is the efficacy
of the toddler-inspired Sparse-to-Dense (S2D) transition. Beyond these performance metrics, using Cross-Density Visualizer technique, we observed that transitions, especially the
S2D, smooth the policy loss landscape, promoting wide minima that enhance generalization in RL models.

Introduction
In early years, toddlers behave much like exploratory agents.
Throughout their development, they interact with their surroundings without much prior knowledge, akin to someone
embarking on new experiences without expecting immediate
rewards (Oudeyer and Smith 2016). As they grow, toddlers
transition from free exploration to more goal-directed learning, aiming for specific goals, resembling someone working
towards known rewards for their efforts (Gopnik, Meltzoff,
and Kuhl 1999; Gibson 1988; Piaget, Cook et al. 1952; Gopnik et al. 2017) as illustrated in Figure 1.
This learning pattern in toddlers can be incorporated in
Reinforcement Learning (RL), as illustrated in Figure 1-(a).
In RL, agents learn by interacting with their environment
and receiving feedback, much like how toddlers learn from
their interactions. Similar to toddlers, agents must navigate
towards positive feedback they receive, which can be infrequent (sparse) or detailed (dense). Sparse feedback might
mean that the agent requires more attempts to figure out the
desired behavior due to limited guidelines (Andrychowicz
et al. 2020; Knox et al. 2023). Meanwhile, dense feedback
* Equal Contributions.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

592

