The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Balancing Humans and Machines: A Study on Integration Scale
and Its Impact on Collaborative Performance
Rui Zou1,2 , Sannyuya Liu1,2 , Yawei Luo3 , Yaqi Liu4 , Jintian Feng1,2 , Mengqi Wei1,2 ,
Jianwen Sun* 1,2
1

National Engineering Research Center of Educational Big Data, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
2
Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
4
School of Information and Engineering, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan 430073, China
zouruixyz@mails.ccnu.edu.cn, liusy027@ccnu.edu.cn, yaweiluo@zju.edu.cn, liuyaqi@zuel.edu.cn,
{fjt2018,weimengqi}@mails.ccnu.edu.cn, sunjw@ccnu.edu.cn
Abstract

et al. 2021; Ribeiro et al. 2020). The human brain excels in
abstract reasoning and learning from limited data, and this
distinction highlights the complementary nature between
humans and AI. Hence, blending human judgment with AI
has become crucial in addressing these challenges (Wilder,
Horvitz, and Kamar 2021; Bansal et al. 2021; De et al. 2020)
and is a focal point in human-machine interaction studies
(Riedl 2019; Bansal et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021; Zahedi
and Kambhampati 2021).
An agent is an entity designed for specific tasks. An
agent can be a machine capable of independently performing a specific task (like an image recognition model), or a
human. Homogeneous agent collaboration refers to purely
human-to-human or machine-to-machine interactions, while
mixed-type collaboration refers to human-machine interactions. However, many current studies focuses on homogeneous agent collaborations, such as ensemble techniques
in machine learning (Breiman 1996; Freund and Schapire
1996; Friedman 2001) or studies on human societies (Aggarwal et al. 2019; Lamberson and Page 2012), whereas mixedtype collaborations, especially large-scale human-machine
partnerships, have been relatively unexplored (Steyvers et al.
2022). Present studies mostly delve into one human interacting with one machine (Tejeda et al. 2022; Steyvers
et al. 2022). Though individual agents often have limited
problem-solving abilities, collaboration amplifies their potential (Wu and Wu 2019). Yet, large-scale human-machine
collaboration research is notably sparse.
In the field of ensemble learning, the mainstream opinion
is that the success of ensemble learning relies on the tradeoff between the accuracy and diversity of individual learners
(Zhou 2020; Breiman 1996; Kuncheva and Whitaker 2003;
Ho 1998). Inspired by this, we propose a statistical framework that breaks down ensemble performance into individual accuracy and diversity. Subsequently, using this framework, we investigate the relationship among ensemble performance, ensemble size, and diversity, particularly in settings involving collaboration between multiple humans and
machines. Firstly, Our method reveals the relationship between ensemble performance and size, theoretically finding that both homogeneous and heterogeneous agent ensembles have a performance ceiling proportional to diver-

In the evolving artificial intelligence domain, hybrid humanmachine systems have emerged as a transformative research
area. While many studies have concentrated on individual
human-machine interactions, there is a lack of focus on multihuman and multi-machine dynamics. Our study introduces a
statistical method for assessing ensembles of any size and
investigates the optimal human-machine ratio alongside the
impact of ensemble size on performance in human-machine
collaboration. This paper delves into these nuances by introducing a novel statistical framework that discerns integration
accuracy in terms of precision and diversity. Empirical studies reveal that performance increases consistently with scale,
either in human or machine settings. However, hybrid systems present complexities. Their performance is intricately
tied to the human-to-machine ratio. Interestingly, as the scale
expands, integration performance growth isn’t limitless. It
reaches a threshold influenced by model diversity. This introduces a pivotal ‘knee point’, signifying the optimal balance
between performance and scale. This knowledge is vital for
resource allocation. Grounded in rigorous evaluations using
public datasets, our findings emphasize the framework’s robustness in refining integrated systems.

Introduction
In the last decade, AI has made significant strides, particularly in deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015;
Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). This progress has
advanced fields like computer vision (Redmon et al. 2016),
speech recognition (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013),
and NLP (Vaswani et al. 2017). The interplay between machine cognition and human intelligence has been pivotal in
this surge (Wu et al. 2022). For example, tools such as ChatGPT empower individuals with limited writing proficiency
to match expert-level work (Noy and Zhang 2023). Despite
AI’s progress, it cannot mimic the complexity of the human
brain entirely. AI models can have unforeseen vulnerabilities (Papernot et al. 2016; Serre 2019; Zhang et al. 2020).
For instance, advanced image and text classifiers occasionally commit unexpected errors (Recht et al. 2019; Hendrycks
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17628

