The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Selective Focus: Investigating Semantics Sensitivity
in Post-training Quantization for Lane Detection
Yunqian Fan1,2 , Xiuying Wei2 , Ruihao Gong2,4 , Yuqing Ma3, 4 , Xiangguo Zhang2 , Qi Zhang2 ,
Xianglong Liu4 *
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
SenseTime Research
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
fanyq2022@shanghaitech.edu.cn, weixiuying966@gmail.com,
{gongruihao, zhangxiangguo, zhangqi3}@sensetime.com, {mayuqing, xlliu}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

often required to run on edge devices within limited sizes,
necessitating quantization and introducing formidable challenges to detection performance.
There are two prevalent quantization techniques: Quantization Aware Training (QAT) e.g. (Choi et al. 2018; Esser
et al. 2019; Bhalgat et al. 2020; Jain et al. 2020) and Posttraining Quantization (PTQ) e.g. (Hubara et al. 2020; Wu
et al. 2020a; Wei et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a). Though
QAT can often yield promising performance, it requires a
longer training duration and the whole labeled dataset, raising computation costs and safety concerns. In contrast, PTQ
methods have attracted wide attention from both industry
and academia due to their speed and label-free nature. Recently, some PTQ methods (Nagel et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021;
Wei et al. 2022) propose to tune the weight by reconstructing
the original outputs, bringing better performance.
LD models typically regress semantic outputs with physical meanings such as offsets, locations, and angles, and
employ complex post-processing to handle these outputs.
Notably, the sensitivity of these semantic outputs to postprocessing varies, with certain elements having the potential to induce significant lane deformation even with minor
perturbations. Prior PTQ approaches employing direct reconstruction methods on feature maps treat all outputs uniformly, overlooking post-processing information.
In this paper, we first propose the semantic sensitivity
in lane detection models and introduce a Lane Distortion
Score to measure the quantization distortion between the
original LD model and the corresponding quantized counterpart. Subsequently, we investigate these sensitivities from
two perspectives, namely the intra-head sensitivity and the
inter-head sensitivity. Specifically, the intra-head sensitivity highlights the heightened sensitivity of a limited number of foreground (lane) regions to quantization noise during post-processing, while the inter-head sensitivity indicates the varying degrees of sensitivity to the quantization
of different semantic heads over time, as shown in Figure 4.
To address the sensitivity problems above, we propose a
Selective Focus framework to alleviate the semantic sensitivity in post-training quantization for LD models, enhancing the performance. The proposed framework is deployed
with a Semantic Guided Focus module and a Sensitivity

Lane detection (LD) plays a crucial role in enhancing the L2+
capabilities of autonomous driving, capturing widespread attention. The Post-Processing Quantization (PTQ) could facilitate the practical application of LD models, enabling fast
speeds and limited memories without labeled data. However,
prior PTQ methods do not consider the complex LD outputs
that contain physical semantics, such as offsets, locations,
etc., and thus cannot be directly applied to LD models. In
this paper, we pioneeringly investigate semantic sensitivity
to post-processing for lane detection with a novel Lane Distortion Score. Moreover, we identify two main factors impacting the LD performance after quantization, namely intra-head
sensitivity and inter-head sensitivity, where a small quantization error in specific semantics can cause significant lane distortion. Thus, we propose a Selective Focus framework deployed with Semantic Guided Focus and Sensitivity Aware
Selection modules, to incorporate post-processing information into PTQ reconstruction. Based on the observed intrahead sensitivity, Semantic Guided Focus is introduced to prioritize foreground-related semantics using a practical proxy.
For inter-head sensitivity, we present Sensitivity Aware Selection, efficiently recognizing influential prediction heads
and refining the optimization objectives at runtime. Extensive experiments have been done on a wide variety of models
including keypoint-, anchor-, curve-, and segmentation-based
ones. Our method produces quantized models in minutes on a
single GPU and can achieve 6.4% F1 Score improvement on
the CULane dataset. Code and supplementary statement can
at found on https://github.com/PannenetsF/SelectiveFocus.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently sparked great interest
in autonomous driving. As a fundamental component in autonomous driving, lane detection (LD) is fundamental for
high-level functions such as lane departure warning, lane departure prevention, etc. Lane detection (Qin, Wang, and Li
2020; Wang et al. 2022b; Tabelini et al. 2021) has garnered
significant attention and undergone in-depth research, leading to substantial advancements. However, LD models are
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11936

