The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BEV-MAE: Bird’s Eye View Masked Autoencoders for Point Cloud
Pre-training in Autonomous Driving Scenarios
Zhiwei Lin1 , Yongtao Wang1 * , Shengxiang Qi2 , Nan Dong2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Chongqing Changan Automobile Co., Ltd
3
University of California, Merced
{zwlin, wyt}@pku.edu.cn, shengxiang.qi@gmail.com, dongnan1@changan.com.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu
Abstract
Existing LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods for autonomous driving scenarios mainly adopt the training-fromscratch paradigm. Unfortunately, this paradigm heavily relies on large-scale labeled data, whose collection can be expensive and time-consuming. Self-supervised pre-training is
an effective and desirable way to alleviate this dependence
on extensive annotated data. In this work, we present BEVMAE, an efficient masked autoencoder pre-training framework for LiDAR-based 3D object detection in autonomous
driving. Specifically, we propose a bird’s eye view (BEV)
guided masking strategy to guide the 3D encoder learning
feature representation in a BEV perspective and avoid complex decoder design during pre-training. Furthermore, we introduce a learnable point token to maintain a consistent receptive field size of the 3D encoder with fine-tuning for masked
point cloud inputs. Based on the property of outdoor point
clouds in autonomous driving scenarios, i.e., the point clouds
of distant objects are more sparse, we propose point density prediction to enable the 3D encoder to learn location
information, which is essential for object detection. Experimental results show that BEV-MAE surpasses prior stateof-the-art self-supervised methods and achieves a favorably
pre-training efficiency. Furthermore, based on TransFusionL, BEV-MAE achieves new state-of-the-art LiDAR-based 3D
object detection results, with 73.6 NDS and 69.6 mAP on
the nuScenes benchmark. The source code will be released
at https://github.com/VDIGPKU/BEV-MAE.

Figure 1: Performance improvement vs. Pre-training time
trade-off. All entries are benchmarked by a P40 GPU. The
3D object detector is CenterPoint (Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021). All models are pre-trained on full Waymo and
then fine-tuned with 20% training samples on Waymo.

around 114s to annotate one object (Meng et al. 2020) on
KITTI. Second, self-driving vehicles can generate massive
unlabeled point cloud data daily in many practical scenarios,
which cannot be used in the training-from-scratch paradigm.
A simple and desirable solution to the above two problems is self-supervised pre-training, widely used in fields
such as computer vision (He et al. 2022) and natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2019). By solving predesigned pretext tasks, self-supervised pre-training can learn
a general and transferable feature representation on largescale unlabeled data. One of the mainstream approaches in
self-supervised learning is masked modeling, as illustrated
in Fig. 2. Specifically, numerous approaches adopt masked
image modeling (He et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2022) and masked
language modeling (Devlin et al. 2019) to pre-train networks by reconstructing images, words, and sentences from
masked inputs. Recently, several methods (Yu et al. 2022;
Pang et al. 2022) use masked point modeling for dense point
clouds, achieving promising performance on shape classification, shape segmentation, and indoor 3D object detection.

Introduction
3D object detection is one of the most basic tasks in autonomous driving. It aims to localize objects in 3D space
and classify them simultaneously. In recent years, LiDARbased 3D object detection methods have achieved significant success due to the increasing amount of labeled training
data (Caesar et al. 2020). However, existing LiDAR-based
3D object detection methods for autonomous driving scenarios often adopt the paradigm of training from scratch,
which brings two defects. First, the training-from-scratch
paradigm largely relies on extensive labeled data. For 3D object detection, annotating precise bounding boxes and classification labels is costly and time-consuming, e.g., it takes
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3531

