The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HEAP: Unsupervised Object Discovery and Localization with
Contrastive Grouping
Xin Zhang1 , Jinheng Xie1 , Yuan Yuan2 , Michael Bi Mi2 , Robby T. Tan1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
{x.zhang, jinheng}@u.nus.edu, yuanyuan10@huawei.com, michaelbimi@yahoo.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

(b)

Abstract
Unsupervised object discovery and localization aims to detect
or segment objects in an image without any supervision. Recent efforts have demonstrated a notable potential to identify
salient foreground objects by utilizing self-supervised transformer features. However, their scopes only build upon patchlevel features within an image, neglecting region/image-level
and cross-image relationships at a broader scale. Moreover,
these methods cannot differentiate various semantics from
multiple instances. To address these problems, we introduce
Hierarchical mErging framework via contrAstive grouPing
(HEAP). Specifically, a novel lightweight head with crossattention mechanism is designed to adaptively group intraimage patches into semantically coherent regions based on
correlation among self-supervised features. Further, to ensure
the distinguishability among various regions, we introduce a
region-level contrastive clustering loss to pull closer similar
regions across images. Also, an image-level contrastive loss
is present to push foreground and background representations
apart, with which foreground objects and background are accordingly discovered. HEAP facilitates efficient hierarchical
image decomposition, which contributes to more accurate object discovery while also enabling differentiation among objects of various classes. Extensive experimental results on semantic segmentation retrieval, unsupervised object discovery,
and saliency detection tasks demonstrate that HEAP achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

Patch-Level

Region-Level

Image-Level
Spectral Clustering
/ Seed Expansion

Previous methods

(a)
Encoder

Patch Embeddings

(c)

Patch-Level

Region-Level

Adaptive Grouping

Foreground

Ours

Patch-Level Affinities
Image-Level

Background

Region-Level Pulling
Image-Level Pushing

Figure 1: (a)-(b): Existing methods, such as
FOUND (SimÃl’oni et al. 2023) and TokenCut (Wang
et al. 2022b), consider patch-level similarities for each image separately. (a)-(c): HEAP jointly explores hierarchical
supervisions (i.e., patch/region/image-level) across images,
enabling more acurate object discovery and discrimination
among objects of various classes. Note that colors only
represent different objects, not specific classes.

Introduction
Unsupervised object discovery and localization aims to detect or segment salient objects in images without any human
supervision (Vo, Pérez, and Ponce 2020). It is a fundamental
problem since it provides a valuable source of weak supervision beneficial for various downstream tasks (Zhang and
Chen 2023; Jin, Yang, and Tan 2022), such as object detection (Shin, Albanie, and Xie 2022; Xie et al. 2021b) and
semantic segmentation (Xie et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2023; Xie
et al. 2022a), etc. Due to the absence of prior knowledge regarding visual characteristics or expected class membership,
localizing possible objects within a scene presents significant challenges.
Early efforts (Zitnick and Dollár 2014; Uijlings et al.
2013; Vo et al. 2019, 2021) attempted to extract excessive

candidate region proposals from the entire image set, which
are computationally prohibitive to scale to large datasets.
More recent works (Melas-Kyriazi et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022b) turn to leveraging self-supervised models such as
DINO (Caron et al. 2021), which show great potential for
object segmentation. (Melas-Kyriazi et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022b) construct a similarity graph for each image separately and exploit spectral clustering to localize objects.
(Shin, Albanie, and Xie 2022; Wang et al. 2022a, 2023)
further utilize the identified objects as pseudo masks to
train a detection/segmentation model. (Siméoni et al. 2021;
SimÃl’oni et al. 2023) first identify foreground/background
seeds from the self-attention map and then expand to cover
the whole object. While yielding promising outcomes, existing methods treat the problem as binary patch-wise clas-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7323

