The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CAVEN: An Embodied Conversational Agent for
Efficient Audio-Visual Navigation in Noisy Environments
Xiulong Liu1 * , Sudipta Paul2† , Moitreya Chatterjee3 , Anoop Cherian3
1

University of Washington, Seattle, WA
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA
3
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA
xl1995@uw.edu, spaul007@ucr.edu, metro.smiles@gmail.com, cherian@merl.com
2

Abstract
Audio-visual navigation of an agent towards locating an audio goal is a challenging task especially when the audio is
sporadic or the environment is noisy. In this paper, we present
CAVEN, a Conversation-based Audio-Visual Embodied Navigation framework in which the agent may interact with a
human/oracle for solving the task of navigating to an audio
goal. Specifically, CAVEN is modeled as a budget-aware partially observable semi-Markov decision process that implicitly learns the uncertainty in the audio-based navigation policy to decide when and how the agent may interact with the
oracle. Our CAVEN agent can engage in fully-bidirectional
natural language conversations by producing relevant questions and interpret free-form, potentially noisy responses
from the oracle based on the audio-visual context. To enable
such a capability, CAVEN is equipped with: i) a trajectory
forecasting network that is grounded in audio-visual cues to
produce a potential trajectory to the estimated goal, and (ii)
a natural language based question generation and reasoning
network to pose an interactive question to the oracle or interpret the oracle’s response to produce navigation instructions. To train the interactive modules, we present a large
scale dataset: AVN-Instruct, based on the Landmark-RxR
dataset. To substantiate the usefulness of conversations, we
present experiments on the benchmark audio-goal task using
the SoundSpaces simulator under various noisy settings. Our
results reveal that our fully-conversational approach leads to
nearly an order-of-magnitude improvement in success rate,
especially in localizing new sound sources and against methods that use only uni-directional interaction.

Figure 1: An illustrative CAVEN interaction: The agent
starts at 1 guided by the audio event at 5 . At 2 , the agent
decides to seek help from the human/oracle H (e.g., because
the audio stopped). The oracle then provides a short natural language instruction for the agent to follow. At locations
3 and 4 , the agent decides to ask questions to the oracle
using the forecasted trajectories (orange) and gets feedback,
finally reaching the audio goal at 5 .

modalities of perception (Li et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). One
such task that we exclusively explore in this paper is that of
audio-visual navigation of an embodied robotic agent where
the goal is to localize a sound producing source in a realistic, complex, and never-seen before environment when the
sound is noisy, intermittent, sporadic, and mixed with other
sounds — a situation even humans may find hard to tackle.
As can be easily imagined, the applications needing such an
audio goal capability are enormous; for example, at one end,
we may think of a robotic disaster and emergency response
agent that may need to move through huge rubble to localize victims who may cry for help and on the other, one may
consider a home robotic vacuum repurposed to be vigilant
to strange sounds.
While the task of navigating to the audio goal, has wit-

Introduction
The advent of powerful deep neural networks and sophisticated language models have led to significant advancements
in building conversational agents that can collaborate with
humans in solving challenging reasoning tasks (Peng et al.
2023; Ram et al. 2018; Chowdhery et al. 2022; Gupta and
Kembhavi 2023; You et al. 2022). While, much effort has
been expended on tasks that are predominantly in the language domain, such progress is yet to percolate into real
world problems that need complex reasoning over multiple
* Work done while interning at MERL.
†

Work done while the author was at UC Riverside.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3765

