The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Local-Global Multi-Modal Distillation
for Weakly-Supervised Temporal Video Grounding
Peijun Bao1 , Yong Xia* 2 , Wenhan Yang3 , Boon Poh Ng1 , Meng Hwa Er1 , Alex C. Kot1
1

Nanyang Technological University
Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
peijun001@e.ntu.edu.sg, yxia@nwpu.edu.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, {ebpng, emher, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg
2

Fully-Sup
Query: A person runs to the window to look.

Abstract

Modality #1

Multi-Modal Videos Modality #2
Cross-Modal
Mutual Learning

This paper for the first time leverages multi-modal videos
for weakly-supervised temporal video grounding. As labeling the video moment is labor-intensive and subjective, the
weakly-supervised approaches have gained increasing attention in recent years. However, these approaches could inherently compromise performance due to inadequate supervision.
Therefore, to tackle this challenge, we for the first time pay
attention to exploiting complementary information extracted
from multi-modal videos (e.g., RGB frames, optical flows),
where richer supervision is naturally introduced in the weaklysupervised context. Our motivation is that by integrating different modalities of the videos, the model is learned from
synergic supervision and thereby can attain superior generalization capability. However, addressing multiple modalities
would also inevitably introduce additional computational overhead, and might become inapplicable if a particular modality
is inaccessible. To solve this issue, we adopt a novel route:
building a multi-modal distillation algorithm to capitalize on
the multi-modal knowledge as supervision for model training, while still being able to work with only the single modal
input during inference. As such, we can utilize the benefits
brought by the supplementary nature of multiple modalities,
without undermining the applicability in practical scenarios.
Specifically, we first propose a cross-modal mutual learning
framework and train a sophisticated teacher model to learn
collaboratively from the multi-modal videos. Then we identify
two sorts of knowledge from the teacher model, i.e., temporal boundaries and semantic activation map. And we devise a
local-global distillation algorithm to transfer this knowledge to
a student model of single-modal input at both local and global
levels. Extensive experiments on large-scale datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
with/without multi-modal inputs.

27.3 s

0

Temporal Boundary Annotation

Global-level
Distillation

Weakly-Sup
Query: A person opens a pantry door.

0

30.6 s

1) Fully / Weakly-Supervised Setting

Teacher
Student

Local-level
Distillation

Single Modal
Videos
2) Local-Global Multi-Modal Distillation

Figure 1: 1) Due to lacking temporal boundary annotations,
weakly-supervised temporal video grounding faces ineffective supervision compared to fully-supervised scenarios. 2)
We alleviate this issue by exploiting complementary multimodal videos as an auxiliary supervisory signal. We propose
a local-global multi-modal distillation algorithm that transfers the multi-modal knowledge from the teacher model to a
single-modal student model at local and global levels.

2023; Sreenu and Durai 2019; Zhu et al. 2021), such as
video localization, video summarization, as well as video
surveillance analysis. While achieving remarkable performance, the fully-supervised temporal video grounding (Liu
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a,b, 2020a; Bao, Zheng, and Mu
2021) necessitates laborious manual annotations of temporal
moment boundaries. Consequently, the weakly-supervised
setting (illustrated in Fig 1) has recently received growing
attention (Chen et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2020;
Zheng et al. 2022a,b), where only paired videos and natural
language queries are required during training. However, the
grounding capability of the existing weakly-supervised methods is still unsatisfactory and lags behind the fully-supervised
counterparts because the incomprehensive annotations do not
provide sufficient supervisory signals.
Different from the prevailing works on weakly-supervised
learning only consider RGB frames for video features (Gao
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2021;
Zheng et al. 2022a,b), we pay attention to exploring the potential of using different modalities of the videos (e.g., RGB
frames, optical flow, audio), whose complementary informa-

Introduction
Given a natural language query and an untrimmed video,
the task of temporal video grounding (Gao et al. 2017; Krishna et al. 2017) aims to temporally localize the video moment described by the language query. It is one of the most
fundamental tasks in video understanding and has a wide
range of real-world applications (Qi et al. 2021; Bao et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

738

