The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GraFITi: Graphs for Forecasting Irregularly Sampled Time Series
Vijaya Krishna Yalavarthi1 , Kiran Madhusudhanan1 , Randolf Scholz1 , Nourhan Ahmed1 ,
Johannes Burchert1 , Shayan Jawed1 , Stefan Born2 , Lars Schmidt-Thieme1
1

Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab (ISMLL), University of Hildesheim, Germany
2
Institute of Mathematics, TU Berlin, Germany
{yalavarthi, kiranmadhusud, scholz, ahmedn, burchert, shayan, schmidt-thieme}@ismll.uni-hildesheim.de,
born@math.tu-berlin.de
Abstract

observation range

Forecasting irregularly sampled time series with missing values is a crucial task for numerous real-world applications
such as healthcare, astronomy, and climate sciences. Stateof-the-art approaches to this problem rely on Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) which are known to be slow and
often require additional features to handle missing values. To
address this issue, we propose a novel model using Graphs
for Forecasting Irregularly Sampled Time Series with missing values which we call GraFITi. GraFITi first converts the
time series to a Sparsity Structure Graph which is a sparse
bipartite graph, and then reformulates the forecasting problem as the edge weight prediction task in the graph. It uses
the power of Graph Neural Networks to learn the graph and
predict the target edge weights. GraFITi has been tested on
3 real-world and 1 synthetic irregularly sampled time series
dataset with missing values and compared with various stateof-the-art models. The experimental results demonstrate that
GraFITi improves the forecasting accuracy by up to 17% and
reduces the run time up to 5 times compared to the state-ofthe-art forecasting models.

1

forecasting range

(a) Forecasting regular multivariate time series (MTS)

(b) Forecasting irregular multivariate time series

(c) Forecasting irregularly sampled time series with
missing values (IMTS)

Introduction
Figure 1: Illustrating forecasting task in various multivariate
time series.

Time series forecasting predicts future values based on past
observations. While extensively studied, most research focuses on regularly sampled and fully observed multivariate time series (MTS) (Lim and Zohren 2021; Zeng et al.
2022; De Gooijer and Hyndman 2006). Limited attention is
given to irregularly sampled time series with missing values
(IMTS) which is commonly seen in many real-world applications. IMTS has independently observed channels at irregular intervals, resulting in sparse data alignment. The focus
of this work is on forecasting IMTS. Additionally, there is
another type called irregular multivariate time series which
is fully observed at irregular time intervals (Figure 1 illustrates the differences) which is not the interest of this paper.
Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) model continuous
time series, and predict system evolution over time based on
the rate of change of state variables as shown in Eq. 1.
d
x(t) = f (t, x(t))
dt

ODE-based models (Schirmer et al. 2022; De Brouwer et al.
2019; Biloš et al. 2021; Scholz et al. 2023) are able to forecast at arbitrary time points. However, ODE models can
be slow because of their auto-regressive nature and computationally expensive numerical integration process. Also,
some ODE models cannot directly handle missing values
in the observation space, hence, they often rely on missing
value indicators (De Brouwer et al. 2019; Biloš et al. 2021)
which are given as additional channels in the data.
To circumvent the above challenges, in this work, we propose a novel model called GraFITi: graphs for forecasting
IMTS. GraFITi converts IMTS data into a Sparsity Structure
Graph and formulates forecasting as edge weight prediction
in the graph. This approach represents channels and timepoints as disjoint nodes connected by observation values as
edges in a bipartite graph. GraFITi uses multiple graph neural network (GNN) layers with attention and feed-forward
mechanisms to learn node and edge interactions. Our Spar-

(1)

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16255

