The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

G-NAS: Generalizable Neural Architecture Search for Single Domain
Generalization Object Detection
Fan Wu1 , Jinling Gao1 , Lanqing Hong2 , Xinbing Wang1 , Chenghu Zhou1 , Nanyang Ye1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China
wufan55@sjtu.edu.cn, gaojinling@sjtu.edu.cn, honglanqing@huawei.com, xwang8@sjtu.edu.cn, zhouchsjtu@gmail.com,
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn
Source Domain
(Training data)

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on a realistic yet challenging task,
Single Domain Generalization Object Detection (S-DGOD),
where only one source domain’s data can be used for training
object detectors, but have to generalize multiple distinct target domains. In S-DGOD, both high-capacity fitting and generalization abilities are needed due to the task’s complexity.
Differentiable Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is known
for its high capacity for complex data fitting and we propose
to leverage Differentiable NAS to solve S-DGOD. However,
it may confront severe over-fitting issues due to the feature
imbalance phenomenon, where parameters optimized by gradient descent are biased to learn from the easy-to-learn features, which are usually non-causal and spuriously correlated
to ground truth labels, such as the features of background in
object detection data. Consequently, this leads to serious performance degradation, especially in generalizing to unseen
target domains with huge domain gaps between the source
domain and target domains. To address this issue, we propose the Generalizable loss (G-loss), which is an OoD-aware
objective, preventing NAS from over-fitting by using gradient
descent to optimize parameters not only on a subset of easyto-learn features but also the remaining predictive features for
generalization, and the overall framework is named G-NAS.
Experimental results on the S-DGOD urban-scene datasets
demonstrate that the proposed G-NAS achieves SOTA performance compared to baseline methods. Codes are available
at https://github.com/wufan-cse/G-NAS.

Daytime-Sunny

Single Domain Generalization

Daytime-Foggy

Dusk-Rainy

Night-Sunny

Target Domains
(Testing data)

Night-Rainy

Figure 1: The setting of S-DGOD, which aims to learn from
a single source domain and generalize to multiple unseen
target domains. It requires extracting the causal features in
the source domain for achieving OoD generalization.

a single source domain for training (see Figure 1 for illustration). It requires methods to extract the causal features in
the source domain and learn from them for generalization.
Compared with the traditional Domain Generalization (DG),
S-DGOD provides only one source domain data, making it
easy to over-fit as we are unable to learn the features shared
by multiple source domains, which usually contain causal
information (Arjovsky et al. 2019). Most existing works on
S-DGOD (Pan et al. 2018, 2019; Huang et al. 2019; Choi
et al. 2021) apply feature normalization to solve the singledomain generalization problem. Other methods, such as feature disentanglement (Wu and Deng 2022) and invariantbased algorithms (Rao et al. 2023), have been proposed.
However, none of these existing works discover the high
capacity of architectural design in learning complex data
distribution. Additionally, there are researches (Ganin et al.
2016; Chen et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2019; Hsu et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2020) on improving object detectors’ generalization ability via the Domain Adaption (DA) setting, which
learns from a source domain and generalizes to a specific
target domain. Compared with DA, S-DGOD targets multiple unseen domains, while DA algorithms solely focus on
one target domain and have privileged access to unlabeled
target domain data during training, which makes S-DGOD
much more challenging than DA.
In this paper, we propose to leverage the high capacity in fitting complex data of Differentiable NAS to solve

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision (Ren et al. 2015; Tan, Pang, and Le 2020; Ge et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2021). However, improving the generalization
ability of object detection remains a challenging problem,
especially for Out-of-Distribution scenarios, where data are
sampled from novel unseen distributions. Recently, this has
been grounded to a realistic yet challenging task, i.e., Single
Domain Generalization Object Detection (S-DGOD) (Wu
and Deng 2022), which raised worldwide researchers’ attention to the generalization ability of object detection algorithms. The objective of S-DGOD is to improve object detectors’ Out-of-Domain (OoD) generalization ability, given
* Nanyang Ye is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5958

