The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding the Generalization of Pretrained Diffusion Models on
Out-of-Distribution Data
Sai Niranjan Ramachandran1 * † , Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay2 * , Madhav Agarwal2 * , C.V. Jawahar2 ,
Vinay Namboodiri3
2

1
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
3
University of Bath

Abstract

remains a challenge. OOD robustness is essential in deep
learning for applications with limited resources, and it helps
address issues like bias and distribution shifts. For example
an autonomous vehicle trained on a dataset with limited extreme weather images must still perform safely under such
conditions.
The research community has extensively analyzed and
used the StyleGAN2 model (Karras et al. 2020) for various
downstream tasks in particular for several face-related tasks
using the StyleGAN2 trained on the FFHQ dataset (Karras
et al. 2020). Its latent space is known for offering control
over diverse aspects like facial expressions and hairstyles.
Despite its strengths, StyleGAN2’s limitations become evident with non-face images or faces that do not align with the
FFHQ dataset’s characteristics which are out-of-distribution
(OOD) examples for StyleGAN. When applied to OOD images such as animals or inanimate objects, StyleGAN’s image generation quality deteriorates. This limitation points to
the challenges in training models on non-face datasets, given
the high data demands and slow convergence. Thus exploring generative models that can better handle a variety of
OOD images is critical for progress in fields like computer
vision, graphics, and entertainment.
Our Contributions Diffusion models, known for their
mathematical clarity and probabilistic insight, have
prompted us to explore their potential in handling outof-distribution (OOD) images compared to GANs’ latent
spaces. The main contributions of our work are as follows:
(1) Empirical analysis reveals that diffusion models outperform GANs in inverting high-quality OOD images. This
superiority is theoretically linked to the absence of ”prior
holes” in diffusion spaces, a flaw seen in GANs where
inverted latents’ distribution misaligns with the actual
distribution. (2) We hypothesize that the Gaussian structure
of diffusion spaces enables projection onto a hypersphere,
streamlining the traversal between inverted images via
geodesics as well as non-linear traversal. We present diverse
image manipulations, assessing the universality of different
diffusion spaces. (3) Capitalizing on the geometry of diffusion spaces, we introduce a method for few-shot generation,
showcasing state-of-the-art results. In summary, our work
underscores the advantages of diffusion models’ latent
spaces in addressing the challenges posed by GANs for

This work tackles the important task of understanding outof-distribution behavior in two prominent types of generative
models, i.e., GANs and Diffusion models. Understanding this
behavior is crucial in understanding their broader utility and
risks as these systems are increasingly deployed in our daily
lives. Our first contribution is demonstrating that diffusion
spaces outperform GANs’ latent spaces in inverting highquality OOD images. We also provide a theoretical analysis
attributing this to the lack of prior holes in diffusion spaces.
Our second significant contribution is to provide a theoretical hypothesis that diffusion spaces can be projected onto a
bounded hypersphere, enabling image manipulation through
geodesic traversal between inverted images. Our analysis
shows that different geodesics share common attributes for
the same manipulation, which we leverage to perform various
image manipulations. We conduct thorough empirical evaluations to support and validate our claims. Finally, our third
and final contribution introduces a novel approach to the fewshot sampling for out-of-distribution data by inverting a few
images to sample from the cluster formed by the inverted latents. The proposed technique achieves state-of-the-art results
for the few-shot generation task in terms of image quality.
Our research underscores the promise of diffusion spaces in
out-of-distribution imaging and offers avenues for further exploration. Please find more details about our project at http:
//cvit.iiit.ac.in/research/projects/cvit-projects/diffusionOOD

Introduction
In the last decade, generative models such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020, 2021;
Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) and Diffusion models (Preechakul et al. 2022; Sinha* et al. 2021; Rombach
et al. 2021a; Ho et al. 2022) have significantly advanced
image synthesis. These models excel in generating realistic
images, but their handling of out-of-distribution (OOD) data
— data that is substantially different from their training sets
* These authors contributed equally.
†
This work was done as a research assistant at International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14767

