The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Channel-Aware Typical Features for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Rundong He1 * , Yue Yuan1 * , Zhongyi Han2† , Fan Wang1 , Wan Su1 , Yilong Yin1† , Tongliang Liu2, 3 ,
Yongshun Gong1
1
Shandong University
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
The University of Sydney
{rundong he, yuanyueyy, suwan}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {hanzhongyicn, fanwangsail}@gmail.com, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn,
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, yongshun2512@hotmail.com
2

Abstract

74

91

69

AUROC(%)

Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) data is essential to ensure the reliability of machine learning models when deployed in real-world scenarios. Different from most previous test-time OOD detection methods that focus on designing OOD scores, we delve into the challenges in OOD detection from the perspective of typicality and regard the feature’s
high-probability region as the feature’s typical set. However,
the existing typical-feature-based OOD detection method implies an assumption: the proportion of typical feature sets for
each channel is fixed. According to our experimental analysis, each channel contributes differently to OOD detection.
Adopting a fixed proportion for all channels results in several channels losing too many typical features or incorporating too many abnormal features, resulting in low performance. Therefore, exploring the channel-aware typical features is crucial to better-separating ID and OOD data. Driven
by this insight, we propose expLoring channel-Aware tyPical featureS (LAPS). Firstly, LAPS obtains the channel-aware
typical set by calibrating the channel-level typical set with
the global typical set from the mean and standard deviation.
Then, LAPS rectifies the features into channel-aware typical
sets to obtain channel-aware typical features. Finally, LAPS
leverages the channel-aware typical features to calculate the
energy score for OOD detection. Theoretical and visual analyses verify that LAPS achieves a better bias-variance tradeoff. Experiments verify the effectiveness and generalization
of LAPS under different architectures and OOD scores.

FPR95(%)

86

64

81

59

76
71

54

10

20

30

40

Channel Index

50

49

10

20

30

40

Channel Index

50

Figure 1: Different channels contribute differently to OOD
detection. FPR95 and AUROC evaluate performance.

OOD detection methods can be classified into two main
categories: density-based and classification-based methods.
Since the performance of density-based methods (Zhou and
Levine 2021; Jiang, Sun, and Yu 2021) often lags behind that of classification-based methods, and the training and optimization processes are more complex (Song,
Sebe, and Wang 2022), this paper focuses on classificationbased methods. The classification-based methods can be
further dissected into training-time and test-time methods.
The training-time methods (Du et al. 2022; He et al. 2022)
require model training or fine-tuning, while the test-time
methods do not require any retraining, making them convenient. The latter can be divided into four types: outputbased (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016), distance-based (Lee
et al. 2018), gradient-based (Huang, Geng, and Li 2021),
and rectified-activation-based methods. The first three types
overlook exploring abnormal activations within the neural
network’s hidden layers. These abnormal activations cause
overconfidence in predicting OOD data and underconfidence
in predicting ID data, enlarging the overlap of ID and OOD
distribution and weakening the performance of OOD detection (Sun, Guo, and Li 2021; Zhu et al. 2022).
Rectified-activation-based methods aim to address abnormal activations (features), which can be classified into two
categories: clip-based and typical-set-based methods. Clipbased methods (Sun, Guo, and Li 2021; Kong and Li 2023)
employ a pre-defined threshold to clip extremely high activations or employ a low-pass filter to exclude activations.
Different from clip-based methods, the typical-set-based
methods consider typical features. Zhu et al. (2022) regards

Introduction
Deep neural networks exhibit remarkable effectiveness
when applied to scenarios where the training and test
datasets share the same label space (Sun et al. 2023, 2022;
Huang et al. 2023b,a). However, in open and dynamic environments, data outside the training label space poses a
significant challenge for deep neural networks (Yang et al.
2023b,a). For example, misclassifying novel diseases as
known could lead to significant medical errors (Han et al.
2022). To mitigate such scenarios and guarantee the security of AI applications, substantial research endeavors have
recently been dedicated to OOD detection.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12402

