The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Greedy-Based Online Fair Allocation with Adversarial Input:
Enabling Best-of-Many-Worlds Guarantees
Zongjun Yang1 , Luofeng Liao2 , Christian Kroer2 *
1

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
Columbia University
allenyzj@stu.pku.edu.cn, {ll3530, christian.kroer}@columbia.edu

Abstract

Nash welfare maximizing allocation is APX-hard (Moulin
2004; Lee 2017), although constant-factor approximation algorithms are known (Cole and Gkatzelis 2018; Cole et al.
2017; McGlaughlin and Garg 2020).
In the online setting, Gao, Peysakhovich, and Kroer (2021)
provides a simple allocation algorithm called PACE (Pace
According to Current Estimated utility), which generates
asymptotically fair and efficient allocations when items are
drawn in an i.i.d. manner. PACE gives each agent a per-round
budget of faux currency and simulates a first-price auction in
each round. The fair allocation is achieved by having each
agent shade their bid with a pacing multiplier, which is a
projection of their current estimated inverse bang-per-buck to
a fixed interval. Liao, Gao, and Kroer (2022) extend these results to non-stationary inputs, where the distribution of items
may change over time. They show that in this case, PACE
still achieves asymptotic fairness and efficiency guarantees,
up to linear error terms from the amount of non-stationarity.
Yet in many real-world scenarios, we cannot expect items
to be drawn in a stochastic manner, even if from nonstationary distributions. This motivates the investigation of
algorithms with competitive ratio guarantee for adversarial
settings. To fit arbitrary inputs, including extreme ones, some
algorithms adopt “conservative” designs for fairness such as
allocating half of each item purely equally (Banerjee et al.
2022). Although this helps to provide worst-case guarantees,
it damages the efficiency in the average case, which may not
be acceptable in some practical applications. Moreover, such
allocation requires each item to be divisible, or at least for
random allocation to be acceptable.
This motivates us to move in another direction: Instead of
developing algorithms to fit extreme adversarial inputs, we
seek to find worst-case guarantees for existing algorithms that
are designed for stochastic inputs, and do not divide any item.
In particular, we focus on the performance of the algorithm
PACE (Gao, Peysakhovich, and Kroer 2021; Liao, Gao, and
Kroer 2022), and explore the question:
How does PACE perform under adversarial input?
Our first contribution is to show that, in the case where
all agents have the same weight (or budget in market equilibrium terminology), PACE is equivalent to the first-order
integral greedy algorithm, assuming no projection of the
pacing multiplier. Due to this equivalence, we start by investigating the greedy allocation. Our results for first-order

We study an online allocation problem with sequentially arriving items and adversarially chosen agent values, with the
goal of balancing fairness and efficiency. Our goal is to study
the performance of algorithms that achieve strong guarantees
under other input models such as stochastic inputs, in order
to achieve robust guarantees against a variety of inputs. To
that end, we study the PACE (Pacing According to Current
Estimated utility) algorithm, an existing algorithm designed
for stochastic input. We show that in the equal-budgets case,
PACE is equivalent to an integral greedy algorithm. We go on
to show that with natural restrictions on the adversarial input
model, both the greedy allocation and PACE have asymptotically bounded multiplicative envy as well as competitive
ratio for Nash welfare, with the multiplicative factors either
constant or with optimal order dependence on the number of
agents. This completes a “best-of-many-worlds” guarantee for
PACE, since past work showed that PACE achieves guarantees
for stationary and stochastic-but-non-stationary input models.

1

Introduction

We study online fair allocation, where items arrive sequentially in T rounds, and we need to distribute them among
a set of n agents with heterogeneous preferences, with the
goal of achieving both fairness and efficiency properties. In
each round, we observe each agent’s value for the item and
make an irrevocable allocation. The horizon length T can be
potentially infinite, which aligns with real-world scenarios
where items appear in high volume and frequency, e.g. bandwidth allocation and content recommendation. We assume
that agents have linear and additive utilities.
Fair allocation problem in the offline setting has been wellstudied. A classical objective to optimize is the Nash welfare
(NW), defined as the geometric mean of the agents’ utilities. Maximizing Nash welfare provides a balance between
efficiency and fairness due to the multiplicative nature of
the objective. For divisible items, an offline optimal allocation can be computed via solving the Eisenberg-Gale (EG)
convex program (Eisenberg and Gale 1959). The solution
enjoys both envy-freeness and proportionality, which are important measures of fairness. For indivisible items, finding a
* For the complete paper and technical appendices, see https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2308.09277.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9960

