The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data Disparity and Temporal Unavailability Aware Asynchronous Federated
Learning for Predictive Maintenance on Transportation Fleets
Leonie von Wahl1 , Niklas Heidenreich1 , Prasenjit Mitra2 , Michael Nolting1 , Nicolas Tempelmeier1
1
2

Volkswagen Group, Hannover, Germany
Penn State University, State College, USA
leonie.von.wahl@volkswagen.de

Abstract

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a collaborative
learning paradigm that prevents privacy issues by not sharing training data but only model parameters, e.g., the learned
neural network weights. A global server coordinates the
training of multiple clients, which only have access to their
local data (McMahan et al. 2017). In canonical federated
learning, client models are collected synchronously to update the global model.
However, this approach does not apply to many heterogeneous real-world problems, in which clients may send
updates at irregular intervals or drop out during training
(Li et al. 2020). Asynchronous federated learning (AFL)
schemes that address the heterogeneity of the systems have
emerged as an alternative to classic FL (Chen, Mao, and Ma
2019). In AFL, the global server aggregates parameter updates of a single client as soon as that device has completed
its local training round. However, existing AFL approaches
suffer from the following problems: (i) While existing systems aim to select the most promising nodes for training

(Chen et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2020), they neglect the data
disparity, i.e., differences in the amount of available training data among the clients. The data disparity can introduce
a bias towards single contributors to the global model. The
few existing approaches addressing data disparity lack flexibility and favour contributors with large amounts of data
(Hao, Zhao, and Zhang 2020). (ii) Existing approaches can
not handle dropouts, i.e., clients that lose the connection to
the server during training, and typically exclude these clients
from being aggregated into the global model (Zhang, Bosch,
and Olsson 2021). (iii) Due to the different data volumes and
convergence speeds, it is unclear when to stop the federated
training since existing schemes, e.g., early stopping, can not
be directly applied (Li et al. 2021).
These challenges are particularly relevant for predictive
maintenance in transportation fleets, where the clients are
individual vehicles. Due to individual travel patterns, the
vehicles produce data at different sizes and may drop out
due to connectivity problems (Yang et al. 2022). In this paper, we propose a novel data disparity aware asynchronous
federated model which enables predictive maintenance for
engines in transportation fleets. We address the data disparity and dropouts by proposing a Disparity Aware AFL
(DAAFL) aggregation scheme which considers the training
data sizes and update frequencies of the individual clients
throughout the aggregation weights. Moreover, we address
the training length determination by introducing a novel
AFL early stopping method, which computes a federated
validation loss. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study exploring an asynchronous federated stopping criterion. We perform an extensive evaluation on two real-world
datasets of transportation fleets, i.e. the prediction of oil dilution of car engines and the prediction of the remaining lifetime of aeroplane turbofan engines. We simulate individual
dropout patterns for each client to show the performance under temporal unavailability. Our experiments show that our
proposed DAAFL approach can reliably improve over existing synchronous, semi-asynchronous and asynchronous
federated learning schemes in both tasks. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that our DAAFL generalises to the established
neural model architectures for time series prediction.
Our contributions can be summarised as follows:

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We formulate a dynamic parameter aggregation rule and
a federated early stopping scheme which considers data

Predictive maintenance has emerged as a critical application
in modern transportation, leveraging sensor data to forecast
potential damages proactively using machine learning. However, privacy concerns limit data sharing, making Federated
learning an appealing approach to preserve data privacy. Nevertheless, challenges arise due to disparities in data distribution and temporal unavailability caused by individual usage
patterns in transportation. In this paper, we present a novel
asynchronous federated learning approach to address system heterogeneity and facilitate machine learning for predictive maintenance on transportation fleets. The approach introduces a novel data disparity aware aggregation scheme and a
federated early stopping method for training. To validate the
effectiveness of our approach, we evaluate it on two independent real-world datasets from the transportation domain: 1)
oil dilution prediction of car combustion engines and 2) remaining lifetime prediction of plane turbofan engines. Our
experiments show that we reliably outperform five state-ofthe-art baselines, including federated and classical machine
learning models. Moreover, we show that our approach generalises to various prediction model architectures.

Introduction

15420

