The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiffusionEdge: Diffusion Probabilistic Model for Crisp Edge Detection
Yunfan Ye1,2 * , Kai Xu2 * , Yuhang Huang2† , Renjiao Yi2 , Zhiping Cai2
1

2

Hunan University
National University of Defense Technology

GT

Abstract

Image

UAED
Encoder

Limited by the encoder-decoder architecture, learning-based
edge detectors usually have difficulty predicting edge maps
that satisfy both correctness and crispness. With the recent
success of the diffusion probabilistic model (DPM), we found
it is especially suitable for accurate and crisp edge detection
since the denoising process is directly applied to the original
image size. Therefore, we propose the first diffusion model
for the task of general edge detection, which we call DiffusionEdge. To avoid expensive computational resources while
retaining the final performance, we apply DPM in the latent space and enable the classic cross-entropy loss which
is uncertainty-aware in pixel level to directly optimize the
parameters in latent space in a distillation manner. We also
adopt a decoupled architecture to speed up the denoising process and propose a corresponding adaptive Fourier filter to
adjust the latent features of specific frequencies. With all
the technical designs, DiffusionEdge can be stably trained
with limited resources, predicting crisp and accurate edge
maps with much fewer augmentation strategies. Extensive experiments on four edge detection benchmarks demonstrate
the superiority of DiffusionEdge both in correctness and
crispness. On the NYUDv2 dataset, compared to the second
best, we increase the ODS, OIS (without post-processing)
and AC by 30.2%, 28.1% and 65.1%, respectively. Code:
https://github.com/GuHuangAI/DiffusionEdge.

Gaussian Noise

Condition

Decoder

DiffusionEdge

Figure 1: CNN-based methods, even the most recent and
state-of-the-art one (UAED (Zhou et al. 2023)), generally
have an encoder-decoder architecture with limitations of
thick edges and more noise. We propose the diffusion-based
edge detector which is superior in both correctness and
crispness without any post-processing.
which can be crisp but not correct enough. Deep learningbased methods (Xie and Tu 2015; Liu et al. 2017; He et al.
2019; Poma, Riba, and Sappa 2020; Pu et al. 2022; Zhou
et al. 2023) achieve significant progress by capturing local and global features with multi-layers, which is correct
but not crisp enough. Recently, efforts have also been made
to design lightweight architectures (Su et al. 2021) for efficiency, or loss functions (Deng et al. 2018; Huan et al.
2021) and refinement strategies (Ye et al. 2023a) for crisp
edge detection. However, none of each single edge detector
can directly predict edge maps that simultaneously satisfy
both correctness and crispness, without a post-processing
of morphological non-maximal suppression (NMS) scheme.
We ask this question: Can we learn an edge detector that can
directly generate both accurate and crisp edge maps without
heavily relying on post-processing?
In this work, we try to answer the question through learning a diffusion model for edge detection. As demonstrated
in Figure 1, DPMs have two main differences compared
with methods based on the Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN): (a) CNN-based models generally learn and infer the
targets in a single round, while DPMs are trained to predict
a denoised variant of the noisy input by several steps, which
makes it easier for DPMs to learn the target distribution; (b)
CNN-based edge detectors generally extract features from
multi-layers and therefore are limited by the existence of
downsampling (for high-level global features) and upsampling (for pixel-wise alignment) operators, which leads to

Introduction
Edge detection is a longstanding vision task for detecting object boundaries and visually salient edges from images. As a
fundamental problem, it benefits various downstream tasks
ranging from 2D perception (Zitnick and Dollár 2014; Revaud et al. 2015; Cheng et al. 2020), generation (Nazeri et al.
2019; Xiong et al. 2019), and 3D curve reconstruction (Ye
et al. 2023b).
There are three main challenges in general edge detection,
correctness (identifying edge and non-edge pixels on noisy
scenes), crispness (the width of edge lines, precisely localizing edges without confusing pixels) and efficiency (the inference speed). Traditional methods extract edges based on
local features such as gradient (Kittler 1983; Canny 1986),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6675

