The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mastering Context-to-Label Representation Transformation for Event Causality
Identification with Diffusion Models
Hieu Man1 , Franck Dernoncourt2 , Thien Huu Nguyen1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oregon, USA
2
Adobe Research, USA
3
VinAI Research, Vietnam
{hieum,thienn}@uoregon.edu, franck.dernoncourt@adobe.com

Abstract

event structure understanding of text, ECI models can introduce useful information for different NLP applications such
as question answering (Oh et al. 2016), machine reading
comprehension (Berant et al. 2014), and event forecasting
(Hashimoto 2019).
While the early work for ECI has applied feature-based
methods (Do, Chan, and Roth 2011; Ning et al. 2018), recent work have employed various deep learning architectures to realize state-of-the-art performance for this problem (Kadowaki et al. 2019; Liu, Chen, and Zhao 2020; Zuo
et al. 2021b). As such, the first step in the current deep
learning models for ECI often involves a transformer-based
encoding network, such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), that help induce initial contextualized representations of event mentions in the input
texts. Afterward, the ECI models tend to explore different
components to further enrich the event context representations from the transformer-based networks, resulting in the
final event representations for causality prediction. For instance, (Tran Phu and Nguyen 2021) leverages graph convolutional networks with rich text structures to produce the
enriched event representations for ECI. Another example includes (Liu, Chen, and Zhao 2020) that augments input texts
with relevant background knowledge retrieved from external sources to enhance event context representations. Consequently, the final step of contemporary ECI models is to
transform the event context representations into causal label
representations that will be used to compute logits scores for
possible causal labels for training and inference. Ideally, the
causal label representations are expected to capture pure information for the causal labels to facilitate label score computation and prediction.
As such, the dominant approach in ECI models is to employ a straightforward feed-forward network, characterized
by its simplicity with zero, one, or a few layers, to directly
convert the event context representations into the causal label representations for causality prediction (Gao, Choubey,
and Huang 2019; Tran Phu and Nguyen 2021; Chen et al.
2022). While this approach can be convenient for implementation, a critical issue arises. The computed event context
representations of ECI models might still involve complicated and noisy information. Attempting to perform contextto-label representation transformation directly with feedforward networks can demand a drastic change, posing sig-

To understand event structures of documents, event causality identification (ECI) emerges as a crucial task, aiming to
discern causal relationships among event mentions. The latest approach for ECI has introduced advanced deep learning
models where transformer-based encoding models, complemented by enriching components, are typically leveraged to
learn effective event context representations for causality prediction. As such, an important step for ECI models is to transform the event context representations into causal label representations to perform logits score computation for training
and inference purposes. Within this framework, event context
representations might encapsulate numerous complicated and
noisy structures due to the potential long context between the
input events while causal label representations are intended
to capture pure information about the causal relations to facilitate score estimation. Nonetheless, a notable drawback of
existing ECI models stems from their reliance on simple feedforward networks to handle the complex context-to-label representation transformation process, which might require drastic changes in the representations to hinder the learning process. To overcome this issue, our work introduces a novel
method for ECI where, instead abrupt transformations, event
context representations are gradually updated to achieve effective label representations. This process will be done incrementally to allow filtering of irrelevant structures at varying
levels of granularity for causal relations. To realize this, we
present a diffusion model to learn gradual representation transition processes between context and causal labels. It operates
through a forward pass for causal label representation noising and a reverse pass for reconstructing label representations
from random noise. Our experiments on different datasets
across multiple languages demonstrate the advantages of the
diffusion model with state-of-the-art performance for ECI.

Introduction
Event Causality Identification (ECI) is an active research
problem in Information Extraction of Natural Language Processing (NLP) whose goal entails predicting causal relations
between event mentions in text. For example, in the sentence
“The hurricane caused significant property damage to his
house.”, an ECI system should identify the causal relation
between the events “hurricane” and “damage, i.e., “hurricause
cane” −−−→ “damage”. Serving as an important step for
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18760

