The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sample-Level Cross-View Similarity Learning for Incomplete Multi-View
Clustering
Suyuan Liu1 , Junpu Zhang1 , Yi Wen1 , Xihong Yang1 , Siwei Wang2 , Yi Zhang1 , En Zhu1 ,
Chang Tang3 , Long Zhao4 , Xinwang Liu1 *
1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, 410073
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China, 100091
3
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China, 430074
4
Shandong Computer Science Center, Qilu University of Technology, Jinan, China, 250000
suyuanliu@nudt.edu.cn, zhangjunpu@nudt.edu.cn, wenyiwy2022@163.com, xihong edu@163.com,
wangsiwei13@nudt.edu.cn, zhangy@nudt.edu.cn, enzhu@nudt.edu.cn, tangchang@cug.edu.cn, Zhaolong@qlu.edu.cn,
xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

few decades, numerous MVC methods have been proposed
and have demonstrated excellent performance (Zhang et al.
2022; Wen et al. 2023b; Yu et al. 2023).
However, in practical applications, multi-view data often
suffers from partial missingness due to limitations in the data
acquisition process, noise from collection devices, or other
uncontrollable factors (Xu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2022b).
For instance, a patient’s medical record may be incomplete
because several tests were not conducted, or data from multiple radar sensors may have missing values caused by channel interference. Traditional MVC models are typically built
on the fundamental assumption of complete data and are unable to directly handle missingness in multi-view data (Wen
et al. 2022). To address these challenges, a series of incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) methods have emerged
in recent years (Liu et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2022; He et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023). Based on the strategies employed to handle missing data, the existing IMVC
methods can be categorized into three types: imputationbased, representation-based, and similarity-based.
The imputation-based IMVC methods address incomplete
data through heuristic strategies or optimization techniques,
followed by fusion and clustering operations on the filling
data (Liu et al. 2020a; Xia et al. 2023). Liu et al. further
propose integrating missing value imputation and clustering
into a unified learning process (Liu et al. 2020b). Based on
the assumption that each sample in incomplete multi-view
data exists in at least one view, representation-based IMVC
methods learn a consistent low-dimensional representation
based on the samples present in each view and then apply
clustering algorithms to this representation (Lv et al. 2022;
Deng et al. 2023). Wen et al. suggest first learning incomplete low-dimensional representations on each view separately and then integrating them into a unified latent representation (Wen et al. 2018). Similarity-based IMVC methods construct partial similarity graphs of each view and then
fuse them to build a complete similarity matrix (Liu et al.
2023). Guo et al. propose to average the common similarity parts among views and concatenate the unique parts to
obtain a complete similarity matrix (Guo and Ye 2019).
Compared to the previous two methods, the similarity-

Incomplete multi-view clustering has attracted much attention due to its ability to handle partial multi-view data. Recently, similarity-based methods have been developed to explore the complete relationship among incomplete multiview data. Although widely applied to partial scenarios, most
of the existing approaches are still faced with two limitations. Firstly, fusing similarities constructed individually on
each view fails to yield a complete unified similarity. Moreover, incomplete similarity generation may lead to anomalous similarity values with column sum constraints, affecting the final clustering results. To solve the above challenging issues, we propose a Sample-level Cross-view Similarity
Learning (SCSL) method for Incomplete Multi-view Clustering. Specifically, we project all samples to the same dimension and simultaneously construct a complete similarity
matrix across views based on the inter-view sample relationship and the intra-view sample relationship. In addition, a simultaneously learning consensus representation ensures the
validity of the projection, which further enhances the quality of the similarity matrix through the graph Laplacian regularization. Experimental results on six benchmark datasets
demonstrate the ability of SCSL in processing incomplete
multi-view clustering tasks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Tracesource/SCSL.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) has garnered considerable attention from researchers as an effective machine learning
paradigm for data analysis (Jiang et al. 2022; Wan et al.
2022; Dong et al. 2023). The objective of MVC is to leverage the features of samples across multiple views and partition the data points into a predetermined number of categories, where samples within the same category should
be as similar as possible (Wang et al. 2022a; Wen et al.
2023a; Yang et al. 2021). The key challenge in MVC lies
in determining the consistent and complementary information across multiple views to achieve clustering performance
that surpasses that of single-view clustering. Over the past
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14017

