The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Approximate Distance Oracle for Fault-Tolerant Geometric Spanners
Kyungjin Cho, Jihun Shin, Eunjin Oh
Pohang University of Science and Technology, South Korea.
{kyungjincho, tmtingsamuel, eunjin.oh}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present approximate distance and shortestpath oracles for fault-tolerant Euclidean spanners motivated
by the routing problem in real-world road networks. A faulttolerant Euclidean spanner for a set of points in Euclidean
space is a graph in which, despite the deletion of small number of any points, the distance between any two points in the
damaged graph is an approximation of their Euclidean distance. Given a fault-tolerant Euclidean spanner and a small
approximation factor, our data structure allows us to compute
an approximate distance between two points in the damaged
spanner in constant time when a query involves any two points
and a small set of failed points. Additionally, by incorporating
additional data structures, we can return a path itself in time
almost linear in the length of the returned path. Both data
structures require near-linear space.

Introduction
Computing the shortest path in a graph is a fundamental
problem motivated by potential applications such as GPS
navigation, route planning services and POI recommendation
for real-world road networks. Although the shortest path can
be computed by Dijkstra’s algorithm, it is not sufficiently efficient if the given graph is large. This requires us to preprocess
a given graph so that for two query vertices, their shortest
path can be computed more efficiently. A data structure for
this task is called a shortest-path (or distance) oracle.
From the theoretical viewpoint, this problem is not an
easy task. More specifically, any data structure for answering (2k + 1)-approximate distance queries in O(1) time for
n-vertices graphs must use Ω(n1+1/k ) space assuming the
1963 girth conjecture of Erdős (Thorup and Zwick 2005). On
the other hand, there are algorithms for this task that work
efficiently for real-world road networks in practice such as
contraction hierarchies (Kuhn et al. 2005), transit nodes (Bast
et al. 2007), and hub labels (Abraham et al. 2011). Although
these algorithms work well in practice, there is still a lack of
theoretical explanation for this. Bridging this theory-practice
gap is one of interesting topics in computer science. Indeed,
there are lots of works on bridging the theory-practice gap
in the routing problems such as (Blum, Funke, and Storandt
2018; Kosowski and Viennot 2017; Abraham et al. 2016).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20087

Motivation. In real-life situations, networks might be vulnerable to unexpected accidents: edges or vertices might be
failed, but these failures are transient due to a repair process.
As the network is large, we cannot afford to construct the
entire data structure from scratch. This motivates the study
of fault-tolerant distance and shortest-path oracles on vulnerable networks: preprocess a graph G = (V, E) so that
for any set F of f failed vertices (or edges) of G and two
query vertices s and s0 , we can compute a shortest path in
G − F between s and s0 efficiently. A data structure that can
handle failed vertices (or edges) is said to be fault-tolerant.
The theoretical performance of a fault-tolerant data structure
is measured by a function of the number n of vertices of an
input graph and the maximum number f of failed vertices.
Although this problem is natural, little is known for vertex failures while there are lots of work on edge failures.
To the best of our knowledge, there is the only published
result on (approximate) distance oracles for general graphs in
the presence of vertex failures: an O(n2 )-sized approximate
distance oracle answering queries in polylog(n) time in the
presence of a constant number of vertex failures (Duan, Gu,
and Ren 2021). On the other hand, there are lots of theoretical
results on (approximate) distance oracles for general graphs
in the presence of edge failures (Bodwin et al. 2018; Chechik
et al. 2017; Ren 2022). Dynamic graphs whose edge weights
change over time also have been studied from a more practical point of view (Ouyang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021;
Zhang, Li, and Zhou 2021). In this case, vertex updates (and
vertex failures) are not allowed.
This raises an intriguing question: Can we design an efficient oracle for handling vertex failures? The size of the
best-known oracle is O(n2 ), which is still large for practical
purposes. In real-life situations, vertices as well as edges are
also prone to failures. A bus map can be considered as a
graph where its vertices correspond to the bus stops. A bus
stop can be closed due to unexpected events, and then buses
make detours. This changes the bus map temporarily. To address this scenario, we need vertex-fault tolerant oracles. In
this paper, we design a new efficient oracle for answering
approximate distance and shortest-path queries for real-world
road networks from a theoretical point of view.
Similar to the static case, there is a huge gap between theory and practice in the dynamic settings: theoretical solutions
are not efficient in general while practical solutions do not

