The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RetouchFormer: Semi-supervised High-Quality Face Retouching
Transformer with Prior-Based Selective Self-Attention
Wen Xue1 * , Lianxin Xie1 * , Le Jiang1 , Tianyi Chen1 , Si Wu1† , Cheng Liu2† , Hau-San Wong3
1

South China University of Technology
2
Shantou University
3
City University of Hong Kong
{csxuewen, cslianxin.xie, csjiangle, csttychen}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cliu@stu.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
Face retouching is to beautify a face image, while preserving the image content as much as possible. It is a promising yet challenging task to remove face imperfections and
fill with normal skin. Generic image enhancement methods
are hampered by the lack of imperfection localization, which
typically results in incomplete removal of blemishes at large
scales. To address this issue, we propose a transformer-based
approach, RetouchFormer, which simultaneously identifies
imperfections and synthesizes realistic content in the corresponding regions. Specifically, we learn a latent dictionary to
capture clean face priors, and predict the imperfection regions
via a reconstruction-oriented localization module. Also based
on this, we can realize face retouching by explicitly suppressing imperfections in selective self-attention computation, such that local content will be synthesized from normal
skin. On the other hand, multi-scale feature tokens lead to increased flexibility in dealing with the imperfections at various
scales. The design elements bring greater effectiveness and
efficiency. RetouchFormer outperforms the advanced face retouching methods and synthesizes clean face images with
high fidelity in our list of extensive experiments performed.

Imperfection prediction

Source image

: Query
: Key
: Value

Selective self-attention

Retouching result

Figure 1: The main idea behind RetouchFormer is to replace
the features of the imperfections with those of normal skin
via selective self-attention.

Introduction
Face retouching aims at beautifying a face image that has
suffered from numerous types of imperfections. It is promising to automatically create a flawless skin tone, while professional retouchers may take a few hours to edit the photo.
A key challenge of face retouching lies in how to automatically recognize face imperfections, which are diverse in the
real world. On the other hand, it is also challenging to fill
realistic details, especially for moderate-to-severe acne regions, while at the same time preserving the structures of
essential facial features.
The traditional face retouching methods apply local
smoothing operators for blemish removal (Arakawa 2004;
Batool and Chellappa 2014). Recently, significant progress
has been made in generic image-to-image translation, such
as style transfer (Isola et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2017; Liu,
Breuel, and Kautz 2017; Zhu et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019;

Ling et al. 2021), image enhancement (Zamir et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022), and so on. AutoRetouch (Shafaei, Little, and Schmidt 2021) and ABPN (Lei
et al. 2022) start to focus on face retouching. However,
these methods only consider image-level transformations by
global convolution filters, and the imperfection regions cannot be adaptively completed. In addition, these methods typically need pairwise retouching data for model training.
In this work, we treat face retouching as a generalized
‘soft’ version of face image inpainting, and train a transformer with selective self-attention mechanism on partially
paired data to synthesize clean face with high realism and
fidelity as shown in Figure 1. More specifically, we apply
the encoder-transformer-decoder design as shown in Figure
2, and the proposed model is referred to as RetouchFormer,
which approximately predicts imperfections to indicate the
regions to be filled and simultaneously synthesize realistic
details. Toward this end, we learn the clean face prior in

* Joint first authors.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5903

