The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VQAttack: Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Visual Question Answering via
Pre-trained Models
Ziyi Yin1 , Muchao Ye1 , Tianrong Zhang1 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Han Liu2
Jinghui Chen1 , Ting Wang3 , Fenglong Ma1 *
1

The Pennsylvania State University
Dalian University of Technology
3
Stony Brook University
{ziyiyin, muchao, tbz5156, jcz5917, fenglong}@psu.edu
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, twang@cs.stonybrook.edu
2

Abstract

Generate image-text
Perturbations

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a fundamental task
in computer vision and natural language process fields. Although the “pre-training & finetuning” learning paradigm
significantly improves the VQA performance, the adversarial robustness of such a learning paradigm has not been explored. In this paper, we delve into a new problem: using
a pre-trained multimodal source model to create adversarial image-text pairs and then transferring them to attack the
target VQA models. Correspondingly, we propose a novel
VQATTACK model, which can iteratively generate both image and text perturbations with the designed modules: the
large language model (LLM)-enhanced image attack and
the cross-modal joint attack module. At each iteration, the
LLM-enhanced image attack module first optimizes the latent representation-based loss to generate feature-level image perturbations. Then it incorporates an LLM to further
enhance the image perturbations by optimizing the designed
masked answer anti-recovery loss. The cross-modal joint attack module will be triggered at a specific iteration, which updates the image and text perturbations sequentially. Notably,
the text perturbation updates are based on both the learned
gradients in the word embedding space and word synonymbased substitution. Experimental results on two VQA datasets
with five validated models demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed VQATTACK in the transferable attack setting,
compared with state-of-the-art baselines. This work reveals
a significant blind spot in the “pre-training & fine-tuning”
paradigm on VQA tasks. The source code can be found in
the link https://github.com/ericyinyzy/VQAttack.

Image

+

Pre-trained
Source Model

What color is the fork?
Text

Attack
Victim
VQA Model

silver

What colour is the fork?

Figure 1: An example of Transferable adversarial attacks on
VQA via pre-trained models.
trained VQA models through the development of effective attack methodologies, exemplified by Fool-VQA (Xu
et al. 2018) and TrojVQA (Walmer et al. 2022). However, models trained end-to-end often exhibit inferior performance compared to the prevalent “pre-training & finetuning” paradigm. Within this paradigm, models are initially pre-trained on extensive collections of image-text pairs
from the public domain, facilitating the acquisition of intermodal relationships. Subsequently, the models undergo finetuning using specific VQA datasets to enhance their performance on downstream tasks. This instructional framework
has yielded commendable predictive accuracy (Bao et al.
2022; Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Li et al. 2021b). Nevertheless, the aspect of adversarial robustness within the context
of the VQA task, as governed by this paradigm, remains insufficiently explored.
This attack scenario presents notable complexities, which
arise from the following two fundamental aspects:

Introduction

• C1 – Transferability across models. The challenge here
involves the transferability of adversarial attacks across
distinct models. An example is shown in Figure 1. Pretrained source models and victim target VQA models
are usually trained for dissimilar tasks and trained on
separate datasets. Furthermore, their structural disparities
may result from variations introduced during fine-tuning.
While the concept of transferability has been widely validated in the context of image models (Madry et al. 2018;
Xie et al. 2019), such property within the domain of pretrained models has yet to be comprehensively explored.
• C2 – Joint attacks across different modalities. Our task
is centered around a multi-modal problem, necessitat-

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is dedicated to extracting essential information from images to formulate
responses to textual queries. While this application has
proven to be highly versatile across various domains, including recommendation systems (Yu, Shen, and Jin 2019),
medicine (Zhan et al. 2020), and robotics (Kenfack et al.
2020), the exploration of VQA system robustness remains
a challenging endeavor. Current research primarily revolves around investigating the robustness of end-to-end
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6755

