The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Inducing Clusters Deep Kernel Gaussian Process for Longitudinal Data
Junjie Liang, Weijieying Ren, Hanifi Sahar, Vasant Honavar
The Pennsylvania State University
jliang282@outlook.com, {wjr5337, szh6071, vuh14}@psu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of predictive modeling from irregularly and sparsely sampled longitudinal data with unknown,
complex correlation structures and abrupt discontinuities. To
address these challenges, we introduce a novel inducing clusters longitudinal deep kernel Gaussian Process (ICDKGP).
ICDKGP approximates the data generating process by a zeromean GP with a longitudinal deep kernel that models the
unknown complex correlation structure in the data and a deterministic non-zero mean function to model the abrupt discontinuities. To improve the scalability and interpretability
of ICDKGP, we introduce inducing clusters corresponding
to centers of clusters in the training data. We formulate the
training of ICDKGP as a constrained optimization problem
and derive its evidence lower bound. We introduce a novel
relaxation of the resulting problem which under rather mild assumptions yields a solution with error bounded relative to the
original problem. We describe the results of extensive experiments demonstrating that ICDKGP substantially outperforms
the state-of-the-art longitudinal methods on data with both
smoothly and non-smoothly varying outcomes.

Introduction
Longitudinal data, consisting of repeated, often irregularly
sampled observations, of variables and outcomes for a set
of individuals (Liang et al. 2021, 2020), are ubiquitous in
many applications, e.g., predictive modeling of health risks
from electronic health records data, or educational outcomes
from activity logs in online platforms. Such data display
complex, often unknown, correlation structures: longitudinal
correlation (LC) across time, cluster correlations (CC) across
individuals, or multi-level correlations (MC) (Liang et al.
2021). Gaussian processes (GP) (Williams and Rasmussen
2006) offer an attractive framework for predictive modeling from such data (Liang et al. 2021). Existing GP models
optimize kernel parameters under the assumption that the
longitudinal outcome being modeled is sufficiently smooth.
However, in many real-world applications, the longitudinal
outcome can show abrupt discontinuities, e.g., due to unobserved transitions between hidden states e.g., healthy versus
sick.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13736

Key Contributions. We consider the problem of predictive
modeling from irregularly and sparsely sampled longitudinal data with unknown, complex correlation structures and
abrupt discontinuities. Specifically, we approximate the data
generating process by a zero-mean GP with a longitudinal
deep kernel to recover the complex correlation structure in the
data and a deterministic non-zero mean function that helps
account for the discontinuities in the observed outcomes.
We improve the scalability of GP predictions by replacing
inducing points (Titsias 2009) with inducing clusters (set
to centers of clusters in the training data), thereby substantially reducing the number of inducing points needed and
performing regression and clustering simultaneously without
increasing computational complexity. We show that inducing clusters mimic the mean-field assumption that is often
used in variational inference with sparse GP while enhancing
both the scalability and interpretability of the learned GP.
We formulate the problem of training the resulting inducing
clusters deep kernel Gaussian process (ICDKGP) as a constrained optimization problem and derive its evidence lower
bound (ELBO). We introduce a novel relaxation of the resulting problem which under rather mild assumptions yields a
solution with error bounded relative to that of the original
problem. Through extensive experiments with both simulated
and real-world data, we show that ICDKGP substantially
outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines in terms of
both predictive accuracy and correlation structure recovery.

Related Work
GP for Longitudinal Data Analysis. Gaussian processes
(GP) (Williams and Rasmussen 2006; Cheng et al. 2019),
offer an attractive approach for predictive modeling from
longitudinal data. GP dispenses with assumptions about the
parametric form of the data generating process using parameterized kernels to model complex, a priori unknown
correlation structure in the data: If a function f : X → R
has a GP prior f ∼GP(µ, kθ ) where µ is the mean function
and kθ (·, ·) is a kernel function parameterized by θ, then
any finite collection of components of f (denoted as f) has
a multivariate Gaussian distribution (f|X)∼N (µX , KXX ),
where µX is the mean vector, and (KXX )ij = kθ (xi , xj )
is the covariance matrix. A zero mean GP, given a kernel
with a universal approximation property, e.g., dot product,
RBF, polynomial, or Matérn kernel (Williams and Rasmussen

