The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph of Thoughts: Solving Elaborate Problems with Large Language Models
Maciej Besta* 1 , Nils Blach* 1 , Ales Kubicek1 , Robert Gerstenberger1 ,
Michał Podstawski2 , Lukas Gianinazzi1 , Joanna Gajda3 , Tomasz Lehmann3 ,
Hubert Niewiadomski3 , Piotr Nyczyk3 , Torsten Hoefler1
1

ETH Zurich
Warsaw University of Technology
3
Cledar
bestam@inf.ethz.ch, nils.blach@inf.ethz.ch, htor@inf.ethz.ch
2

Abstract

of reasoning within the prompt (intermediate “thoughts”),
besides the task input/output. CoT was shown to significantly improve the capability of LLMs to solve problems without resorting to any model updates. One major
improvement over CoT, Self-Consistency with CoT (CoTSC) (Wang et al. 2023b), is a scheme where multiple CoTs
are generated, and then the best one is selected as the outcome. More recently, CoT and CoT-SC were extended with
Tree of Thoughts (ToT) (Long 2023; Yao et al. 2023a; Xie
et al. 2023), which models the LLM reasoning process with
a tree. This facilitates using different paths of thoughts, and
offers novel capabilities such as backtracking from nonpromising outcomes. Unfortunately, the ToT approaches still
fundamentally limit the reasoning abilities within a prompt
by imposing the rigid tree structure on the thought process.
In this work, we argue that fundamentally more powerful prompting can be achieved by enabling LLM thoughts to
form an arbitrary graph structure. This is motivated by numerous phenomena such as human reasoning, brain structure, or algorithmic execution. When working on a novel
idea, a human would not only follow a chain of thoughts
(as in CoT) or try different separate ones (as in ToT), but
would actually form a more complex network of thoughts.
For example, one could explore a certain chain of reasoning, backtrack and start a new one, then realize that a certain
idea from the previous chain could be combined with the
currently explored one, and merge them both into a new solution, taking advantage of their strengths and eliminating
their weaknesses. Similarly, brains form complex networks,
with graph-like patterns such as recurrence (Friston 2008).
Executing algorithms also expose networked patterns, often
represented by Directed Acyclic Graphs. The corresponding graph-enabled transformations bring a promise of more
powerful prompting when applied to LLM thoughts, but they
are not naturally expressible with CoT or ToT.
We observe that these (and many other) thought transformations can be naturally enabled when modeling the
reasoning process of an LLM as a graph. For this, we
propose Graph of Thoughts (GoT)1 , an approach that enhances LLMs’ capabilities through networked reasoning
(contribution #1). In GoT, an LLM thought is modeled
as a vertex, while an edge is a dependency between such

We introduce Graph of Thoughts (GoT): a framework that
advances prompting capabilities in large language models
(LLMs) beyond those offered by paradigms such as Chain-ofThought or Tree of Thoughts (ToT). The key idea and primary
advantage of GoT is the ability to model the information generated by an LLM as an arbitrary graph, where units of information (“LLM thoughts”) are vertices, and edges correspond
to dependencies between these vertices. This approach enables combining arbitrary LLM thoughts into synergistic outcomes, distilling the essence of whole networks of thoughts,
or enhancing thoughts using feedback loops. We illustrate
that GoT offers advantages over state of the art on different
tasks, for example increasing the quality of sorting by 62%
over ToT, while simultaneously reducing costs by >31%.
We ensure that GoT is extensible with new thought transformations and thus can be used to spearhead new prompting
schemes. This work brings the LLM reasoning closer to human thinking or brain mechanisms such as recurrence, both
of which form complex networks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are taking over the world of
AI. Recent years saw a rapid development of models primarily based on the decoder-only Transformer variant (Vaswani
et al. 2017), such as GPT (Radford et al. 2018, 2019; Bubeck
et al. 2023; Brown et al. 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al.
2022), or LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023b).
Prompt engineering is a resource-efficient approach for
solving different LLM tasks. In brief, one includes the task
description within the input sent to an LLM. If this description is appropriately formulated, the LLM solves the task
using its autoregressive token-based mechanism for generating text. Such prompts may contain example tasks with
solutions (few-shot prompting, also referred to as in-context
learning (ICL)), or even no example tasks at all (zero-shot
prompting). In recent years it was shown that this mechanism can be used to solve a broad set of tasks that involve
mathematical, commonsense, or symbolic reasoning.
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al. 2022) is an approach
for prompting, in which one includes the intermediate steps
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

17682

Extended Technical Report: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09687

