The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Lifting by Image - Leveraging Image Cues for Accurate 3D Human Pose
Estimation
Feng Zhou, Jianqin Yin* , Peiyang Li
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{zhoufeng, jqyin, lipeiyang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

2D Pose

The “lifting from 2D pose” method has been the dominant
approach to 3D Human Pose Estimation (3DHPE) due to
the powerful visual analysis ability of 2D pose estimators.
Widely known, there exists a depth ambiguity problem when
estimating solely from 2D pose, where one 2D pose can be
mapped to multiple 3D poses. Intuitively, the rich semantic
and texture information in images can contribute to a more accurate “lifting” procedure. Yet, existing research encounters
two primary challenges. Firstly, the distribution of image data
in 3D motion capture datasets is too narrow because of the
laboratorial environment, which leads to poor generalization
ability of methods trained with image information. Secondly,
effective strategies for leveraging image information are lacking. In this paper, we give new insight into the cause of poor
generalization problems and the effectiveness of image features. Based on that, we propose an advanced framework.
Specifically, the framework consists of two stages. First, we
enable the keypoints to query and select the beneficial features from all image patches. To reduce the keypoints attention to inconsequential background features, we design a
novel Pose-guided Transformer Layer, which adaptively limits the updates to unimportant image patches. Then, through
a designed Adaptive Feature Selection Module, we prune
less significant image patches from the feature map. In the
second stage, we allow the keypoints to further emphasize
the retained critical image features. This progressive learning approach prevents further training on insignificant image
features. Experimental results show that our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both the Human3.6M dataset
and the MPI-INF-3DHP dataset.

query

Image

regress

3D Pose
Background Overfitting
Assistance Image Feature
Key Image Feature

2D Pose
Image

3D Pose

Figure 1: The main idea of this paper is to design a framework that enables 2D poses to regress 3D poses by querying
information from the image. The framework is specifically
designed based on two key insights: First, excessive attention to dataset-biased background information leads to poor
generalization ability. Second, it is not only the image features corresponding to the keypoints that are helpful for the
task, but also the associated body structural positions of the
keypoints that can provide valuable assistance.

approach consists of two stages. First, utilize off-the-shelf
2D pose estimators (Sun et al. 2019; Newell, Yang, and
Deng 2016; Dang et al. 2022) to estimate the 2D pose from
the image and then regress the 3D pose from the obtained
2D human pose. Compared to direct estimation, this cascaded approach has the following advantages: 2D estimator is trained on more diverse and extensive 2D human pose
datasets, which enables stronger visual perception and generalization ability (Martinez et al. 2017). Besides, the “lifting” can be trained with infinite 2D-3D pairs by setting different camera views (Xu et al. 2021). Nevertheless, estimating 3D pose from 2D pose introduces the depth ambiguity
problem, one 2D pose can be mapped to multiple 3D poses.
Intuitively, rich texture and semantic information in images can assist in regressing a more accurate 3D pose from
2D pose. There has been some exploration in this direction.
For example, Nie, Wei, and Zhu; Xu et al. segment im-

Introduction
Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation (3DHPE) aims to
estimate the relative 3D coordinates of human joints from
an image. It is a fundamental computer vision task related
to a wide range of applications, including human motion
forecasting (Ding and Yin 2022; Liu et al. 2020), human action recognition (Dang, Yang, and Yin 2020), human-centric
generation (Cao et al. 2023b, 2022, 2023a) and so on.
In recent years, 3D human pose estimation has been dominated by the “lifting” technique (Martinez et al. 2017). This
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7632

