The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Peer Neighborhood Mechanisms:
A Framework for Mechanism Generalization
Adam Richardson, Boi Faltings
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
Peer prediction incentive mechanisms for crowdsourcing are
generally limited to eliciting samples from categorical distributions. Prior work on extending peer prediction to arbitrary distributions has largely relied on assumptions on the
structures of the distributions or known properties of the data
providers. We introduce a novel class of incentive mechanisms that extend peer prediction mechanisms to arbitrary
distributions by replacing the notion of an exact match with
a concept of neighborhood matching. We present conditions
on the belief updates of the data providers that guarantee
incentive-compatibility for rational data providers, and admit
a broad class of possible reasonable updates.

1

Figure 1: An example of a partition family on R2 with θ
representing translations of the bins: β0 (i) transforms into
βθ (i). Partition families are used to construct Peer Neighborhoods.

Introduction

With the advent of machine learning in data analysis, governance, recommendation systems, and commercial products,
there is an increasing need for abundant and accurate data
with which to train these models. In some contexts, acquiring the necessary data can be expensive, slow, or require access to private information like medical records. For this reason, there has been ample recent research on crowdsourcing
for data acquisition. The primary goal of such research is
to design incentive mechanisms, or payment schemes, that
incentivize independent, rational Agents to provide accurate
data to a Center.
For many years, the gold standard for such incentive
mechanisms has been the class of Peer prediction mechanisms. Peer prediction mechanisms operate in the absence
of any a priori baseline evaluation of the quality of reports.
Generally, a Peer prediction mechanism works by comparing an Agent’s report to a randomly selected report from
another Agent, called a Peer, during the same data collection period. By examining correlations between reports,
such mechanisms can induce desirable equilibria. In most
settings, the Center wants the Agents to truthfully report
some observation about a real world phenomenon. The major disadvantage of such mechanisms that they are generally
only applicable for eliciting data from categorical distributions because they rely on a notion of report matching, i.e.
the Agent and Peer report a sample from the same category.

We refer to such mechanisms as Peer Consistency mechanisms. Because they are restricted to categorical distributions, they eschew any notion of locality among the categories. This disadvantage presents a clear theoretical roadblock for applying such mechanisms to arbitrary distributions, since continuous random variables are only understandable through measuring local neighborhoods.
Our work presents a novel framework for extending Peer
Consistency mechanisms to arbitrary distributions. We call
such extensions Peer Neighborhood mechanisms. To our
knowledge, this is the only work that does so without assuming that the Center possesses a priori knowledge of properties of the Agents or of the underlying distribution. We only
assume that Agents are rational and that they follow some
reasonable belief update conditions, which we will show admit a broad class of updates. By analyzing an extension of
the Peer Truth Serum, we prove that it can admit truthful
Bayes-Nash Equilibria on the ex-ante game produced by the
mechanism.

1.1

Related Work

Our work builds on a long line of advancements in incentive mechanism design based on Peer Consistency. The most
basic such mechanism is Output Agreement, which simply pays Agents a constant reward when their reports are
identical (Von Ahn and Dabbish 2004; Waggoner and Chen

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9883

