The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Aligner2 : Enhancing Joint Multiple Intent Detection and Slot Filling
via Adjustive and Forced Cross-Task Alignment
Zhihong Zhu, Xuxin Cheng, Yaowei Li, Hongxiang Li, Yuexian Zou *
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
{zhihongzhu, chengxx, ywl, lihongxiang}@stu.pku.edu.cn
zouyx@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-intent spoken language understanding (SLU) has garnered growing attention due to its ability to handle multiple
intent utterances, which closely mirrors practical scenarios.
Unlike traditional SLU, each intent in multi-intent SLU corresponds to its designated scope for slots, which occurs in
certain fragments within the utterance. As a result, establishing precise scope alignment to mitigate noise impact emerges
as a key challenge in multi-intent SLU. More seriously, they
lack alignment between the predictions of the two sub-tasks
due to task-independent decoding, resulting in a limitation
on the overall performance. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel framework termed Aligner2 for multi-intent
SLU, which contains an Adjustive Cross-task Aligner (ACA)
and a Forced Cross-task Aligner (FCA). ACA utilizes the information conveyed by joint label embeddings to accurately
align the scope of intent and corresponding slots, before the
interaction of the two subtasks. FCA introduces reinforcement
learning, to enforce the alignment of the task-specific hidden
states after the interaction, which is explicitly guided by the
prediction. Extensive experiments on two public multi-intent
SLU datasets demonstrate the superiority of our Aligner2 over
state-of-the-art methods. More encouragingly, the proposed
method Aligner2 can be easily integrated into existing multiintent SLU frameworks, to further boost performance.

1

add

David

Axelrod

O

B-a

l-a

to

my

O
O
AddtoPlaylist

futuors

hits

…

latin on

zvooq

B-p

l-p

…

B-g O
B-s
PlayMusic

Figure 1: A typical example of multi-intent SLU,
where B/I-a denotes B/I-artist, B/I-p denotes
B/I-playlist, B-g denotes B-genre, and B-s denotes B-service. Different colors represent different intents and the scope of their corresponding slots.

Introduction

Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) plays a critical
role in task-oriented dialogue systems (Tur and De Mori
2011; Qin et al. 2021c). A typical SLU task mainly includes
two subtasks: intent detection to identify users’ intents and
slot filling to extract semantic constituents from the user’s
query. In a more practical scenario, users usually express
more than one intent in an utterance (Gangadharaiah and
Narayanaswamy 2019; Cheng et al. 2023a). Thus, multiintent SLU is derived and has attracted extensive attention. A
simple example of multi-intent SLU is shown in Figure 1.
One of the key challenges in multi-intent SLU is accurately aligning both the user’s intent and slots simultaneously
within complex utterances. Generally speaking, a user’s utterance consists of multiple sub-utterances, with each subutterance conveying a corresponding intent. The slots are
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19777

consequently embedded within certain tokens of each subutterance, pertaining solely to the intent of that particular subutterance and remaining unrelated to others. Take the example in Figure 1, the intent AddtoPlaylist of the previous
sub-utterance is related to the token David axelrod and
futuors hits. And the intent of the second sub-utterance
PlayMusic is mainly originated from token latin and
zvooq. Thus, introducing irrelevant intents to the current
sub-utterance and introducing irrelevant tokens in the current
utterance for the intent will impact the performance of SLU.
To conclude, how to accurately align the scope between each
intent and its corresponding slots becomes a major challenge.
Another challenge in multi-intent SLU is the lack of alignment between the correct predictions of the two subtasks. To
be specific, most existing models decode the hidden states
of the two subtasks independently without leveraging the
correlations between them, which leads to the misalignment
of the correct predictions of the two subtasks. As shown in
Figure 2, the F1 score of slot filling and the accuracy of intent
detection may increase or decrease asynchronously. Overall
accuracy is a more important metric and it denotes the ratio
of the utterances for which both intents and slots are predicted correctly in an utterance. Due to the lack of alignment,
overall accuracy on utterance-level semantic frame parsing is
much worse than these two subtasks’ single metrics.
To solve the above challenges, in this paper, we propose
a novel method Aligner2 to enhance multi-intent SLU. Our
Aligner2 contains an adjustive cross-task aligner (ACA) before the interaction of the two subtasks, and a forced crosstask aligner (FCA) after the interaction of the two subtasks.
The ACA is proposed to align the scope information for the
first challenge. Technically, we introduce joint label embeddings as a bridge to align the semantic scope. Intent-specific

