The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Self- and Cross-Triplet Correlations for Human-Object Interaction
Detection
Weibo Jiang 1 , Weihong Ren 1 * , Jiandong Tian 2 , Liangqiong Qu 3 , Zhiyong Wang 1 , Honghai Liu 1
1

State Key Laboratory of Robotics and System, School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
2
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
3
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong
jiangweibo@stu.hit.edu.cn, {renweihong, wangzhiyong, honghai.liu}@hit.edu.cn, tianjd@sia.cn, liangqqu@hku.hk
Abstract

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection plays a vital role
in scene understanding, which aims to predict the HOI triplet
in the form of <human, object, action>. Existing methods
mainly extract multi-modal features (e.g., appearance, object semantics, human pose) and then fuse them together to
directly predict HOI triplets. However, most of these methods focus on seeking for self-triplet aggregation, but ignore
the potential cross-triplet dependencies, resulting in ambiguity of action prediction. In this work, we propose to explore Self- and Cross-Triplet Correlations (SCTC) for HOI
detection. Specifically, we regard each triplet proposal as a
graph where Human, Object represent nodes and Action indicates edge, to aggregate self-triplet correlation. Also, we
try to explore cross-triplet dependencies by jointly considering instance-level, semantic-level, and layout-level relations.
Besides, we leverage the CLIP model to assist our SCTC
obtain interaction-aware feature by knowledge distillation,
which provides useful action clues for HOI detection. Extensive experiments on HICO-DET and V-COCO datasets verify
the effectiveness of our proposed SCTC.

Figure 1: Architecture comparison of different HOI detection pipelines. (a) Traditional HOI detection methods focus
on exploring multiple features and fuse them by self-triplet
fusion (e.g. body-part attention); (b) our SCTC jointly explores Self- and Cross-triplet Correlations, aiming to eliminate action ambiguity and promote scene understanding.

Introduction
Human-object interaction detection plays a core role in
human-centric behavior analysis and provides deeply understanding of human intentions (Chao et al. 2015; Gupta and
Malik 2015). HOI detection approaches need to extract the
semantic relationships between humans and objects and finally predict a set of <human, object, action> triplets within
an image. The challenges in the HOI detection task mainly
lie in the modeling the relationships between human and object and leveraging these relationships to perform humanobject paring as well as predict their interactions.
The HOI detection approaches can be roughly divided
into two categories: one-stage detectors and two-stage ones.
One-stage methods implicitly build the relationship between
human and object, and try to simultaneously perform object
detection and interaction prediction. E.g., previous CNNbased work (Wang et al. 2020b) localizes and classifies the
interaction by detecting additional interaction point, while

other method (Kim et al. 2020a) directly captures the interaction region using a union-level box. Though the CNNbased methods can effectively model human-object relationships, they usually need post-grouping strategies to form a
complete triplet. Recently, to capture long range contexts,
the transformer-based works (Tamura, Ohashi, and Yoshinaga 2021; Zou et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2021; Kim et al.
2022; Liao et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Kim, Jung, and
Cho 2023) have greatly advanced the HOI detection using
self-attention and cross-attention mechanisms. They directly
predict a HOI triplet without extracting instance-level priors or exploring their dependencies, but this end-to-end way
may suffer insufficient exchange between contextual clues,
potentially leading to a sub-optimal solution.
The two-stage methods firstly perform object detection,
and then explicitly build the relationships between human
and object. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), some works (Xu et al.
2019; Kim et al. 2020b) extract multi-modal features based

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2543

