The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Estimating the Gradient of the Expected Information Gain in Bayesian
Experimental Design
Ziqiao Ao, Jinglai Li
School of Mathematics, University of Birmingham
{zxa029, j.li.10}@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian Experimental Design (BED), which aims to find the
optimal experimental conditions for Bayesian inference, is
usually posed as to optimize the expected information gain
(EIG). The gradient information is often needed for efficient
EIG optimization, and as a result the ability to estimate the
gradient of EIG is essential for BED problems. The primary
goal of this work is to develop methods for estimating the
gradient of EIG, which, combined with the stochastic gradient descent algorithms, result in efficient optimization of EIG.
Specifically, we first introduce a posterior expected representation of the EIG gradient with respect to the design variables.
Based on this, we propose two methods for estimating the
EIG gradient, UEEG-MCMC that leverages posterior samples generated through Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
to estimate the EIG gradient, and BEEG-AP that focuses on
achieving high simulation efficiency by repeatedly using parameter samples. Theoretical analysis and numerical studies
illustrate that UEEG-MCMC is robust agains the actual EIG
value, while BEEG-AP is more efficient when the EIG value to
be optimized is small. Moreover, both methods show superior
performance compared to several popular benchmarks in our
numerical experiments.

Introduction
The advancement of science and engineering heavily relies
on the acquisition of data through experiments. However,
conducting experiments can be resource-intensive and timeconsuming. To maximize the information gained from collected data and optimize experimental outcomes, researchers
turn to Bayesian experimental design (BED) which offers
a systematic and powerful framework for making informed
decisions about experimental setups and selecting optimal
conditions for data collection. At its core, BED aims to strategically allocate resources to collect the most informative
data, which leads to more accurate parameter estimation,
model validation, and decision-making. It has been broadly
applied in diverse scientific fields, including pharmacokinetic
study (Ryan et al. 2014), drug discovery (Lyu et al. 2019),
systems biology (Kreutz and Timmer 2009), compressed
sensing (Seeger and Nickisch 2008) and physics simulations
(Melendez et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20311

Mathematically, BED can be formulated as an optimization problem, where the objective is to maximize a specific
function known as the utility function. The choice of the
utility function is often driven by the purpose of the BED.
In this paper, our focus lies on BED’s application to precise
parameter estimation. Various utility functions have been employed to address parameter estimation challenges, and some
notable examples include Bayesian A-posterior precision,
Bayesian D-posterior precision, quadratic loss and expected
information gain (EIG) (see (Ryan et al. 2016) for a review).
While the EIG stands out for its exceptional theoretical appeal among these functions, its use has been a long-standing
challenge historically due to the computational complexity associated with estimating the evidence or marginal likelihood,
which is analytically intractable or computationally expensive to evaluate directly. Consequently, BED based on EIG
was once restricted to special cases where analytical solutions
or simplifying assumptions allowed for a tractable computation of the evidence (Borth 1975; Lewi, Butera, and Paninski
2009). Fortunately, recent advancements in Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools, particularly in neural EIG estimators and
automatic differentiation frameworks, have significantly alleviated the computational challenge, enabling the efficient
implementation of EIG-based BED in a wide range of nonlinear and high-dimensional problems.
Accurate estimation of EIG has been widely recognized as
one of the most significant barriers of EIG-based BED. However, our primary interest is not in the exact value of the EIG,
but rather in the design variables that maximize the value. Motivated by this viewpoint, an alternative strategy is directly
estimating the gradient of EIG w.r.t. the design variables
and then using stochastic gradient descent to search for the
optimal design. In this paper, we propose two methods for estimating the EIG gradient. The first method, UEEG-MCMC,
applies posterior samples generated by Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) to estimate the EIG gradient. It is shown
effective across different scenarios, regardless of the groundtruth EIG values. The second method, BEEG-AP, is more
simulation-efficient. However, its performance suffers when
dealing with problems that have large ground-truth EIG values. The paper establishes a connection with nested Monte
Carlo to analyze this behavior, shedding light on the limitations of BEEG-AP in such cases.
We validate the aforementioned attributes of the two pro-

