The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge-Enhanced Historical Document Segmentation and Recognition
En-Hao Gao1,2 , Yu-Xuan Huang1,2 , Wen-Chao Hu1,2 , Xin-Hao Zhu1,2 , Wang-Zhou Dai1,3
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
{gaoeh, huangyx, huwc, zhuxh, daiwz}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

cal documents often include a wide range of character categories. For instance, while modern Chinese documents typically use around 3,500 characters, historical counterparts
may contain over 10,000 characters. This extensive character dictionary requires a large amount of labeled data for
the recognition model training. Thirdly, annotating historical documents is time-consuming and requires a high level
of expert knowledge. This results in a scarcity of labeled images, consequently leading to inferior performance of modern data-driven segmentation and recognition models.
However, humans are able to make successful segmentation and recognition from historical manuscripts by utilizing background knowledge, which is also a promising
way for enhancing machine learning performance (Raedt
et al. 2020). For instance, during the segmentation of Chinese document images, characters typically have a squarelike shape. Furthermore, characters within the same text line
are expected to exhibit similar aspect ratios and sizes. Firstorder logic (FOL) rules provide a precise way to express
such knowledge. However, it is non-trivial to inject these
rules into the learning process of common deep learning
models, since the application of FOL typically relies on logical reasoning, a discrete process that is difficult to integrate
with gradient-based numerical optimization methods.
In order to leverage human knowledge to empower document image analysis, we adopt the ABductive Learning
(ABL) framework (Zhou 2019; Zhou and Huang 2022).
This novel paradigm bridges data-driven machine learning
and knowledge-driven logical reasoning while preserving
the expressive power of both. In ABL, the machine learning
model initially converts raw data into primitive logic facts,
named pseudo-labels. The reasoning component then revises
pseudo-labels that are inconsistent with the FOL knowledge
base by abductive reasoning (Magnani 2009), a.k.a. abduction. Subsequently, these knowledge-refined pseudo-labels
are utilized to update the machine learning model, and the
above routine repeats iteratively.
In this paper, we propose KESAR (Knowledge-Enhanced
document Segmentation And Recognition) to tackle the
above challenges based on the ABL framework. It first trains
the segmentation model with structural knowledge, where
the predicted character regions and affinities (area between
adjacent characters) are refined by the knowledge base via
abduction. Then, to address the issue of label scarcity, it

Optical Character Recognition (OCR) of historical document
images remains a challenging task because of the distorted input images, extensive number of uncommon characters, and
the scarcity of labeled data, which impedes modern deep
learning-based OCR techniques from achieving good recognition accuracy. Meanwhile, there exists a substantial amount
of expert knowledge that can be utilized in this task. However, such knowledge is usually complicated and could only
be accurately expressed with formal languages such as firstorder logic (FOL), which is difficult to be directly integrated
into deep learning models. This paper proposes KESAR, a
novel Knowledge-Enhanced Document Segmentation And
Recognition method for historical document images based on
the Abductive Learning (ABL) framework. The segmentation
and recognition models are enhanced by incorporating background knowledge for character extraction and prediction,
followed by an efficient joint optimization of both models.
We validate the effectiveness of KESAR on historical document datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our
method can simultaneously utilize knowledge-driven reasoning and data-driven learning, which outperforms the current
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Document image analysis is a common task that aims to extract text from document images. Typically, it involves two
steps, image segmentation and recognition. Segmentation is
devised to identify and isolate regions containing the desired texts. After segmentation, recognition transforms the
segmented images into textual form. With the rapid development of OCR technologies, the analysis of modern document images can now be well addressed (Long, He, and Yao
2021), as these images often have neat arrangement, clear
handwriting, and abundant labeled data. However, different
from modern ones, the analysis of historical documents, including handwritten manuscripts and early prints, remains a
challenging, unresolved issue.
Three main challenges hinder the segmentation and
recognition of historical document images. Firstly, text lines
are often distorted and densely packed, leading to substantial challenges for image segmentation. Secondly, historiCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8409

