The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning the Causal Structure of Networked Dynamical Systems
under Latent Nodes and Structured Noise
Augusto Santos1 * , Diogo Rente2 , Rui Seabra2 , José M. F. Moura2
1

Instituto de Telecomunicações-IT, Lisbon, Portugal
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
augusto.santos@lx.it.pt, drobertd@andrew.cmu.edu, rvilarpo@andrew.cmu.edu, moura@andrew.cmu.edu.

2

Abstract

The main goal of causal inference or structure identification
is to map out the underlying causal architecture of a complex system, i.e., to enable consistent inference of the latent
network structure from the observed data.
For the most part, causal inference is addressed in two
phases: i) Estimation Phase— a scalar value is assigned
to each pair of nodes as a proxy to the pair’s coupling
strength or affinity (e.g., mutual information); ii) Classification Phase— a thresholding or hypothesis testing is applied
to the estimated couplings to draw the network, consistently.
Reference (Machado et al. 2023) departed from this approach and addressed the framework of partial observability
(with diagonal or uncorrelated noise), under a novel feature
based paradigm. Instead of a scalar-based estimation for the
pairs’ affinity, a feature vector is assigned to each pair of
nodes, and structure is recovered by leveraging certain identifiability properties of the engineered features in a higherdimensional space (instead of thresholding). Desirable characteristics of this feature based approach include: i) Separability —there exists a manifold that separates the features of
connected pairs from those of disconnected pairs; ii) Stability—this separation manifold should not be too sensitive to
differences in the regimes of connectivity, observability and
noise correlation of the underlying complex system; and iii)
Locality—the feature of each pair can be computed from
the time series of each pair (or neighboring pairs thereof).
Separability is a necessary property to consistently cluster
the features, i.e., for structure inference; stability renders supervised ML tools (e.g., SVM) amenable to generalization;
and locality of the features is crucial for large-scale systems
where only a subset of nodes can be feasibly observable.
However, in most applications, the underlying excitation
noise exhibits nontrivial correlation structure. Depending on
the regime of observation or noise structure, information
about the main object of inference may be fundamentally
lost (Barbier et al. 2023). The level of noise plays a major
role in the feasibility of statistical inference tasks in that the
problem can be impossible, hard (possible, but no known
polynomial-time algorithm), or easy, depending on the noise
level (Barbier et al. 2019). It is thus, critical to understand
the impact of the noise structure on inference problems.
In this work, we address causal inference under the delicate regime of partial observability and structured noise. For
this structure identification problem, and defying common

This paper considers learning the hidden causal network of
a linear networked dynamical system (NDS) from the time
series data at some of its nodes – partial observability. The
dynamics of the NDS are driven by colored noise that generates spurious associations across pairs of nodes, rendering
the problem much harder. To address the challenge of noise
correlation and partial observability, we assign to each pair of
nodes a feature vector computed from the time series data of
observed nodes. The feature embedding is engineered to yield
structural consistency: There exists an affine hyperplane that
consistently partitions the set of features, separating the feature vectors corresponding to connected pairs of nodes from
those corresponding to disconnected pairs. The causal inference problem is thus addressed via clustering the designed
features. We demonstrate with simple baseline supervised
methods the competitive performance of the proposed causal
inference mechanism under broad connectivity regimes and
noise correlation levels, including a real world network. Further, we devise novel technical guarantees of structural consistency for linear NDS under the considered regime.

Introduction
Complex Networked Dynamical Systems (NDS) are
causally structured: the state of each unit or node evolves
over time due to peer-to-peer interactions or local information exchange (Barrat, Barthélemy, and Vespignani 2008).
Examples include: brain activity (Huang and Ding 2016;
Liégeois et al. 2020); Gene Regulatory Networks (Aalto
et al. 2020; Casadiego et al. 2017); or pandemics (Ganesh,
Massoulié, and Towsley 2005; Wan et al. 2014). Understanding the underlying connectivity pattern in these applications is fundamental to forecast the long term behavior
of the NDS as, for example, predicting the onset of criticality (Eroglu et al. 2020) or neurological crises (Douw
et al. 2010); ascertaining whether a strain of virus persists
or dies out in the long run (Lahmanovich and James 1976);
or for structure-informed downstream tasks, e.g., the design
of mitigation measures (Ren et al. 2019) in a pandemics.
In all these applications, usually, only the time series data
at some of the nodes are readily available while the underlying causal structure linking these nodes lurks underneath.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14866

