The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Explaining Generalization Power of a DNN Using Interactive Concepts
Huilin Zhou1 , Hao Zhang1 , Huiqi Deng1 , Dongrui Liu1 ,
Wen Shen1 , Shih-Han Chan1, 2 , Quanshi Zhang1 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of California San Diego
{zhouhuilin116, 1603023-zh, denghq7, drliu96, wen shen}@sjtu.edu.cn
s2chan@ucsd.edu, zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper explains the generalization power of a deep neural network (DNN) from the perspective of interactions. Although there is no universally accepted definition of the concepts encoded by a DNN, the sparsity of interactions in a
DNN has been proved, i.e., the output score of a DNN can
be well explained by a small number of interactions between
input variables. In this way, to some extent, we can consider such interactions as interactive concepts encoded by the
DNN. Therefore, in this paper, we derive an analytic explanation of inconsistency of concepts of different complexities.
This may shed new lights on using the generalization power
of concepts to explain the generalization power of the entire DNN. Besides, we discover that the DNN with stronger
generalization power usually learns simple concepts more
quickly and encodes fewer complex concepts. We also discover the detouring dynamics of learning complex concepts,
which explains both the high learning difficulty and the low
generalization power of complex concepts. The code will be
released when the paper is accepted.

𝑺𝟏

outputs

𝒗(𝒙𝑻 )

𝑺𝒆𝒂𝒓

...

𝑺𝒇𝒂𝒄𝒆

𝑺𝒍𝒆𝒈

2-order interaction

Masked sample 𝒙𝑻

𝑥4
𝑥1

𝑺 Ω𝒔𝒂𝒍𝒊𝒆𝒏𝒕

4-order interaction

2-order interaction

𝑥7
𝑥5
𝑥8 𝑥6

...

𝑥3
𝑥2

Figure 1: Interactions encoded by the DNN. Each interaction S represents an AND relationship between a set of input
variables (e.g., image regions). Masking any patches in Sface
will deactivate the interaction, making I(Sface |x) = 0.

countable concepts, then the generalization power of a DNN
would be explained by the generalization power of elementary concepts encoded by the DNN. This will be a new insight into the generalization power of the DNN.
Can we really define concepts encoded by a DNN?
How to define concepts encoded by a DNN is still an open
problem, and there is no formal and universally-accepted
definition so far. To this end, given a trained DNN, Ren et al.
(2023a) quantified Harsanyi interactions (Harsanyi 1963)
encoded by a DNN as concepts in the DNN. Each Harsanyi
interaction represents an AND relationship between a set of
input variables. For example, in the natural language processing, a Harsanyi interaction may represent the AND relationship between words. In the face detection, as Figure 1
shows, a Harsanyi interaction may consist of patches of
S = {eyes, nose, mouth} to represent the AND relationship
between image patches for the face. Only if all patches in S
are present in the image, the face interaction S is activated
and makes a numerical effect I(S|x) on the detection score.
Although Ren et al. (2023a) did not convince us that
the above interaction really represented a concept that fits
human cognition, they did provide mathematical supports
for such interactions. (1) Li and Zhang (2023); Ren et al.

Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
remarkable success nowadays, the essence for the superior generalization power of a DNN is still unclear. People usually explained DNNs via the flatness of the loss
landscape (Keskar et al. 2016) and theoretical bounds for
the generalization (Dziugaite and Roy 2017; Neyshabur,
Tomioka, and Srebro 2015), or by proposing new metrics for
the representation power (Fort et al. 2019; Weng et al. 2018).
In recent years, analyzing the capacity or blind spots of encoding specific concepts represents an emerging direction in
explaining DNNs (Deng et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2021a).
Therefore, unlike previous studies, we revisit the generalization of a DNN from a new perspective of concepts. If
the inference score of a DNN can be attributed to a set of
* Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft
Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Quanshi Zhang < zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17105

