The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Controllable 3D Face Generation with Conditional Style Code Diffusion
Xiaolong Shen1,2 * , Jianxin Ma2 , Chang Zhou2 , Zongxin Yang1†
1

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
{sxlongcs, zongxinyang}@zju.edu.cn, {majx13fromthu,ericzhou.zc}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

(1) 3D GAN Inversion

Saved style
codes 𝑤 "

Real image

Generating photorealistic 3D faces from given conditions
is a challenging task. Existing methods often rely on timeconsuming one-by-one optimization approaches, which are
not efficient for modeling the same distribution content, e.g.,
faces. Additionally, an ideal controllable 3D face generation
model should consider both facial attributes and expressions.
Thus we propose a novel approach called TEx-Face (TExt
& Expression-to-Face) that addresses these challenges by
dividing the task into three components, i.e., 3D GAN Inversion, Conditional Style Code Diffusion, and 3D Face Decoding. For 3D GAN inversion, we introduce two methods
which aim to enhance the representation of style codes and alleviate 3D inconsistencies. Furthermore, we design a style
code denoiser to incorporate multiple conditions into the
style code and propose a data augmentation strategy to address the issue of insufficient paired visual-language data.
Extensive experiments conducted on FFHQ, CelebA-HQ, and
CelebA-Dialog demonstrate the promising performance of our
TEx-Face in achieving the efficient and controllable generation of photorealistic 3D faces. The code will be available at
https://github.com/sxl142/TEx-Face.

(2) Style Code Diffusion (Training)
𝜖%
Noise

Re-PoI
𝑤"
(2) Style Code Diffusion (Inference)

SCD

…

SCD

…

𝑥!

SCD

Noise

𝑥$ T Tex Exp

T Tex Exp

Style Code Denoiser (SCD)
𝑥#

T Tex Exp
Conditions

(3) 3D Face Decoding
EG3D

T Tex Exp

Figure 1: An overview of our pipeline. We train an inversion
model called Re-PoI and save the style codes it infers. These
saved codes are then used to train a style code denoiser with
three conditions, i.e., time steps, text prompts, and expression
codes. When inference, we decode the generated style codes
into 3D faces using EG3D.

number of objects from the same distribution is timeconsuming, such as generating 3D faces with one-by-one
optimization schema. Besides, some text-to-3D face generation techniques (Zhang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023) primarily
focus on generating texture for parametric face models, e.g.,
3D Morphable face model (Blanz and Vetter 1999). While
parametric models make it possible to explicitly control the
expression, pose, and lighting of faces, the generated results
often lack realism since the parametric geometry lacks finer
details such as eyes, teeth, and hair.
Human faces consist of two main components, i.e., appearance and skeleton. The appearance represents the visual characteristics that differentiate individuals, while the skeleton
is responsible for different poses and expressions. From this
perspective, an ideal controllable generative model should be
able to understand these inherent facial properties. Thus, we
need to find a reasonable way to represent these properties
for the generative model. The emergence of CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) has bridged the gap between images and text,
enabling successful text-conditioned generation like (Nichol
et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022). This
motivates us to choose the text to represent facial appearances. Regarding the other component skeleton, a typical
representation is a set of keypoints. Alternatively, we can

Introduction
Face generation, as a longstanding task in image synthesis,
is extensively utilized in artistic creation and portrait generation. Benefits from well-designed 2D/3D unconditional
generation frameworks (Karras et al. 2020; Chan et al. 2022),
current face generation models have achieved remarkable
photorealism in both 2D and 3D. However, introducing multiple conditional representations (Yang, Zhuang, and Pan
2021) into face generation, particularly in the context of 3D,
remains largely unexplored.
Existing Text-to-3D generation techniques (Poole et al.
2022; Huang et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2023; Xu, Yang,
and Yang 2023) typically involve training an initialized
NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020) model to generate a specific object using pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022). Although these approaches offer flexibility and can produce various objects, generating a large
*Xiaolong Shen worked on this at his Alibaba internship.
†

Zongxin Yang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4811

