The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Statistical Spatially Inhomogeneous Diffusion Inference
Yinuo Ren1 , Yiping Lu2 , Lexing Ying1,3 , Grant M. Rotskoff1,4
1

Insitute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering (ICME), Stanford University
2
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
3
Department of Mathematics, Stanford University
4
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University
{yinuoren, lexing, rotskoff}@stanford.edu, yiping.lu@nyu.edu
Abstract

2009; Frishman and Ronceray 2020; Crommelin and VandenEijnden 2011). Also, the statistical convergence rate has
been extensively studied for both the one-dimensional
case (Dalalyan 2005; Dalalyan and Reiß 2006; Pokern, Stuart, and van Zanten 2013; Aeckerle-Willems and Strauch
2018) and the multidimensional cases (Van der Meulen, Van
Der Vaart, and Van Zanten 2006; Dalalyan and Reiß 2007;
van Waaij and van Zanten 2016; Nickl and Söhl 2017; Nickl
and Ray 2020; Oga and Koike 2023; Nickl 2022). For parametric estimators using a Fourier or wavelet basis, the statistical limits of estimating the spatially-inhomogeneous diffusion tensor have been rigorously characterized (Hoffmann
1997, 1999a). However, strategies based on such decompositions do not scale to high-dimensional problems, which
has motivated the investigation of neural networks as a more
flexible representation of the SDE coefficients (Han, Jentzen,
and E 2018; Rotskoff, Mitchell, and Vanden-Eijnden 2022;
Khoo, Lu, and Ying 2021; Li et al. 2021).

Inferring a diffusion equation from discretely-observed measurements is a statistical challenge of significant importance
in a variety of fields, from single-molecule tracking in biophysical systems to modeling financial instruments. Assuming
that the underlying dynamical process obeys a d-dimensional
stochastic differential equation of the form
dxt = b(xt )dt + ⌃(xt )dwt ,
we propose neural network-based estimators of both the drift
b and the spatially-inhomogeneous diffusion tensor D =
⌃⌃T /2 and provide statistical convergence guarantees when
b and D are s-Hölder continuous. Notably, our bound aligns
2s
with the minimax optimal rate N 2s+d for nonparametric
function estimation even in the presence of correlation within
observational data, which necessitates careful handling when
establishing fast-rate generalization bounds. Our theoretical
results are bolstered by numerical experiments demonstrating accurate inference of spatially-inhomogeneous diffusion
tensors.

Introduction
The dynamical evolution of a wide variety of natural processes, from molecular motion within cells to atmospheric
systems, involves an interplay between deterministic forces
and noise from the surrounding environment. While it is
possible to observe time series data from such systems, in
general the underlying equation of motion is not known analytically. Stochastic differential equations offer a powerful
and versatile framework for modeling these complex systems, but inferring the deterministic drift and diffusion tensor from time series data remains challenging, especially in
high-dimensional settings. Among the many strategies proposed (Crommelin and Vanden-Eijnden 2011; Frishman and
Ronceray 2020; Nickl 2022), there are few rigorous results
on the optimality and convergence properties of estimators
of, in particular, spatially-inhomogeneous diffusion tensors.
Many numerical algorithms have been proposed to infer the drift and diffusion, accommodating various settings,
including one-dimensional (Sura and Barsugli 2002; Papaspiliopoulos et al. 2012; Davis and Buffett 2022) and multidimensional SDEs (Pokern, Stuart, and Vanden-Eijnden
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14820

Thus, we consider the nonparametric neural network estimator (Suzuki 2018; Oono and Suzuki 2019; Schmidt-Hieber
2020) as our ansatz function class, which has achieved great
success in estimating SDE coefficients empirically (Xie et al.
2007; Zhang et al. 2018; Han, Jentzen, and E 2018; Wang
et al. 2022; Lin, Li, and Ren 2023). We aim to build statistical guarantees for such neural network-based estimators.
The most related concurrent work is (Gu et al. 2023), where
the authors provide a convergence guarantee for the neural
network estimation of the drift vector and the homogeneous
diffusion tensor of an SDE by solving appropriate supervised learning tasks. However, their approach assumes that
the data observed along the trajectory are independently and
identically distributed from the stationary distribution. Additionally, the generalization bound used in (Gu et al. 2023)
is not the fast rate generalization bound (Bartlett, Bousquet,
and Mendelson 2005; Koltchinskii 2006), resulting in a suboptimal final guarantee. Therefore, we seek to bridge the
gap between the i.i.d. setting and the non-i.i.d. ergodic setting using mixing conditions and extend the algorithm and
analysis to the spatially-inhomogeneous diffusion estimation.
We show that neural estimators have the ability to achieve
standard minimax optimal nonparametric function estimation
rates even when the data are non-i.i.d.

