The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Advancing Video Synchronization with Fractional Frame Analysis:
Introducing a Novel Dataset and Model
Yuxuan Liu1,2 , Haizhou Ai1,2 , Junliang Xing1,2 * , Xuri Li3 , Xiaoyi Wang4 , Pin Tao1,2 ,
1

2

Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
4
Unaffiliated Scholar, Haidian District, Beijing, China
liu-yx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ahz@tsinghua.edu.cn, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn,
bjutlxr@emails.bjut.edu.cn, wangxiaoyi00@gmail.com, taopin@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Multiple views play a vital role in 3D pose estimation tasks.
Ideally, multi-view 3D pose estimation tasks should directly
utilize naturally collected videos for pose estimation. However, due to the constraints of video synchronization, existing
methods often use expensive hardware devices to synchronize the initiation of cameras, which restricts most 3D pose
collection scenarios to indoor settings. Some recent works
learn deep neural networks to align desynchronized datasets
derived from synchronized cameras and can only produce
frame-level accuracy. For fractional frame video synchronization, this work proposes an Inter-Frame and Intra-Frame
Desynchronized Dataset (IFID), which labels fractional time
intervals between two video clips. IFID is the first dataset
that annotates inter-frame and intra-frame intervals, with a
total of 382, 500 video clips annotated, making it the largest
dataset to date. We also develop a novel model based on
the Transformer architecture, named InSynFormer, for synchronizing inter-frame and intra-frame. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate its promising performance. The
dataset and source code of the model are available at https:
//github.com/yuxuan-cser/InSynFormer.

Camera 0

Camera 1

Camera 2

Figure 1: Video clips of an actor performing Tai Chi with
a masked face. The clips are captured from three different
camera views. Without connected hardware synchronization
devices, there is temporal desynchronization in the recordings from different views.

Introduction

scenes or large-scale sports venues, which have limited existing datasets that require synchronized collection for multiview tasks in small and medium-sized indoor venues with
highly constrained scenes. Current synchronization also includes methods based on WiFi signals or Bluetooth signals.
These methods are greatly affected by network fluctuations
(Wu et al. 2019). Besides, synchronization based on audio is
limited by the desynchronization of audio and video. Therefore, video synchronization based on videos is essential.
However, labeling the time intervals between different
views is challenging. One intuitive method uses synchronization devices to record synchronized videos and shifts
an integral number of frames as the time interval (Wu
et al. 2019; Yin et al. 2022; Boizard et al. 2023). However,
this method results in discrete labeled time intervals, with
lengths that can only be multiples of a single frame. Under natural conditions, the time intervals should be random
and continuous, as shown in Figure 2. Especially when estimating the 3D pose in a state of intense movement, the error
caused by intra-frame can not be ignored (Shuai et al. 2022).

In the monocular 3D pose estimation, the occlusion issue has
always been challenging to overcome (Cheng et al. 2021;
Fang et al. 2018; Cheng et al. 2020). Estimating 3D pose
from multiple views (Rhodin, Salzmann, and Fua 2018;
Rhodin et al. 2018; Mitra et al. 2020) can solve this problem
effectively since the occluded part in one view may become
visible in other views (Zheng et al. 2023). Multi-view videos
require recording by multiple cameras, but the start-up of
multiple cameras may be desynchronized, as shown in Figure 1. However, multi-view 3D pose estimation must simultaneously utilize the pose information. The desynchronized
start will cause such tasks to be greatly troubled by temporal desynchronization. The majority of existing solutions use
hardware synchronization devices to synchronize cameras.
However, as is well-known, hardware synchronization devices are costly. They can not be easily deployed in outdoor
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3828

