The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revisiting Disentanglement in Downstream Tasks:
A Study on Its Necessity for Abstract Visual Reasoning
Ruiqian Nai1, 2, 3 , Zixin Wen4 , Ji Li1 , Yuanzhi Li4 , Yang Gao1, 2, 3 *
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China
4
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{nrq22, ji-li20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {gaoyangiiis }@tsinghua.edu.cn, {zixinw, yuanzhil}@andrew.cmu.edu
2

Abstract
In representation learning, a disentangled representation is
highly desirable as it encodes generative factors of data in a
separable and compact pattern. Researchers have advocated
leveraging disentangled representations to complete downstream tasks with encouraging empirical evidence. This paper
further investigates the necessity of disentangled representation in downstream applications. Specifically, we show that
dimension-wise disentangled representations are unnecessary
on a fundamental downstream task, abstract visual reasoning.
We provide extensive empirical evidence against the necessity
of disentanglement, covering multiple datasets, representation
learning methods, and downstream network architectures. Furthermore, our findings suggest that the informativeness of representations is a better indicator of downstream performance
than disentanglement. Finally, the positive correlation between
informativeness and disentanglement explains the claimed usefulness of disentangled representations in previous works. The
source code is available at https://github.com/Richard-coderNai/disentanglement-lib-necessity.git.

1

Introduction

Disentanglement has been considered an essential property of
representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013;
Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017; Goodfellow, Bengio,
and Courville 2016; Bengio, LeCun et al. 2007; Schmidhuber
1992; Lake et al. 2017; Tschannen, Bachem, and Lucic 2018).
Disentanglement is defined as a dimension-wise relationship,
wherein a representation dimension should capture information from exactly one factor and vice versa (Locatello et al.
2019b; Higgins et al. 2016; Kim and Mnih 2018; Chen et al.
2018; Eastwood and Williams 2018; Ridgeway and Mozer
2018; Kumar, Sattigeri, and Balakrishnan 2017; Do and Tran
2019). Such property is analogous to biological mechanisms,
as neurons in brains are specialized for specific tasks, with
some aligned to axes of data generative factors (Higgins et al.
2021; Whittington et al. 2022). Moreover, disentangled representations offer a compact and separable structure. Therefore,
they are believed to aid in compositional generalization and
reasoning, potentially leading to improved performance in
downstream tasks (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14405

These purported advantages have been verified on multiple
downstream tasks. For instance, abstract visual reasoning
(van Steenkiste et al. 2019), fairness (Locatello et al. 2019a),
and out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization (Dittadi et al.
2020). Disentangled representations result in better downstream performance, faster learning, and a strong correlation
with task success. Based on these promising empirical results,
adopting disentangled representations is considered a wise
decision for completing downstream tasks.
However, Cao et al. (2022) demonstrates that contrastive
learning, does not produce fully disentangled representations. Yet contrastive pre-training methods achieve remarkable downstream performances (He et al. 2020; Caron et al.
2021; He et al. 2022; Oquab et al. 2023). These findings
may contradict earlier claims regarding the benefits of developing disentangled representations, as such disentanglement does not appear to play a significant role in the success
of downstream tasks. This potential conflict with the previously claimed usefulness of disentanglement motivates us to
reassess the role of disentanglement for downstream tasks.
Are disentangled representations necessary for downstream
tasks? If not, how do we explain the previously reported
benefits?
We choose abstract visual reasoning as the testbed to investigate the necessity of disentanglement. In this task, intelligent agents are asked to take human IQ tests, i.e., predict
the missing panel of Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs)
(Raven 1941). To solve this task, it is essential to comprehend
and employ the generative factors of data, as they serve as
reasoning attributes. The task is completed in a two-staged
fashion: (1) extracting RPMs’ representations in an unsupervised manner, (2) then performing abstract reasoning
training based on learned representations. Therefore, it is
an essential and popular benchmark for disentangled representation learning (van Steenkiste et al. 2019; Locatello
et al. 2020; Schölkopf et al. 2021). In practice, among various researched downstream tasks (van Steenkiste et al. 2019;
Locatello et al. 2019a; Dittadi et al. 2020), disentanglement
has been shown to improve sample efficiency and final performance on abstract reasoning tasks (van Steenkiste et al. 2019).
Researchers have therefore suggested the use of disentangled
representations (Steenbrugge et al. 2018; van Steenkiste et al.
2019; Małkiński and Mańdziuk 2022).
We conduct an extensive empirical study that uses abstract

