The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parallel Empirical Evaluations: Resilience despite Concurrency
Johannes K. Fichte1 , Tobias Geibinger2 , Markus Hecher3 , Matthias Schlögel2
1
AIICS, IDA, Linköping University, Sweden
KBS Group, Institute for Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
johannes.fichte@liu.se, {tobias.geibinger,matthias.schloegel}@tuwien.ac.at, hecher@mit.edu
2

Abstract

Schirra 2010) all require in-depth, breadth, and reliable empirical experiments. The sheer amount of required resources
often makes it impossible to execute the experiments on a
single computer. Instead, we use clusters of computers for
experiments, which cannot be used exclusively by single
persons or groups due to cost-efficiency demands. In engineering, complexity, but there referring to complicatedness,
is often seen as an enemy of reliability (Geer et al. 2003).
On computer clusters, the complicatedness of the underlying architecture results in drawbacks and pitfalls during operations for combinatorial solving. Parallel executions, diverging runtimes of instances and solvers, shared resources
(network or local), and scheduling efficiency are drawbacks
that might result in unreliable execution and hence irreproducible empirical results.
In engineering (Henderson and Patel 2002; Force 1993),
standardization is used to control complicatedness and reduce uncontrolled parts’ potential side effects. Unfortunately, to our knowledge, no standardization on configuring hardware and software is available in the combinatorialsolving community. Mistakes are common and far from
easy to spot. Reliable empirical experiments on individual systems and performance improvements are well investigated (Georgiou et al. 2014; Beyer, Löwe, and Wendler
2019; Vercellino et al. 2023), and tools focusing on precise measurements, repeatability, optimal throughput, and
efficiency of participating systems are available for installation (Beyer, Löwe, and Wendler 2019). However, a primary disadvantage of most dedicated tools is exclusive and
very permissive system access, which is often hard to establish or requires dedicated resources for a limited number of
people resulting in extremely unsustainable and inefficient
usage of computer hardware.
Still, cost efficiency demands from a management or resource availability perspective, and sustainability require
that resources are shared among many applications. Highperformance computing (HPC) data centers have resources
in the form of computation clusters widely available and are
often very well maintained (Green500 Authors 2022; Strevell et al. 2019). Fortunately, when applying the right restrictions, widely developed technology from HPC environments
can be highly useful for computational experiments in various combinatorial communities. Furthermore, these systems
allow us to “maximize” throughput and use of shared re-

Computational evaluations are crucial in modern problemsolving when we surpass theoretical algorithms or bounds.
These experiments frequently take much work, and the sheer
amount of needed resources makes it impossible to execute
them on a single personal computer or laptop. Cluster schedulers allow for automatizing these tasks and scale to many
computers. But, when we evaluate implementations of combinatorial algorithms, we depend on stable runtime results.
Common approaches either limit parallelism or suffer from
unstable runtime measurements due to interference among
jobs on modern hardware. The former is inefficient and not
sustainable. The latter results in unreplicable experiments.
In this work, we address this issue and offer an acceptable balance between efficiency, software, hardware complexity, reliability, and replicability. We investigate effects towards replicability stability and illustrate how to efficiently use widely
employed cluster resources for parallel evaluations. Furthermore, we present solutions which mitigate issues that emerge
from the concurrent execution of benchmark jobs. Our experimental evaluation shows that – despite parallel execution –
our approach reduces the runtime instability on the majority
of instances to one second.

Introduction
“Can we please do science again” was a highly provocative catchphrase by Karem Shakallah in a roadmap talk on
his perspective for the next stage of research in solving
the Boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem (Sakallah 2023).
He argued that we have a limited understanding of certain
aspects of modern solving techniques, that understanding
could be purely driven by empirical competitions catching
for slightly improving another technique or implementation,
and that models and techniques are too complex for grasp.
Still, not just in the SAT community but also in various
combinatorial-solving communities (Bartocci et al. 2019),
empirical evaluations are at heart and certainly a tedious part
of scientific work (McGeoch 2012). Competitions (Bartocci
et al. 2019), obtaining conclusions about practical algorithms (Elffers et al. 2018), verifying proof traces (Heule and
Kullmann 2017), or estimating the benefits of some new algorithm or technical improvement (Müller-Hannemann and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8004

