The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SURER: Structure-Adaptive Unified Graph Neural Network for Multi-View
Clustering
Jing Wang1 , Songhe Feng1 * , Gengyu Lyu2 , Jiazheng Yuan3
1

Key Laboratory of Big Data and Artificial Intelligence in Transportation (Ministry of Education),
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligence Perception and Autonomous Control (Ministry of Education),
Beijing University of Technology
3
College of Science and Technology, Beijing Open University
{jing w, shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn, lyugengyu@bjut.edu.cn, jzyuan@139.com
Abstract
Deep Multi-view Graph Clustering (DMGC) aims to partition instances into different groups using the graph information extracted from multi-view data. The mainstream framework of DMGC methods applies graph neural networks to
embed structure information into the view-specific representations and fuse them for the consensus representation. However, on one hand, we find that the graph learned in advance is
not ideal for clustering as it is constructed by original multiview data and localized connecting. On the other hand, most
existing methods learn the consensus representation in a late
fusion manner, which fails to propagate the structure relations across multiple views. Inspired by the observations, we
propose a Structure-adaptive Unified gRaph nEural network
for multi-view clusteRing (SURER), which can jointly learn
a heterogeneous multi-view unified graph and robust graph
neural networks for multi-view clustering. Specifically, we
first design a graph structure learning module to refine the
original view-specific attribute graphs, which removes false
edges and discovers the potential connection. According to
the view-specific refined attribute graphs, we integrate them
into a unified heterogeneous graph by linking the representations of the same sample from different views. Furthermore,
we use the unified heterogeneous graph as the input of the
graph neural network to learn the consensus representation
for each instance, effectively integrating complementary information from various views. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets demonstrate the superior effectiveness of our
method compared to other state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: The framework of mainstream deep multi-view
graph clustering. It usually constructs view-specific graphs
in advance and then adopts graph neural networks to map
the representations of various views to the common space.
ploring the consistency and complementarity of multi-view
data. For instance, Xu et al. (Xu et al. 2022) utilize viewspecific deep autoencoders to extract view-specific instancelevel and cluster-level representations. After that, the contrastive losses are introduced to learn discriminative features
and reliable clustering labels. Zhou et al. (Zhou and Shen
2020) also adopt deep networks to learn view-specific representations and introduce the adversarial learning mechanism to align the latent representations. Although DMVC
achieves impressive clustering performance, its effectiveness is constrained by its failure to leverage the topological
structure information among instances. To address this issue,
many Deep Multi-view Graph Clustering (DMGC) methods
(Huang et al. 2023; Xia et al. 2021) are proposed recently.
The mainstream framework of DMGC methods, as depicted
in Figure 1, initially utilizes multi-view data to construct
topological graphs in advance. Subsequently, view-specific
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are employed to encode the graph information into view-specific representations, which are then merged to create the consensus representation. For example, Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2021)
adopt GCNs to explore the complementarity of multi-view
data and introduce a mutual information maximization module to guide the consensus representation maintaining the
structure information of multiple views. However, the graph
used in the above methods is constructed by original multiview data and remains fixed throughout the entire representation learning process. These graphs inherently incorporate

Introduction
In the big data era, the exploration of a comprehensive
understanding of heterogeneous features such as images,
videos, speech, and text is an important research problem
(Wu et al. 2023). Multi-view clustering (MVC) algorithms
(Ling et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023) have found widespread application across many fields. Benefiting from the modeling
capacity of deep neural networks, Deep Multi-view Clustering (DMVC) (Li et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2022) methods
emerge to provide an effective solution for handling highdimensional and complex multi-view data. DMVC usually aims at learning the consensus representation by ex* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15520

