The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MCL-NER: Cross-Lingual Named Entity Recognition via
Multi-View Contrastive Learning
Ying Mo1 , Jian Yang1 * , Jiahao Liu2 , Qifan Wang3 , Ruoyu Chen4 , Jingang Wang2 , Zhoujun Li1 *
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Meituan, Beijing, China
3
Meta AI, New York, United States
4
Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing, China
{moying, jiaya, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn, {liujiahao12, wangjingang02}@meituan.com, wqfcr@fb.com, chenruoyu@bistu.edu.cn
Abstract

Mtgt

Mtgt

Mtgt
Cross-lingual
Transfer

Cross-lingual named entity recognition (CrossNER) faces
challenges stemming from uneven performance due to the
scarcity of multilingual corpora, especially for non-English
data. While prior efforts mainly focus on data-driven transfer methods, a significant aspect that has not been fully explored is aligning both semantic and token-level representations across diverse languages. In this paper, we propose
Multi-view Contrastive Learning for Cross-lingual Named
Entity Recognition (MCL-NER). Specifically, we reframe
the CrossNER task into a problem of recognizing relationships between pairs of tokens. This approach taps into the
inherent contextual nuances of token-to-token connections
within entities, allowing us to align representations across
different languages. A multi-view contrastive learning framework is introduced to encompass semantic contrasts between
source, codeswitched, and target sentences, as well as contrasts among token-to-token relations. By enforcing agreement within both semantic and relational spaces, we minimize the gap between source sentences and their counterparts
of both codeswitched and target sentences. This alignment
extends to the relationships between diverse tokens, enhancing the projection of entities across languages. We further
augment CrossNER by combining self-training with labeled
source data and unlabeled target data. Our experiments on
the XTREME benchmark, spanning 40 languages, demonstrate the superiority of MCL-NER over prior data-driven and
model-based approaches. It achieves a substantial increase of
nearly +2.0 F1 scores across a broad spectrum and establishes
itself as the new state-of-the-art performer.

Msrc

Msrc

Mtrans

Dsrc

Dsrc

Dtrans

(a) TSL

(b) CROP

Mcds

Semantic
Token-to-Token
Contrastive Relation Contrastive

Dsrc

Dcds
(c) Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of MCL-NER vs. existing methods
TSL (Wu et al. 2020a) and CROP (Yang et al. 2022a). Dsrc ,
Dtrans and Dcds are the source, translated-source and codeswitched data respectively. M∗ represents the trained models from the corresponding data. Our model leverages multiview contrastive learning to bridge the gap between crosslingual semantic and token-to-token representations.

aim to facilitate knowledge transfer from languages with
ample resources to those with fewer resources. Furthermore,
recent studies (Wu et al. 2020b; Yang et al. 2022a; Zhou
et al. 2022, 2023) unify model-based and data-based transfer
methods to enhance CrossNER. The efficacy of these methods hinges on both the inherent cross-lingual abilities of the
pre-trained models and the quality of the synthetic data produced via phrase-level and sentence-level translation.
Along the research line of levering the cross-lingual pretrained model, previous works (Mayhew, Tsai, and Roth
2017; Xie et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2020b; Wu, Wang, and
Liu 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022a) perform
phrase-level and sentence-level translation and annotate corresponding target entities. These methods can be broadly
classified into two groups, as illustrated in Figure 1. Within
the first group, methods like TSL (Wu et al. 2020a) generate
soft labels in the target language based on the model trained
using the source language. These soft labels are then utilized
to facilitate training a NER model for the target language. In
contrast, techniques belonging to the second group, such as
CROP (Yang et al. 2022a), leverage both the source model
and translation data to fine-tune the NER model for the target
domain. Despite their effectiveness, most existing studies fo-

Introduction
Cross-lingual named entity recognition (CrossNER) suffered from significant performance degradation in lowresource languages with limited data. In response to this
challenge, the advent of multilingual pre-trained models
(Devlin et al. 2018; Conneau et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020b,
2021b; Wang et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020) has driven the development of model-based methods (Keung, Lu, and Bhardwaj 2019; Bari, Joty, and Jwalapuram 2020; Wu et al. 2020a;
Wang et al. 2019, 2020; Wu et al. 2020c). These methods
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18789

