The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking the Paradigm of Content Constraints in Unpaired
Image-to-Image Translation
Xiuding Cai1 2 , Yaoyao Zhu1 2 , Dong Miao1 2 , Linjie Fu1 2 , Yu Yao1 2 *
1

Chengdu Institute of Computer Application, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, China
2
University of Chinese Academic Sciences, Beijing, China
{caixiuding20, zhuyaoyao19, miaodong20, fulinjie19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, casitmed2022@163.com

Abstract

In an unpaired setting, lacking sufficient content constraints for the I2I task, using an adversarial loss (Goodfellow et al. 2014) alone is often prone to model collapse.
To ensure content constraints, current generative adversarial networks (GAN)-based approaches can be broadly classified into two categories. One is reconstruction-based solutions. Typical approaches are CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017)
and UNIT (Liu, Breuel, and Kautz 2017). They propose the
cycle consistency or shared-latent space assumption, which
requires that the transformed image, or the transforming
image, should be able to map back to the original image
perfectly. However, these assumptions are sometimes too
strict (Park et al. 2020). For instance, the city street view
is converted into a certain pixel-level annotated label, but reconverting a label to a city street view has yet countless possibilities. Such ill-posed setting limits the performance of
reconstruction-based GANs, leading to unsatisfactory generations (Chen et al. 2020a).
Another solution for content constraints is Siamese networks (Bromley et al. 1993). Siamese networks are weight
sharing neural networks that accept two or more inputs.
They are natural tools for comparing entity differences.
For the I2I task, the input image and the generated image
are fed to some Siamese networks separately, and the content consistency is ensured by matching the output features.
CUT (Park et al. 2020) re-exploit the encoder of the generator as a feature extractor and propose the PatchNCE loss
to maximize the mutual information between the patches
of the input and generated images and achieve superior
performance over the reconstruction-based methods. Some
studies (Mechrez, Talmi, and Zelnik-Manor 2018; Zheng,
Cham, and Cai 2021) repurpose the pre-trained VGG network (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) as a feature extractor to constrain the feature correlation between the source
and generated images. Given the strength and flexibility of
Siamese networks, such content-constrained methods are increasingly widely used. However, Siamese network-based
GANs mean that the source and generated images need to
be fed into the Siamese networks again separately, which entails additional computational costs for training. In addition,
an ideal Siamese network that can measure the differences
in images well, is not always available.
Can we explicitly constrain the content inside the generator network? Inspired by U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer,

In an unpaired setting, lacking sufficient content constraints
for image-to-image translation (I2I) tasks, GAN-based approaches are usually prone to model collapse. Current solutions can be divided into two categories, reconstructionbased and Siamese network-based. The former requires that
the transformed or transforming image can be perfectly converted back to the original image, which is sometimes too
strict and limits the generative performance. The latter involves feeding the original and generated images into a feature extractor and then matching their outputs. This is not efficient enough, and a universal feature extractor is not easily
available. In this paper, we propose EnCo, a simple but efficient way to maintain the content by constraining the representational similarity in the latent space of patch-level features from the same stage of the encoder and decoder of the
generator. For the similarity function, we use a simple MSE
loss instead of contrastive loss, which is currently widely used
in I2I tasks. Benefits from the design, EnCo training is extremely efficient, while the features from the encoder produce
a more positive effect on the decoding, leading to more satisfying generations. In addition, we rethink the role played by
discriminators in sampling patches and propose a discriminative attention-guided (DAG) patch sampling strategy to replace random sampling. DAG is parameter-free and only requires negligible computational overhead, while significantly
improving the performance of the model. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and
advantages of EnCo, and we achieve multiple state-of-the-art
compared to previous methods.

Introduction
Image-to-image translation (I2I) aims to convert images
from one domain to another with content preserved as
much as possible. I2I tasks have received a lot of attention given their wide range of applications, such as style
transfer (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2016), semantic
segmentation (Yu, Koltun, and Funkhouser 2017; Kirillov
et al. 2020), super resolution (Yuan et al. 2018), colorization (Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016), dehazing (Dong et al.
2020) and image restoration (Liang et al. 2021) etc.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

891

