The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

In-Hand 3D Object Reconstruction from a Monocular RGB Video
Shijian Jiang1 , Qi Ye1,2 * , Rengan Xie3 , Yuchi Huo3,4 , Xiang Li5 , Yang Zhou5 , Jiming Chen1
1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
4
Zhejiang Lab
5
OPPO US Research Center
{jsj630, qi.ye, rgxie}@zju.edu.cn, huo.yuchi.sc@gmail.com,
{xiang.li, yang.zhou}@oppo.com, cjm@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

prior knowledge of the object. Several in-hand object reconstruction works based on these representations (Hampali et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022; Wen et al. 2023) have
achieved compelling results in the visible part of the object.
However, their performance degrades significantly when objects are heavily occluded by the hand as these methods optimize 3D object models to fit the observed images only.
In this paper, we argue that dealing with object surface
reconstruction under occlusion demands the incorporation
of additional priors beyond direct observation. Humans are
capable of intuitively elucidating objects under occlusion.
Some works (Back et al. 2022; Zhan et al. 2020; Zhou et al.
2021) therefore explore large-scale data to learn the capability of occlusion elucidation for images with amodal mask
completion. However, leveraging this 2D elucidation capability for multi-view 3D reconstruction is challenging as the
amodal masks may be inaccurate and inconsistent across
multiple views, especially in the heavily occluded areas. To
address this issue, we add a semantic amodal mask head
to the implicit 3D reconstruction neural network and refine
the masks by jointly optimizing the parameters of both networks.
Though the completed amodal mask can help to constrain
a rough global shape of an object, it may not reconstruct local surfaces well, as small changes in the 3D local surfaces
might not render apparent changes in the 2D masks. On the
other hand, we humans can feel the object shapes and manipulate objects by hands without seeing them and an attempt
has been made in (Yin et al. 2023) that robotic hands can accomplish similar tasks with only simple tactile information
(touch object surfaces or not) collected by tactile sensors attached on robotic hands. With this inspiration, we propose to
infer the occluded local object surfaces by reasoning about
the physical contact between objects and hands: the reconstructed hands and objects must not intersect with each other
and must be in contact to enforce friction so that objects
will not fall due to gravity. To this end, we introduce penetration and attraction penalties to guide the inference of the
occluded surface in contact areas with hands.
By incorporating the 2D occlusion elucidation and the
physical contact priors, we propose a novel in-hand 3D object reconstruction method based on implicit representations
from a monocular RGB video sequence. We evaluate our

Our work aims to reconstruct a 3D object that is held and
rotated by a hand in front of a static RGB camera. Previous
methods that use implicit neural representations to recover
the geometry of a generic hand-held object from multi-view
images achieved compelling results in the visible part of the
object. However, these methods falter in accurately capturing
the shape within the hand-object contact region due to occlusion. In this paper, we propose a novel method that deals
with surface reconstruction under occlusion by incorporating
priors of 2D occlusion elucidation and physical contact constraints. For the former, we introduce an object amodal completion network to infer the 2D complete mask of objects under occlusion. To ensure the accuracy and view consistency
of the predicted 2D amodal masks, we devise a joint optimization method for both amodal mask refinement and 3D
reconstruction. For the latter, we impose penetration and attraction constraints on the local geometry in contact regions.
We evaluate our approach on HO3D and HOD datasets and
demonstrate that it outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
in terms of reconstruction surface quality, with an improvement of 52% on HO3D and 20% on HOD. Project webpage:
https://east-j.github.io/ihor.

Introduction
3D object reconstruction from images has many applications
in fields such as robotic manipulation and AR/VR. A handy
and low-cost way to obtain 3D models is to rotate an object
in hand in front of a camera and reconstruct the 3D objects
from a captured video, which is the focus of this work. However, in-hand 3D object reconstruction in this setting poses
several challenges, such as the lack of prior knowledge of the
object shape, the estimation of the relative poses between the
camera and the object, and particularly, the occlusion caused
by the hand-object interaction.
Implicit neural representations, combined with volume
rendering techniques (Wang et al. 2021; Yariv et al. 2021),
have proven to be remarkably effective in reconstructing
3D geometry from multi-view images without requiring any
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2525

