The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neighborhood-Enhanced 3D Human Pose Estimation with Monocular LiDAR in
Long-Range Outdoor Scenes
Jingyi Zhang1,2 , Qihong Mao1,2 , Guosheng Hu3 , Siqi Shen1,2 , Cheng Wang1,2 *
2

1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, School of
Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Oosto, Belfast, UK
{zhangjingyi1, maoqihong}@stu.xmu.edu.cn; {siqishen, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn; huguosheng100@gmail.com

Abstract

3BN
3SN
Human

3D human pose estimation (3HPE) in large-scale outdoor
scenes using commercial LiDAR has attracted significant attention due to its potential for real-life applications. However,
existing LiDAR-based methods for 3HPE primarily rely on
recovering 3D human poses from individual point clouds,
and the coherence cues present in the neighborhood are not
sufficiently harnessed. In this work, we explore spatial and
contexture coherence cues contained in the neighborhood that
leads to great performance improvements in 3HPE. Specifically, firstly, we deeply investigate the 3D neighbor in the
background (3BN) which serves as a spatial coherence cue
for inferring reliable motion since it provides physical laws
to limit motion targets. Secondly, we introduce a novel 3D
scanning neighbor (3SN) generated during the data collection and 3SN implies structural edge coherence cues. We use
3SN to overcome the degradation of performance and data
quality caused by the sparsity-varying properties of LiDAR
point clouds. In order to effectively model the complementation between these distinct cues and build consistent temporal relationships across human motions, we propose a new
transformer-based module called the CoherenceFuse module. Extensive experiments conducted on publicly available
datasets, namely LidarHuman26M, CIMI4D, SLOPER4D and
Waymo Open Dataset v2.0, showcase the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed method. In particular, when compared
with LidarCap on the LidarHuman26M dataset, our method
demonstrates a reduction of 7.08mm in the average MPJPE
metric, along with a decrease of 16.55mm in the MPJPE metric for distances exceeding 25 meters. The code and models
are available at https://github.com/jingyi-zhang/Neighborhoodenhanced-LidarCap.

LidarHuman26M

CIMI4D

SLOPER4D

Figure 1: The visualization of 3SN and 3BN. Our method
treats 3SN sequence, 3BN sequence, and human sequence as
input to predict 3D human motions.
To effectively address long-range 3HPE, various modalities have distinctive challenges that require specific solutions.
Some researchers (Xu et al. 2021, 2020b; Wan et al. 2021)
focus on recovering 3D human motions from degraded and
low-resolution images, due to factors such as poor lighting
and long camera-subject distances. Other researchers (Zhang
et al. 2022b; Sun et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2022a) concentrate on alleviating the influence of ill-posed to
global location prediction from RGB images since the camera
is unable to provide accurate depth information. RGBD-based
methods are also unsuitable for long-range 3HPE, due to the
limited effective range (less than 5 m). In contrast, bodyworn sensors like Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) have
environment-independent properties, IMUs-based methods
(Yi et al. 2022; Yi, Zhou, and Xu 2021b; Marcard et al. 2017;
Huang et al. 2018b) dedicated to achieving convenient 3HPE
by minimizing the number of wearable devices. HSC4D (Dai
et al. 2022) employs LiDAR sensors to obtain depth information and correct an accumulated global drifting artifact that
occurs in IMUs when working in long-range outdoor scenes.
Despite the success of these sensors, benefitting from the
LiDAR’s inherent insensitivity to lighting conditions, its capacity to acquire precise depth information, and its extended
detection range, the LiDAR-based method is the preferred
choice for conducting motion capture in daily scenarios characterized by extensive distances and expansive environments.
Recently, researchers started exploring the LiDAR sensor in
human motion capture. LidarCap(Li et al. 2022a) achieves remarkable results in 3D human motion capture within a range
of 30 meters, relying solely on individual human point clouds

Introduction
3D human pose estimation (3HPE) in unconstrained environments is a rapidly advancing field with lots of promising
research work (Kim et al. 2022; Joo, Neverova, and Vedaldi
2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Jin et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022;
Zhan et al. 2022). However, accurate 3HPE in long-range
outdoor scenes, which has diverse and impactful applications
in action recognition, sports analysis, AR/VR, autonomous
driving, etc, remains challenging.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7169

