The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hierarchical and Incremental Structural Entropy Minimization for Unsupervised
Social Event Detection
Yuwei Cao1 , Hao Peng2 , Zhengtao Yu3 , Philip S. Yu1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, China
{ycao43, psyu}@uic.edu, penghao@buaa.edu.cn, ztyu@hotmail.com
2

Abstract

mentions, hashtags, named entities, etc.) linked together.
Figure 1A.2 shows an example message graph. They then
partition the message graph using GNNs, which incorporate
the natural language representations of the messages with
that of their neighbors. The resulting graph partitions (e.g.,
Figure 1B.3) serve as the detected social events. Despite
their SOTA performance, GNN-based methods merely link
messages that share exactly the same attributes. The useful
correlations between messages that are semantically close
yet have no common attributes are missing. Furthermore, the
GNN components of these models require supervision for
training and predetermining the total number of events for
prediction. Recent GNN-based methods (Ren et al. 2022a;
Peng et al. 2022; Cao et al. 2021), unlike earlier ones (Peng
et al. 2019), adopt contrastive learning, inductive learning,
and pseudo label generation to alleviate the reliance on labels. However, manual labeling is still necessary for the initial training and periodical maintenance.

As a trending approach for social event detection, graph neural network (GNN)-based methods enable a fusion of natural
language semantics and the complex social network structural information, thus showing SOTA performance. However, GNN-based methods can miss useful message correlations. Moreover, they require manual labeling for training
and predetermining the number of events for prediction. In
this work, we address social event detection via graph structural entropy (SE) minimization. While keeping the merits of
the GNN-based methods, the proposed framework, HISEvent, constructs more informative message graphs, is unsupervised, and does not require the number of events given a priori. Specifically, we incrementally explore the graph neighborhoods using 1-dimensional (1D) SE minimization to supplement the existing message graph with edges between semantically related messages. We then detect events from the
message graph by hierarchically minimizing 2-dimensional
(2D) SE. Our proposed 1D and 2D SE minimization algorithms are customized for social event detection and effectively tackle the efficiency problem of the existing SE minimization algorithms. Extensive experiments show that HISEvent consistently outperforms GNN-based methods and
achieves the new SOTA for social event detection under both
closed- and open-set settings while being efficient and robust.

In this work, we address the above issues from an
information-theoretic perspective. We gain inspiration from
structural entropy (SE) (Li and Pan 2016), a metric that
assesses the amount of information contained in a graph.
Specifically, minimizing one-dimensional (1D) SE discloses
the reliable node correlations contained in the raw, noisy
graphs and is applied in biomedical studies (Li, Yin, and Pan
2016). We explore message graph neighborhoods via 1D SE
minimization and supplement the existing message graph
with edges between the semantically close messages. Unlike previous studies (Li, Yin, and Pan 2016; Li et al. 2018),
our exploration is conducted in an incremental manner to
maximize efficiency. Minimizing higher-dimensional SE decrypts the higher-order structure of the graphs (Li and Pan
2016). Given this, we further partition the message graph
via two-dimensional (2D) SE minimization. Though effective and requiring no supervision, 2D SE minimization can
be prohibitively slow to perform on complex, large-scale
message graphs. We effectively tackle this by customizing
a 2D SE minimization algorithm for social event detection.
Our algorithm addresses the message correlations in a hierarchical manner: it repeatedly splits the message graph,
detects clusters, and combines the clusters into new ones
while keeping the previously detected partitions. Our proposed framework, hierarchical and incremental structural
entropy minimization-guided social event detector (HISEv-

Introduction
Social event detection serves as a foundation for public opinion mining (Beck et al. 2021), fake news detection (Mehta,
Pacheco, and Goldwasser 2022), etc., and is attracting increasing attention in industry and academia. Existing studies (Ren et al. 2022a; Cao et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2020a; Peng
et al. 2019, 2022) commonly formalize the task of social
event detection as extracting clusters of co-related messages
from sequences of social media messages.
Recent years have witnessed the booming of social event
detection studies (Ren et al. 2023, 2022a; Peng et al. 2022;
Cao et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2019) that are based on
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017).
These methods typically follow a two-step strategy: they
first construct message graphs that contain all the candidate messages, with ones that share common attributes (user
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8255

