The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spherical Pseudo-Cylindrical Representation for Omnidirectional Image
Super-resolution
Qing Cai1 , Mu Li2 , Dongwei Ren3 , Jun Lyu4 , Haiyong Zheng1∗ , Junyu Dong1∗ , Yee-Hong Yang5
1

Faculty of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
4
School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
cq@ouc.edu.cn, {limuhit,rendongweihit}@gmail.com, junlyu@polyu.edu.hk, {zhenghaiyong,dongjunyu}@ouc.edu.cn,
herberty@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract
Omnidirectional images have attracted significant attention
in recent years due to the rapid development of virtual reality technologies. Equirectangular projection (ERP), a naive
form to store and transfer omnidirectional images, however, is
challenging for existing two-dimensional (2D) image superresolution (SR) methods due to its inhomogeneous distributed
sampling density and distortion across latitude. In this paper, we make one of the first attempts to design a spherical pseudo-cylindrical representation, which not only allows
pixels at different latitudes to adaptively adopt the best distinct sampling density but also is model-agnostic to most offthe-shelf SR methods, enhancing their performances. Specifically, we start by upsampling each latitude of the input ERP
image and design a computationally tractable optimization algorithm to adaptively obtain a (sub)-optimal sampling density
for each latitude of the ERP image. Addressing the distortion of ERP, we introduce a new viewport-based training loss
based on the original 3D sphere format of the omnidirectional
image, which inherently lacks distortion. Finally, we present
a simple yet effective recursive progressive omnidirectional
SR network to showcase the feasibility of our idea. The experimental results on public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method as well as the consistently
superior performance of our method over most state-of-theart methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the inhomogeneous distributed
sampling density and distortion issues of an ERP image. (b)
Concept of the proposed spherical pseudo-cylindrical representation to address the above issues.

must be transformed into a 2D planar representation to facilitate storage and transmission. Equirectangular projection
(ERP) is the most popular projection form, in which the
latitude and the longitude of the original spherical image
are mapped to the horizontal and vertical grid coordinates.
As a result, the distributed sampling density in the ERP is
inhomogeneous and distorted across latitude (as shown in
Fig. 1(a)), making it unfriendly to subsequent visual communication applications. Additionally, when considering the
trade-off between resolution and ease of storage and transmission, omnidirectional images usually have low resolutions (Elbamby et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2021).
Image super-resolution (SR) is a technique that aims to
recover high-resolution (HR) image from its corresponding degraded low-resolution (LR) version with algorithms
alone, without the need for any hardware device. It plays
an important and fundamental role in many computer vision tasks (Haris, Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2018; Zhang
et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2022; Cao et al. 2016; Cai et al. 2023;
Lyu et al. 2023). Due to their superior feature representation capabilities, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved remarkable success in SR and many architectures have been presented so far, for example, residual
learning (Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016; Nie et al. 2020), dense

Introduction
Omnidirectional images also referred to as 360◦ images,
provide 360◦ × 180◦ field-of-view (FoV), and enable an excellent immersive experience. Recent years have garnered
significant attention in many real-world applications, including robotics (Su and Grauman 2021; Scaramuzza 2007),
computer vision (Khasanova and Frossard 2017; Ozcinar,
Rana, and Smolic 2019), virtual reality (VR) and augmented
reality (AR) (Su and Grauman 2019; Deng et al. 2021) and
gaming (Tateno, Navab, and Tombari 2018). In general, the
original omnidirectional image format, i.e., the 3D sphere,
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

873

