The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Feature Transportation Improves Graph Neural Networks
Moshe Eliasof1,2 * , Eldad Haber3 , Eran Treister2
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
2
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
3
Department of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Canada
me532@cam.ac.uk, ehaber@eoas.ubc.ca, erant@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

chitectures still rely on controlled diffusion or wave propagation, as well as non-linear pointwise convolutions. Therefore, as discussed in (Rusch, Bronstein, and Mishra 2023),
while there are methods that can alleviate oversmoothing,
they may lack expressiveness. We now provide a simple example, known as the graph node feature transportation task
(LeVeque 1990), where diffusion, wave propagation, and reaction networks may fail. In this task, the goal is to gather
the node information (i.e., features) from several nodes to
a single node. Clearly, no diffusion process can express or
model such a phenomenon, because diffusion spreads and
smooths, rather than transports information (Evans 1998;
Ascher 2008). Likewise, a wave-propagation approach cannot express such a phenomenon, because it lacks directionality (Ascher 2008), which is required for this task. An instance of this problem is illustrated in Figure 1, where we
show the source and target node features, and the learned
advection weights that can achieve the desired target. Later,
in Figure 2, we show that popular operators such as diffusion
or reaction cannot model the transition from the source to the
target node features, while advection can. Furthermore, the
concept of advection appears in many real-world problems
and data, such as traffic-flow and control (Betts 2001), quantity transportation in computational biology (Uys 2009), and
rainfall forecasting (Seed 2003). Motivated by the previously discussed observations and examples, we propose, in
addition to learning and combining diffusion and reaction
terms, to develop a learnable, neural advection term, also
known as a transportation term (Evans 1998; Ascher 2008;
LeVeque 1990), that is suited to model feature transportation from the data in a task-driven fashion. The resulting
architecture, called ADR-GNN, can therefore express various phenomena, from advection, diffusion, to pointwise reactions, as well as their compositions.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown remarkable success in learning representations for graph-structured data.
However, GNNs still face challenges in modeling complex
phenomena that involve feature transportation. In this paper,
we propose a novel GNN architecture inspired by AdvectionDiffusion-Reaction systems, called ADR-GNN. Advection
models feature transportation, while diffusion captures the
local smoothing of features, and reaction represents the nonlinear transformation between feature channels. We provide
an analysis of the qualitative behavior of ADR-GNN, that
shows the benefit of combining advection, diffusion, and
reaction. To demonstrate its efficacy, we evaluate ADRGNN on real-world node classification and spatio-temporal
datasets, and show that it improves or offers competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art networks.

1

Introduction

Recently, GNNs have been linked to ordinary and partial differential equations (ODEs and PDEs) in a series of works
(Chamberlain et al. 2021; Eliasof, Haber, and Treister 2021;
Rusch et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Giovanni et al. 2023;
Gravina, Bacciu, and Gallicchio 2023). These works propose to view GNN layers as the time discretization of ODEs
and PDEs, and as such they offer both theoretical and practical advantages. First, ODE and PDE based models allow to reason about the behavior of existing GNNs. For
instance, as suggested in (Chamberlain et al. 2021), it is
possible to view GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) and GAT
(Veličković et al. 2018) as discretizations of the non-linear
heat equation. This observation helps to analyze and understand the oversmoothing phenomenon in GNNs (Oono
and Suzuki 2020; Cai and Wang 2020). Second, ODE and
PDE based GNNs pave the path to the construction and design of GNNs that satisfy desired properties, such as energypreservation (Eliasof, Haber, and Treister 2021; Rusch et al.
2022), attraction and repulsion forces modeling (Wang et al.
2022; Giovanni et al. 2023), anti-symmetry (Gravina, Bacciu, and Gallicchio 2023), as well as reaction-diffusion systems (Choi et al. 2022). Nonetheless, the aforementioned ar-

Contributions. The contributions of this paper are threefold. (1) We develop a novel graph neural advection operator
that is mass-preserving, stable, and consistent with continuous advection PDEs. This operator enables the modeling of
phenomena that involve feature transportation on graphs by
learning the direction of the transportation. (2) We propose
ADR-GNN, a GNN based on learnable advection-diffusionreaction (ADR) systems, that can express a wide range of
phenomena, including learned directional information flow,
diffusion, and pointwise reactions. (3) We demonstrate the

* Work done while being a Ph.D. student at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11874

