The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SciEval: A Multi-Level Large Language Model
Evaluation Benchmark for Scientific Research
Liangtai Sun, Yang Han, Zihan Zhao, Da Ma, Zhennan Shen, Baocai Chen, Lu Chen* , Kai Yu*
X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{slt19990817, csyanghan, zhao mengxin, mada123}@sjtu.edu.cn
{ieee-szn, 15368493547, chenlusz, kai.yu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

sess the research ability of LLMs and not align with real-life
scientific research scenarios. In addition, some benchmarks
have been proposed to evaluate the scientific capability of
LLMs, such as MultiMedQA (Singhal et al. 2023), ChemLLMBench (Guo et al. 2023), and MATH (Hendrycks et al.
2021), while these benchmarks are restricted to a specific
scientific discipline, leaving a lack of a more general scientific evaluation benchmark.1 In addition, these benchmarks
(1) lack evaluation systems for scientific capabilities, (2) are
all based on objective questions, which are insufficient to assess scientific abilities, and (3) face the risk of data leakage.
In response to this gap, we present SciEval, an English
benchmark designed to evaluate advanced abilities of LLMs
in the scientific domain. SciEval consists of a total of about
18000 challenging scientific questions, spanning three important basic science fields: chemistry, physics and biology,
each of which is further divided into multiple sub-topics.
SciEval mainly has the following three characteristics:

Recently, there has been growing interest in using Large
Language Models (LLMs) for scientific research. Numerous
benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate the ability of
LLMs for scientific research. However, current benchmarks
are mostly based on pre-collected objective questions. This
design suffers from data leakage problem and lacks the evaluation of subjective Q/A ability. In this paper, we propose
SciEval, a comprehensive and multi-disciplinary evaluation
benchmark to address these issues. Based on Bloom’s taxonomy, SciEval covers four dimensions to systematically evaluate scientific research ability. In particular, we design a “dynamic” subset based on scientific principles to prevent evaluation from potential data leakage. Both objective and subjective questions are included in SciEval. These characteristics make SciEval a more effective benchmark for scientific
research ability evaluation of LLMs. Comprehensive experiments on most advanced LLMs show that, although GPT-4
achieves SOTA performance compared to other LLMs, there
is still substantial room for improvement, especially for dynamic questions. The codes and data are publicly available
on https://github.com/OpenDFM/SciEval.

1

• Multi-level and comprehensive evaluation of the ability of LLMs in the scientific field. Scientific ability of LLMs needs to be evaluated from multiple aspects. Leveraging cognitive domains of Bloom’s taxonomy (Krathwohl 2002; Forehand 2010), which covers
six levels, SciEval evaluates the scientific capabilities
of large language models across four dimensions: basic knowledge, knowledge application, scientific calculation, and research ability, where each capability aligns
with one or more cognitive levels.
• Combination of objective and subjective questions.
SciEval is mainly based on objective questions, which allow for quick and standard model evaluations, involving
multiple-choice, fill-in-the-blank, and judgment questions. These questions can help us understand whether
the model can correctly understand and memorize scientific knowledge. However, objective questions are insufficient to assess scientific capability holistically. To
better assess scientific reasoning and application ability,
SciEval introduces a small number of subjective questions, involving a total of twelve basic science experiments, which is named Experimental Data.

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT (Schulman et al. 2022), have attracted widespread attention in
general scenarios, including information search, code generation, and more. In the field of science, LLMs have
also shown preliminary potential in improving scientific
research efficiency and transforming scientific research
paradigms (Blanco-Gonzalez et al. 2023; WANG and MIAO
2023). In the meanwhile, several scientific LLMs have been
proposed by researchers (Taylor et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2022;
Frey et al. 2022). In the general field, there are already
numerous evaluation benchmarks to evaluate the language
understanding, language generation and reasoning capabilities of LLMs, such as MMLU (Hendrycks et al. 2020),
AGIEval (Zhong et al. 2023), and C-EVAL (Huang et al.
2023), shown in Table 1. Although these benchmarks cover
data of science domain, the data sources are usually confined to educational materials, which can not adequately as* The corresponding authors are Lu Chen and Kai Yu.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Due to the page limitation, we only compare some widely used
benchmarks. For more information, we refer to (Chang et al. 2023).

19053

