The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Multi-Modal Cross-Scale Deformable Transformer Network for
Unregistered Hyperspectral Image Super-resolution
Wenqian Dong* , Yang Xu* , Jiahui Qu† , Shaoxiong Hou
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Network, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
wqdong@xidian.edu.cn, xuy@stu.xidian.edu.cn, jhqu@xidian.edu.cn, sxhou@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Hyperspectral image super-resolution (HSI-SR) is a technology to improve the spatial resolution of HSI. Existing
fusion-based SR methods have shown great performance, but
still have some problems as follows: 1) existing methods
assume that the auxiliary image providing spatial information is strictly registered with the HSI, but images are difficult to be registered finely due to the shooting platforms,
shooting viewpoints and the influence of atmospheric turbulence; 2) most of the methods are based on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), which is effective for local features but cannot utilize the global features. To this end, we
propose a multi-modal cross-scale deformable transformer
network (M2 DTN) to achieve unregistered HSI-SR. Specifically, we formulate a spectrum-preserving based spatialguided registration-SR unified model (SSRU) from the view
of the realistic degradation scenarios. According to SSRU,
we propose the multi-modal registration deformable module
(MMRD) to align features between different modalities by
deformation field. In order to efficiently utilize the unique
information between different modals, we design the multiscale feature transformer (MSFT) to emphasize the spatialspectral features at different scales. In addition, we propose
the cross-scale feature aggregation module (CSFA) to accurately reconstruct the HSI by aggregating feature information
at different scales. Experiments show that M2 DTN outperforms the-state-of-the-art HSI-SR methods. Code is obtainable at https://github.com/Jiahuiqu/M2DTN.

Figure 1: The figure shows the panchromatic and lowresolution hyperspectral images for ideal and realistic conditions, as well as ground truth. Spectral curves for the three
HSI are also shown, with data from the Pavia Center dataset.

(HSI-SR) has appeared and gained widely concern in recent years. HSI-SR can be divided into two categories: single image super-resolution (SISR) and fusion-based superresolution (fusion-based SR) according to whether high spatial resolution auxiliary images are used. Compared with
SISR, the fusion-based SR methods provide the high spatial
resolution hyperspectral images (HrHSI) with higher spatial
and spectral fidelity.
In recent years, with the rapid development of deep learning (DL), a series of fusion-based SR models based on HSI
such as HyperPNN (He et al. 2019), LPPNet (Dong et al.
2021b), and PS-GDANet (Dong et al. 2021a) have emerged,
and shown excellent performance. However, these models
fuse low spatial resolution hyperspectral images (LrHSI)
and high spatial resolution multispectral image (HrMSI) on
the premise that the two images are strictly registered. In
reality, images are difficult to be registered finely due to
the imaging platforms, imaging viewpoints and the influence of atmospheric turbulence as shown in Figure 1, and
how to achieve image registration in the fusion process is
a more realistic problem. Meanwhile, most of the previous
fusion-based SR methods are based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) such as WSRCNN (Aburaed et al. 2020).
Although the CNNs with deep layers can properly fuse the

Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging can obtain hyperspectral images
(HSI) with hundreds of spectral bands. Since the intensity of
electromagnetic waves reflected by various ground objects
is varying in different bands, HSI provides detailed information of different ground objects. However, due to the limitations of imaging systems, HSI has low spatial resolution,
and remote sensing tasks such as change detection (Qu et al.
2023), classification (Zhang et al. 2022a), and semantic segmentation (Zeng et al. 2023) require high accuracy images
to obtain meaningful results. In order to obtain HSI with
high spatial resolution, hyperspectral image super-resolution
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1573

