The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Promoting Fair Vaccination Strategies through Influence Maximization: A Case
Study on COVID-19 Spread
Nicola Neophytou1,2 , Afaf Taı̈k1,2 , Golnoosh Farnadi1,2,3
1

Mila, Quebec AI Institute, Quebec, Canada,
2
Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada,
3
McGill University, Quebec, Canada
nicola.neophytou@mila.quebec, afaf.taik@mila.quebec, farnadig@mila.quebec
Abstract

of travelling to test and vaccination sites are also factors
contributing to this discrepancy (Yee, Bajaj, and Stanford
2022). These data demonstrate inequities in receiving resources throughout the pandemic, which also extends to vaccination (Perry et al. 2021; Kates, Tolbert, and Michaud
2021; Ndugga et al. 2022; Bayati et al. 2022). In Figure
1, we demonstrate how racial minorities and lower income
communities in three US metropolitan areas were less able
to reduce their mobility as quickly when the lockdown was
introduced.
This disparity motivates the need for a fair vaccination
strategy that differs from the current technique. In this work,
we investigate a collection of alternative vaccination strategies that consider both mobility and fairness. We leverage
an approach called influence maximization (IM), a network
science technique designed to detect the most influential
members of social networks, typically used in applications
such as viral marketing campaigns (Chen, Wang, and Wang
2010). We adapt this principle to instead detect the neighborhoods or communities which exhibit the largest influence on
a mobility network in terms of disease propagation. Such
communities are likely to include essential workers who are
less able to reduce their mobility during lockdowns (Rasnača
2020; Nguyen et al. 2020).
We adapt our IM approach to achieve fairness in vaccine
allocation for racial groups as well as groups of different
social statuses. Moreover, older individuals may be less mobile but more at risk of severe outcomes when exposed to
the disease. It is essential not to overlook this trade-off; we
therefore also design a strategy designed to protect communities based on higher risk and vulnerability. To summarize,
our contributions are as follows:
1. A novel community-level influence maximization approach for identifying impactful neighborhoods, aiding
targeted vaccination against disease transmission.
2. Extension of influence maximization to mitigate infection disparities among racial and income-level communities.
3. Introduction of a competitive method, merging influence
maximization with prioritizing older communities to reduce overall infections.
4. Empirical validation on mobility networks from three
major US metropolitan areas, utilizing real aggregated

The aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic saw more severe outcomes for racial minority groups and economicallydeprived communities. Such disparities can be explained by
several factors, including unequal access to healthcare, as
well as the inability of low income groups to reduce their mobility due to work or social obligations. Moreover, senior citizens were found to be more susceptible to severe symptoms,
largely due to age-related health reasons. Adapting vaccine
distribution strategies to consider a range of demographics is
therefore essential to address these disparities. In this study,
we propose a novel approach that utilizes influence maximization (IM) on mobility networks to develop vaccination
strategies which incorporate demographic fairness. By considering factors such as race, social status, age, and associated risk factors, we aim to optimize vaccine distribution to
achieve various fairness definitions for one or more protected
attributes at a time. Through extensive experiments conducted
on Covid-19 spread in three major metropolitan areas across
the United States, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed approach in reducing disease transmission and promoting fairness in vaccination distribution.

Introduction
The fallout of Covid-19 revealed the stark inequalities in access to healthcare between social groups in diverse and urban areas (Ndugga et al. 2021; Price-Haywood et al. 2020;
Millett et al. 2020; Joseph et al. 2020; Azar et al. 2020;
Hsu et al. 2020; Gayam et al. 2021). Studies confirmed
that economically-deprived communities and racial minorities experienced higher rates of infection, hospitalization
and mortality as a result of Covid-19 (Kirby 2020; Tai et al.
2022; Alcendor 2020). The reasons for this disparity form a
long chain of events, with unequal access to healthcare between socioeconomic groups, and therefore racial groups,
at the root of it. Furthermore, studies on mobility networks
in the US also revealed how minority communities were less
able to reduce their mobility as quickly during the pandemic,
and as a result suffered higher rates of infection (Chang
et al. 2020). This can be largely attributed to underprivileged
groups assuming the roles of frontline and critical infrastructure work, and also living and working in more crowded circumstances. Inequalities in access to the internet and ease
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22285

