The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DVANet: Disentangling View and Action Features for Multi-View Action
Recognition
Nyle Siddiqui, Praveen Tirupattur, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
nyle.siddiqui@ucf.edu, praveen.tirupattur@ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

In specific regards to multi-view action recognition, it is
currently a vital and heavily researched variant of HAR as
it is more challenging and representative of real-world scenarios. For example, HAR datasets are commonly collected
in an in-the-wild manner, where labelled actions are collected from viewpoints that are not explicitly controlled.
Since single-view action recognition is usually the main
learning objective in standard HAR, it is not guaranteed
that the learned action representations of such models are
robust to changes in viewpoints. However, in the previously mentioned real-world scenarios, videos of an action
being performed are synchronously captured from multiple
known viewpoints. Thus, multi-view action recognition has
emerged as a more modern, challenging, and realistic version of HAR (Liu et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2019). Additionally,
many of these in-the-wild scenarios may lack the equipment
or controlled collection that is required to capture additional
modalities besides RGB frames, such as skeletal or depth
(Sun et al. 2022). This proves to be a significant obstacle
for current state-of-the-art multi-modal methods, as many of
these solutions are heavily reliant on these modalities.
There are also many tangential areas of deep learning that
affect the current approaches of multi-view action recognition. For example, a major obstacle in supervised deep
learning is ensuring that learned features do not contain any
irrelevant or confounding information with respect to the
learning objective. This can be difficult to achieve since we
cannot fully control how supervised models learn and represent information in their feature space. This can lead to
learned features becoming ’entangled’ with irrelevant information, thereby degrading performance. An example of this
phenomenon in multi-view action recognition can be seen
in Figure 1, where view and action information can potentially become entangled in the feature space. However, large
strides have been made in representation learning to close
these gaps, including disentangled representation learning
(DRL) (Liu et al. 2018; Higgins et al. 2018). DRL aims to
improve the learned features for a training objective by enforcing strict separation between relevant and irrelevant information, improving overall performance.
Therefore, this work proposes a novel approach specifically towards multi-view action recognition in which we
train a transformer decoder-based model for view-invariant
action recognition using only a single modality. Our train-

In this work, we present a novel approach to multi-view
action recognition where we guide learned action representations to be separated from view-relevant information in
a video. When trying to classify action instances captured
from multiple viewpoints, there is a higher degree of difficulty due to the difference in background, occlusion, and visibility of the captured action from different camera angles.
To tackle the various problems introduced in multi-view action recognition, we propose a novel configuration of learnable transformer decoder queries, in conjunction with two
supervised contrastive losses, to enforce the learning of action features that are robust to shifts in viewpoints. Our disentangled feature learning occurs in two stages: the transformer decoder uses separate queries to separately learn action and view information, which are then further disentangled using our two contrastive losses. We show that our
model and method of training significantly outperforms all
other uni-modal models on four multi-view action recognition datasets: NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D 120, PKUMMD, and N-UCLA. Compared to previous RGB works, we
see maximal improvements of 1.5%, 4.8%, 2.2%, and 4.8%
on each dataset, respectively. Our code can be found here:
https://github.com/NyleSiddiqui/MultiView Actions

Introduction
Human action recognition (HAR) has played an integral role
in the development and progression of computer vision research. HAR has established itself as a critical intersection
between academic research and real-world implementation
due to its practical application to a myriad of domains, such
as human-computer interaction (Chakraborty et al. 2018),
road safety (Ismail 2010), video understanding (Hussain
et al. 2021), security/surveillance (Black, Ellis, and Rosin
2002), and more. Consequently, there are a plethora of largescale datasets that have been collected over the years to provide ample resources for researchers to advance this historically active field. Furthermore, HAR datasets have grown
in difficulty proportionally to the astounding capabilities of
deep learning in computer vision, such as the introduction
of additional modalities, increased number of subjects and
actions, and multiple viewpoints.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4873

