The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Emergent Communication for Numerical Concepts Generalization
Enshuai Zhou1, 2, 3 , Yifan Hao2 , Rui Zhang2 , Yuxuan Guo1, 2, 3 , Zidong Du2, 5 ,
Xishan Zhang2, 3 , Xinkai Song2 , Chao Wang1 , Xuehai Zhou1 , Jiaming Guo2 ,
Qi Yi1, 2, 3 , Shaohui Peng6 , Di Huang2 , Ruizhi Chen6 , Qi Guo2 , Yunji Chen2, 4 *
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
Cambricon Technologies
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies
6
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS
enszhou@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {haoyifan, cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

tasks better (Mu and Goodman 2021; Xu, Niethammer, and
Raffel 2022).

Research on emergent communication has recently gained
significant traction as a promising avenue for the linguistic
community to unravel human language’s origins and explore
artificial intelligence’s generalization capabilities. Current research has predominantly concentrated on recognizing qualitative patterns of object attributes(e.g., shape and color) and
paid little attention to the quantitative relationship among
object quantities which is known as the part of numerical
concepts. The ability to generalize numerical concepts, i.e.,
counting and calculations with unseen quantities, is essential,
as it mirrors humans’ foundational abstract reasoning abilities. In this work, we introduce the NumGame, leveraging
the referential game framework, forcing agents to communicate and generalize the numerical concepts effectively. Inspired by the human learning process of numbers, we present
a two-stage training approach that sequentially fosters a rudimentary numerical sense followed by the ability of arithmetic
calculation, ultimately aiding agents in generating semantically stable and unambiguous language for numerical concepts. The experimental results indicate the impressive generalization capabilities to unseen quantities and regularity of
the language emergence from communication.

1

The ability to generalize numerical concepts, i.e., counting and calculating on unseen quantities, is essential. According to linguistics and cognitive psychology, this ability is considered foundational for human abstract reasoning (Gelman and Gallistel 1986; Wiese 2003). Natural language possesses a comprehensive numerical system that allows humans to describe the number of objects accurately,
concisely, and efficiently (Hiraiwa 2017). Furthermore, humans can perform more complex mathematical operations
based on numerical concepts and digits, constructing a complete arithmetic system (Dehaene 2011). However, previous
research has focused chiefly on recognizing qualitative patterns of object attributes(e.g., shape and color) (Kottur et al.
2017; Kuciński et al. 2021) and paid little attention to the
agents’ numerical concepts. It remains challenging to help
agents understand the quantitative relations between numbers (i.e., quantities) through emergent communication.
In this work, we introduce the NumGame, leveraging the
referential game framework (Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and
Baroni 2016), where agents are mandated to communicate
and generalize their comprehension of numerical concepts
proficiently. Specifically, agents are tasked with generalizing (in a few-shot learning manner) over unseen quantities
via emergent communication in NumGame, encompassing
two core tasks: Counting and Calculating. In the Counting task, agents must precisely evaluate unseen quantities
of objects. In the Calculating task, agents face the challenge of deducing arithmetic relations (including addition,
subtraction, and maximization) among unseen quantities.
Both tasks in NumGame require the agents to understand
rather than mechanically memorize quantities and their relations, making the agents’ training difficult to converge effectively. Drawing inspiration from the human learning process
of numbers(Wiese 2003; Hiraiwa 2017), we present a twostage training approach comprising NumSen and NumRel.
In this approach, we first employ the NumSen method to
foster a rudimentary numerical sense of the agents. Then, we
guide the agents to gain a foundational understanding of basic arithmetic relations between numbers within a specified

Introduction

Research on emergent communication has gained
widespread attention in recent years (Lazaridou,
Peysakhovich, and Baroni 2016; Choi, Lazaridou, and
de Freitas 2018; Conklin and Smith 2023). It primarily
involves using deep neural networks to simulate communication among multiple agents to complete collaborative
tasks. From linguistics and cognitive psychology perspectives, studying emergent communication can provide a new
experimental method and may validate specific linguistic
and cognitive hypotheses quickly (Chaabouni et al. 2019;
Rita, Chaabouni, and Dupoux 2020). From the standpoint
of artificial intelligence, the language emergence from
communication can help agents generalize on cooperative
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17609

