The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contextual Pandora’s Box
Alexia Atsidakou1 * , Constantine Caramanis1 , Evangelia Gergatsouli2 * , Orestis
Papadigenopoulos3 * , Christos Tzamos2,4
1

2

University of Texas - Austin,
University of Wisconsin - Madison,
3
Columbia University,
4
University of Athens

Abstract

The model captures a variety of different settings where
the decision-maker needs to balance the value of the selected
alternative and the effort devoted to find it. We include some
examples below.

PANDORA’ S B OX is a fundamental stochastic optimization
problem, where the decision-maker must find a good alternative, while minimizing the search cost of exploring the value
of each alternative. In the original formulation, it is assumed
that accurate distributions are given for the values of all the
alternatives, while recent work studies the online variant of
PANDORA’ S B OX where the distributions are originally unknown. In this work, we study PANDORA’ S B OX in the online
setting, while incorporating context. At each round, we are
presented with a number of alternatives each having a context, an exploration cost and an unknown value drawn from
an unknown distribution that may change at every round. Our
main result is a no-regret algorithm that performs comparably well against the optimal algorithm which knows all prior
distributions exactly. Our algorithm works even in the bandit setting where the algorithm never learns the values of the
alternatives that were not explored. The key technique that
enables our result is a novel modification of the realizability
condition in contextual bandits that connects a context to a
sufficient statistic of each alternative’s distribution (its reservation value) rather than its mean.

1

• Consider an online shopping environment where a search
engine needs to present users with results on a product
they want to buy. Visiting all potential e-shops that sell
this product to find the cheapest option would be prohibitive in terms of time needed to present the search results to the user. The search engine needs to explore the
different options only up to the extent that would make
the marginal improvement in the best price found worthwhile.
• Consider a path planning service provider like Google
Maps. Upon request, the provider must search its
database for a good path to recommend to the user, but
the higher the time spent searching the higher is the
server cost. The provider must trade off computation cost
with the quality of the result.
Rather surprisingly, despite the richness of the setting,
Weitzman shows that the optimal policy for any instance of
PANDORA’ S B OX admits a particularly simple characterization: for each box, one can compute a reservation value as
a function of its cost and value distribution. Then, the boxes
are inspected in increasing order of these values, until a simple termination criterion is fulfilled. This characterization is
revealing: obtaining an optimal algorithm for PANDORA’ S
B OX does not require complete knowledge of the distributions or the costs, yet only access to a single statistic for
each box.
This raises the important question of how easy it is to
learn a near-optimal search strategy, especially in environments where the distributions may not remain fixed across
time but can change according to the characteristics of the
instance at hand. In the case of online shopping, depending on the type of product we are searching, the e-shops
have different product-specific distributions on the prices.
We would be interested in a searching strategy that is not tied
to a specific product, but is able to minimize the expected
cost for any product we may be interested in. Similarly, in
the case of path recommendations, the optimal search strategy may depend on the time of day or the day of the year.
Motivated by the above question, we extend the PAN -

Introduction

PANDORA’ S B OX is a fundamental stochastic optimization
framework, which models the trade-off between exploring a
set of alternatives and exploiting the already collected information, in environments where data acquisition comes at a
cost. In the original formulation of the problem – introduced
by Weitzman in (Weitzman 1979) – a decision-maker is presented with a set of alternatives (called “boxes”) each containing an unknown value drawn independently from some
known box-specific distribution. In addition, each box is associated with a known cost, namely, the price that needs to
be paid in order to observe its realized value. At each step,
the decision-maker can either open a box of her choice, paying the associated cost and observing its value, or stop and
collect the minimum value contained in the already opened
boxes. The objective is to minimize the sum of the smallest
observed value plus the total cost incurred by opening the
boxes.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10944

