The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Provably Convergent Federated Trilevel Learning
Yang Jiao1 , Kai Yang1,2,3 * , Tiancheng Wu1 , Chengtao Jian1 , Jianwei Huang4,5
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing Ministry of Education at Tongji University
3
Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems
4
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
5
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
yangjiao@tongji.edu.cn, kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn, tony318@tongji.edu.cn, jct@tongji.edu.cn,
jianweihuang@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

mization problem is given by,
min f1 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) s.t.
x2 = arg min f2 (x1 , x2 ′ , x3 ) s.t.

Trilevel learning, also called trilevel optimization (TLO), has
been recognized as a powerful modelling tool for hierarchical
decision process and widely applied in many machine learning applications, such as robust neural architecture search,
hyperparameter optimization, and domain adaptation. Tackling TLO problems has presented a great challenge due to
their nested decision-making structure. In addition, existing
works on TLO face the following key challenges: 1) they all
focus on the non-distributed setting, which may lead to privacy breach; 2) they do not offer any non-asymptotic convergence analysis which characterizes how fast an algorithm
converges. To address the aforementioned challenges, this paper proposes an asynchronous federated trilevel optimization
method to solve TLO problems. The proposed method utilizes µ-cuts to construct a hyper-polyhedral approximation
for the TLO problem and solve it in an asynchronous manner.
We demonstrate that the proposed µ-cuts are applicable to not
only convex functions but also a wide range of non-convex
functions that meet the µ-weakly convex assumption. Furthermore, we theoretically analyze the non-asymptotic convergence rate for the proposed method by showing its iteration complexity to obtain ϵ-stationary point is upper bounded
by O( ϵ12 ). Extensive experiments on real-world datasets have
been conducted to elucidate the superiority of the proposed
method, e.g., it has a faster convergence rate with a maximum
acceleration of approximately 80%.

x2 ′

x3 = arg min f3 (x1 , x2 ′ , x3 ′ )
x3

var.

(1)

′

x1 , x2 , x3 ,

where f1 , f2 , f3 respectively denote the first, second, and
third level objectives. Here x1 ∈ Rd1 , x2 ∈ Rd2 , x3 ∈ Rd3 are
variables. Despite its wide applications, the development of
solution methods was predominately limited to bilevel optimization (BLO) (Ji, Yang, and Liang 2021; Franceschi et al.
2018) primarily due to the escalated difficulty in solving the
TLO problem (Sato, Tanaka, and Takeda 2021). The literature, specifically (Blair 1992; Avraamidou 2018), highlights
that the complexity associated with solving problems characterized by hierarchical structures comprising more than
two levels is substantially greater compared to that of bilevel
optimization problems.
Theoretical work on solving TLO problems only emerge
during the recent several years. A hypergradient (gradient)based method is proposed in (Sato, Tanaka, and Takeda
2021), which uses K gradient descent steps to replace the
lower-level problem to solve the TLO problems. This algorithm in (Sato, Tanaka, and Takeda 2021) is one of the
first results that establish theoretical guarantees for solving
the TLO problem. A general automatic differentiation technique is proposed in (Choe et al. 2022), which is based on
the interpretation of TLO as a special type of dataflow graph.
Nevertheless, there are still some issues that have not been
addressed in the prior work, including 1) in TLO applications, data may be acquired and disseminated across multiple nodes, the prior works only solve the TLO problems
in a non-distributed manner, which needs to collect a massive amount of data to a single server and may lead to the
data privacy risks (Subramanya and Riggio 2021; Jiao et al.
2022b; Han, Wang, and Leung 2020). Moreover, the synchronous federated algorithms often suffer from straggler
problems and will immediately stop working if some workers fail to communicate (Jiao et al. 2022b). Therefore, developing asynchronous federated algorithms for TLO is significantly important. 2) The existing TLO works only provide
the asymptotic convergence guarantee for their algorithms.

Introduction
Recently, trilevel learning, also called trilevel optimization
(TLO), has found applications in many machine learning
tasks, e.g., robust neural architecture search (Guo et al.
2020), robust hyperparameter optimization (Sato, Tanaka,
and Takeda 2021) and domain adaptation (Raghu et al.
2021). Trilevel optimization problems refer to the optimization problems that involve three-level optimization problems
and thus have a trilevel hierarchy (Avraamidou 2018; Sato,
Tanaka, and Takeda 2021). A general form of trilevel opti* Corresponding author (e-mail: kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12928

