The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scribble Hides Class: Promoting Scribble-Based Weakly-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation with Its Class Label
Xinliang Zhang1,3 * , Lei Zhu1-4 * , Hangzhou He1-3 , Lujia Jin1-4 , Yanye Lu1,3,4†
1

Institute of Medical University, Peking University, Beijing, China
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Beijing, China
zhangxinliang@tju.edu.cn, {zhulei, zhuang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {jinlujia, yanye.lu}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Image

Scribble-based weakly-supervised semantic segmentation using sparse scribble supervision is gaining traction as it reduces annotation costs when compared to fully annotated
alternatives. Existing methods primarily generate pseudolabels by diffusing labeled pixels to unlabeled ones with local
cues for supervision. However, this diffusion process fails to
exploit global semantics and class-specific cues, which are
important for semantic segmentation. In this study, we propose a class-driven scribble promotion network, which utilizes both scribble annotations and pseudo-labels informed by
image-level classes and global semantics for supervision. Directly adopting pseudo-labels might misguide the segmentation model, thus we design a localization rectification module
to correct foreground representations in the feature space. To
further combine the advantages of both supervisions, we also
introduce a distance entropy loss for uncertainty reduction,
which adapts per-pixel confidence weights according to the
reliable region determined by the scribble and pseudo-label’s
boundary. Experiments on the ScribbleSup dataset with different qualities of scribble annotations outperform all the previous methods, demonstrating the superiority and robustness
of our method. The code is available at https://github.com/
Zxl19990529/Class-driven-Scribble-Promotion-Network.

P

scribble

Image

P

scribble
consistency loss

regularization loss

(a) regularization loss
scribble
Image

P

Image’

(b) consistency learning
scribble

class
global
localization

local diffusion
pseudo label

(c) label diffusion

P’

Image

P

pseudo label

(d) ours

Figure 1: Schematic diagrams of different scribble-based
WSSS methods. Existing approaches (a-c) overlooked the
class label in scribbles, which provides image-level supervision. “P” represents the model prediction. The red dashed
line represents the supervision relationship.

annotations strikes an optimal balance between supervision
effectiveness and labor cost (Lin et al. 2016). Consequently,
scribble-based WSSS has garnered increasing attention in
recent years (Liang et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023).
The intrinsic challenge in scribble-based WSSS lies in the
partial supervision provided by sparse labels. Existing approaches have attempted to address this issue from three perspectives, namely, regularization loss (Tang et al. 2018a,b),
consistency learning (Pan et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022),
and label diffusion (Lin et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2023), as illustrated in Figure 1(a-c). Specifically, regularization lossbased methods design specific loss functions to improve
the stability of the models. Consistency learning-based approaches aim to capture invariant features to boost finegrained segmentation performance through consistency loss.
However, both methods fail to address the deficiency of
pixel-level supervision, leading to limited performance. In
contrast, label diffusion-based methods generate pixel-level
pseudo-labels by diffusing labeled pixels to unlabeled ones,
i.e. constructing a graph model on the scribble to generate
pseudo-labels for training. However, the diffusion process
predominantly relies on local pixel information and fails to
exploit the global semantics and class-specific cues of im-

Introduction
Primarily driven by the availability of extensive pixel-level
annotated datasets, the field of semantic segmentation has
made remarkable strides in the last decade. However, the
challenges of the laborious and time-consuming process
of collecting and manually annotating such datasets hinder
real-world applications of semantic segmentation. Weaklysupervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) methods utilizing sparse labels have emerged as a prominent trend to
overcome this limitation. These methods use annotations
at the image, scribble, or bounding box levels as supervision to train the semantic segmentation model. Among
them, image-level annotations offer limited spatial supervision, while bounding boxes may lead to overlapping issues
when objects are nearby. In comparison, the use of scribble
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author, yanye.lu@pku.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7332

