The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Zero-1-to-3: Domain-Level Zero-Shot Cognitive Diagnosis via One Batch of
Early-Bird Students towards Three Diagnostic Objectives
Weibo Gao1,2 , Qi Liu1,2 * , Hao Wang1,2 , Linan Yue1,2 , Haoyang Bi1,2 , Yin Gu1,2 ,
Fangzhou Yao1,2 , Zheng Zhang1,2 , Xin Li1,3 , Yuanjing He4
1 University of Science and Technology of China
2 Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application & State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, iFLYTEK Co., Ltd
4 The Open University of China, China

Mature Domain

Abstract
Cognitive diagnosis seeks to estimate the cognitive states of
students by exploring their logged practice quiz data. It plays
a pivotal role in personalized learning guidance within intelligent education systems. In this paper, we focus on an
important, practical, yet often underexplored task: domainlevel zero-shot cognitive diagnosis (DZCD), which arises due
to the absence of student practice logs in newly launched
domains. Recent cross-domain diagnostic models have been
demonstrated to be a promising strategy for DZCD. These
methods primarily focus on how to transfer student states
across domains. However, they might inadvertently incorporate non-transferable information into student representations, thereby limiting the efficacy of knowledge transfer. To
tackle this, we propose Zero-1-to-3, a domain-level zero-shot
cognitive diagnosis framework via one batch of early-bird
students towards three diagnostic objectives. Our approach
initiates with pre-training a diagnosis model with dual regularizers, which decouples student states into domain-shared
and domain-specific parts. The shared cognitive signals can
be transferred to the target domain, enriching the cognitive
priors for the new domain, which ensures the cognitive state
propagation objective. Subsequently, we devise a strategy
to generate simulated practice logs for cold-start students
through analyzing the behavioral patterns from early-bird students, fulfilling the domain-adaption goal. Consequently, we
refine the cognitive states of cold-start students as diagnostic outcomes via virtual data, aligning with the diagnosisoriented goal. Finally, extensive experiments on six realworld datasets highlight the efficacy of our model for DZCD
and its practical application in question recommendation.
The code is publicly available at https://github.com/bigdataustc/Zero-1-to-3.

1

Topic: English
Topic: Function
Topic: Geometry
Practice

Diagnosis Applications

Cold-start Domain

{weibogao,lnyue,bhy0521,gy128,fangzhouyao,zhangzheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql,wanghao3,leexin}@ustc.edu.cn,
heyuanjing@ouchn.edu.cn
Topic: Physics
Early-birds

Unseen students

?

Figure 1: Illustrative procedure of personalized learning in
intelligent education systems.

Figure 1, each topic includes an extensive question bank,
empowering students to independently select specific questions for targeted practice. By analyzing student practice
logs (e.g., correct or incorrect responses), their cognitive
states (i.e., the proficiency on specific knowledge concepts)
are estimated, which is referred to as the procedure of cognitive diagnosis (Wang et al. 2020). The diagnostic results
can support further customized applications, such as question recommendation (Liu et al. 2023a) and adaptive testing (Zhuang et al. 2023). As a result, cognitive diagnosis has
garnered significant attention from both the “AI for education” community and the general populace (Nguyen 2015).
Previously, a number of cognitive diagnosis models
(CDMs) (Embretson and Reise 2013; Reckase 2009; Tsutsumi, Kinoshita, and Ueno 2021; Wang et al. 2020; Gao
et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2023) have been developed to enhance diagnostic precision. However, many of these models encounter challenges with the “cold-start” problem. This
challenge arises when an online platform launches a novel
learning topic with a fresh question bank (e.g., Physics in
Figure 1). At the initial launch, there exists only a limited
collection of practice records from the early-bird learners,
who form the first batch of students in this domain. However, practice logs of unseen students remain unavailable for
model training. Consequently, the diagnostic performance
of traditional CDMs is often impaired as they only work in
mature domains where student practice logs are available.
We call this task domain-level zero-shot cognitive diagnosis
(DZCD). DZCD is an important and practical task aiming
to diagnose cognitive states of unseen students, for whom

Introduction

Intelligent education systems offer access to learning resources and tailor-made services, contributing significantly
to the burgeoning popularity of online learning. These platforms cover a broad range of learning topics. As shown in
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8417

