The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Low-Resource Relation Representations through Multi-View
Decoupling
Chenghao Fan1,2 , Wei Wei* 1,2 , Xiaoye Qu1,2 , Zhenyi Lu1,2 ,
Wenfeng Xie3 , Yu Cheng4 , Dangyang Chen3
1

Cognitive Computing and Intelligent Information Processing (CCIIP) Laboratory, School of Computer Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL)
3
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance Company of China, Ltd.
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
facicofan@gmail.com,{weiw,quxiaoye}@hust.edu.cn,luzhenyi529@gmail.com,xiewenfeng801@pingan.com.cn
chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,chendangyang273@pingan.com.cn
(a) Prompt-tuning For RE

Abstract

[CLS] Steve Jobs, co-founder of Apple. [SEP] Apple

Steve Jobs.

MLM Head

Label Set

...

...

...

Vocabulary
...

Recently, prompt-tuning with pre-trained language models
(PLMs) has demonstrated the significantly enhancing ability
of relation extraction (RE) tasks. However, in low-resource
scenarios, where the available training data is scarce, previous
prompt-based methods may still perform poorly for promptbased representation learning due to a superficial understanding of the relation. To this end, we highlight the importance of
learning high-quality relation representation in low-resource
scenarios for RE, and propose a novel prompt-based relation
representation method, named MVRE (Multi-View Relation
Extraction), to better leverage the capacity of PLMs to improve the performance of RE within the low-resource prompttuning paradigm. Specifically, MVRE decouples each relation into different perspectives to encompass multi-view relation representations for maximizing the likelihood during relation inference. Furthermore, we also design a Global-Local
loss and a Dynamic-Initialization method for better alignment of the multi-view relation-representing virtual words,
containing the semantics of relation labels during the optimization learning process and initialization. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets show that our method can
achieve state-of-the-art in low-resource settings.

Verbalizer
...

...

...

...

(b) Multi-view Decoupling
relation label
multi-view of relation
relation virtual word

Figure 1: (a) An example of prompt-tuning for RE. Redcolored words indicate the subject, while blue-colored
words indicate the object. (b) The concept of multi-view decoupling attempts to encompass various aspects of a relation
using multiple relation representations.
large language models (Ye et al. 2020; Soares et al. 2019;
Zhou and Chen 2022; Ye et al. 2022). In these works, the
language models are integrated with classification heads and
fine-tuned specifically for relation extraction tasks, resulting in promising results. However, the effective training of
additional classification heads becomes challenging in situations where task-specific data is scarce. This challenge
arises from the disparity between pre-training tasks, such as
masked language modeling, and the subsequent fine-tuning
tasks encompassing classification and regression. This divergence hampers the seamless adaptation of pre-trained language models (PLMs) to downstream tasks.
Recently, prompt tuning has emerged as a promising direction for facilitating few-shot learning, which effectively
bridges the gap between the pre-training and the downstream task (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Jin et al. 2023).
Conceptually, prompt-tuning involves template and verbalizer engineering, aiming to discover optimal templates and
answer spaces. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (a),
given a sentence “Steve Jobs, co-founder of Apple” for

Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) aims to extract the relation between two entities (Qu et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2022b) from
an unstructured text (Cheng et al. 2021). Given the significance of inter-entity relations within textual information, the
practice of relation extraction finds extensive utility across
various downstream tasks, including dialogue systems (Lu
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2018), information retrieval (Dietz,
Kotov, and Meij 2018; Yang 2020; Yu et al. 2023), information extraction (Zhu et al. 2023, 2021), and question answering (Yasunaga et al. 2021; Qu et al. 2021).
Following the emergence of the paradigm involving pretrained models and fine-tuning for downstream tasks (Kenton and Toutanova 2019; Radford et al. 2018), many recent
relation extraction studies have embraced the utilization of
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17968

