The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pre-trained Online Contrastive Learning for Insurance Fraud Detection
Rui Zhang1,2 , Dawei Cheng1,3,2 * , Jie Yang1 , Yi Ouyang4 ,
Xian Wu4 , Yefeng Zheng4 , Changjun Jiang1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
4
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, Shenzhen, China
{2050271,dcheng,2153814,cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn, {yiouyang,kevinxwu,yefengzheng}@tencent.com
Abstract

indirectly (NHCAA 2021). The ramifications of these acts
echo throughout society, emphasizing the imperative nature
of combating insurance fraud.
Moreover, medical insurance fraud tactics are constantly
evolving (Thornton et al. 2013). Fraudsters adapt, devising
increasingly clandestine tactics to reduce their exposure to
detection (Timofeyev and Jakovljevic 2022). Such evolving stratagems exacerbate the challenges in fraud detection.
Contemporary static health insurance fraud detection systems are not fit for this situation (Thornton et al. 2013), overlooking many fraudulent activities that cause massive losses.
This underscores the imperative to devise a medical insurance verification system characterized by rapid adaptability
and online learning capabilities.
Fraud detection has a long history, tracing its origins
back to research in the 1980s (McDowell 1987). Traditional
methodologies often pivoted around rule-based approaches
as depicted in (Dua and Bais 2014), or embraced the realm
of machine learning, evidenced by the work of (Fiore et al.
2019). These approaches garnered significant attention due
to their efficacy in fraud detection. Parallelly, as deep learning method gained traction in the broader scientific community, they began to be applied in the fraud detection domain,
ushering in a novel era of sophisticated detection mechanisms, such as (Roy et al. 2018). Pioneering works such
as (Dou et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023;
Gao et al. 2023) highlight the capability of graph neural
networks (GNNs) to learn complex relationships and patterns, thereby signifying the burgeoning potential of this approach in elevating the state of fraud detection. However,
the models delineated above predominantly cater to the offline learning paradigm. Transposing these methods directly
to online learning contexts frequently results in suboptimal
outcomes. Retraining a complete model to circumvent these
limitations (Lebichot et al. 2020) often introduces significant
challenges, given the substantial computational and temporal resources required (Wu, Dobriban, and Davidson 2020).
Fortunately, in recent years, various of fraud detection
models employing incremental or online learning have
emerged. Notably, in specific dynamic settings, these models have demonstrated commendable efficacy. For instance,
(Sadreddin and Sadaoui 2022) leverages an innovative adaptive learning approach, melding transfer learning with incremental learning. (Anowar and Sadaoui 2021) introduces

Medical insurance fraud has always been a crucial challenge
in the field of healthcare industry. Existing fraud detection
models mostly focus on offline learning scenes. However,
fraud patterns are constantly evolving, making it difficult
for models trained on past data to detect newly emerging
fraud patterns, posing a severe challenge in medical fraud detection. Moreover, current incremental learning models are
mostly designed to address catastrophic forgetting, but often exhibit suboptimal performance in fraud detection. To
address this challenge, this paper proposes an innovative
online learning method for medical insurance fraud detection, named POCL. This method combines contrastive learning pre-training with online updating strategies. In the pretraining stage, we leverage contrastive learning pre-training
to learn on historical data, enabling deep feature learning
and obtaining rich risk representations. In the online learning
stage, we adopt a Temporal Memory Aware Synapses online
updating strategy, allowing the model to perform incremental learning and optimization based on continuously emerging new data. This ensures timely adaptation to fraud patterns
and reduces forgetting of past knowledge. Our model undergoes extensive experiments and evaluations on real-world insurance fraud datasets. The results demonstrate our model
has significant advantages in accuracy compared to the stateof-the-art baseline methods, while also exhibiting lower running time and space consumption. Our sources are released at
https://github.com/finint/POCL.

Introduction
Medical insurance fraud poses a severe detriment to society
and is drawing increasing attention from the public. In 2017,
the United States expended a staggering $3.5 trillion on
healthcare (Sisko et al. 2019), with over 20%, or $720 billion
(Cubanski, Neuman, and Freed 2019), dedicated to medical insurance. Yet, amidst these vast expenditures, fraudulent organizations and individuals have found opportunities for exploitation. Studies indicated that an alarming 310% of medical insurance funds (Morris 2009), equating to
$21-70 billion, were squandered due to deceitful activities.
Such fraudulent actions not only heighten the operational
costs of the healthcare system, but also burden consumers
* Corresponding Author is Dawei Cheng.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22511

