The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupled Training:
Return of Frustratingly Easy Multi-Domain Learning
Ximei Wang1 * , Junwei Pan1 , Xingzhuo Guo2 , Dapeng Liu1 , Jie Jiang1
1

Tencent Inc, China
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
{messixmwang,jonaspan,rocliu,zeus}@tencent.com, gxz23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multi-domain learning (MDL) aims to train a model with minimal average risk across multiple overlapping but non-identical
domains. To tackle the challenges of dataset bias and domain
domination, numerous MDL approaches have been proposed
from the perspectives of seeking commonalities by aligning
distributions to reduce domain gap or reserving differences by
implementing domain-specific towers, gates, and even experts.
MDL models are becoming more and more complex with
sophisticated network architectures or loss functions, introducing extra parameters and enlarging computation costs. In
this paper, we propose a frustratingly easy and hyperparameterfree multi-domain learning method named Decoupled Training
(D-Train). D-Train is a tri-phase general-to-specific training
strategy that first pre-trains on all domains to warm up a root
model, then post-trains on each domain by splitting into multiheads, and finally fine-tunes the heads by fixing the backbone,
enabling decouple training to achieve domain independence.
Despite its extraordinary simplicity and efficiency, D-Train
performs remarkably well in extensive evaluations of various
datasets from standard benchmarks to applications of satellite
imagery and recommender systems.

Introduction
The success of deep learning models across a wide range of
fields often relies on the fundamental assumption that the
data points are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.).
However, in real-world scenarios, training and test data are
usually collected from different regions or platforms, consisting of multiple overlapping but non-identical domains. For
example, a popular satellite dataset named FMoW (Christie
et al. 2018), which predicts the functional purpose of buildings and land use on this planet, contains large-scale satellite
images from various regions with different appearances and
styles. Thus, jointly training a single model obscures domain
distinctions, while separately training multiple models by
domains reduces training data in each model (Joshi et al.
2012). This dilemma motivated the research on multi-domain
learning (Joshi et al. 2012; Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2017; Ma
et al. 2018; Alice et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2020).
To figure out the challenges of multi-domain learning, we
first delved into these two standard benchmark datasets. By
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15644

analyzing the examples of these datasets, it is obvious that
dataset bias across domains is one of the biggest obstacles
to multi-domain learning. As shown in Figure 1(a), reviews
from different domains have different keywords and styles.
Further, Figure 1(b) reveals that images of Office-Home
are from four significantly different domains: Art, Clipart,
Product and Real-World, with various appearances and backgrounds. To tackle the dataset bias problem, numerous approaches have been proposed and they can be briefly grouped
into two categories: 1) Seeking Commonalities. Some classical solutions (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2017; Alice et al. 2019)
adopting the insightful idea of domain adversarial training
have been proposed to extract domain-invariant representations across multiple domains. 2) Reserving Differences.
These approaches (Ma et al. 2018; Tang et al. 2020) adopt
multi-branch network architectures with domain-specific towers, gates, and even experts, implementing domain-specific
parameters to avoid domain conflict caused by dataset bias
across domains. As shown in Figure 2, these methods are becoming more and more complex with sophisticated network
architectures or loss functions.
Further, different from multi-task learning which focuses
on tackling different tasks within a single domain, multidomain learning shares the same label space across multiple
domains with different marginal distributions. We thus calculated the distribution of sample amount across domains on
several benchmark datasets and the results are shown in Figure 1. In practice, the distributions of sample amount across
domains are usually twisted, imbalanced, or even long-tailed,
causing another main challenge of multi-domain learning:
domain domination. In this case, some tailed domains may
have much fewer examples and it would be difficult to train
satisfied models on them. Without proper network designs
or loss functions, the model will be easily dominated by the
head domains with many more examples and shift away from
the tailed ones with few examples.
Realizing the main challenges of dataset bias and domain
domination in multi-domain learning, we aim to propose a
general, effective, and efficient method to tackle these obstacles all at once. We first rethought the development of
multi-domain learning and found that the approaches in this
field are becoming more and more sophisticated, consisting of multifarious network architectures or complex loss
functions with many trade-off hyperparameters. By assign-

