The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Primitive-Based 3D Human-Object Interaction Modelling and Programming
Siqi Liu, Yong-Lu Li* , Zhou Fang, Xinpeng Liu, Yang You, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{magi-yunan, yonglu li, joefang, qq456cvb, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, xinpengliu0907@gmail.com

Abstract

(Xu et al. 2021) contains articulated objects, they only use
simplified CAD models from SAPIEN (Xiang et al. 2020),
which limits its applications. In detail, they have several disadvantages: (1) In terms of objects, scanning or building
all object CAD models is unscalable because different categories have different mesh topologies and different instances
of the same category have different part ratio scales. As a result, they can only select CAD models that look like the objects in the images to be pseudo GT. (2) In terms of humans,
the flexibility of parametric models like SMPL is what cannot be ignored when it comes to unseen human body parts in
images. When only some part of the body is essential, learning the other body part parameters is redundant. (3) From
the view of HOI, representing humans and objects with heterogeneous models like SMPL and CAD models making it
hard to generalize to new HAOIs.
In light of these problems, we propose a new 3D
primitive-based “language” to represent interacted 3D humans and articulated objects. We argue that, in 3D HAOI
understanding, geometric structure of the object is closer to
the essence than semantic categories. For example, while a
refrigerator and a closet belong to different categories, their
interactions could be similar. However, even within the same
category, interactions can differ significantly, as seen with
closets having doors with revolute or prismatic joints. Besides, more categories can be easily covered when creating
new objects via assembly primitives. Based on these observations, we choose to represent all objects in primitives. Our
primitive-based language is a useful complement to previous representations like CAD models. In fact, CAD models
are precise representations but in some cases, they contain
too many details. When the overall object structure is the
focus, these details are not only expensive but also generalize poorly. If we use primitives to represent humans, we can
easily choose and model the interested or seen body parts.
Then we choose the representation based on two principles.
One is it must be sufficiently expressive, and the other is
it can be represented in compact low-dimensional representations. The two principles lead us to the representation
called superquadric. Superquadric is a powerful primitive
that can represent multiple atomic shapes in a single continuous parameter space.
Given our primitive language, a new 3D HOI dataset
called P3HAOI (Primitive-based 3D Human-Articulated

Embedding Human and Articulated Object Interaction
(HAOI) in 3D is an important direction for a deeper human activity understanding. Different from previous works
that use parametric and CAD models to represent humans
and objects, in this work, we propose a novel 3D geometric primitive-based language to encode both humans and objects. Given our new paradigm, humans and objects are all
compositions of primitives instead of heterogeneous entities.
Thus, mutual information learning may be achieved between
the limited 3D data of humans and different object categories.
Moreover, considering the simplicity of the expression and
the richness of the information it contains, we choose the superquadric as the primitive representation. To explore an effective embedding of HAOI for the machine, we build a new
benchmark on 3D HAOI consisting of primitives together
with their images and propose a task requiring machines to
recover 3D HAOI using primitives from images. Moreover,
we propose a baseline of single-view 3D reconstruction on
HAOI. We believe this primitive-based 3D HAOI representation would pave the way for 3D HAOI studies. Our code and
data are available at https://mvig-rhos.com/p3haoi.

1

Introduction

Human and Object Interaction (HOI) has attracted attention.
Thanks to the progress in deep learning and the emergence
of large-scale datasets, achievements have been reached in
HOI in 2D space. However, the 3D field has received little
focus due to the scarcity of 3D HOI data. Recently, significant progress has been made in 3D human and object reconstruction respectively. This inspires us that it is time to bring
HOI into 3D which would advance various areas like virtual
reality and robotics.
However, there are limited datasets that describe HOI with
3D ground truth (GT) (Xu et al. 2021; Bhatnagar et al. 2022;
Huang et al. 2022). BEHAVE (Bhatnagar et al. 2022) and
InterCap (Huang et al. 2022) focus on whole-body humans
interacting with rigid objects. They contain RGBD video
frames, pseudo GT 3D human and object CAD models, as
well as contact labels. But in the real world, the articulated objects also play an essential role. Although D3D-HOI
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3711

