The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Coverage-Guaranteed Prediction Sets for Out-of-Distribution Data
Xin Zou, Weiwei Liu*
School of Computer Science,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Wuhan University, China
{zouxin2021, liuweiwei863}@gmail.com
Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization has attracted increasing research attention in recent years, due to its promising
experimental results in real-world applications. In this paper,
we study the confidence set prediction problem in the OOD
generalization setting. Split conformal prediction (SCP) is an
efficient framework for handling the confidence set prediction
problem. However, the validity of SCP requires the examples
to be exchangeable, which is violated in the OOD setting.
Empirically, we show that trivially applying SCP results in
a failure to maintain the marginal coverage when the unseen
target domain is different from the source domain. To address
this issue, we develop a method for forming confident prediction sets in the OOD setting and theoretically prove the
validity of our method. Finally, we conduct experiments on
simulated data to empirically verify the correctness of our
theory and the validity of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the remarkable success of modern machine learning techniques in many applications. A fundamental assumption of most machine learning algorithms
is that the training and test data are drawn from the same
underlying distribution. However, this assumption is consistently violated in many practical applications. In reality, the
test environment is influenced by a range of factors, such as
the distributional shifts across photos caused by the use of
different cameras in image classification tasks, the voices of
different persons in voice recognition tasks, and the variations
between scenes in self-driving tasks (Nagarajan, Andreassen,
and Neyshabur 2021). As a result, there is now a rapidly
growing body of research with a focus on generalizing to
unseen target domains with the help of the source domains,
namely OOD generalization (Shen et al. 2021).
Existing OOD generalization methods focus on improving
worst-case performance on the target domains, i.e., improving the average test accuracy of the model on the worst target domain. However, in some systems that require high
security (such as medical diagnosis), even a single mistake may have disastrous consequences. In these cases, it
is important to quantify the uncertainty of the predictions.
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17263

One way to perform uncertainty estimation (Amodei et al.
2016; Jiang et al. 2012, 2018; Angelopoulos et al. 2021)
is to create confident prediction sets that provably contain
the correct answer with high probability. Let Xn+1 ∈ X
be a new test example for which we would like to predict
the corresponding label Yn+1 ∈ Y, where X is the input
space and Y is the label space. For any given α ∈ (0, 1),
the aim of confidence set prediction is to construct a setvalued output, C(Xn+1 ), which contains the label Yn+1 with
distribution-free marginal coverage at a significance level α,
i.e., P (Yn+1 ∈ C(Xn+1 )) ≥ 1 − α. A confidence set predictor C α is said to be valid if P (Yn+1 ∈ C α (Xn+1 )) ≥ 1 − α
for any α ∈ (0, 1), where α is a hyper-parameter of the predictor. To simplify the notation, we omit the superscript α in
the remainder of this paper.
Conformal prediction (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer
2005; Shafer and Vovk 2008, CP) is a model-agnostic, nonparametric and distribution-free (the coverage guarantee
holds for any distribution) framework for creating confident
prediction sets. Split conformal prediction (Vovk 2013; Vovk,
Gammerman, and Shafer 2005, SCP), a special type of CP,
has been shown to be computationally efficient. SCP reserves
a set of data as the calibration set, and then uses the relative
value of scores of the calibration set and that of a new test
example to construct the prediction set. The validity of SCP
relies on the assumption that the examples are exchangeable.
However, in the OOD setting, the distributional shift between
the training and test distributions leads to the violation of
the exchangeability assumption. We empirically evaluate the
performance of SCP in the OOD setting in Section 4. Unfortunately, we find that trivially applying SCP results in a
failure to maintain marginal coverage in the OOD setting.
To address this issue, we construct a set predictor based on
the f -divergence (Alfréd 1961) between the test distribution
(target domain) and the convex hull of the training distributions (source domains). We theoretically show that our set
predictor is guaranteed to maintain the marginal coverage
(Corollary 9). We then conduct simulation experiments to
verify our theory.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows: §2
introduces some related works; §3 presents the notation definitions and preliminaries; §4 conducts experiments that show
the failure of SCP in the OOD generalization setting; §5
creates corrected confidence set predictor in the OOD gen-

