The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DTMFormer: Dynamic Token Merging for Boosting Transformer-Based Medical
Image Segmentation
Zhehao Wang1 * , Xian Lin1 * , Nannan Wu1 , Li Yu1 , Kwang-Ting Cheng2 , Zengqiang Yan1†
1

School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
School of Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{zhehao wang, xianlin, wnn2000, hustlyu}@hust.edu.cn, timcheng@ust.hk, z yan@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the great potential in capturing long-range dependency, one rarely-explored underlying issue of transformer in
medical image segmentation is attention collapse, making it
often degenerate into a bypass module in CNN-Transformer
hybrid architectures. This is due to the high computational
complexity of vision transformers requiring extensive training data while well-annotated medical image data is relatively limited, resulting in poor convergence. In this paper, we
propose a plug-n-play transformer block with dynamic token
merging, named DTMFormer, to avoid building long-range
dependency on redundant and duplicated tokens and thus pursue better convergence. Specifically, DTMFormer consists of
an attention-guided token merging (ATM) module to adaptively cluster tokens into fewer semantic tokens based on feature and dependency similarity and a light token reconstruction module to fuse ordinary and semantic tokens. In this way,
as self-attention in ATM is calculated based on fewer tokens,
DTMFormer is of lower complexity and more friendly to converge. Extensive experiments on publicly-available datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of DTMFormer working as a
plug-n-play module for simultaneous complexity reduction
and performance improvement. We believe it will inspire future work on rethinking transformers in medical image segmentation. Code: https://github.com/iam-nacl/DTMFormer.

1

TransUnet

FATNet

Layer-1

Layer-5

Layer-9

Layer-12

Figure 1: Attention collapse in existing transformer-based
medical image segmentation approaches. The color of each
token in a row represents its dependency score. The darker
the color, the closer the dependency. All tokens sharing a
uniform dependency distribution is called attention collapse.
Unfortunately, one underlying but rarely-explored issue in
existing CNN-Transformer hybrid frameworks is attention
collapse (Lin et al. 2023a) where all patches/tokens share
the same dependency distribution. In other words, transformer becomes a bypass module, completely failing to extract meaningful global features, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The
main reasons can be summarized as follows:

Introduction

Medical image segmentation is a fundamental task in
computer-aided diagnosis, image-guided surgery, and treatment planning. Despite the great success of convolutional
neural networks (CNN) (Milletari, Navab, and Ahmadi
2016; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Zhou et al.
2018), its relatively limited receptive fields have been a major bottleneck, especially in dealing with small-size objects,
irregular shapes, etc. Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2021), designed for
capturing long-term dependencies and allowing the network
to dynamically aggregate relevant features globally, seems a
perfect complement for CNN. Therefore, developing CNNTransformer hybrid architectures has been extensively studied for medical image segmentation.

1. High Model Complexity. Vision transformer is of
O(n2 ) model complexity where n is the length of input
token sequences (Vaswani et al. 2017). In medical image
segmentation, with the increase of patches/tokens, it becomes too complicated to well converge given relatively
limited well-annotation training data, making transformers less effective in capturing long-range dependency.
2. Severe Dependence Redundancy. Medical images of
the same modality share stable structures/views and
in most cases rely on local features for segmentation. Consequently, building pair-wise dependence for all
patches/tokens may produce severe dependence redundancy (Lin et al. 2023b), which in turn makes it more
difficult to capture truly-useful long-range dependence.

* Equal contribution

Inspired by the above analysis, if we can filter out those
redundant tokens in transformers and preserve those important tokens, it will not only reduce model complexity and

†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5814

