The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Selective Deep Autoencoder for Unsupervised Feature Selection
Wael Hassanieh, Abdallah Chehade
Department of Industrial & Manufacturing Systems Engineering
University of Michigan-Dearborn
4901 Evergreen Road, Dearborn, Michigan 48128 USA
waelh@umich.edu, achehade@umich.edu

Abstract

Feature selection (FS) is a learning process that selects
features that are significant according to the task at hand and
eliminates the others. It is often used to enhance data explainability, improve learning model performance, and cut
off computational time (Yu and Liu 2003). It is important
to highlight the difference between feature selection and dimensionality reduction. The latter, which includes methods
like Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Hotelling 1933)
and Autoencoders (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006), is used
to represent data in a new lower dimensional space, rather
than select the important features from the original feature space. There exist various feature selection categories:
supervised (Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko 2003; Guyon
and Elisseeff 2003) and unsupervised methods (Wang et al.
2013; Alelyani, Tang, and Liu 2018). The latter is often
preferred because labels, which might be time-consuming
and/or costly to obtain depending on the application, are not
required. The literature presents several types of unsupervised feature selection: Filter (Li et al. 2018) (e.g. Laplacian
Score (LS) (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2005) and Spectral Feature Selection (Zhao and Liu 2007)), Wrapper (e.g. AMBER
(Ramjee and Gamal 2020)) and Embedded based methods. The embedded feature selection methods are where
recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods are developed, e.g.
Deep Feature Selection (Li, Chen, and Wasserman 2016)
and UDFS algorithm (Yang et al. 2011) which applies L2L1 regularization on weights of inputs to select from them
useful features. Similarly, the MCFS algorithm (Cai, Zhang,
and He 2010) also uses regularization to keep features that
maintain clustering structures. Unsupervised feature selection methods have faced two main limitations: the first is the
challenge of searching for possible important subsets of features when labels are not present, and the second is taking
into account the inter-correlation of features. In particular,
the set of selected features needs to be “globally representative and diverse” (Wu and Cheng 2021).
Deep Neural Network (DNN) learning architectures have
witnessed a revival of interest in the 2000s due to the discovery of approaches capable of learning the parameters.
AutoEncoders (AE), which have been part of the neural network space for decades, were developed for the purpose of
unsupervised dimensionality reduction, mainly as a nonlinear extension of PCA (Kramer 1991). It consists of two sequential neural network parts: an Encoder and a Decoder.

In light of the advances in big data, high-dimensional datasets
are often encountered. Incorporating them into data-driven
models can enhance performance; however, this comes at the
cost of high computation and the risk of overfitting, particularly due to abundant redundant features. Identifying an informative subset of the features helps in reducing the dimensionality and enhancing model interpretability. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework for unsupervised feature selection, called Selective Deep Auto-Encoder (SDAE). It aims
to reduce the number of features used in unlabeled datasets
without compromising the quality of information obtained. It
achieves this by selecting sufficient features - from the original feature set - capable of representing the entire feature
space and reconstructing them. Architecturally, it leverages
the use of highly nonlinear latent representations in deep Autoencoders and intrinsically learns, in an unsupervised fashion, the relevant and globally representative subset of features through a customized Selective Layer. Extensive experimental results on three high-dimensional public datasets have
shown promising feature selection performance by SDAE
in comparison to other existing state-of-the-art unsupervised
feature selection methods.

Introduction
In light of the advances in big data, high-dimensional
datasets are often encountered. Deploying them in datadriven models can boost performance; however, this comes
at the cost of high computation and poor out-of-training accuracy (possibly due to poor robustness and/or overfitting)
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014). The presence of
a large number of redundant features is the main problem.
Moreover, such models are prone to low interpretability, in
a world where humans and industries are increasingly demanding to understand the data and models they are working
with (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017). It is evident in the Computer Vision field in which high-dimensional images contain
a significant number of redundant pixels (Bolón-Canedo and
Remeseiro 2020). Elsewhere, connected devices governed
by the Internet of Things (IoT) generate massive amounts of
data that can be overwhelming for practitioners who try to
extract meaningful insights from abundant sensor readings
(Diène et al. 2020). This is where feature selection thrives.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12322

