The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

OntoFact: Unveiling Fantastic Fact-Skeleton of LLMs via Ontology-Driven
Reinforcement Learning
Ziyu Shang1 * , Wenjun Ke1,2 * † , Nana Xiu3 , Peng Wang1,2† ,
Jiajun Liu1 , Yanhui Li4 , Zhizhao Luo5 , Ke Ji1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University
4
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
5
Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Application
{ziyus1999, kewenjun, xiunana, pwang, jiajliu, keji}@seu.edu.cn, yanhuili@nju.edu.cn, qibai-aluminum@outlook.com
2

Abstract

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive proficiency in information retrieval, while they are prone
to generating incorrect responses that conflict with reality,
a phenomenon known as intrinsic hallucination. The critical
challenge lies in the unclear and unreliable fact distribution
within LLMs trained on vast amounts of data. The prevalent approach frames the factual detection task as a questionanswering paradigm, where the LLMs are asked about factual knowledge and examined for correctness. However, existing studies primarily focused on deriving test cases only
from several specific domains, such as movies and sports,
limiting the comprehensive observation of missing knowledge and the analysis of unexpected hallucinations. To address this issue, we propose OntoFact, an adaptive framework
for detecting unknown facts of LLMs, devoted to mining the
ontology-level skeleton of the missing knowledge. Specifically, we argue that LLMs could expose the ontology-based
similarity among missing facts and introduce five representative knowledge graphs (KGs) as benchmarks. We further
devise a sophisticated ontology-driven reinforcement learning (ORL) mechanism to produce error-prone test cases with
specific entities and relations automatically. The ORL mechanism rewards the KGs for navigating toward a feasible direction for unveiling factual errors. Moreover, empirical efforts
demonstrate that dominant LLMs are biased towards answering Yes rather than No, regardless of whether this knowledge is included. To mitigate the overconfidence of LLMs,
we leverage a hallucination-free detection (HFD) strategy to
tackle unfair comparisons between baselines, thereby boosting the result robustness. Experimental results on 5 datasets,
using 32 representative LLMs, reveal a general lack of fact in
current LLMs. Notably, ChatGPT exhibits fact error rates of
51.6% on DBpedia and 64.7% on YAGO, respectively. Additionally, the ORL mechanism demonstrates promising error
prediction scores, with F1 scores ranging from 70% to 90%
across most LLMs. Compared to the exhaustive testing, ORL
achieves an average recall of 80% while reducing evaluation
time by 35.29% to 63.12%.

Large language models (LLMs) have proven remarkable
effectiveness across various NLP tasks (Bubeck et al.
2023; Li, Wang, and Ke 2023). These models, trained on
massive corpora, encode world knowledge within enormous parameters, making them adaptable to knowledgeintensive tasks (Liévin, Hother, and Winther 2022; Singhal et al. 2023). However, LLMs often lack factual accuracy, which is crucial for applications where credibility is
paramount (Maynez et al. 2020; Kang and Hashimoto 2020).
Understanding the factual distribution of LLMs is therefore
practical for analyzing and enhancing their veracity.
Existing studies typically approach the factuality detection task in the question-answering paradigm, which can
be grouped into two families: text-driven methods and KGdriven methods, depending on the derivation of test cases.
Text-driven methods utilize natural language text including
news, summaries, or claims, to explore the absent knowledge of LLMs (Honovich et al. 2022; Durmus, He, and Diab
2020; Honovich et al. 2021). However, the high redundancy
of text corpora could lead to wasted fact coverage during
testing. Consider Figure 1, where Text #1 explains a lot but
elaborates on the sole fact that LeBron James is a basketball
player. In contrast, KG-driven methods leverage knowledge
graphs (KGs) to collect test cases by combining instancelevel entities and relations (Pezeshkpour 2023; Kim et al.
2023; Agarwal et al. 2021; Wang, Wang, and Mao 2020;
Pan et al. 2018). By utilizing concise triples, test cases of
KG-driven methods shift to being more orthogonal and concentrated. For example in Figure 1, the simple triple (LeBron James, Occupation, Basketball Player) can replace the
lengthy text representation.
In reality, the above two groups of studies only conduct
experiments using small-scale datasets in several typical
domains. Statistically, the coverage of the most extensive
dataset is limited to around 30 commonsense topics, e.g.,
movies and sports (Li et al. 2023). However, neglected
fields, such as biology and plants, which are crucial for
the artificial general intelligence (AGI) ability of LLMs,
have not been adequately addressed (Xiong et al. 2023).

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18934

