The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

IVP-VAE: Modeling EHR Time Series with Initial Value Problem Solvers
Jingge Xiao1 , Leonie Basso1 , Wolfgang Nejdl1 , Niloy Ganguly2 , Sandipan Sikdar1
1

L3S Research Center, Leibniz Universität Hannover
2
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
{xiao, basso, nejdl, sandipan.sikdar}@L3S.de, niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

Abstract
Continuous-time models such as Neural ODEs and Neural
Flows have shown promising results in analyzing irregularly sampled time series frequently encountered in electronic
health records. Based on these models, time series are typically processed with a hybrid of an initial value problem
(IVP) solver and a recurrent neural network within the variational autoencoder architecture. Sequentially solving IVPs
makes such models computationally less efficient. In this paper, we propose to model time series purely with continuous
processes whose state evolution can be approximated directly
by IVPs. This eliminates the need for recurrent computation
and enables multiple states to evolve in parallel. We further
fuse the encoder and decoder with one IVP solver utilizing its
invertibility, which leads to fewer parameters and faster convergence. Experiments on three real-world datasets show that
the proposed method can systematically outperform its predecessors, achieve state-of-the-art results, and have significant
advantages in terms of data efficiency.

Introduction
Electronic Health Record (EHR) data contains multi-variate
time series of patient information, such as vital signs and
laboratory results, which can be utilized to perform diagnosis
or recommend treatment (McDermott et al. 2021). The data
in EHR time series is often irregularly sampled (i.e., unequal
time intervals between successive measurements) and can
have missing values (Zhang et al. 2022). The irregularity is
caused mainly due to unstructured manual processes, eventdriven recordings, device failure, and also different sampling
frequencies across multiple variables (Weerakody et al. 2021).
These complexities make learning and modeling clinical time
series data particularly challenging for classical machine
learning models (Shukla and Marlin 2021b; Sun et al. 2020).
In recent years, significant progress has been made in the
development of models for handling irregularly sampled time
series data (Che et al. 2018; Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud
2019; Shukla and Marlin 2021a; Zhang et al. 2022), which
have been extensively tested on EHR data.
Neural ODEs (Chen et al. 2018) are continuous-time models based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs) that can
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16023

naturally handle irregularly sampled data. The data is assumed to be generated by a continuous process that is modeled using ODEs.
Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud (2019) further extend the
idea and develop Latent-ODE by integrating Neural ODEs
and recurrent neural network (RNN) into a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014) architecture.
However, neural ODE models require deploying a numerical
ODE solver which is computationally expensive. Biloš et al.
(2021) hence propose an efficient alternative by directly modeling the solution of ODEs with a neural network, thereby
obtaining a variant of Latent-ODE using Neural Flows, referred to as Latent-Flow in this paper. However, when analyzing time series, these Latent-based continuous-time models
(Latent-ODE and Latent-Flow) require sequential processing
of data, which makes them inefficient and hard to train.
In this work, we propose IVP-VAE, a continuous-time
model specifically designed for EHR time series, which is capable of dealing with irregularly sampled time series data in
a non-sequential way. Different from Latent-ODE and LatentFlow, our model takes variational approximation purely as
solving initial value problems (IVPs). Specifically, observations at different time points are mapped to states of an unknown continuous process and propagated to a latent variable
z0 by solving different IVPs in parallel. This parallelization
leads to a significant speedup over existing continuous-time
models. Latent-based continuous-time models use the VAE
architecture, whose encoder and decoder consist of separate
recognition and generative modules. We observe that neural
IVP solvers are inherently invertible, i.e., IVPs can be solved
in both forward and backward time directions, and exploit
this property to utilize the same solver for both encoding and
decoding. Our design results in reduced model complexity in
terms of number of parameters and convergence rate.
We deploy our model on the tasks of time series forecasting and classification across three real-world EHR datasets.
IVP-VAE generally outperforms the existing latent-based
continuous-time models across all the datasets and tasks.
More importantly, it achieves more than one order of magnitude speedup over its latent-based predecessors. With regard to the state-of-the-art irregular sampled time series
classification and forecasting models, IVP-VAE consistently
ranks among the top-2 models, even though the baselines
are in many cases task-specific. IVP-VAE offers the best

