The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exposing the Deception: Uncovering More Forgery Clues for Deepfake Detection
Zhongjie Ba1,2 , Qingyu Liu1,2 , Zhenguang Liu1,2 * , Shuang Wu3 , Feng Lin1,2 , Li Lu1,2 , Kui Ren1,2
1

State Key Lab. of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, Hangzhou, China
3
Black Sesame Technologies, Singapore
{zhongjieba,qingyuliu}@zju.edu.cn, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, wushuang@outlook.sg, {flin,li.lu,kuiren}@zju.edu.cn,
2

Abstract
Deepfake technology has given rise to a spectrum of novel
and compelling applications. Unfortunately, the widespread
proliferation of high-fidelity fake videos has led to pervasive
confusion and deception, shattering our faith that seeing is
believing. One aspect that has been overlooked so far is that
current deepfake detection approaches may easily fall into the
trap of overfitting, focusing only on forgery clues within one
or a few local regions. Moreover, existing works heavily rely
on neural networks to extract forgery features, lacking theoretical constraints guaranteeing that sufficient forgery clues
are extracted and superfluous features are eliminated. These
deficiencies culminate in unsatisfactory accuracy and limited
generalizability in real-life scenarios.
In this paper, we try to tackle these challenges through
three designs: (1) We present a novel framework to capture
broader forgery clues by extracting multiple non-overlapping
local representations and fusing them into a global semanticrich feature. (2) Based on the information bottleneck theory, we derive Local Information Loss to guarantee the orthogonality of local representations while preserving comprehensive task-relevant information. (3) Further, to fuse
the local representations and remove task-irrelevant information, we arrive at a Global Information Loss through the
theoretical analysis of mutual information. Empirically, our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on five benchmark datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/
QingyuLiu/Exposing-the-Deception, hoping to inspire researchers.

1

Figure 1: Example visualization of four local salient features
obtained by our method. Each feature focuses on distinct
forgery regions with little overlap. We zoom in to show the
detailed differences for these regions between a real sample
and a fake sample. Our method can grasp broader forgery
clues including blending ghosts, consistent and symmetrical
skin tones, tooth details, and stitching seams.

highlight the risk of deepfake technology in misleading the
public and undermining trust. Consequently, accurate and
effective deepfake detection is essential for mitigating these
risks.
Fundamentally, deepfake detection amounts to recognizing forgery clues that distinguish real and synthetic images.
There emerge many studies for deepfake detection, which
can be roughly categorized into two main branches. One line
of work (Afchar et al. 2018; Dolhansky et al. 2020) employs
CNN networks to automatically learn the clues within manipulated images. Another line of work is dedicated to pondering and exploring the differences between fake and real
images by incorporating human observation and understanding. These approaches hone in on high-level semantic imperfections of counterfeits (Haliassos et al. 2021), as well as underlying imperceptible patterns in artifacts (such as blending
ghost (Shiohara and Yamasaki 2022) and frequency domain
anomalies (Liu et al. 2021)).
After scrutinizing and experimenting with the implementations of state-of-the-art approaches, we obtain two empiri-

Introduction

Fueled by the accessibility of large-scale video datasets and
the maturity of deepfake technologies (Nirkin, Keller, and
Hassner 2019; Li et al. 2019), one may effortlessly create
massive forgery videos beyond human discernibility. However, malicious usage of deepfake can have serious influences, ranging from identity theft and privacy violations
to large-scale financial frauds and dissemination of misinformation. For instance, in March 2022, hackers created a
fake video of the Ukrainian president Zelenskyy in which he
stands at a podium and addresses Ukrainian soldiers to lay
down their arms. Such events are far from isolated, and they
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

719

