The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transient Glimpses: Unveiling Occluded Backgrounds through the Spike Camera
Jiyuan Zhang1, 2 , Shiyan Chen1, 2 , Yajing Zheng1, 2* , Zhaofei Yu1, 2, 3 * , Tiejun Huang1, 2, 3
2

1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{jyzhang,2301112005}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yj.zheng,yuzf12,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The de-occlusion problem, involving extracting clear background images by removing foreground occlusions, holds
significant practical importance but poses considerable challenges. Most current research predominantly focuses on generating discrete images from calibrated camera arrays, but
this approach often struggles with dense occlusions and
fast motions due to limited perspectives and motion blur.
To overcome these limitations, an effective solution requires the integration of multi-view visual information. The
spike camera, as an innovative neuromorphic sensor, shows
promise with its ultra-high temporal resolution and dynamic
range. In this study, we propose a novel approach that utilizes a single spike camera for continuous multi-view imaging to address occlusion removal. By rapidly moving the
spike camera, we capture a dense stream of spikes from
occluded scenes. Our model, SpkOccNet, processes these
spikes by integrating multi-view spatial-temporal information
via long-short-window feature extractor (LSW) and employs
a novel cross-view mutual attention-based module (CVA)
for effective fusion and refinement. Additionally, to facilitate research in occlusion removal, we introduce the S-OCC
dataset, which consists of real-world spike-based data. Experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and generalization capabilities of our model in effectively removing
dense occlusions across diverse scenes. Public project page:
https://github.com/Leozhangjiyuan/SpikeDeOcclusion.

Spike Camera

Moving Trajectory
(a) Occlusions

(b) Scened

(c) Recovered
Background

(d) Capturing with a spike camera

Figure 1: Outline of occlusion removal with a single spike
camera. (a) Selected challenging occlusions, (b) Real-world
Scenes with occlusions, (c) Recovered backgrounds with the
proposed SpkOccNet, (d) We capture dataset with a fastmoving spike camera.

ception, particularly at high driving speeds. Consequently,
the acquisition of sharp and continuous-view information in
high-speed scenarios remains a significant and ongoing challenge.
Recently, neuromorphic sensors (Gallego et al. 2020;
Brandli et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2022) show remarkable
performance in visual tasks. These sensors generate continuous signals asynchronously, enabling high temporalresolution sampling. Two commonly used types of neuromorphic sensors are event cameras and spike cameras.
Event cameras (Brandli et al. 2014; Lichtsteiner, Posch,
and Delbruck 2008) asynchronously fire events in a differential manner when the light change surpasses a threshold,
thus capturing rich motion information. Some studies have
utilized event cameras for occlusion removal tasks (Zhang
et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022; Liao et al. 2022). However,
event-based algorithms often require refocusing events to
align them and provide accurate information for background
reconstruction. This reliance on camera intrinsic parameters and distance information between objects and the camera restricts its applicability. Spike cameras (Huang et al.
2022) mimic the sampling mechanism of the fovea in the
retina (Masland 2012; Wässle 2004), with each pixel capturing photons and asynchronously firing spikes when the
accumulated intensity surpasses a threshold. The integration
mechanism of spikes enables the recording of absolute light

Introduction
The presence of dense occlusions poses challenges to visual
algorithms. Recently, frame-based algorithms have been
proposed to see the background scenes through occlusions
assisted by leveraging multi-view image (Zhang et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2020; Zhang, Shen, and Lin 2021; Li et al.
2021a; Zhang et al. 2022b; Hur et al. 2023). The task
is named Synthetic Aperture Imaging (SAI). However,
these algorithms often rely on discrete multi-view exposures, which may not provide sufficient background information. Moreover, obtaining sharp frames in high-speed scenarios poses further challenges. In applications such as autonomous driving, effectively removing foreground occlusions (e.g., fences) is crucial for enhancing environment per* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

637

