The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Temporal Resolution in Spectrogram for Audio Classification
Haohe Liu1 , Xubo Liu1 , Qiuqiang Kong2 , Wenwu Wang1 , Mark D. Plumbley1
1

2

University of Surrey
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The audio spectrogram is a time-frequency representation
that has been widely used for audio classification. One of
the key attributes of the audio spectrogram is the temporal
resolution, which depends on the hop size used in the ShortTime Fourier Transform (STFT). Previous works generally
assume the hop size should be a constant value (e.g., 10 ms).
However, a fixed temporal resolution is not always optimal
for different types of sound. The temporal resolution affects
not only classification accuracy but also computational cost.
This paper proposes a novel method, DiffRes, that enables
differentiable temporal resolution modeling for audio classification. Given a spectrogram calculated with a fixed hop size,
DiffRes merges non-essential time frames while preserving
important frames. DiffRes acts as a “drop-in” module between an audio spectrogram and a classifier and can be jointly
optimized with the classification task. We evaluate DiffRes on
five audio classification tasks, using mel-spectrograms as the
acoustic features, followed by off-the-shelf classifier backbones. Compared with previous methods using the fixed temporal resolution, the DiffRes-based method can achieve the
equivalent or better classification accuracy with at least 25%
computational cost reduction. We further show that DiffRes
can improve classification accuracy by increasing the temporal resolution of input acoustic features, without adding to the
computational cost.

Figure 1: The spectrogram of Alarm Clock and Siren sound
with 40 ms and 10 ms hop sizes. All with a 25 ms window
size. The pattern of Siren, which is relatively stable, does
not change significantly using a smaller hop size (i.e., larger
temporal resolution), while Alarm Clock is the opposite.

to the Gabor’s uncertainty principle (Gabor 1946), there is
always a trade-off between time and frequency resolutions.
To achieve the desired resolution on the temporal dimension,
it is a common practice (Kong et al. 2021a; Liu et al. 2022)
to apply a fixed hop size between windows to capture the
dynamics between adjacent frames. With the fixed hop size,
the spectrogram has a fixed temporal resolution, which we
will refer to simply as resolution in this work.
Using a fixed resolution is not necessarily optimal for an
audio classification model. Intuitively, the resolution should
depend on the temporal pattern: fast-changing signals are
supposed to have high resolution, while relatively steady
signals or blank signals may not need the same high resolution for the best accuracy (Huzaifah 2017). For example,
Figure 1 shows that by increasing resolution, more details
appear in the spectrogram of Alarm Clock while the pattern
of Siren stays mostly the same. This indicates the finer details in high-resolution Siren may not essentially contribute
to the classification accuracy. There are plenty of studies
on learning a suitable frequency resolution with a similar spirit (Stevens, Volkmann, and Newman 1937; Sainath
et al. 2013; Ravanelli and Bengio 2018b; Zeghidour et al.
2021). Most previous studies focus on investigating the effect of different temporal resolutions (Kekre et al. 2012;
Huzaifah 2017; Ilyashenko et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2023).
Huzaifah (2017) observe the optimal temporal resolution
for audio classification is class dependent. Ferraro et al.
(2021) experiment on music tagging with coarse-resolution
spectrograms, and observes a similar performance can be
maintained while being much faster to compute. Kazakos
et al. (2021) propose a two-stream architecture that processes both fine-grained and coarse-resolution spectrogram

Introduction
Audio classification refers to a series of tasks that assign
labels to an audio clip. Those tasks include audio tagging (Kong et al. 2020), speech keyword classfication (Kim
et al. 2021), and music genres classification (Castellon, Donahue, and Liang 2021). The input to an audio classification
system is usually a one-dimensional audio waveform, which
can be represented by discrete samples. Although there are
methods using time-domain samples as features (Kong et al.
2020; Lee et al. 2017), the majority of studies on audio classification convert the waveform into a spectrogram as the input feature (Gong, Chung, and Glass 2021b,a). Spectrogram
is usually calculated by the Fourier transform (Champeney
and Champeney 1987), which is applied in short waveform
chunks multiplied by a windowing function, resulting in a
two-dimensional time-frequency representation. According
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13873

