The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Reverse Distillation for Multi-Modal Anomaly Detection
Zhihao Gu1 * , Jiangning Zhang2 , Liang Liu2 , Xu Chen2 , Jinlong Peng2 , Zhenye Gan2 ,
Guannan Jiang3 , Annan Shu3 , Yabiao Wang2 , Lizhuang Ma1†
1

School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
YouTu Lab, Tencent
3
Contemporary Amperex Technology Co. Limited (CATL)
ellery-holmes@sjtu.edu.cn, {vtzhang, cxxuchen, jeromepeng, wingzygan}@tencent.com, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
In recent years, there has been significant progress in employing color images for anomaly detection in industrial scenarios, but it is insufficient for identifying anomalies that are
invisible in RGB images alone. As a supplement, introducing extra modalities such as depth and surface normal maps
can be helpful to detect these anomalies. To this end, we
present a novel Multi-Modal Reverse Distillation (MMRD)
paradigm that consists of a frozen multi-modal teacher encoder to generate distillation targets and a learnable student
decoder targeting to restore multi-modal representations from
the teacher. Specifically, the teacher extracts complementary
visual features from different modalities via a siamese architecture and then parameter-freely fuses these information
from multiple levels as the targets of distillation. For the student, it learns modality-related priors from the teacher representations of normal training data and performs interaction
between them to form multi-modal representations for target
reconstruction. Extensive experiments show that our MMRD
outperforms recent state-of-the-art methods on both anomaly
detection and localization on MVTec-3D AD and Eyecandies
benchmarks. Codes will be available upon acceptance.

Shared
Teacher
Encoder

Student
Decoder
Pixel-wise
Difference

Baseline (RD)

Point
Cloud
Encoder
Memory

RGB
Encoder
Memory

Memory

Late Fusion
Nearest Neighbor
Search

Late Fusion (M3DM)

Teacher
Encoder

Middle
Fusion

Teacher
Encoder

Generating
Priors

Multi-Modal Student
Interaction Decoder
Pixel-wise
Difference

MMRD (Ours)

Figure 1: Illustration of different multi-modal anomaly detectors and corresponding anomaly maps (last row). Left:
Reverse distillation. Middle: Two-stream structure with late
fusion. Right: Our proposed paradigm.

2021; Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021) estimate the decision boundary between anomaly-free samples and the synthetically anomalous data for detection. Contrarily, methods
by reconstruction (Hou et al. 2021; Deng and Li 2022) either
recover the input (Hou et al. 2021) or restore middle-level
features (Deng and Li 2022), as shown in Fig. 1-Left, where
the pixel-wise similarity indicates the anomalies. However,
extensive investigations in Invest3D (Horwitz and Hoshen
2022) show that some anomalies are hard to be detected on
RGB images. Therefore, a few 3D-based methods are motivated to be developed, which directly deal with the 3D
data for anomaly detection. For instance, Invest3D extracts
orientation-invariant 3D features via FPFH (Rusu, Blodow,
and Beetz 2009) operator and adopts PatchCore (Roth et al.
2022) for detection. And 3D-ST (Bergmann and Sattlegger
2023) extends the 2D teacher-student network to anomalyfree point clouds. Nevertheless, they usually produce inferior results than their RGB-based counterparts due to the
complexity of 3D data. To improve the effectiveness, recent
arts (Rudolph et al. 2023; Bonfiglioli et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2023) tend to utilize multiple modalities for AD, the necessity of which is illustrated in Fig. 2. The hole on the “cookies” and the protrusion on the “lollipop” is imperceptible on
RGB images, but can be detected using depth and surface
normals as the auxiliary modality. Besides, they also pro-

Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) has received continuous attention
for several decades due to its wide range of applications such
as defect detection, autonomous driving, video surveillance,
and medical diagnosis. It is usually formulated as an unsupervised problem for the scarcity of anomalous data.
In recent years, vast efforts are dedicated to developing
unsupervised anomaly detectors in images and tremendous
progress has been made (Rudolph, Wandt, and Rosenhahn
2021; Roth et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021; Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021; Hou et al. 2021; Deng and Li 2022),
where embedding-based methods, synthesis and reconstruction are the dominant trends for this task. Embedding-based
methods (Rudolph, Wandt, and Rosenhahn 2021; Roth et al.
2022) characterize the corresponding distribution of the extracted features, and the anomalies are detected by measuring the distance between features of test images and the estimated distribution. The synthesis-based methods (Li et al.
* Work done when Zhihao Gu is an intern at CATL.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8445

