The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Everything2Motion: Synchronizing Diverse Inputs via a Unified Framework for
Human Motion Synthesis
Zhaoxin Fan1* , Longbin Ji2* , Pengxin Xu1 , Fan Shen1 , Kai Chen3
1

Psyche AI Inc
Xi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
fanzhaoxin@ruc.edu.cn, robingg1100@gmail.com
2

process of designing character movements across an array
of practical applications.

Abstract
In the dynamic field of film and game development, the
emergence of human motion synthesis methods has revolutionized avatar animation. Traditional methodologies, typically reliant on single modality inputs like text or audio,
employ modality-specific model frameworks, posing challenges for unified model deployment and application. To address this, we propose Everything2Motion, a unified model
framework. Everything2Motion consists of three key modules. The Input-Output Modality Modulation module tailors structures for specific multimodal inputs, eliminating
the need for modality-specific frameworks. The Query-aware
Autoencoder, based on the transformer encoder-decoder architecture, enables efficient latent motion generation. Lastly,
the Prior Motion Distillation Decoder, a pretrained module,
enhances the final skeleton sequence’s naturalness and fluidity. Comprehensive experiments on several public datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of Everything2Motion, highlighting its potential for practical applications and setting a
new benchmark in human motion synthesis.

Figure 1: The framework of Everything2Motion. In contrast
to previous modality specific works, we design a unified
framework for diverse input modalities.

Introduction
The task of synthesizing realistic human motions — a cornerstone in the animation of robots (Khatib et al. 2009)
and digital avatars (Lee et al. 2002) — is an imperative
at the crossroads of various disciplines such as film making (Huang et al. 2019), video game development (Menache
2000), and live broadcasting (Fan et al. 2022). The pursuit of
authenticity in digital human movements, particularly those
that exhibit a nuanced response to environmental stimuli,
has traditionally been under the purview of action directors and artists, facilitated by sophisticated equipment. Despite remarkable strides made using these methods, the associated expenses are often prohibitive, particularly for engines tasked with continuous, long-term motion synthesis.
This economic challenge has catalyzed the need for alternative approaches that efficiently generate human-like motions
given suitable input guidance. Not only would such methods be more economical, but they would also streamline the

Fortunately, the rapid advancements in deep learning have
made it possible to synthesize human motion in a costeffective and real-time manner (Holden, Saito, and Komura
2016). Two tasks that have particularly benefited from these
advancements are: text-to-motion (Guo et al. 2022a,b; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022) and music-to-dance (Sun et al.
2020; Zhuang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021) synthesis. In the
former, a sequence of human motions is generated based on
textual descriptions, while in the latter, a dance motion sequence is produced corresponding to a given piece of music.
Benefiting from variational autoencoder (Petrovich, Black,
and Varol 2021; Yan et al. 2018), generative adversarial networks (Barsoum, Kender, and Liu 2018; Liu et al. 2019),
diffusion models (Dabral et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022),
et al., these tasks have made significant strides in terms of
progress and performance. The ability to transform textual
or musical input into realistic human motion sequences not
only demonstrates the power of deep learning but also opens
up new avenues for efficient and dynamic character animation.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal Contribution

1688

