The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SEC: More Accurate Clustering Algorithm via Structural Entropy
Junyu Huang1, 2 , Qilong Feng1, 2, * , Jiahui Wang1, 2 , Ziyun Huang3 , Jinhui Xu4 , Jianxin Wang1, 2, 5, *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, NY, USA
5
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
junyuhuangcsu@foxmail.com, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn, 224711099@csu.edu.cn, zxh201@psu.edu, jinhui@buffalo.edu,
jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn

Introduction

Abstract

As a widely studied unsupervised learning task, clustering
involves partitioning data points into different clusters according to their similarity such that data points within the
same cluster share high similarity as much as possible. By
modeling clustering tasks as optimization problems, several classic clustering methods have been proposed, such
as Lloyd-type methods, DBSCAN, hierarchical clustering
and MST clustering. However, a recurring limitation of the
existing methods is that they only use local neighborhood
information during the optimization process. Furthermore,
most existing clustering methods use Euclidean distances or
clustering densities to measure the similarity between data
points. These clustering methods might fail to capture the
intrinsic global patterns of the given clustering instances,
which could constrain the effectiveness of the algorithms
for handling datasets with irregular patterns. Consequently,
a critical challenge for achieving better clustering performance lies in effective integration of global structural information into the clustering optimization process.
As pointed out in (Du and Wang 2022), global structural
information of the data points represents the high-level patterns and relationships across the entire dataset. Recently,
a new metric based on the graph’s structural information,
known as structural entropy, was introduced to analyze the
hierarchical structure of graphs. This metric utilizes an encoding tree approach, offering a novel perspective in graph
analysis (Li and Pan 2016). By minimizing the structural entropy of the given graph, an encoding tree can be constructed
where each node of the encoding tree is associated with a
partition of the graph. In general, the encoding tree provides
hierarchical abstractions of the graph, allowing the preservation of global structural information within its nodes.
For many datasets, the clustering performance is closely
related to the distinctiveness between clusters. To enlarge the
distinctiveness between clusters, we present an encodingtree-based structural metric where global structural information of the given data points can be captured to guide
the clustering process. Firstly, we design a new sparse
graph embedding technique for clustering instances using kNearest Neighbor (k-NN) and thresholding strategies. k-NN
and thresholding strategies help to identify the most rele-

As one of the most popular machine learning tools in the field
of unsupervised learning, clustering has been widely used
in various practical applications. While numerous methods
have been proposed for clustering, a commonly encountered
issue is that the existing clustering methods rely heavily on
local neighborhood information during the optimization process, which leads to suboptimal performance on real-world
datasets. Besides, most existing clustering methods use Euclidean distances or densities to measure the similarity between data points. This could constrain the effectiveness of
the algorithms for handling datasets with irregular patterns.
Thus, a key challenge is how to effectively capture the global
structural information in clustering instances to improve the
clustering quality. In this paper, we propose a new clustering algorithm, called SEC. This algorithm uses the global
structural information extracted from an encoding tree to
guide the clustering optimization process. Based on the relation between data points in the instance, a sparse graph of
the clustering instance can be constructed. By leveraging the
sparse graph constructed, we propose an iterative encoding
tree method, where hierarchical abstractions of the encoding
tree are iteratively extracted as new clustering features to obtain better clustering results. To avoid the influence of easily
misclustered data points located on the boundaries of the clustering partitions, which we call “fringe points”, we propose an
iterative pre-deletion and reassignment technique such that
the algorithm can delete and reassign the “fringe points” to
obtain more resilient and precise clustering results. Empirical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate that our proposed algorithm outperforms stateof-the-art clustering methods and achieves better clustering
performances. On average, the clustering accuracy (ACC)
is increased by 1.7% and the normalized mutual information (NMI) by 7.9% compared with the current state-of-theart (SOTA) algorithm on synthetic datasets. On real-world
datasets, our method outperforms other clustering methods
with an average increase of 12.3% in ACC and 5.2% in NMI,
respectively.

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12583

