The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Cross-View Hierarchical Graph Learning Hypernetwork for Skill
Demand-Supply Joint Prediction
Wenshuo Chao1,2 , Zhaopeng Qiu2 , Likang Wu2,3 , Zhuoning Guo1 ,
Zhi Zheng2,3 , Hengshu Zhu2,1 * , Hao Liu1 *
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Career Science Lab, BOSS Zhipin
3
University of Science and Technology of China
{wchao829,zguo772}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {zhpengqiu, zhuhengshu}@gmail.com,
{wulk,zhengzhi97}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liuh@ust.hk
Abstract

Pre-training
Neural
Network

The rapidly changing landscape of technology and industries
leads to dynamic skill requirements, making it crucial for employees and employers to anticipate such shifts to maintain
a competitive edge in the labor market. Existing efforts in
this area either rely on domain-expert knowledge or regarding
skill evolution as a simplified time series forecasting problem. However, both approaches overlook the sophisticated
relationships among different skills and the inner-connection
between skill demand and supply variations. In this paper, we
propose a Cross-view Hierarchical Graph learning Hypernetwork (CHGH) framework for joint skill demand-supply prediction. Specifically, CHGH is an encoder-decoder network
consisting of i) a cross-view graph encoder to capture the
interconnection between skill demand and supply, ii) a hierarchical graph encoder to model the co-evolution of skills
from a cluster-wise perspective, and iii) a conditional hyperdecoder to jointly predict demand and supply variations by
incorporating historical demand-supply gaps. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework compared to seven baselines and the effectiveness of the three modules.

Statistics
SVM
Pattern
Recognition

Before 2016

LLM
Prompting

Statistics

SVM

Neural
Network

LLM Pre-training

Prompting

Pattern
Recognition

2016-2022

SVM
Pattern
Recognition

Statistics

Neural
Network

2023-Present

Figure 1: Real-world skill demand variation of machinelearning related jobs, data ranged from 2015 to 2023.
ers anticipate and proactively handle the skill gap. For instance, job seekers can plan relevant skill-learning paths in
advance, companies can optimize their workforce planning
strategies, and policymakers can develop policies to guide
market development.
Existing studies on skill demand and supply prediction can be broadly categorized into expert-based and
learning-based methods. Expert-based methods analyze skill
shifts by exploring survey data (Belhaj and Tkiouat 2013).
Such methods usually deliver coarse-grained forecasting results via expert domain knowledge (Bughin et al. 2018).
Learning-based methods predict more fine-grained skill
shifts by exploiting patterns and implications based on machine learning techniques. For example, Xu et al. (Xu et al.
2018) measure the popularity of skills via topic model and
Macedo et al. (de Macedo et al. 2022) predict skill demands
by adopting the recurrent neural network. However, both
classes of approaches overlook the sophisticated demandsupply relationships among different skills grounded in
structural and contextual domains. In this work, we investigate the joint prediction of skill demand and supply by
explicitly modeling the collaborative relationships between
different skills.
However, this is a non-trivial task due to the following
technical challenges. First, the demand and supply variation of each skill in the labor market is correlated yet diversified. For instance, the breakthrough of LLM led to a
great demand for prompt engineering, and the supply of this
skill may slightly be lagged behind the demand to let talents familiar with it. Capturing the interconnection between

Introduction
The rapid advancement of information technology (e.g.,
5G, VR, and generative AI) has significantly reshaped the
skill requirements. According to the released reports, the
required skill set in the job market has changed by about
25% since 2015 (Communications 2022). Take machinelearning-related skills for example, there has been a booming demand for deep-learning-related skills since 2014 and
Large Language Model (LLM) (Radford et al. 2018) related
skills in the past year, but declining demand on classic statistical learning skills, as illustrated in Figure 1. Such shifts
in skill requirements have led to a significant imbalance of
skill demand and supply in various industries, commonly referred to as the skill gap (Larsen et al. 2018), which may
result in unemployment and business failures as industries
evolve (Kim, Hsu, and Stern 2006; McGuinness and Ortiz
2016; Donovan et al. 2022). It is crucial to forecast and analyze the skill supply and demand to help various stakehold* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19813

