The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Style2 Talker: High-Resolution Talking Head Generation
with Emotion Style and Art Style
Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, Ye Pan*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{tanshuai0219, bin.ji, whitneypanye}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Emotion Style Source
"The man widens his
eyes, feeling shocked."

Although automatically animating audio-driven talking heads
has recently received growing interest, previous efforts have
mainly concentrated on achieving lip synchronization with
the audio, neglecting two crucial elements for generating expressive videos: emotion style and art style. In this paper,
we present an innovative audio-driven talking face generation
method called Style2 Talker. It involves two stylized stages,
namely Style-E and Style-A, which integrate text-controlled
emotion style and picture-controlled art style into the final
output. In order to prepare the scarce emotional text descriptions corresponding to the videos, we propose a labor-free
paradigm that employs large-scale pretrained models to automatically annotate emotional text labels for existing audiovisual datasets. Incorporating the synthetic emotion texts, the
Style-E stage utilizes a large-scale CLIP model to extract
emotion representations, which are combined with the audio, serving as the condition for an efficient latent diffusion
model designed to produce emotional motion coefficients of
a 3DMM model. Moving on to the Style-A stage, we develop
a coefficient-driven motion generator and an art-specific style
path embedded in the well-known StyleGAN. This allows us
to synthesize high-resolution artistically stylized talking head
videos using the generated emotional motion coefficients and
an art style source picture. Moreover, to better preserve image details and avoid artifacts, we provide StyleGAN with the
multi-scale content features extracted from the identity image
and refine its intermediate feature maps by the designed content encoder and refinement network, respectively. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of audio-lip synchronization and performance of both emotion style and art style.

Identity
Source

Art Style
Source

"He is joyful, pulling up
the lip corners."

Audio
Source

Results with Style2

Figure 1: Illustrative animations produced by our
Style2 Talker. Our approach takes an identity image
and an audio clip as inputs and generates a talking head
with emotion style and art style, which are controlled
respectively by an emotion source text and an art source
picture.

Rosenberg 2005), while art style can evoke different human
experiences, leading to stronger visual effect and applications in entertainment (Yang et al. 2022b). However, the generation of audio-driven talking head videos with both styles
from a regular face photo has not been extensively explored.
When it comes to emotion style, previous works have either used a one-hot emotion label as the emotion source (Ji
et al. 2021; Sinha et al. 2021), limiting the range of expressions, or relied on an additional emotion video (Ji et al.
2022), which can be inconvenient as finding a video with
the desired emotion style might not always be feasible. In
contrast, we design our system to enable more user-friendly
input by allowing users to provide a text description of the
emotion style, encompassing emotion categories and detailed facial muscle movements. On the other hand, assuming that using a picture is more suitable and visual to indicate
art style like the rendering color of specific part, face shape,
etc, we prefer an art picture for the art style reference. While
there have been several efforts in single image style transfer (Yang et al. 2022a; Choi et al. 2020), these methods face
challenges when generating continuous videos driven by an

Introduction
The automatic animation of images plays a crucial role in
computer graphics and vision, finding applications in various fields such as film production, virtual avatars, and social media (Pataranutaporn et al. 2021). To enable more extensive applications, two essential elements come into play:
emotion style and art style, which we refer to as style2 . Emotion style allows users to convey communicative information more efficiently with diverse expressions (Ekman and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5079

