The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When To Grow?
A Fitting Risk-Aware Policy for Layer Growing in Deep Neural Networks
Haihang Wu* , Wei Wang, Tamasha Malepathirana, Damith Senanayake,
Denny Oetomo, Saman Halgamuge
Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Melbourne
haihangw@student.unimelb.edu.au

Model Size

Abstract

Underfitted Model

Se

Neural growth is the process of growing a small neural network to a large network and has been utilized to accelerate the
training of deep neural networks. One crucial aspect of neural growth is determining the optimal growth timing. However, few studies investigate this systematically. Our study reveals that neural growth inherently exhibits a regularization
effect, whose intensity is influenced by the chosen policy for
growth timing. While this regularization effect may mitigate
the overfitting risk of the model, it may lead to a notable accuracy drop when the model underfits. Yet, current approaches
have not addressed this issue due to their lack of consideration
of the regularization effect from neural growth. Motivated by
these findings, we propose an under/over fitting risk-aware
growth timing policy, which automatically adjusts the growth
timing informed by the level of potential under/overfitting
risks to address both risks. Comprehensive experiments conducted using CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet datasets show that
the proposed policy achieves accuracy improvements of up to
1.3% in models prone to underfitting while achieving similar
accuracies in models suffering from overfitting compared to
the existing methods.

Existing policy
Overfitted Model

S0
t0

te

te

te

Train Epochs

Figure 1: When to grow policy. To expedite the training process of the target large model with size Se , neural growth
grows the initial small model from size S0 at time t0 into
Se at time te . For the prevailing conventional strategies (illustrated by the green curve), te is not influenced by overfitting or underfitting risks directly, and these strategies may
fail to address under/over fitting risks effectively. By contrast, our fitting risk-aware policy accelerates growth (black
curve) by reducing te to mitigate underfitting risks when the
target model exhibits underfitting tendencies. Conversely, it
decelerates growth (red curve) by extending the te for models displaying signs of overfitting, addressing the overfitting
risk.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have significantly advanced
the state of the art in various computer vision tasks, including image classification (He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al.
2021), object detection (Fang et al. 2021), and image segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2023). For instance, with a model
size 10 times larger than ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016), the pioneering convolutional neural network ConvNext (Liu et al.
2022) achieves a substantial improvement in classification
accuracy on the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al. 2009) compared to ResNet. However, this improvement comes at the
expense of approximately 50 times more computational burden (Liu et al. 2022). Consequently, the development of efficient training methods for DNN becomes imperative.
Existing works demonstrate that neural growth can significantly reduce training time with minimal impact on accuracy (Li et al. 2022; Chang et al. 2018). For instance, studies
(Chang et al. 2018; Dong et al. 2020) show neural growth

can save around 40% training time for deep ResNet on CIFAR datasets with minor accuracy loss (Krizhevsky 2009),
and a similar finding has also been observed in vision transformer growth (Li et al. 2022). Although the study of neural
growth encompasses various dimensions (Maile et al. 2022;
Maile, Luga, and Wilson 2022), such as initialization of new
neurons/layers, when to grow (growth timing), and where to
grow, these works predominantly focus on the initialization
of new neurons or layers.
Few studies (Wen et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2020) investigate the “when to grow” policy for neural growth. Two major
policies are periodic growth which adds layers or neurons at
regular intervals, and convergent growth which adds layers
only when the current model has converged. In this study,
we investigate the impact of neural growth on the model accuracy and then develop a “when to grow” policy that considers this impact.
Our investigation reveals that neural growth inherently

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5994

