The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Label Supervised Contrastive Learning
Pingyue Zhang, Mengyue Wu*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{williamzhangsjtu, mengyuewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

mainly focus on the correlation between the sample and
its corresponding label set, which may limit the generalization ability of their models due to the sample-label binding
and the exclusive use of fully supervised learning. In MulCon (Dao et al. 2021), several label-level embeddings are
extracted for each label in the dataset for a single sample.
If two samples belong to the same class, their corresponding label-level embeddings, which correspond to the class,
are pulled together. Further, contrastive learning can boost
multi-label prediction model based on a Gaussian mixture
variational autoencoder (C-GMVAE), indicating that contrastive loss can pull together correlated label embeddings
and push away unrelated label embeddings in MLC (Bai,
Kong, and Gomes 2022).
Different from prior investigations into MLC contrastive
learning, our approach focuses primarily on capturing the
correlation between samples. In this regard, we specifically
analyze the relationships between two sets of labels, instead
of directly utilizing the label information itself. By decoupling samples from their associated labels, our intention is
to achieve improved performance and enhance generalization capabilities. This departure from binding samples to labels is driven by the aim to enhance overall model effectiveness. Taking inspiration from successful supervised contrastive learning (SupCon) (Khosla et al. 2020) technique,
which demonstrates enhanced capability in exploiting label information within single-label classification tasks, we
strive to extend these concepts to the realm of MLC. SupCon leverages label information and broadens the concept of
positive samples from the anchor to all samples sharing the
same label. This approach consistently outperforms traditional cross-entropy loss and shows robustness against data
corruptions. However, in the context of MLC, determining
positive samples for an anchor proves intricate and ambiguous due to the presence of multiple labels. This complexity
stands in contrast to single-label classification, where positive samples can be unambiguously identified by matching
their label to that of the anchor.
An intuitive question would be, should we consider one
sample as positive when its label set partially overlaps
with or exactly matches the anchor’s? We take both situations into consideration and properly define them as “ANY”
for partially overlapping, and “ALL” for exactly matching.
We then show the possible drawbacks of these two meth-

Multi-label classification is an arduous problem given the
complication in label correlation. Whilst sharing a common
goal with contrastive learning in utilizing correlations for
representation learning, how to better leverage label information remains challenging. Previous endeavors include extracting label-level presentations or mapping labels to an embedding space, overlooking the correlation between multiple
labels. It exhibits a great ambiguity in determining positive
samples with different extent of label overlap between samples and integrating such relations in loss functions. In our
work, we propose Multi-Label Supervised Contrastive learning (MulSupCon) with a novel contrastive loss function to adjust weights based on how much overlap one sample shares
with the anchor. By analyzing gradients, we explain why our
method performs better under multi-label circumstances. To
evaluate, we conduct direct classification and transfer learning on several multi-label datasets, including widely-used image datasets such as MS-COCO and NUS-WIDE. Validation
indicates that our method outperforms the traditional multilabel classification method and shows a competitive performance when comparing to other existing approaches.

Introduction
Multi-label classification (MLC) scenario commonly exists
in many machine learning domains such as computer vision (Wang et al. 2017), audio signal processing (Gemmeke
et al. 2017), and natural language processing (Yang et al.
2018). Unlike single-label classification, label correlation is
more complex and important in MLC. Previous endeavors
on MLC have included latent space learning and label correlation modeling (Wang et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2021; Ma
et al. 2021).
As a matter of fact, MLC shares a similar goal with
contrastive learning paradigm, where two instances exhibit
a relation based on their content, semantics, or label correlation (Zhang et al. 2022). Therefore, extending contrastive learning to MLC is a natural progression and has
shown promising results in recent works (Zhang et al. 2022;
Małkiński and Mańdziuk 2022; Bai, Kong, and Gomes
2022; Zhou, Kang, and Ren 2022). However, these works
* Mengyue Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16786

