The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CrossBind: Collaborative Cross-Modal Identification of
Protein Nucleic-Acid-Binding Residues
Linglin Jing1,2 * , Sheng Xu3,1∗ , Yifan Wang2 , Yuzhe Zhou4 , Tao Shen3 ,
Zhigang Ji5 , Hui Fang2 , Zhen Li4† , Siqi Sun3,1 †
1
Shanghai Artifcial Intelligence Laboratory
Department of Computer Science, Loughborough University
3
Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University
4
SSE & FNII, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
5
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{jinglinglin, xusheng1, sunsiqi1}@pjlab.org.cn, lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Accurate identification of protein nucleic acid binding
residues poses a significant challenge with important implications for various biological processes and drug design. Many
typical computational methods for protein analysis rely on a
single model that could ignore either the semantic context of
the protein or the global 3D geometric information. Consequently, these approaches may result in incomplete or inaccurate protein analysis. To address the above issue, in this paper, we present CrossBind, a novel collaborative cross modal
approach for identifying binding residues by exploiting both
protein geometric structure and its sequence prior knowledge
extracted from a large scale protein language model. Specifically, our multi modal approach leverages a contrastive learning technique and atom wise attention to capture the positional relationships between atoms and residues, thereby incorporating fine grained local geometric knowledge, for better binding residue prediction. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms the next best
state of the art methods, GraphSite and GraphBind, on DNA
and RNA datasets by 10.8/17.3% in terms of the harmonic
mean of precision and recall (F1 Score) and 11.9/24.8% in
Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC), respectively. We release the code at https://github.com/BEAM-Labs/CrossBind.

Figure 1: CrossBind model incorporates atom-level structure
features in a point cloud representation and sequence features from a protein language model into a cross-model fusion module for protein Nucleic-Acid-Binding residues prediction (red).

because it requires time-consuming and expensive experimental techniques, such as X-ray crystallography (Chayen
and Saridakis 2008) or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (Tugarinov, Hwang, and Kay 2004). Therefore,
computational prediction of binding residues in proteins
with high efficiency and accuracy is essential.
Proteins can be represented as strings of letters using the
20 distinct types of amino acids (AAs) and a residue refers to
a specific AA in a protein chain. Atoms are the basic units
of matter that make up everything in the universe, including AA. Several approaches have been developed for representing proteins computationally, including one-hot encodings (Yan, Friedrich, and Kurgan 2016), position-specific
scoring matrix (PSSM)(Su et al. 2019), pseudo-AA composition(Chou 2001), and hidden Markov models (HMM).
Physico-chemical properties (Chen and Lim 2008), including hydrophobicity and electrostatics, have also proven effective for protein-related tasks. Currently, two primary
types of protein-centric computational methods are available: sequence-based and structure-based methods.
Sequence-based methods analyze sequence-derived features to identify potential binding regions. Early machine

Introduction
Proteins and nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) interact in numerous biological processes, including regulation of gene expression, signal transduction, and post-transcriptional modification and regulation. Identifying protein nucleic-acidbinding residues with accuracy is critical for comprehending the mechanisms behind various biological activities and
developing new drugs. However, direct measurement of protein binding sites is challenging and often not feasible, especially when large-scale analyses are conducted. This is
* These authors contributed equally. The work was done during

their internships at the Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2661

