The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Uncertainty-Aware GAN for Single Image Super Resolution
Chenxi Ma
Fudan University, School of Computer Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
cxma@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative adversarial network (GAN) has become a popular
tool in the perception-oriented single image super-resolution
(SISR) for its excellent capability to hallucinate details. However, the performance of most GAN-based SISR methods is
impeded due to the limited discriminative ability of their discriminators. In specific, these discriminators only focus on
the global image reconstruction quality and ignore the more
fine-grained reconstruction quality for constraining the generator, as they predict the overall realness of an image instead of the pixel-level realness. Here, we first introduce the
uncertainty into the GAN and propose an Uncertainty-aware
GAN (UGAN) to regularize SISR solutions, where the challenging pixels with large reconstruction uncertainty and importance (e.g., texture and edge) are prioritized for optimization. The uncertainty-aware adversarial training strategy enables the discriminator to capture the pixel-level SR uncertainty, which constrains the generator to focus on image regions with high reconstruction difficulty, meanwhile, it improves the interpretability of the SR. To balance the weights
of multiple training losses, we introduce an uncertainty-aware
loss weighting strategy to learn the optimal loss weights adaptively. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach in extracting the SR uncertainty and the superiority of the UGAN over the state-of-the-art in terms of
reconstruction accuracy and perceptual quality.

Figure 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art GAN-based SISR methods with the RRDBNet (Wang et al. 2018) backbone,
including Beby-GAN (Li et al. 2022), LDL (Liang, Zeng,
and Zhang 2022), and SROOE (Park, Moon, and Cho 2023).
Our discriminator can predict SR uncertainty by indicating
pixels with unreliable reconstruction performance.

Introduction
all pixels in an image equally and fails to provide powerful
feedback for the generator, resulting in unpleasant visual results (Figure 1). In addition, similar to most deep networks,
these GAN models lack interpretability about the SR quality
and reconstruction confidence of different pixels or regions.
Therefore, GAN-based SISR methods call for a strong discriminator for further improvement.
In this paper, we propose an Uncertainty-aware GAN
(UGAN) by learning the regionally different reconstruction uncertainty to regularize SISR solutions of the GAN.
As (Qian et al. 2021) mentioned, pixels with large uncertainty carry visually important information and are hard to
reconstruct, such as textures and edges. To focus on these
challenging situations, we introduce the uncertainty into the
adversarial training of the UGAN, where the discriminator
can predict the SR uncertainty and enables the generator to
pay more attention to image regions with high uncertainty

Perception-oriented single image super-resolution (SISR),
aiming to generate a high-resolution (HR) image with better perceptual quality from its low-resolution (LR) version,
has gathered increasing attention. Thanks to the strong generation ability of the generative adversarial network (GAN),
GAN-based SISR methods (SRGAN (Ledig et al. 2017),
ESRGAN (Wang et al. 2018), RankSRGAN (Zhang et al.
2019), SPSR (Ma et al. 2020), Beby-GAN (Li et al. 2022),
LDL (Liang, Zeng, and Zhang 2022), SROOE (Park, Moon,
and Cho 2023)) can recover photo-realistic images.
However, the limited ability of the discriminator, which
only predicts a compressed representation of the overall image quality, becomes a crucial obstacle to most of the current
GAN-based SISR methods. Firstly, the discriminator treats
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4071

