The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Knowledge Extraction from LLMs
for Task Learning through Agent Analysis
James R. Kirk, Robert E. Wray, Peter Lindes, John E. Laird
Center for Integrated Cognition at IQMRI
Ann Arbor, MI 48105 USA
{james.kirk,robert.wray,peter.lindes,john.laird}@cic.iqmri.org

Abstract

ties, will (generally) generate responses conforming with
human embodiment and affordances. Responses that do
not consider an agent’s often non-human embodiment
(e.g., a single-armed robot) will often be infeasible for
that agent to execute.
4. Aligned with individual human preferences and values.
Users will have individual expectations about how tasks
should be performed and what constitutes appropriate
outcomes in the current situation. Task success requires
identifying and conforming to these preferences.
The first three requirements are necessary for an embodied agent to use an LLM response to act in its world. We
define responses that meet these requirements as viable. The
final requirement is necessary to achieve the task as a specific human user prefers. A response is situationally relevant
if it is viable and matches the user’s preferences.
To attempt to elicit viable responses from the LLM, we
previously (Kirk et al. 2023) employed a template-based
prompting approach (TBP; Olmo, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2021; Kirk et al. 2022; Reynolds and McDonell
2021). We developed prompt templates that included examples of desired task knowledge, instantiated them with context from the current task, and retrieved multiple responses
(varying LLM temperature to generate different responses).
Unfortunately, this TBP strategy produced responses that often violated one or more of the first three requirements. Human feedback could be used to overcome these limitations,
but required substantial input to correct responses (as well as
to align them with agent needs and user preferences), making TBP impractical for an embodied agent.
Motivated by these inadequacies, we present a novel
strategy: Search Tree, Analyze and Repair, and Selection
(STARS). Similar to “agentic” uses of LLMs (Sumers et al.
2023; Park et al. 2023; Richards 2023), we employ the LLM
as a component within a larger system. Like self-consistency
(Wang et al. 2023), STARS generates a large space of responses from the LLM (multiple responses to a query). In
contrast with the voting in self-consistency, the agent analyzes and evaluates each response for potential issues (e.g.,
mismatched embodiment, unknown words, ungrounded references). It attempts to repair problematic responses via targeted re-prompting of the LLM. To select among candidates,
the agent queries the LLM for a “preferred” response. The
STARS agent can still solicit human feedback, but the pri-

Large language models (LLMs) offer significant promise as a
knowledge source for task learning. Prompt engineering has
been shown to be effective for eliciting knowledge from an
LLM, but alone it is insufficient for acquiring relevant, situationally grounded knowledge for an embodied agent learning novel tasks. We describe a cognitive-agent approach,
STARS, that extends and complements prompt engineering,
mitigating its limitations and thus enabling an agent to acquire new task knowledge matched to its native language capabilities, embodiment, environment, and user preferences.
The STARS approach is to increase the response space of
LLMs and deploy general strategies, embedded within the
autonomous agent, to evaluate, repair, and select among candidate responses produced by the LLM. We describe the approach and experiments that show how an agent, by retrieving and evaluating a breadth of responses from the LLM, can
achieve 77 − 94% task completion in one-shot learning without user oversight. The approach achieves 100% task completion when human oversight (such as an indication of preference) is provided. Further, the type of oversight largely shifts
from explicit, natural language instruction to simple confirmation/discomfirmation of high-quality responses that have
been vetted by the agent before presentation to a user.

Introduction
Prompt engineering (Reynolds and McDonell 2021), along
with in-context learning (OpenAI 2023), has been shown
to be an effective strategy for extracting knowledge from
a large language model (LLM). However, embodied agents
learning task knowledge (e.g., goals and actions) face far
more stringent requirements. LLM responses must be:
1. Interpretable by the agent’s parsing capabilities. LLM responses must be understandable by the agent, meaning
grammar and terminology are presented in a form that
the agent can actually process.
2. Situated to the agent’s environment. Objects, features,
and relations referenced in an LLM response must be perceivable and identifiable in the environment for the agent
to ground the response successfully.
3. Matched to agent’s embodiment and affordances. An
LLM, trained on a large corpus describing human activiCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18390

