The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sparse Bayesian Deep Learning for Cross Domain Medical Image Reconstruction
Jiaxin Huang1 , Qi Wu1 , Yazhou Ren1,2 , Fan Yang2 , Aodi Yang1 , Qianqian Yang1 , Xiaorong Pu1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
hjx1134@gmail.com, qi.wu1@outlook.com, yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn, yf@std.uestc.edu.cn, aodi.yang@outlook.com,
yangqq507@163.com, puxiaor@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross domain medical image reconstruction aims to address
the issue that deep learning models trained solely on one
source dataset might not generalize effectively to unseen target datasets from different hospitals. Some recent methods
achieve satisfactory reconstruction performance, but often at
the expense of extensive parameters and time consumption.
To strike a balance between cross domain image reconstruction quality and model computational efficiency, we propose
a lightweight sparse Bayesian deep learning method. Notably,
we apply a fixed-form variational Bayes (FFVB) approach
to quantify pixel-wise uncertainty priors derived from degradation distribution of the source domain. Furthermore, by
integrating the uncertainty prior into the posterior sampled
through stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD), we
develop a training strategy that dynamically generates and
optimizes the prior distribution on the network weights for
each unseen domain. This strategy enhances generalizability
and ensures robust reconstruction performance. When evaluated on medical image reconstruction tasks, our proposed approach demonstrates impressive performance across various
previously unseen domains.

Low-dose Abdominal CT

Distribution shift

Low-dose Head CT

Knee MRI with Artifact from
MRNet

Domain shift

Head MRI with Artifact from
ADNI

Figure 1: Examples of two kinds of cross domain scenarios
in medical image reconstruction tasks: distribution shift and
domain shift.

varying texture of smooth regions in low-dose abdominal
and head computed tomography (CT) scans, along with the
diversity in artifact expression across magnetic resonance
image (MRI) datasets, highlight the substantial divergence
between source (training data) and target (testing data) domains. This gap presents evident challenges for the scalability and real-world applicability of DL in a clinical setting, with models prone to overfit to training data and subsequently lose generalization capabilities when encountering
new degradation types. Consequently, the ability to bridge
source-target domain discrepancies is crucial for the deployment of DL in medical image reconstruction tasks.
Recent progress in Bayesian deep learning offers promising solutions to the prevalence of overfitting in conventional reconstruction networks (Xu, Zhang, and Zhang 2020;
Zhang et al. 2020a; El Helou and Süsstrunk 2020). Bayesian
neural networks, in contrast to their traditional counterparts,
infer a posterior distribution over model parameters, thus
encapsulating the underlying uncertainty. This approach affords a more nuanced representation of parameter uncertainties, which is particularly advantageous in handling the
erratic nature of real-world clinical data. To address the
cross domain problem, some methods (Shankar et al. 2018;
Manakov et al. 2019; Du, Chen, and Yang 2020; Huang
et al. 2020) have been proposed to transfer the image from
the noise domain to the clean domain, based on the similarity between the query image and support example. For
instance, hybrid discriminator cycleGAN (Manakov et al.

Introduction
Image reconstruction is a crucial task in medical image processing that involves estimating the degradation distribution
from the given input and removing it to obtain a clean image.
Previous methods, such as deep neural networks (DNNs)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs), have demonstrated remarkable performance in medical image denoising and artifact removal (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015; Zhang et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017).
Such deep learning (DL) methods typically operate under
the assumption of consistent degradation features between
training and testing datasets, a simplification that diverges
from real-world application. Clinical datasets are inherently
varied, affected by differences in scanning protocols, imaging equipment manufacturers, and patient demographics (Li
et al. 2020), evident during simulations as well as actual patient assessments. Consider the example in Figure 1 which
contrasts two distinct cross domain scenarios in medical image reconstruction: distribution shift and domain shift. The
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2339

