The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PNeRFLoc: Visual Localization with Point-Based Neural Radiance Fields
Boming Zhao1 , Luwei Yang2 , Mao Mao1 , Hujun Bao1 , Zhaopeng Cui1 *
1

State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
2
Simon Fraser University
bmzhao@zju.edu.cn, mluweiyang@outlook.com, maomao6006@gmail.com, zhpcui@gmail.com, bao@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract

in a RANSAC loop (Fischler and Bolles 1981; Chum and
Matas 2008) to compute the camera poses. Besides handcrafted features (Bay et al. 2008; Lowe 2004), deep features
(DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018; Dusmanu et al.
2019; Germain, Bourmaud, and Lepetit 2020; Sarlin et al.
2020) have been extensively utilized recently to improve feature matching for better localization. Very recently, some
state-of-the-art (SOTA) feature matching methods have been
proposed to train the deep features and align features through
pose refinement in an end-to-end manner (Lindenberger et al.
2021; Sarlin et al. 2021). However, these structure-based
methods rely on 2D-3D or 2D-2D point matching, and thus
the accuracy is limited when the feature extraction and matching is sparse or noisy due to the large view changes between
images and textureless structures.
Regression-based localization trains a neural network and
takes the network parameters as a global map representation
which can directly regress the 6-DOF camera poses (Kendall,
Grimes, and Cipolla 2015; Balntas, Li, and Prisacariu 2018;
Kendall and Cipolla 2017; Moreau et al. 2022a; Shavit, Ferens, and Keller 2021) or the 3D scene coordinate of each
pixel (Cavallari et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2019)
by taking the query image as the network input. For the simplicity and end-to-end training manner, these methods have
attracted considerable attention. However, these methods are
usually scene-specific, and the accuracy heavily relies on the
distribution of the training images with poor generalization
to new viewpoints (Sarlin et al. 2021). Thus Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) has been introduced
recently to render realistic novel viewpoint images for data
augmentation (Chen et al. 2022; Chen, Wang, and Prisacariu
2021; Moreau et al. 2022b) that can boost the training of the
regression network. However, these methods are inherently
regression-based, which imposes constraints on the localization accuracy as it is not feasible to indefinitely expand the
training data and cover the whole 6D pose space.
To fix the problems of existing methods, we propose a
novel framework for visual localization, i.e., PNeRFLoc, that
integrates the structure-based framework and the renderingbased optimization with NeRF representation. Specifically,
on one hand, our framework supports the initial pose estimation by matching 2D and 3D feature points; on the other hand,
it also enables the pose refinement with novel view synthesis using rendering-based optimization, i.e., minimizing the

Due to the ability to synthesize high-quality novel views, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has been recently exploited to
improve visual localization in a known environment. However,
the existing methods mostly utilize NeRF for data augmentation to improve the regression model training, and their
performances on novel viewpoints and appearances are still
limited due to the lack of geometric constraints. In this paper,
we propose a novel visual localization framework, i.e., PNeRFLoc, based on a unified point-based representation. On one
hand, PNeRFLoc supports the initial pose estimation by matching 2D and 3D feature points as traditional structure-based
methods; on the other hand, it also enables pose refinement
with novel view synthesis using rendering-based optimization.
Specifically, we propose a novel feature adaption module to
close the gaps between the features for visual localization
and neural rendering. To improve the efficacy and efficiency
of neural rendering-based optimization, we also developed
an efficient rendering-based framework with a warping loss
function. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PNeRFLoc
performs the best on the synthetic dataset when the 3D NeRF
model can be well learned, and significantly outperforms all
the NeRF-boosted localization methods with on-par SOTA performance on the real-world benchmark localization datasets.
The code and supplementary material are available on the
project webpage: https://zju3dv.github.io/PNeRFLoc/.

Introduction
Visual localization is a fundamental task in computer vision
that aims to determine the precise position and orientation
of a camera in a known scene based on the visual input, and
it has widespread applications in areas such as robot navigation, augmented reality, virtual reality, etc. Traditional
structure-based localization, as the mainstream solution for
visual localization, has advantages such as scene agnosticism,
robustness, and high precision. These methods (Brachmann
and Rother 2021; Sarlin et al. 2019) require computing and
storing a global map consisting of 3D point locations and
try to find the correspondences between 2D feature points
extracted in the query image and 3D points in the reconstructed scene and use a Perspective-n-Point (PnP) solver
(Haralick et al. 1994; Bujnak, Kukelova, and Pajdla 2008)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7450

