The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SDAC: A Multimodal Synthetic Dataset for Anomaly and Corner Case Detection
in Autonomous Driving
Lei Gong1 , Yu Zhang1, 2 * , Yingqing Xia1 , Yanyong Zhang1,2 , Jianmin Ji1, 2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
gleisa19@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yuzhang@ustc.edu.cn, xiayingqing@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {yanyongz, jianmin}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Nowadays, closed-set perception methods for autonomous
driving perform well on datasets containing normal scenes.
However, they still struggle to handle anomalies in the real
world, such as unknown objects that have never been seen
while training. The lack of public datasets to evaluate the
model performance on anomaly and corner cases has hindered the development of reliable autonomous driving systems. Therefore, we propose a multimodal Synthetic Dataset
for Anomaly and Corner case detection, called SDAC, which
encompasses anomalies captured from multi-view cameras
and the LiDAR sensor, providing a rich set of annotations for
multiple mainstream perception tasks. SDAC is the first public dataset for autonomous driving that categorizes anomalies
into object, scene, and scenario levels, allowing the evaluation under different anomalous conditions. Experiments show
that closed-set models suffer significant performance drops
on anomaly subsets in SDAC. Existing anomaly detection
methods fail to achieve satisfactory performance, suggesting
that anomaly detection remains a challenging problem. We
anticipate that our SDAC dataset could foster the development of safe and reliable systems for autonomous driving.

Figure 1: A DeepLabv3+ model trained without the bus class
label incorrectly labels the overturned white bus as background buildings. From left to right are the RGB image,
ground truth, and detection results.

identifies the overturned white bus as background buildings,
posing potential risks to autonomous vehicles in real-world
scenarios. Therefore, to build a safe and reliable self-driving
system, the perception modules should be capable of detecting anomalies and corner cases. Research in this domain is
commonly named anomaly detection (Bogdoll, Nitsche, and
Zöllner 2022), or open-set detection (Scheirer et al. 2012).
Anomaly detection in autonomous driving is still in its
early stages. One main reason that impedes the development
is the lack of public datasets for performance evaluation.
Table 1 lists publicly available datasets for anomaly detection in autonomous driving. They are primarily created for
vision-based systems and provide either semantic masks or
bounding boxes from images, which restricts the advancement of 3D anomaly detection techniques. Regarding the
core concept, the terms “anomaly” and “corner case” are
often used interchangeably, and there is no consistent definition across different datasets. A systematization of corner cases (Breitenstein et al. 2020) for visual perception in
autonomous driving divides anomalies into different levels
based on the theoretical complexity of their detection. Inspired by it, we propose to categorize anomalies into object, scene, and scenario levels: object-level anomalies represent unknown objects, scene-level anomalies contain unexpected patterns of objects and domain shifts (Ben-David
et al. 2010), scenario-level corner cases denote patterns with
temporal context that contain the potential for collision. According to the definition, datasets listed in Table 1 mainly focus on the object and scene level anomalies, and anomalies
in these datasets are conflated due to the absence of systematization of corner cases. Furthermore, they do not provide
scenario-level corner cases.

Introduction
In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
achieved remarkable performance in various perception
tasks on public autonomous driving datasets such as
KITTI (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012), nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020) and Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016). Closedset detection models are designed based on the assumption that all classes and situations in testing would be available during training. However, in open-world road scenes,
autonomous vehicles may encounter anomalies and corner
cases such as unknown objects or severe weather conditions
that have never been seen while training. Closed-set methods
still struggle to handle unexpected situations in real-world
environments, which may lead to devastating consequences
in some situations. For instance, Figure 1 depicts an anomaly
example where an overturned white bus is located straight
ahead of the road. A DeepLabv3+ (Chen et al. 2018) model
trained on normal scenes without bus class labels incorrectly
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1914

