The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning GAI-Decomposable Utility Models for Multiattribute Decision Making
Margot Herin1 , Patrice Perny1 , Nataliya Sokolovska2
1 LIP6, Sorbonne University, Paris
2 LCQB, Sorbonne University, Paris

margot.herin@lip6.fr, patrice.perny@lip6.fr, nataliya.sokolovska@sorbonne-universite.fr

this paper on learning utility functions to efficiently represent values and preferences on multiattribute objects. For this
purpose, the most widely used preference model is the socalled additive utility model (Krantz et al. 1971). It assumes
a special kind of independence among attributes called “mutual preferential independence” which ensures that the overall utility of multiattribute objects can be decomposed as the
sum of mono-attribute utility functions. Such decomposability significantly simplifies the construction of the model that
can be achieved componentwise. However, in practice, preferential independence is often violated, when interactions
among attributes are present, and the simple additive utility
model does not fit. This is the reason why, in this paper, we
tackle the problem of learning a more general multiattribute
utility function in the presence of interacting attributes, with
the aim of keeping the model as simple and decomposable
as possible.
Les us consider a toy example involving a set of cars described using 3 attributes, namely car make, body color and
seat color. Let 𝑋1 = {Ferrari, Lamborghini, Porsche} be the
car make domain, 𝑋2 = {Blue, Red, Yellow} be the body
color domain, and 𝑋3 = {Black, White} the seat color domain. Assume that an individual (named the Decision Maker
hereafter, DM for short) prefers a red body color for a Ferrari but a blue one for a Porsche. Then one cannot build a
mono-attribute utility function on body color because the
preferences on body colors depend on the car make. This is
an example of interaction between two attributes. A similar
problem appears when, in addition, the DM prefers a black
seat color for a red car and a white seat color for a blue
car. This makes it impossible to define a mono-attribute utility function on the seat color. Hence the DM’s preferences
over 𝑋1 × 𝑋2 × 𝑋3 cannot be described by an additive utility
function of the form 𝑢(𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , 𝑥3 ) = 𝑢 1 (𝑥1 ) + 𝑢 2 (𝑥 2 ) + 𝑢 3 (𝑥3 )
due to presence of interactions among attributes {1, 2} on
the one hand, and among attributes {2, 3} on the other. A
less decomposable utility function can be used instead, of
the form: 𝑢(𝑥 1 , 𝑥2 , 𝑥3 ) = 𝑢 1,2 (𝑥 1 , 𝑥2 ) + 𝑢 2,3 (𝑥 2 , 𝑥3 ). Function
𝑢 1,2 measures the attractiveness of the pair (car make, body
color) for the DM while function 𝑢 2,3 measures car and seats
color matching.
We can see that some additive decomposability still remains in this decomposition but utility factors now include
several interacting attributes and the factors may partially

Abstract
We propose an approach to learn a multiattribute utility function to model, explain or predict the value system of a Decision Maker. The main challenge of the modeling task is
to describe human values and preferences in the presence
of interacting attributes while keeping the utility function as
simple as possible. We focus on the generalized additive decomposable utility model which allows interactions between
attributes while preserving some additive decomposability of
the evaluation model. We present a learning approach able to
identify the factors of interacting attributes and to learn the
utility functions defined on these factors. This approach relies
on the determination of a sparse representation of the ANOVA
decomposition of the multiattribute utility function using multiple kernel learning. It applies to both continuous and discrete
attributes. Numerical tests are performed to demonstrate the
practical efficiency of the learning approach.

Introduction
An increasing number of AI systems is used to describe,
explain or predict human behaviors in evaluation or decision making tasks, but also to help one or more individuals to make a relevant choice in the light of their preferences (Domshlak et al. 2011; Pigozzi, Tsoukias, and Viappiani 2016). Intelligent decision systems can also be used to
give machines the ability to make sophisticated decisions in
complex environments in an autonomous but controlled way
(Mosier and Skitka 2018). These systems are often grounded
on decision theory which proposes preference models that
verify normative properties guaranteeing the internal consistency of the value system modeled and the resulting decisions (Raiffa 1968; Fishburn 1970; Keeney, Raiffa, and
Meyer 1993; Roy 1996; Wakker 2010).
One of the current research challenges in this area is to produce models that are sufficiently expressive to account for a
diversity of possible behaviors, but at the same time sufficiently simple to remain interpretable and allow the explanation of evaluations or decisions (Labreuche 2011). There is
also a need of automated mechanisms for preference assessment and tailoring general models to specific users (Braziunas and Boutilier 2008). With this in mind, we focus in
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20412

