The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Test-Time Domain Adaptation by Learning Domain-Aware Batch Normalization
Yanan Wu1,2 * , Zhixiang Chi3 * , Yang Wang4 , Konstantinos N. Plataniotis3 , Songhe Feng1,2†
1

Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
2
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
3
The Edward S Rogers Sr. ECE Department, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5S3G8, Canada
4
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, H3G2J1, Canada
{ynwu0510,shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn, zhixiang.chi@mail.utoronto.ca, yang.wang@concordia.ca, kostas@ece.utoronto.ca
Abstract

TT-DA setting for an unseen target domain

...

Unlabeled
image data

Test-time domain adaptation aims to adapt the model trained
on source domains to unseen target domains using a few unlabeled images. Emerging research has shown that the label
and domain information is separately embedded in the weight
matrix and batch normalization (BN) layer. Previous works
normally update the whole network naively without explicitly decoupling the knowledge between label and domain.
As a result, it leads to knowledge interference and defective
distribution adaptation. In this work, we propose to reduce
such learning interference and elevate the domain knowledge
learning by only manipulating the BN layer. However, the
normalization step in BN is intrinsically unstable when the
statistics are re-estimated from a few samples. We find that
ambiguities can be greatly reduced when only updating the
two affine parameters in BN while keeping the source domain statistics. To further enhance the domain knowledge extraction from unlabeled data, we construct an auxiliary branch
with label-independent self-supervised learning (SSL) to provide supervision. Moreover, we propose a bi-level optimization based on meta-learning to enforce the alignment of two
learning objectives of auxiliary and main branches. The goal
is to use the auxiliary branch to adapt the domain and benefit main task for subsequent inference. Our method keeps the
same computational cost at inference as the auxiliary branch
can be thoroughly discarded after adaptation. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms the prior works
on five WILDS real-world domain shift datasets. Our method
can also be integrated with methods with label-dependent
optimization to further push the performance boundary. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ynanwu/MABN.

Adaptation

Weight
matrix
(label info.)

BN (domain info.)
Norm.

Affine

Inference
SSL loss
Gradient
Frozen

Target BN output
Adaptation

Tuned

Figure 1: Top: Illustration of TT-DA setting. Given an unseen target domain at test-time, a few unlabeled data are used
for adaptation and the adapted model is then used for inference. Bottom: To maximize the extraction of domain knowledge from unlabeled data, we only update the two affine parameters in BN using the label-independent self-supervised
loss. The goal is to enforce the adapted affine parameters to
correct the feature distribution towards target domain.

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a line of research to mitigate the distribution shift by incorporating mutual dependence of labeled source data and unlabeled target
data (Wang and Deng 2018; Ganin et al. 2016; Shu et al.
2018; Long et al. 2018). Clearly, it is impractical to repetitively perform UDA for every unseen target domain. In
contrast, domain generalization (DG) aims to overcome this
limitation by aspiring to train a model on source data that can
effectively generalize across unseen target domains (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013; Seo et al. 2020). Nevertheless, it is unrealistic to expect a universal model to handle all diverse unseen domains. To address such limitation,
pioneer works such as ARM (Zhang et al. 2021) and MetaDMoE (Zhong et al. 2022) propose to introduce an additional phase where the model is adapted to each target domain using a few unlabeled data prior to inference. We refer
to this scenario as test-time domain adaptation (TT-DA) as
shown in the top of Fig. 1. The motivation behind TT-DA is
that a small number of unlabeled data in a target domain are
easy to obtain (e.g., images obtained during camera calibration) and they provide a cue of the underlying distribution of
the target domain (Zhang et al. 2021).
Adapting a model with a limited amount of unlabeled

Introduction
Deep models achieve astonishing performance due to the
matched training and testing data distributions (Choi et al.
2018; Wu et al. 2021). However, such assumption is vulnerable in the real world as it is impossible to collect training data
to cover the universal distribution. Therefore, unseen distributions at inference lead to degenerate performance stemming from distribution shift (Geirhos et al. 2018).
* The authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15961

