The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Online Conversion Rate Prediction via Multi-Interval Screening and Synthesizing
under Delayed Feedback
Qiming Liu1,2 , Xiang Ao1,2,3 * , Yuyao Guo1,2 , Qing He1,2 *
1 Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology,

CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, CAS, Beijing 100049, China
3 Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS

{liuqiming21s, aoxiang, guoyuyao21s, heqing}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Due to the widespread adoption of the cost-per-action (CPA)
display strategy that demands a real-time conversion rate prediction (CVR), delayed feedback is becoming one of the major challenges in online advertising. As the true labels of a
significant quantity of samples are only available after long
delays, the observed training data are usually biased, harming
the performance of models. Recent studies show integrating
models with varying waiting windows to observe true labels
is beneficial, but the aggregation framework remains far from
reaching a consensus. In this work, we propose the MultiInterval Screening and Synthesizing model (MISS for short)
for online CVR prediction. We first design a multi-interval
screening model with various output heads to produce accurate and distinctive estimates. Then a light-weight synthesizing model with an assembled training pipeline is applied
to thoroughly exploit the knowledge and relationship among
heads, obtaining reliable predictions. Extensive experiments
on two real-world advertising datasets validate the effectiveness of our model.

Figure 1: Conversion distribution (bar) and accumulated
conversion distribution (line) of Criteo dataset.

w.r.t the delayed time on the Criteo dataset. Only about 60
percents of conversions happen in the first day after clicks,
while the longest delay between the click and conversion
could reach 30 days. Online models that wait for 30 days to
train would suffer severely from data staleness. On the other
hand, a shorter wait time would introduce fake negatives that
are temporarily observed as negative but may convert later,
which affect the label accuracy of training.
In previous studies, various strategies were put out to address the delayed feedback issue. Early strategies estimate
the anticipated conversion delay via jointly trained models
for accurate CVR prediction (Chapelle 2014; Yoshikawa
and Imai 2018), but they require lots of offline data and are
not suited for streaming deployment. As for online learning,
custom approaches choose a proper wait interval, known as
the waiting window, to wait and observe samples (Yang et al.
2021), achieving a trade-off between data freshness and label accuracy. Several methods utilize no or one short waiting window and rely on importance sampling (Bottou et al.
2013) to adjust the weights of samples, making fake negatives less influential. Despite their success, these methods
still suffer from highly biased training data with MissingNot-At-Random problems, resulting in sub-optimal performance (Chen et al. 2022; Gao and Yang 2022).
The delayed feedback provides samples with an extra
dimension of waiting time. Simply determining a waiting
interval and screening out one distinctive data slice is inadequate. Recently, merging models with different waiting windows becomes one alternative solution for the delayed feedback issue (Gao and Yang 2022; Hou et al. 2021;

Introduction
In the advertising market, advertisers purchase ads via realtime bidding platforms with various paying options such as
cost-per-click (CPC) and cost-per-action (CPA) (Guo et al.
2023; Hojjat et al. 2017; Zhang, Yuan, and Wang 2014;
Liu et al. 2023). Cost-per-action, which enables advisers
to bid on pre-defined conversions, e.g., purchase or registration, has become the primary objective due to its strong
connections to the final return and resistance to notorious
frauds (Chapelle, Manavoglu, and Rosales 2014; Goldfarb
and Tucker 2011). Therefore, a precise estimation of conversion rate (CVR) becomes a critical demand for all advertising platforms. Especially, online systems require a streaming
serving paradigm that continuously predicts and learns with
the latest data (He et al. 2016; Guo et al. 2022).
As a consequence, the delayed feedback problem is becoming one of the imperative challenges. Concretely, after an ad is clicked, it takes a delay ranging from several
seconds to a few days to receive the corresponding conversion. For example, Figure 1 exhibits the feedback proportion
* Correspondence to Xiang Ao and Qing He.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8796

