The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Eliciting Honest Information from Authors Using Sequential Review*
Yichi Zhang1 , Grant Schoenebeck1 , Weijie Su2
1

2

School of Information, University of Michigan
The Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania
yichiz@umich.edu, schoeneb@umich.edu, suw@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract

(from a large set of submissions) clashes with the shortage of
reliable peer reviews upon which the conference must base
its decisions. To mitigate this issue, we introduce a novel
review mechanism called the sequential review mechanism
that can 1) solicit high-quality information from authors to
assist the acceptance/rejection decisions, 2) reduce the reviewing workload and 3) incentivize authors to write highquality papers.
The main challenge is how to elicit useful information
from the authors who have conflicting interests with the conference. For instance, authors may desire to have more publications, leading them to seek acceptance for more papers,
regardless of the papers’ quality. In this case, although authors possess the best signals of their own papers’ quality
compared with any reviewer, they may prefer not to disclose
this information truthfully to the conference. For example,
while being asked to report the true quality of their papers,
authors may be inclined to inflate scores in order to increase
the chance of acceptance.
Fortunately, positive results exist. Su (2021) shows that it
is possible to elicit truthful rankings of paper quality from an
author with multiple submissions. The main idea of the proposed isotonic mechanism is to shift the noisy review scores
by running an isotonic regression based on the author’s reported ranking. It is shown that reporting the ranking of papers truthfully is the best response for an author. Unfortunately, this result only holds when the agent’s utility for each
paper is an increasing and convex function of the review
score and additive across papers. However, the assumption
of convex utility is strong and likely violated in the setting
of conference peer review. For example, this assumption is
violated when an author aims to maximize the number of her
accepted papers. Moreover, in this case, the isotonic mechanism can be gamed in a rather straightforward manner. Suppose such an author has several borderline papers and one
outstanding paper to submit. Under the isotonic mechanism,
her best response is nonetheless to rank the outstanding paper at the bottom such that the review scores of all borderline
papers will be shifted up after the isotonic regression, which
will almost certainly lead to the acceptance of all papers.1
In this work, we build on the idea of eliciting the author’s

In the setting of conference peer review, the conference aims
to accept high-quality papers and reject low-quality papers
based on noisy review scores. A recent work proposes the
isotonic mechanism, which can elicit the ranking of paper
qualities from an author with multiple submissions to help
improve the conference’s decisions. However, the isotonic
mechanism relies on the assumption that the author’s utility
is both an increasing and a convex function with respect to
the review score, which is often violated in realistic settings
(e.g. when authors aim to maximize the number of accepted
papers). In this paper, we propose a sequential review mechanism that can truthfully elicit the ranking information from
authors while only assuming the agent’s utility is increasing
with respect to the true quality of her accepted papers. The
key idea is to review the papers of an author in a sequence
based on the provided ranking and conditioning the review of
the next paper on the review scores of the previous papers.
Advantages of the sequential review mechanism include: 1)
eliciting truthful ranking information in a more realistic setting than prior work; 2) reducing the reviewing workload and
increasing the average quality of papers being reviewed; 3)
incentivizing authors to write fewer papers of higher quality.

1

Introduction

Peer review, the process of evaluating scientific research by
volunteered experts, undergirds the success of a conference
by ensuring the accepted papers are of high quality. However, the reliability of peer review (especially for large computer science conferences) has raised significant concerns.
In a NeurIPS experiment conducted in 2014 (Lawrence and
Cortes 2014), it was shown that within the set of papers recommended for acceptance by two independent committees,
the disagreement rate was as high as 50%. This result was
further confirmed in the repeated experiment conducted in
2021 (Cortes and Lawrence 2021). Even worse, the rapid
growth of the reviewing workload and the shortage of qualified reviewers, have posed unprecedented challenges to our
review system (Sculley, Snoek, and Wiltschko 2018).
This leads to the dilemma of conference peer review: the
conference’s objective of accepting only high-quality papers
* The full version of this paper is available on Arxiv (Zhang,
Schoenebeck, and Su 2023).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For an introduction of the isotonic mechanism and a careful
illustration of this example, please refer the full version.

9977

