The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Winnie: Task-Oriented Dialog System with Structure-Aware Contrastive Learning
and Enhanced Policy Planning
Kaizhi Gao, Tianyu Wang, Zhongjing Ma, Suli Zou*
School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology
gaokaizhi 0@126.com, wangtianyu1122@gmail.com, {mazhongjing, sulizou}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained encoder-decoder models are widely applied in
Task-Oriented Dialog (TOD) systems on the session level,
mainly focusing on modeling the dialog semantic information. Dialogs imply structural information indicating the interaction among user utterances, belief states, database search
results, system acts and responses, which is also crucial
for TOD systems. In addition, for the system acts, additional pre-training and datasets are considered to improve
their accuracies, undoubtedly introducing a burden. Therefore, a novel end-to-end TOD system named Winnie is
proposed in this paper to improve the TOD performance.
First, to make full use of the intrinsic structural information, supervised contrastive learning is adopted to narrow the gap in the representation space between text representations of the same category and enlarge the overall continuous representation margin between text representations of different categories in dialog context. Then, a
system act classification task is introduced for policy optimization during fine-tuning. Empirical results show that Winnie substantially improves the performance of the TOD system. By introducing the supervised contrastive and system act
classification losses, Winnie achieves state-of-the-art results
on benchmark datasets, including MultiWOZ2.2, In-Car,
and Camrest676. Their end-to-end combined scores are improved by 3.2, 1.9, and 1.1 points, respectively.

Figure 1: The first turn for Task-Oriented Dialog Systems.
state, capturing the entire context information. The belief
state is used to query a task-related database to align with the
user’s objective, e.g., determining matching entities or booking availability. Based on the matched results, the dialogue
policy module determines the next system action, guiding
the system to generate an appropriate response. Finally, the
natural language generation module converts the system action into a natural language response. However, this sequential approach has a significant drawback, as errors can propagate from one module to another, affecting subsequent subtasks.
To address this limitation, researchers are exploring module integration into a unified model, establishing an end-toend neural architecture for TOD systems. Due to the significant improvement of Pre-trained Language Models(PLMs)
(Yang et al. 2019) on various downstream tasks, researchers
construct the end-to-end TOD system (Hosseini-Asl et al.
2020) by modeling a cascaded generation problem based on
PLMs (Su et al. 2022). Through multi-task training, typical
generative models, e.g., GPT and T5 (Raffel et al. 2019),
can convert the whole dialog context into system responses.
Nevertheless, prior research (Zhang et al. 2020c) indicates
that inherent disparities in linguistic patterns exist between
human conversations and regular texts. Simply fine-tuning
PLMs are initially trained on plain texts. For downstream dialogue tasks, they hamper the model’s ability to adequately

Introduction
The extensive adoption of intelligent customer services and
personal assistants has sparked a growing fascination with
constructing Task-Oriented Dialog (TOD) systems. These
systems assist users in diverse tasks through natural language conversations, including tasks like table reservations,
hotel bookings, and more. To effectively serve users, TOD
systems need to possess the ability to comprehend user
intentions, devise appropriate strategies, and generate responses that resemble human-like interactions.
Conventional TOD systems adopt a modular pipeline approach. The natural language understanding module identifies user intentions and extracts relevant information from
utterances. Then, the dialogue state tracking (Zhang et al.
2020a) module monitors slot values and updates the belief
* Correponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18021

