The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mixed-Effects Contextual Bandits
Kyungbok Lee1 , Myunghee Cho Paik1, 2 , Min-hwan Oh3 , Gi-Soo Kim 4 *
1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University
2
Shepherd23 Inc.
3
Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University
4
Department of Industrial Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
turtle107@snu.ac.kr, myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr, minoh@snu.ac.kr, gisookim@unist.ac.kr
Abstract

user and observe the ratings for each item, these ratings are
stochastically correlated. The correlation does not stem from
the items being related to each other but from the inclusion
of unobservable variables specific to that user, such as the
user’s preferences or mood at the time, which act as shared
random effects across all ratings. While this problem setting
of multiple correlated responses per decision is prevalent
in various applications, the study of such aspects in online
decision-making has been limited.
In this paper, we propose a novel contextual bandit model
where the reward feedback from a single action is given
as vector and rewards can be correlated with each other
in a vector. We formulate this model using a mixed-effects
model. In statistical literature (Laird and Ware 1982; Zhang
et al. 2016), mixed-effects model is a multivariate regression model with both fixed effects and random effects to
handle the correlated structure among longitudinal/clustered
outcomes. Fixed effects refer to usual non-stochastic regression coefficients common to all subjects, while random effects refer to stochastic coefficients specific for each subject.
In mixed-effects model, outcomes from the same subject are
correlated by sharing the random effects common to all measurements from the same subject. Typically, weighted estimators taking the correlations into account are utilized to
efficiently estimate the regression parameters. To the best
of our knowledge, our work is the first to adapt the mixedeffects model to contextual bandits.
In other variants of multi-armed bandit for a vector of
rewards, such as combinatorial bandits (Chen, Wang, and
Yuan 2013; Qin, Chen, and Zhu 2014; Li et al. 2016), potential correlations among rewards are commonly ignored.
It is well known that when the outcomes are correlated, the
weighted least-squares estimator (WLSE) with the weight
incorporating correlation has a smaller variance than the
ordinary least-squares estimator. Since the regret is commonly related to the estimation error, utilizing an efficient
estimator has the potential for a tighter bound for the regret. However, incorporating correlation between rewards in
bandit algorithms poses technical challenges in analysis. Using the weighted estimator addressing correlation requires a
novel yet more involved analysis since the self-normalized
martingale theorem (de la Pena, Klass, and Lai 2004) does
not apply as in the regret analysis of canonical linear bandit algorithms (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011;

We study a novel variant of a contextual bandit problem with
multi-dimensional reward feedback formulated as a mixedeffects model, where the correlations between multiple feedback are induced by sharing stochastic coefficients called random effects. We propose a novel algorithm, Mixed-Effects
√
Contextual UCB (ME-CUCB), achieving Õ(d mT ) regret
bound after T rounds where d is the dimension of contexts
and m is the dimension of outcomes, with either known or
unknown covariance structure. This is a tighter regret bound
than that of the naive canonical linear bandit algorithm ignoring the correlations
among rewards. We prove a lower
√
bound of Ω(d mT ) matching the upper bound up to logarithmic factors. To our knowledge, this is the first work providing a regret analysis for mixed-effects models and algorithms involving weighted least-squares estimators. Our theoretical analysis faces a significant technical challenge in that
the error terms do not constitute martingales since the weights
depend on the rewards. We overcome this challenge by using
covering numbers, of theoretical interest in its own right. We
provide numerical experiments demonstrating the advantage
of our proposed algorithm, supporting the theoretical claims.

Introduction
Many real-world decision-making problems involve multiple outcomes for each decision. As an example, clinical
trials in medicine often yield multivariate outcomes in response to a treatment. Measurements obtained from different parts of the brain (Lennihan et al. 2000), as well
as assessments involving the eyes, ears, or psychological
distress comprising depression and stress scales, can exhibit correlations with one another. This correlation arises
as all these measurements are derived from the same individual. For behavioral intervention trials, treatments such
as standard of care in a hospital and educational intervention are implemented collectively, and the outcomes of the
subjects who receive intervention in the same session are
correlated. Another example of correlated responses arises
in user-rating systems, where each user evaluates multiple
items. The ratings provided by the same user can exhibit
correlation (Karumur, Nguyen, and Konstan 2016). In scenarios where we recommend a bundle of items to a single
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13409

