The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Explaining Reinforcement Learning Agents through Counterfactual Action
Outcomes
Yotam Amitai* , Yael Septon* , Ofra Amir
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
yotama@campus.technion.ac.il, yaelfr1994@gmail.com, oamir@technion.ac.il

Abstract

to (Greydanus et al. 2017), causal action graphs (Madumal
et al. 2020b) that are based on a causal model of the agent’s
policy, or reward decomposition (Juozapaitis et al. 2019)
which depict the agent’s expected reward for different components of the reward function, among others. In contrast
to these local explanation methods, a complementary set of
explanation approaches aim to convey the global policy of
the agent, that is, describe its overall strategy, behavior, or
how it behaves in different regions of the state space. Such
approaches include policy summaries (Amir, Doshi-Velez,
and Sarne 2019) that demonstrate agent behavior in selected
world-states based on some criteria or learning a decision
tree that approximates the agent’s policy (Liu et al. 2018).
In this work, we focus on helping laypeople understand
and anticipate agent preferences by depicting the trade-offs
between alternative actions. We propose a new method for
visualizing the outcomes of actions not taken by the agent
as a means to explain their chosen action. We introduce
“COViz” – Counterfactual Outcome Visualization1 , a novel
local explanation method that looks beyond the agent’s decision, to its manifestation. By displaying the outcomes of
both actions side-by-side, COViz provides insight into the
consequences of the agent’s decision. Observing the outcomes (“what if?”) can be beneficial for understanding agent
behavior or preferences. The contrastive nature of the explanation is in line with the literature on explanation in the social sciences which show that people typically provide and
prefer explanations that contrast alternatives (Miller 2019).
COViz draws inspiration from global policy summaries (Amir, Doshi-Velez, and Sarne 2019). Similar to policy summaries, COViz conveys agent behavior by showing
trajectories of the agent acting in the environment. It is therefore natural to incorporate COViz in policy summaries. We
propose a simple extension to COViz for generating global
explanations augmented by COViz which selects summary
states based on alternative action outcomes.
The idea of presenting action outcomes naturally complements many other local explanation methods that focus
on state-limited reasoning. In particular, this approach pairs
well with methods that present the agent’s motivation for
choosing a specific action (“why?”), such as reward decomposition (Juozapaitis et al. 2019) which quantifies the agent’s

Explainable reinforcement learning (XRL) methods aim to
help elucidate agent policies and decision-making processes.
The majority of XRL approaches focus on local explanations, seeking to shed light on the reasons an agent acts the
way it does at a specific world state. While such explanations are both useful and necessary, they typically do not
portray the outcomes of the agent’s selected choice of action. In this work, we propose “COViz”, a new local explanation method that visually compares the outcome of an agent’s
chosen action to a counterfactual one. In contrast to most local explanations that provide state-limited observations of the
agent’s motivation, our method depicts alternative trajectories
the agent could have taken from the given state and their outcomes. We evaluated the usefulness of COViz in supporting
people’s understanding of agents’ preferences and compare it
with reward decomposition, a local explanation method that
describes an agent’s expected utility for different actions by
decomposing it into meaningful reward types. Furthermore,
we examine the complementary benefits of integrating both
methods. Our results show that such integration significantly
improved participants’ performance.

Introduction
The behavior of reinforcement learning (RL) agents is complex - these agents operate in large, stochastic settings, and
are trained through rewards received during their interaction with the environment, which is often sparse. Moreover,
state-of-the-art RL models often utilize deep learning, resulting in complex models that can be hard to interpret, making the task of explaining such an agent’s behavior even
more complicated. While supporting people’s understanding of the decision-making of RL agents is challenging, it is
important for facilitating effective collaboration and appropriate trust, in particular in high-stakes domains (Rong et al.
2022) such as healthcare or transportation.
Numerous approaches for explainable reinforcement
learning (XRL) have been proposed in recent years (Milani
et al. 2022). Some methods aim to explain local decisions of
the agents in particular world-states. These include saliency
maps that show what features of the state the agent attends
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10003

Code repository: https://github.com/yotamitai/COViz

