The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FACL-Attack: Frequency-Aware Contrastive Learning
for Transferable Adversarial Attacks
Hunmin Yang1,2, * , Jongoh Jeong1, * , Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1

Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST
Agency for Defense Development
{hmyang, jeong2, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr
2

Band-specific Characteristics in Frequency Domain

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to security
risks due to the inherent transferable nature of adversarial examples. Despite the success of recent generative model-based
attacks demonstrating strong transferability, it still remains a
challenge to design an efficient attack strategy in a real-world
strict black-box setting, where both the target domain and
model architectures are unknown. In this paper, we seek to explore a feature contrastive approach in the frequency domain
to generate adversarial examples that are robust in both crossdomain and cross-model settings. With that goal in mind,
we propose two modules that are only employed during the
training phase: a Frequency-Aware Domain Randomization
(FADR) module to randomize domain-variant low- and highrange frequency components and a Frequency-Augmented
Contrastive Learning (FACL) module to effectively separate
domain-invariant mid-frequency features of clean and perturbed image. We demonstrate strong transferability of our
generated adversarial perturbations through extensive crossdomain and cross-model experiments, while keeping the inference time complexity.

Low FCs

Mid FCs

High FCs

domain-variant

domain-invariant

domain-variant

Data-level

Randomize

Preserve

Randomize

Feature-level

Keep

Perturb

Keep

Input

(e.g., color)

(e.g., shape, structure)

(e.g., texture)

Figure 1: To boost the transferability of adversarial examples, we exploit band-specific characteristics of natural
images in the frequency domain. Our method randomizes
domain-variant low- and high-band frequency components
(FCs) in the data space, and contrasts domain-invariant midrange clean and perturbed feature pairs in the feature space.

Introduction

Regarding the transferability of adversarial attacks, threat
model is typically carried out in three different settings (i.e.,
white-box, black-box, and strict black-box) depending on
the prior knowledge of the model architecture and data distributions by the adversary. In each respective setting, the
adversary has either complete knowledge of the target model
profile (i.e., architecture and weights) and data distributions
reflecting the target domain, query access to the limited
black-box only, or no information at all. In this work, we
specifically consider the strict black-box case in which the
victim attributes are completely unknown to the attacker
since such a scenario is commonly encountered in practical real-world settings. We believe that crafting adversarial
examples in this strict black box setting has practical values
towards stronger transferabilty, as well as safe and reliable
deployment of deep learning models.
In this light, generative attacks (Poursaeed et al. 2018;
Naseer et al. 2019; Salzmann et al. 2021; Naseer et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2022) have recently gained attention,
demonstrating the high transferability across unknown models and domains. Moreover, generator-based attacks yield
lower time complexity than iterative or optimization-based
methods in the inference stage, which is also a crucial part

Deep neural networks have brought forth tremendous improvements in visual recognition tasks. However, the inherent transferable nature of adversarial examples still exposes the security vulnerability to malicious attackers targeting such susceptible classifiers, causing serious threats
and undesirable outcomes in real-world applications. The
majority of current attack methods can be primarily classified into two main categories: iterative or optimization-based
approaches, and generative model-based approaches. Over
the past years, iterative attack methods (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018, 2017; Croce and Hein
2020; Lorenz et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2019;
Lu et al. 2020; Naseer et al. 2020) have been the standard attack protocol for its simplicity and effectiveness. However,
this iterative approach is frequently constrained by inefficient time complexity and the potential risk of over-fitting to
the training data and models. Moreover, it has shown limited
applicability in practical situations due to the low transferability to unknown models and domains.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6494

