The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Representation-Based Robustness in Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
Xiangyu Yin1 * , Sihao Wu1 * , Jiaxu Liu1 , Meng Fang1 , Xingyu Zhao2 ,
Xiaowei Huang1 , Wenjie Ruan1†
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK
2
WMG, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
{X.Yin22;sihao.wu;Meng.Fang;xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk, xingyu.zhao@warwick.ac.uk, w.ruan@trustai.uk

Abstract

scenarios because there are known gaps between simulated
and real-world environments, such as measurement errors,
motor noise, etc. The observations made by agents encompass unavoidable disturbances that originate from unforeseeable stochastic noises or errors in sensing (Huang et al. 2020;
Zhang, Ruan, and Xu 2023; Wang et al. 2022; Huang, Jin,
and Ruan 2023). For example, due to the existence of adversarial attacks in RL agents (Huang et al. 2017; Weng et al.
2019; Bai, Guan, and Wang 2019; Mu et al. 2023a,b), even
minor perturbations can lead to unsafe outcomes in safetycritical GCRL control strategies (Gleave et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2020).
Recently, numerous robust techniques have been implemented in traditional RL, which can be broadly classified
into two categories: i) Adversarial Training (AT), and ii) Robust Representation Training. Particularly, AT in RL trains
agents with adversarial states or actions (Pinto et al. 2017;
Kos and Song 2017; Zhang et al. 2020b), and then enhances
their adversarial robustness. However, AT-trained RL agents
cannot be utilized across downstream tasks, which limits
their transferability. Compared to AT, robust representation
training can deliver low-dimensional, collapse-resistent, and
perturbation-robust representations of observations (Gelada
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020a; Zang, Li, and Wang 2022),
which is the focus of recent studies. Specifically, it learns
representations that capture only task-relevant information
based on the bisimulation metric of states (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup 2011). Technically, this is achieved by
reducing the behavioural difference between representations
of similar observation pairs in the latent space.
Although there are already many articles enhancing the
robustness of RL, few works (He and Lv 2023) consider the
robustness of GCRL against adversarial perturbations. Different from the vanilla one, GCRL employs reward functions
characterized by sequences of unshaped binary signals. For
example, (Andrychowicz et al. 2018) allocates the reward
by determining whether the distance between the achieved
goal ĝ and the desired goal g is less than a threshold ϵ:
1(∥ĝ − g∥ ≤ ϵ). This makes the reward sequences in GCRL
notably sparser than those in traditional RL. The sparsity
of rewards in GCRL leads to inaccurate estimations of both
Q-values and actions. This presents a significant challenge
for directly implementing conventional RL attacks, particularly those that rely on pseudo labels such as Q-values or

While Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL)
has gained attention, its algorithmic robustness against adversarial perturbations remains unexplored. The attacks and
robust representation training methods that are designed
for traditional RL become less effective when applied to
GCRL. To address this challenge, we first propose the SemiContrastive Representation attack, a novel approach inspired
by the adversarial contrastive attack. Unlike existing attacks
in RL, it only necessitates information from the policy function and can be seamlessly implemented during deployment.
Then, to mitigate the vulnerability of existing GCRL algorithms, we introduce Adversarial Representation Tactics,
which combines Semi-Contrastive Adversarial Augmentation
with Sensitivity-Aware Regularizer to improve the adversarial
robustness of the underlying RL agent against various types
of perturbations. Extensive experiments validate the superior
performance of our attack and defence methods across multiple state-of-the-art GCRL algorithms. Our code is available
at https://github.com/TrustAI/ReRoGCRL.

Introduction
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) trains
an agent to learn skills in the form of reaching distinct goals.
Unlike conventional RL, GCRL necessitates the agent to
make decisions that are aligned with goals. This attribute
allows agents to learn and accomplish a variety of tasks
with shared knowledge, better generalization, and improved
exploration capabilities. Furthermore, it is binary-rewarded,
which is easier to implement compared to hand-crafted complex reward functions. Recently, there has been a significant surge in research related to GCRL. Exemplary works
include methods based on techniques such as hindsight experience replay (Andrychowicz et al. 2018; Fang et al. 2018,
2019), imitation learning (Ghosh et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2021b), or offline learning (Chebotar et al. 2021; Ma et al.
2022; Mezghani et al. 2023).
Generally, these studies tend to assume that the sensing
and perception systems of agents are devoid of uncertainties.
However, this presumption is hardly applicable in real-world
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21761

