The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decentralized Monte Carlo Tree Search for Partially Observable Multi-Agent
Pathfinding
Alexey Skrynnik1,2 , Anton Andreychuk1 , Konstantin Yakovlev2,1 , Aleksandr Panov1,2
1

2

AIRI, Moscow, Russia
Federal Research Center for Computer Science and Control of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
skrynnikalexey@gmail.com, andreychuk@airi.net, yakovlev@isa.ru, panov@airi.net

Abstract

agent reaches its goal, it is immediately assigned another
one. This setting is motivated by the real-world delivery applications when a group of robots has to constantly deliver
some items dispersed in the shared environment, e.g., items
of goods in the warehouse, documents in the office building,
medicine in the hospital, etc.
One of the ways to solve LMAPF is to adapt existing
MAPF solvers to the lifelong setting. One of such recent
methods, RHCR (Li et al. 2021), involves centralized replanning every k time-steps. Indeed, when k is small and
the number of agents is large, the performance of such an approach degrades significantly as it may take too much time
for a solver to construct a joint collision-free plan. Boundedhorizon planning can mitigate this issue to a certain extent;
indeed, RHCR utilizes this technique. However, this is still
limited.
An appealing orthogonal approach is to solve LMAPF in
a distributed fashion, i.e., model it as a decentralized sequential decision-making process when every agent individually decides what action to take at each time step. Most of
the state-of-the-art decentralized (L)MAPF solvers are the
learnable ones (Sartoretti et al. 2019; Damani et al. 2021;
Ma, Luo, and Ma 2021; Li et al. 2022). However, the performance of these solvers may rely heavily on the dataset
of problem instances used at the learning stage. Their performance often drops significantly in setups that are unlike
the latter ones. This is a general problem known in machine
learning as low generalization. To mitigate this issue, hybrid
approaches were proposed that typically include a (searchbased) global planner and a (local) learnable policy that is
tailored to follow the global plan while resolving the potential inter-agent conflicts (Wang et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2020). Such approaches also have limitations because, under
challenging cases, it is required to move significantly away
from the local sub-goal for the agents to disperse in bottlenecks. Learning-based methods may demonstrate low efficiency in this kind of task. Thus, another way of combining
the learning-based and search-based approaches is desirable.
This work follows a hybrid search-and-learning approach
to create a decentralized MAPF solver. However, our
methodology is different from the ones described above. On
the one hand, we rely on the (lightweight) learnable policy
that can drive an agent toward a goal. On the other hand, to
improve the agent’s ability to cooperate, we utilize Monte-

The Multi-Agent Pathfinding (MAPF) problem involves finding a set of conflict-free paths for a group of agents confined to a graph. In typical MAPF scenarios, the graph
and the agents’ starting and ending vertices are known beforehand, allowing the use of centralized planning algorithms. However, in this study, we focus on the decentralized MAPF setting, where the agents may observe the other
agents only locally and are restricted in communications with
each other. Specifically, we investigate the lifelong variant
of MAPF, where new goals are continually assigned to the
agents upon completion of previous ones. Drawing inspiration from the successful AlphaZero approach, we propose a
decentralized multi-agent Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
method for MAPF tasks. Our approach utilizes the agent’s
observations to recreate the intrinsic Markov decision process, which is then used for planning with a tailored for
multi-agent tasks version of neural MCTS. The experimental results show that our approach outperforms state-of-theart learnable MAPF solvers. The source code is available at
https://github.com/AIRI-Institute/mats-lp.

Introduction
Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) is a non-trivial problem
inspired by numerous practical applications like automated
warehouses, video games, intelligent transport systems, etc.
A large body of works (Ma et al. 2019; Sharon et al. 2015;
Wagner and Choset 2011) study this problem in a centralized setting, i.e., it is assumed that a central control unit exists that i) has a knowledge of the full state of the environment (locations of the agents, their goals, positions of the
static obstacles, etc.) at any time moment; ii) is in charge of
providing conflict-free solutions to MAPF queries. Indeed,
various flavors of MAPF problems are studied within this
setting, e.g., Classical MAPF (Stern et al. 2019) when each
agent is assigned a unique goal, Colored MAPF (Ma and
Koenig 2016) when the agents are split into teams and agents
of one team are interchangeable, Anonymous MAPF (Hönig
et al. 2018), when any agent can pursue any goal, etc. One
MAPF variant, that we study in this work, is the Lifelong MAPF (LMAPF). In this setting, the agents must constantly pursue goals (provided externally), i.e., when an
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17531

