The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DUEL: Duplicate Elimination on Active Memory
for Self-Supervised Class-Imbalanced Learning
Won-Seok Choi1 , Hyundo Lee1 , Dong-Sig Han1 , Junseok Park1 , Heeyeon Koo2 ,
Byoung-Tak Zhang1,3, *
1

Seoul National University
2
Yonsei University
3
AI Institute of Seoul National University (AIIS)
{wchoi, hdlee, dshan, jspark, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr
Abstract

et al. 2021) has proposed self-supervised pretraining techniques that can be trained with minimally processed data and
demonstrate improved performance in class-imbalanced environments.
Self-supervised learning (Chen et al. 2020a; He et al.
2020; Zbontar et al. 2021), which is the modernized form
of metric learning (Khosla et al. 2020; Sohn 2016), has the
advantage of acquiring positive samples via augmentation
which reflects the inductive bias in the data. Similarly, by
using data in either a mini-batch or a memory as negative
samples, SSL methods do not require class information to
collect such negatives. However, in a class-imbalanced environment, we have observed that the relationships within and
between classes are unevenly reflected when training an SSL
model. This imbalance leads to performance degradation in
both mini-batch and memory-based methods. Based on this
empirical evidence, we claim that an active memory that can
alleviate the imbalances between latent classes is necessary
for self-supervised class-imbalanced learning.
In this context, we mimic a well-known human cognitive
process to achieve an active memory. Human working memory (Baddeley and Logie 1999; Baddeley 2012) is a prominent cognitive concept that explains how humans deal with
extreme class-imbalances via an active data filtering process.
Figure 1.A shows the mechanism of human working memory. The Central Executive System (CES), which is a supervisory subsystem of working memory, inhibits dominant information (Miyake et al. 2000; Wongupparaj, Kumari, and
Morris 2015) from perceived data and remembers it while
maximizing the amount of information (Baddeley and Logie 1999). These cognitive phenomena support our hypothesis that eliminating the most duplicated data will increase
the distinctiveness information within memory.
To compute the amount of the information, we define distinctiveness information, which measures how different a
data point is from other data points. We also introduce Hebbian Metric Learning (HML) which directly optimizes distinctiveness information while reducing information among
co-fired similar data inspired by the characteristics of Hebbian learning (Hebb 2005; Löwel and Singer 1992). We
show that to generalize HML in class-imbalanced environments, an active memory is essential. In this case, a policy
for managing the memory should maximize the distinctiveness information in the memory.

Recent machine learning algorithms have been developed using well-curated datasets, which often require substantial cost
and resources. On the other hand, the direct use of raw data
often leads to overfitting towards frequently occurring class
information. To address class imbalances cost-efficiently, we
propose an active data filtering process during self-supervised
pre-training in our novel framework, Duplicate Elimination
(DUEL). This framework integrates an active memory inspired by human working memory and introduces distinctiveness information, which measures the diversity of the data
in the memory, to optimize both the feature extractor and
the memory. The DUEL policy, which replaces the most duplicated data with new samples, aims to enhance the distinctiveness information in the memory and thereby mitigate
class imbalances. We validate the effectiveness of the DUEL
framework in class-imbalanced environments, demonstrating
its robustness and providing reliable results in downstream
tasks. We also analyze the role of the DUEL policy in the
training process through various metrics and visualizations.

Introduction
Recent machine learning algorithms are heavily influenced
by the quantity and quality of data. However, when agents
collect data in real-world environments, the class distribution of the unprocessed data is long-tailed, indicating that
data from certain classes are acquired much more frequently
than others (Liu et al. 2019). When trained on such raw
data without any processing, deep learning models tend to
overfit to these frequent classes. Therefore, adaptive data
refinement during the training process is essential to mitigate class imbalances cost-efficiently. Traditional methods
have been developed based on resampling (Buda, Maki, and
Mazurowski 2018; Pouyanfar et al. 2018) and reweighting (Cao et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2020) techniques. However, these methods require class information
for each data point, which increases the cost of preprocessing and labeling. Even semi-supervised approaches (Wei
et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2020) still require a fine-tuned support set that can reflect the target data distribution. To address these issues, recent research (Yang and Xu 2020; Liu
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11579

