The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Defeasible Normative Reasoning:
A Proof-Theoretic Integration of Logical Argumentation
Ofer Arieli1 , Kees van Berkel2 , Christian Straßer2
1

School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv Academic College, Israel
Institute for Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
oarieli@mta.ac.il, {kees.vanberkel, christian.strasser}@rub.de

2

Abstract

features: their modularity, enabling simultaneous investigation of large classes of logics; their proven suitability for the
analysis of meta-properties; and their rule-based characteristic, accommodating constructive reasoning via proof-search.
Such proof systems are predominantly monotonic. This perspective faces serious challenges in the context of defeasible
reasoning, where inferences deemed unproblematic at some
stage of the reasoning process may become problematic at
a later stage (of a derivation). We find nonmonotonic proof
theory in the literature, from Hilbert style proofs in adaptive logics (Batens 2007; Straßer 2014) to sequent based systems (Bonatti and Olivetti 2002; Giordano et al. 2009; Arieli
and Straßer 2019). However, many challenges remain unaddressed, such as providing a transparent bridge to argumentation theory and affording an explicit account of different
commitment statuses (such as acceptance and rejection).
NMR comes with a variety of inference relations: from
credulous ones mapping out different, possibly inconsistent,
but ultimately defendable stances, to various skeptical approaches. The latter differ, e.g., in their treatment of floating conclusions, i.e., conclusions that can be obtained by
several otherwise conflicting arguments. In this paper we
focus on an approach that blocks floating conclusions. In
the context of normative reasoning it has the advantage of
providing conclusions that are non-controversial and therefore give a firm basis for actionable decisions. The approach
is known as grounded semantics in formal argumentation
(Dung 1995) or as free consequences when reasoning with
maximal consistent sets (Rescher and Manor 1970).
The general contribution of this article is a class of nonmonotonic calculi that proof-theoretically characterize skeptical reasoning by internalizing formal argumentation’s notion of argumentative attack. In particular, we develop a
proof system for defeasible skeptical reasoning in the context of formal normative reasoning (generally referred to as
deontic logic), and show its relations to two central traditions
in nonmonotonic reasoning: formal argumentation (Dung
1995) and constrained Input/Output (I/O) logics (Makinson
and van der Torre 2001). That is, we demonstrate a threefold
correspondence between the following approaches to NMR:

We present a novel computational approach to resolving conflicts among norms by nonmonotonic normative reasoning
(in constrained I/O logics). Our approach extends standard
sequent-based proof systems and makes them more adequate
to nonmonotonic reasoning by adding to the sequents annotations that keep track of what is known about the defeasible
status of the derived sequents. This makes transparent the reasons according to which norms should be applicable or inapplicable, and accordingly the sequents that make use of such
norms are accepted or retracted. We also show that this proof
theoretic method has tight links to the semantics of formal argumentation frameworks. The outcome of this paper is thus a
threefold characterization result that relates, in the context of
nonmonotonic normative reasoning, three traditional ingredients of AI-based reasoning methods: maximally consistent
sets of premises (in constrained I/O logics), derived sequents
(which are accepted in corresponding annotated sequent calculi), and logical arguments (that belong to the grounded extensions of the induced logical argumentation frameworks).

1

Introduction

The central role of defeasible, or nonmonotonic reasoning
(NMR) in symbolic AI is due to the need to manage uncertainty and resolve conflicts in complex reasoning tasks. Over
the past decades, formal argumentation (Dung 1995; Baroni
et al. 2018) has proven to be an effective framework for the
unified representation and comparison of nonmonotonic logics in AI. Its auspiciousness is due to its pivotal notions of
argumentative attack and defense, which are strongly akin to
natural reasoning practices (Mercier and Sperber 2011). Due
to the inevitability of norm conflicts and defeasibility in normative reasoning, recent years have also seen an increasing
interest in argumentative characterizations of logics of normative reasoning (Straßer and Arieli 2015; da Costa Peirera
et al. 2017; Beirlaen, Straßer, and Heyninck 2018; Governatori, Rotolo, and Riveret 2018; Liao et al. 2018; Pigozzi and
van der Torre 2018; Pardo and Straßer 2022).
A natural perspective on (logical) reasoning is prooftheoretic, where inference rules are iteratively applied.
In particular, sequent-style proof systems (Gentzen 1934;
Troelstra and Schwichtenberg 2000) own their renown three

1. The class of sequent-style calculi proposed in this article: Annotated Deontic Argumentation Calculi) (ADAC).
These are nonmonotonic proof systems deriving sequents
augmented with annotations for describing their status in

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10450

