The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

p-Laplacian Adaptation for Generative Pre-trained Vision-Language Models
Haoyuan Wu* , Xinyun Zhang* , Peng Xu, Peiyu Liao, Xufeng Yao, Bei Yu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
wuhyhowell@gmail.com, xyzhang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

2022b,a; Cho et al. 2021). Using a sequence-to-sequence
approach, generative VLMs can align cross-modal representations, which benefits multi-modal downstream tasks such
as image captioning (Lin et al. 2014; Sidorov et al. 2020;
Gurari et al. 2020), visual question answering (VQA) (Chen
et al. 2020b; Goyal et al. 2017), etc.
To effectively transfer the knowledge gained by pretrained VLMs to downstream tasks, fine-tuning (Devlin et al.
2018; Howard and Ruder 2018) has become the de facto
paradigm, whereby all parameters of the model are tuned
for each downstream task. However, as model sizes continue to grow rapidly, fine-tuning is increasingly affected
by the parameter-efficiency issue (Houlsby et al. 2019).
To address this challenge, (Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022b;
Houlsby et al. 2019) have proposed a solution that involves
the use of adapters, which are small, learnable modules that
can be inserted into the transformer blocks. By only tuning
the adapters added to the model for each downstream task
while keeping the original pre-trained model fixed, this approach achieves high parameter-efficiency and has demonstrated promising results on various downstream tasks.
This paper introduces a novel modeling framework for
adapter tuning coupled with attention. Specifically, we reformulate tuning adapters after attention to the spectral message passing process in GNNs on the attention graphs,
wherein nodes and the edge weights are the projected query
and value features and the attention weights, respectively.
The attention graphs are bipartite, and each edge connects
a feature in the projected query space and one in the projected value space. The discrepancy between the two feature
spaces renders the attention graphs heterophilic graphs, in
which the neighborhood nodes have distinct features (Fu,
Zhao, and Bian 2022; Zhu et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2022).
Within this framework, the standard adapter (Sung, Cho, and
Bansal 2022b; Houlsby et al. 2019) tuning process becomes
a spectral graph convolution with the adjacency matrix serving as the aggregation matrix on the attention graphs. However, this graph convolution is impractical for handling heterophilic graphs (Fu, Zhao, and Bian 2022).
To mitigate this heterophilic issue, we propose a new
adapter module, p-adapter. Same as the vanilla adapter, padapter only has a small number of learnable parameters.
What distinguishes p-adapter is to incorporate node features
to renormalize the attention weights in pre-trained VLMs,

Vision-Language models (VLMs) pre-trained on large corpora have demonstrated notable success across a range of
downstream tasks. In light of the rapidly increasing size
of pre-trained VLMs, parameter-efficient transfer learning
(PETL) has garnered attention as a viable alternative to full
fine-tuning. One such approach is the adapter, which introduces a few trainable parameters into the pre-trained models while preserving the original parameters during adaptation. In this paper, we present a novel modeling framework
that recasts adapter tuning after attention as a graph message passing process on attention graphs, where the projected query and value features and attention matrix constitute the node features and the graph adjacency matrix, respectively. Within this framework, tuning adapters in VLMs
necessitates handling heterophilic graphs, owing to the disparity between the projected query and value space. To address this challenge, we propose a new adapter architecture, p-adapter, which employs p-Laplacian message passing in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Specifically, the attention weights are re-normalized based on the features, and
the features are then aggregated using the calibrated attention matrix, enabling the dynamic exploitation of information with varying frequencies in the heterophilic attention
graphs. We conduct extensive experiments on different pretrained VLMs and multi-modal tasks, including visual question answering, visual entailment, and image captioning. The
experimental results validate our method’s significant superiority over other PETL methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/wuhy68/p-Adapter/

Introduction
Recently, pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al.
2018; Brown et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019; Clark et al. 2020;
Raffel et al. 2020; Lewis et al. 2020) have demonstrated
significant success within the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) community. By leveraging massive amounts of unlabeled data during training, PLMs can learn highly performant and generalizable representations, leading to improvements on various downstream tasks. Similarly, researchers
have successfully applied massive pre-training techniques
to generative vision-language models (VLMs) (Li et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6003

