The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SimCS: Simulation for Domain Incremental Online Continual Segmentation
Motasem Alfarra1,2 , Zhipeng Cai1 , Adel Bibi3 , Bernard Ghanem2 , Matthias Müller1
2

1
Intel Labs
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
3
University of Oxford
motasem.alfarra@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

fication with carefully crafted data streams that assume nonoverlapping tasks, e.g. , the class-incremental setting where
each task corresponds to a fixed set of classes.
This work studies a more realistic problem of Online
Domain-Incremental Continual Learning for Semantic
Segmentation (ODICS). ODICS is essential for many applications where the perception system needs to be updated
over time. In this setting, the model is trained with a limited computation and memory budget at each time step on
data sampled from a varying distribution (Ghunaim et al.
2023). The variation comes from domain shifts, e.g. , data
coming from a different environment; the model has no information about the domain boundaries. This setup mimics
the practical scenario where labeled data from new scenes
(weather conditions, cities, etc. ) are generated continually
over time, e.g. , when developing a segmentation system for
autonomous driving, last-mile delivery, or other robotics applications. The goal is to continually train the model (on the
data center) with limited budget to enable frequent updates
(e.g. , once a day for self-driving cars) of deployed models.
Despite the importance of this problem, it has received
little attention in recent years. The few prior arts (Douillard
et al. 2021; Maracani et al. 2021) for continual semantic segmentation study the problem under two unrealistic assumptions. First, it is assumed that the deployed model is aware of
the domain boundaries (Garg et al. 2022), i.e. , the domain
change, during both training and testing. While this simplifies the problem, domain boundaries are often not available
in real-world applications as the transition between different
domains is usually smooth or unknown. Second, the model
is permitted to make any number of training iterations over
current domain data, i.e. , learning with unlimited computational budget (Douillard et al. 2021; Garg et al. 2022; Maracani et al. 2021). This means that the model can pause the
stream from revealing new data during training, while in realistic setups, streams continuously and uninterruptedly reveal new data and remain agnostic to the training status of
the model (Cai, Sener, and Koltun 2021; Alfarra et al. 2023).
Moving closer to practical scenarios, we study the problem of online, i.e. limited computational budget, domainincremental continual learning for semantic segmentation.
We propose a new benchmark using public datasets captured
from different cities and different weather conditions and order them based on acquisition time. We find that the domain

Continual Learning is a step towards lifelong intelligence
where models continuously learn from recently collected data
without forgetting previous knowledge. Existing continual
learning approaches mostly focus on image classification in
the class-incremental setup with clear task boundaries and unlimited computational budget. This work explores the problem of Online Domain-Incremental Continual Segmentation
(ODICS), where the model is continually trained over batches
of densely labeled images from different domains, with limited computation and no information about the task boundaries. ODICS arises in many practical applications. In autonomous driving, this may correspond to the realistic scenario of training a segmentation model over time on a sequence of cities. We analyze several existing continual learning methods and show that they perform poorly in this setting
despite working well in class-incremental segmentation. We
propose SimCS, a parameter-free method complementary to
existing ones that uses simulated data to regularize continual
learning. Experiments show that SimCS provides consistent
improvements when combined with different CL methods.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning has been the go-to solution for many
computer vision problems (He et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015).
The large scale of available labeled data has been the key
factor for its success (Radford et al. 2021). However, in
many settings the training data is not available all at once
but generated sequentially over time. Moreover, the distribution of the training data may vary gradually over time (Cai,
Sener, and Koltun 2021; Lin et al. 2021), e.g. , images taken
in winter with rain and snow versus images with clear skies
taken in the summer. Naively applying supervised learning
in such a setting suffers from catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017), i.e. , training a model on new data
of a different distribution worsens its performance on old
data. Continual learning (CL) attempts to address these issues by designing algorithms that operate on continuous data
streams and efficiently adapt to new data while retaining previous knowledge. However, in the existing CL literature (Li
and Hoiem 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2018), methods are usually
evaluated only on restricted problems such as image classiCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10795

