The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AMSP-UOD: When Vortex Convolution and Stochastic Perturbation Meet
Underwater Object Detection
Jingchun Zhou1 * , Zongxin He2 * , Kin-Man Lam3 , Yudong Wang4 , Weishi Zhang1 , Chunle Guo5 ,
Chongyi Li5†
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Huizhou University
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
5
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
zhoujingchun03@gmail.com, hikari0608@outlook.com, enkmlam@polyu.edu.hk, yudongwang@tju.edu.cn,
teesiv@dlmu.edu.cn, {guochunle, lichongyi}@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract

Due to light absorption and scattering (Zhou et al. 2023b;
Zhang et al. 2022), underwater imaging often suffers from
quality degradation compared to object detection in highquality images. This impacts the performance of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based object detectors. The
key challenges include 1) the lack of underwater object detection datasets hindering the training of deep learning models, 2) degradation factors, such as light absorption and scattering, leading to low contrast and color distortion (Zhou
et al. 2023a) (Guo et al. 2022), 3) the difficulty in extracting
rich details from small and clustered underwater objects, and
4) class imbalance, making the challenging for object detectors to learn features for classes with a small-sample size (Fu
et al. 2023). To address these challenges, new detectors capable of accurate localization and classification in complex
underwater environments are required. This research aims to
advance ocean science and deep-sea exploration technology
and holds practical value in environmental protection and
resource development.
In this paper, we propose the AMSP-UOD network,
crafted to tackle non-ideal imaging factors in underwater
environments. Utilizing the optical imaging model I =
H(J, B, t) + N (I represent observed image, J represent
raw scene, B represents backscatter, and t represent transmission map), we discern that underwater images combine a
degradation function H with noise N . To remove noise, we
propose the AMSP-VConv. This strategy not only reduces
parameters but also bolsters the network’s robustness. We
further implement the FAD-CSP to improve feature extraction in degraded environments. Our post-processing strategy, which relies on NMS, is designed to optimize the detection of dense clusters of underwater objects. Experimental
results on the URPC (Liu et al. 2021) and RUOD (Fu et al.
2023) datasets showcase the effectiveness of our method.
Overall, AMSP-UOD presents an innovative solution for
UOD with potential real-world applications.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) We propose a novel single-stage UOD network. In the
backbone, we design the AMSP-VConv to address the impact of noise and other degradations in underwater object

In this paper, we present a novel Amplitude-Modulated
Stochastic Perturbation and Vortex Convolutional Network,
AMSP-UOD, designed for underwater object detection.
AMSP-UOD specifically addresses the impact of non-ideal
imaging factors on detection accuracy in complex underwater environments. To mitigate the influence of noise on object detection performance, we propose AMSP Vortex Convolution (AMSP-VConv) to disrupt the noise distribution, enhance feature extraction capabilities, effectively reduce parameters, and improve network robustness. We design the
Feature Association Decoupling Cross Stage Partial (FADCSP) module, which strengthens the association of long and
short range features, improving the network performance
in complex underwater environments. Additionally, our sophisticated post-processing method, based on Non-Maximum
Suppression (NMS) with aspect-ratio similarity thresholds,
optimizes detection in dense scenes, such as waterweed
and schools of fish, improving object detection accuracy.
Extensive experiments on the URPC and RUOD datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms existing state-ofthe-art methods in terms of accuracy and noise immunity.
AMSP-UOD proposes an innovative solution with the potential for real-world applications. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/zhoujingchun03/AMSP-UOD.

Introduction
Recently, underwater object detection (UOD) has gained attention in the fields of marine technology, deep-sea exploration, and environmental protection. Precise detection of
biological, geological, and man-made structures in deep-sea
environments is vital for human society and environmental
conservation (Xu et al. 2023) (Zhuang et al. 2022). However,
challenges in seawater, such as transparency, color, temperature, and suspended particles, combined with varying marine
environments and target object types, reduce the accuracy of
object detection.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7659

