The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Supervised Multi-Modal Knowledge Graph Contrastive Hashing for
Cross-Modal Search
Meiyu Liang, Junping Du * , Zhengyang Liang, Yongwang Xing, Wei Huang, Zhe Xue
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunication Software and Multimedia, School of Computer Science (National
Pilot Software Engineering School), Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{meiyu1210, junpingd, 1ce, 1416642324, xuezhe}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

years. It aims to search one modal data from another different modal data that are most semantically relevant to
the given query, such as searching images from texts, or
searching texts from images. However, due to the problem
of feature heterogeneity and semantic gap between different modal data, they are not directly comparable, which is
an important challenge for achieving effective and efficient
cross-modal search. To tackle this challenge, an effective solution is to learn a unified joint embedding space based on
visual-semantic embedding, where the semantic similarities
between the embeddings of different modal data are optimized to be maximum.
Owing to excellent nonlinear feature learning ability
of deep learning, deep learning based cross-modal visualsemantic embedding learning methods have attracted broad
attention which utilize the deep neural networks to extract
global representations of both images and texts and then perform cross-modal alignment and fusion (Qian et al. 2021;
Zhuo et al. 2020; Peng, Qi, and Yuan 2019; Wang et al.
2017; Wei et al. 2017). Due to low storage cost and fast
searching speed, cross-modal deep hashing methods have
been increasingly popular (Chen et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2019; Zhang, Peng, and Yuan 2018a; Wendel
et al. 2019). However, the above methods do not fully utilize multi-modal knowledge for reasoning more cross-modal
semantic knowledge relations hindered between image and
text.
To address this problem, some works incorporate the
commonsense knowledge for reasoning the high-level relations between image and text. The existing multimodal
knowledge enhanced deep learning methods aim to incorporate multimodal knowledge into the networks, which have
been utilized in visual question answering (Yang Ding and
Wu 2022), and image-text retrieval (Fudong Nian and Xu
2017). Ding et al. (Yang Ding and Wu 2022) propose to
represent multimodal knowledge based on triplets to correlate visual objects and answers. Nian et al. (Fudong Nian
and Xu 2017) propose a multi-modal knowledge representation learning method that attempts to handle knowledge
from both text and visual data. Since graph convolutional
network (GCN) can make use of the semantic structure of
data, some researchers have applied it to cross-modal hashing. Graph convolutional network hashing (GCH) (R. Xu
and Liu 2019) introduces a GCN to bridge the modality

Deep cross-modal hashing technology provides an effective
and efficient cross-modal unified representation learning solution for cross-modal search. However, the existing methods neglect the implicit fine-grained multimodal knowledge
relations between different modalities such as when the image contains information that is not directly described in
the text. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel selfsupervised multi-grained multi-modal knowledge graph contrastive hashing method for cross-modal search (CMGCH).
Firstly, in order to capture implicit fine-grained cross-modal
semantic associations, a multi-modal knowledge graph is
constructed, which represents the implicit multimodal knowledge relations between the image and text as inter-modal and
intra-modal semantic associations. Secondly, a cross-modal
graph contrastive attention network is proposed to reason
on the multi-modal knowledge graph to sufficiently learn
the implicit fine-grained inter-modal and intra-modal knowledge relations. Thirdly, a cross-modal multi-granularity contrastive embedding learning mechanism is proposed, which
fuses the global coarse-grained and local fine-grained embeddings by multihead attention mechanism for inter-modal and
intra-modal contrastive learning, so as to enhance the crossmodal unified representations with stronger discriminativeness and semantic consistency preserving power. With the
joint training of intra-modal and inter-modal contrast, the invariant and modal-specific information of different modalities can be maintained in the final cross-modal unified hash
space. Extensive experiments on several cross-modal benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed CMGCH outperforms the state-of the-art methods.

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet and social networks, a large amount of muti-modal data such as text, image, and video have been generated. These massive amounts
of multi-modal data contain very valuable information, and
the descriptions of different modal data are complementary. Correspondingly, the demands for effective and efficient cross-modal search technologies are significantly increasing, which has attracted extensive attention in recent
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13744

