The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Inverse Weight-Balancing for Deep Long-Tailed Learning
Wenqi Dang1 , Zhou Yang1 , Weisheng Dong1 * , Xin Li2 , Guangming Shi1,3
1
XiDian University, China
West Virginia University, America
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{wqdangxdu, yangzhouxdu}@gmail.com, wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
xin.li@mail.wvu.edu, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
2

Norm of Classifier weight

Abstract

Other classifier
…

The performance of deep learning models often degrades
rapidly when faced with imbalanced data characterized by
a long-tailed distribution. Researchers have found that the
fully connected layer trained by cross-entropy loss has large
weight-norms for classes with many samples, but not for
classes with few samples. How to address the data imbalance
problem with both the encoder and the classifier seems an
under-researched problem. In this paper, we propose an inverse weight-balancing (IWB) approach to guide model training and alleviate the data imbalance problem in two stages. In
the first stage, an encoder and classifier (the fully connected
layer) are trained using conventional cross-entropy loss. In
the second stage, with a fixed encoder, the classifier is finetuned through an adaptive distribution for IWB in the decision space. Unlike existing inverse image frequency that implements a multiplicative margin adjustment transformation
in the classification layer, our approach can be interpreted as
an adaptive distribution alignment strategy using not only the
class-wise number distribution but also the sample-wise difficulty distribution in both encoder and classifier. Experiments
show that our method can greatly improve performance on
imbalanced datasets such as CIFAR100-LT with different imbalance factors, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturelists2018.

0 1 2 3 4 5

Head-class
Images

0
1
2
3
4
5

Medium-class

Tail-class

…
n

class

Long-tail datasets

Network

n

Balance
classifier

Naïve classifier
…
0 1 2 3 4 5

n

Distribution
alignment

Our classifier
…
0 1 2 3 4 5

n

Figure 1: Inverse weight-balancing (IWB) for long-tailed
learning (note the opposite trends in naive and our classifier
weight distribution). Previous studies balance the weightnorm classifier to cope with long-tailed datasets, ignoring
the imbalance problem in the encoder. We use IWB-based
adaptive distribution alignment to reverse the weight-norms
distribution and compensate for the imbalance in both the
encoder and the classifier.

Introduction
A great deal of progress has been made in image recognition with the development of deep learning (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2017; He et al. 2016), but all of
these are based on relatively perfect datasets. In the presence
of imbalanced datasets, deep convolutional neural networks
will perform poorly. Imbalanced data in the real world is a
common problem, particularly in the medical field. We may
not be able to obtain enough relevant data for some rare diseases, resulting in a data imbalance between head-class and
tail-class. Thus, solving the data imbalance problem, also
known as deep long-tailed learning, has great practical significance (Zhang et al. 2021c).
In traditional classification methods, deep convolutional
neural networks tend to focus on head-class. They are more
accurate because they contribute more gradients than other
classes. Tail-class accuracy is often poor because of the

small number of samples and too little attention from the
network. Oversampling tail-class and downsampling headclass is the simplest way to solve the long-tail problem.
Oversampling (Joloudari et al. 2023; Han, Wang, and Mao
2005; Feng, Zhong, and Huang 2021) generates new samples from existing samples. Having few tail samples reduces
the diversity of generated samples, so the overfitting problem is easily aggravated and an effective generation method
cannot be determined. Furthermore, this method of generating additional data introduces additional costs in both
the generation and training phases. When downsampling
(Drummond, Holte et al. 2003; Estabrooks, Jo, and Japkowicz 2004) is performed, there is often an issue of information
loss during model training.
In this paper, we propose a new method called inverse
weight-balancing (IWB) to address the problem of imbalanced data. In previous studies (Kang et al. 2019; Alshammari et al. 2022), cross-entropy loss classifiers are found to
be imbalanced, as the weight-norms for the head-class are

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11713

