The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Locally Rainbow Paths
Till Fluschnik1 , Leon Kellerhals2 , Malte Renken2
1

2

Institut für Informatik, TU Clausthal, Germany
Technische Universität Berlin, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Germany
till.fluschnik@tu-clausthal.de, leon.kellerhals@tu-berlin.de, m.renken@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

s

We introduce the algorithmic problem of finding a locally
rainbow path of length ` connecting two distinguished vertices s and t in a vertex-colored directed graph. Herein, a path
is locally rainbow if between any two visits of equally colored vertices, the path traverses consecutively at leaset r differently colored vertices. This problem generalizes the wellknown problem of finding a rainbow path. It finds natural applications whenever there are different types of resources that
must be protected from overuse, such as crop sequence optimization or production process scheduling. We show that the
problem is computationally intractable even if r = 2 or if one
looks for a locally rainbow among the shortest paths. On the
positive side, if one looks for a path that takes only a short
detour (i.e., it is slightly longer than the shortest path) and
if r is small, the problem can be solved efficiently. Indeed,
the running time of the respective algorithm is near-optimal
unless the ETH fails.

t

Figure 1: A digraph whose vertices are colored with four colors, with a shortest 2-rainbow (but not 3-rainbow) s-t path.
types of crops which, depending on the season, have different impacts on soil health (Dury et al. 2012; Turchetta et al.
2022; Benini et al. 2023). Other applications include holiday trip planning (different colors modeling different types
of leisure activities), production process scheduling (different colors modeling different workers or machines).
More concretely, given a vertex-colored graph, we propose the concept of locally rainbow paths, in which every
subpath of bounded length is required to carry pairwise distinct colors. Formally, a path or walk W = (v0 , v1 , . . . , vq )
in G is r-rainbow if for every i ∈ [0, q − r], the vertices vi , vi+1 , . . . , vi+r have pairwise different color (see
Fig. 1). We arrive at the following problem description:

Introduction
Many graph connectivity problems are studied with additional constraints to make them applicable to real-world
problems. Typical constraints include forbidden pairs of vertices or edges in the solution or — if the graph is colored —
requiring that the solutions are rainbow (no two elements
in the solution have the same color) or properly colored
(no two adjacent elements have the same color). Examples
for such constraints on problems can be found for spanning
trees (Broersma and Li 1997; Darmann et al. 2011), Steiner
trees (de Uña et al. 2016; Ferone, Festa, and Guerriero 2022;
Halldórsson et al. 2018), but most notably for paths (Alon,
Yuster, and Zwick 1995; Agrawal et al. 2020; Bhattacharya
2010; Bentert, Kellerhals, and Niedermeier 2023).
For paths, the properly edge-colored variant forbids two
equally colored edges to appear subsequently in the path.
What, to the best of our knowledge, has not been considered yet, is any model that forbids a visited color for the
next, say r, subsequent vertices of the path. For example,
this allows the modeling of protecting certain types of resources from overuse. This for example is relevant for crop
sequence optimization: here, different colors model different

L OCALLY R AINBOW PATH
Input: A digraph G, a vertex-coloring c : V (G) → C,
two vertices s, t ∈ V (G), two integers r, ` ∈ N0 .
Question: Is there an r-rainbow s-t path of length at
most ` in G?
We also consider L OCALLY R AINBOW WALK, where we
look for s-t walks with the same constraints. L OCALLY
R AINBOW PATH becomes the aforementioned problem of
finding a rainbow path when r = `. If r = 1, then the problem coincides with finding a properly colored s-t path.
Our contributions. We study the parameterized complexity of L OCALLY R AINBOW WALK and L OCALLY R AIN BOW PATH , with a focus on the locality parameter r. We
show that the path variant is NP-hard for any fixed value of
r ≥ 2 (Theorem 16). In contrast, we are able to design an
algorithm with running time 2O(r log r) · nO(1) for the walk
variant (Theorem 1), with n being the number of vertices.
This result is achieved by developing an ordered version of
the representative families technique. We prove this result to
be optimal in the sense that no 2o(r log r) · nO(1) -time algorithm is possible if the ETH holds (Theorem 12).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8013

