The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Spiking Neural Networks with Sparse Selective Activation for Continual
Learning
Jiangrong Shen1, 2 , Wenyao Ni 2 , Qi Xu3 , Huajin Tang1, 2, 4 *
1
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China
4
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
jrshen@zju.edu.cn, 22221209@zju.edu.cn, xuqi@dlut.edu.cn, htang@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

ing with neuromorphic hardware (Imam and Cleland 2020;
Pei et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2021). Hence, in this paper, we
explore how to implement continual learning using SNNs by
leveraging the spatiotemporal dynamics specificity in SNNs.
In biological systems, the context has been found to have
a significant influence on modulating, filtering, and assimilating new information (Kay and Laurent 1999; Levinson
et al. 2020). Context gating facilitates the selective activation of subpopulations of neurons, thereby encouraging the
reduction of memory interference between similar experiences (Kudithipudi et al. 2022). Coincidentally, the SNNs
model exhibits the relational property with the context gating mechanism. On the one hand, SNNs have significant
sparsity owing to the expansion of the temporal dimension
and the discrete nature of information transmission termed
as ”spike”. This characteristic is advantageous in mitigating interference between neurons with distinct functionalities (Shen et al. 2023). On the other hand, the synaptic weight of each postsynaptic neuron undergoes update
only when the corresponding connected presynaptic neuron’s membrane potential reaches the firing threshold and
emits a spike, while even small activation values in ANN can
arise weight updates (Hammouamri, Masquelier, and Wilson 2022). Hence, the aforementioned sparsity in two different levels of neural activity and synapse plasticity could be
helpful for SNNs model to reduce memory interference and
mitigate the catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen
1989) (French 1999) during the continual learning scenario.
In this paper, we explore how to alleviate catastrophic forgetting by enhancing the neural dynamics characteristics in
SNN. The selective activation SNNs (SA-SNN) model for
continual learning with trace-based K-Winner-Take-All (KWTA) and variable threshold mechanisms is proposed to alleviate catastrophic forgetting by enhancing the neural dynamics characteristics in SNN, which does not need task
labels or memory replay. In the SA-SNN model, we first
adopt a biologically plausible, temporal trace-based K-WTA
method to reduce interference between different tasks. The
trace-based K-WTA method itself converges with the connectivity of many brain regions that utilize inhibitory interneurons and we further modify it to accommodate multistep spiking neurons. Then we design a simple but effective
variable threshold method to modify the threshold of spiking neurons, which enables to encourage the participation of

The next generation of machine intelligence requires the capability of continual learning to acquire new knowledge without forgetting the old one while conserving limited computing resources. Spiking neural networks (SNNs), compared to
artificial neural networks (ANNs), have more characteristics
that align with biological neurons, which may be helpful as a
potential gating function for knowledge maintenance in neural networks. Inspired by the selective sparse activation principle of context gating in biological systems, we present a
novel SNN model with selective activation to achieve continual learning. The trace-based K-Winner-Take-All (K-WTA)
and variable threshold components are designed to form the
sparsity in selective activation in spatial and temporal dimensions of spiking neurons, which promotes the subpopulation of neuron activation to perform specific tasks. As a result, continual learning can be maintained by routing different
tasks via different populations of neurons in the network. The
experiments are conducted on MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets
under the class incremental setting. The results show that
the proposed SNN model achieves competitive performance
similar to and even surpasses the other regularization-based
methods deployed under traditional ANNs.

Introduction
Biological organisms are capable of learning continually
from interactions with their environments throughout their
lifespan (Kandel and Hawkins 1992). Machine intelligence
with artificial neural networks (ANNs) has exhibited remarkable capabilities in computer vision and natural language processing applications (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton
2015). However, the new generation of applications, such
as self-driving cars and wearable devices, require new machine intelligence that can acquire new knowledge without forgetting the old one while conserving limited computing resources (Kudithipudi et al. 2022). Inspired by biological systems, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have exhibited more complex spatiotemporal dynamics in comparison
to ANNs (Maass 1997; Subbulakshmi Radhakrishnan et al.
2021; Yin, Corradi, and Bohte 2023; Bu et al. 2023), and
have the potential to implement the next generation of machine intelligence with low power consumption by combin* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

611

