The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Time-Reversed Generalized Riccati Equation
Alessandro Betti1 , Michele Casoni2 , Marco Gori1, 2 , Simone Marullo2, 3 ,
Stefano Melacci2 , Matteo Tiezzi2
1

Inria, Lab I3S, MAASAI, Universitè Côte d’Azur, Nice, France,
2
DIISM, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,
3
DINFO, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
alessandro.betti@inria.fr, m.casoni@student.unisi.it, {marco,mela, mtiezzi}@diism.unisi.it, simone.marullo@unifi.it
Abstract

the boundary conditions at opposite sides of the temporal interval.
In many instances of control problems, where either the
complexity of the model is high and/or the temporal horizon could be very long, as it could happen for instance in
Reinforcement Learning (Sutton and Barto 2018; Bertsekas
2019) or Lifelong Learning (Betti et al. 2022; Mai et al.
2022), these methods are unfeasible and we usually need
to resort to different control strategies. A typical approach
is that of using Model Predictive Control (Garcia, Prett, and
Morari 1989) (also known as receding horizon control), with
a real-time iteration (RTI) scheme for solving the online optimization problem (Diehl, Bock, and Schlöder 2005). The
necessity of finding optimization procedures that only exploit forward (in time) computations is an especially sensible matter within the machine learning community, where
the possibility of performing a backpropagation through the
entire temporal horizon (backpropagation through time) is
considered to be extremely implausible from a biological
point of view (Hinton 2022) and in some cases prohibitively
costly.
In this work we present a novel approach that makes use
of Hamilton Equations giving an estimate of the costate
function through a neural-network computation, working
forward-in-time. The basic idea of our approach is to estimate the parameters of this network by means on an indirect usage of the Hamilton equations. Recently, in (Jin et al.
2019), the possibility of exploiting Hamiltonian equations
for learning system dynamics and controlling policies forward in time has been investigated. In this paper, the authors
introduced Pontryagin Differentiable Programming (PDP)
to efficiently compute the gradients of the state trajectory
with respect to the system parameters using an auxiliary control system. This approach differs from the method proposed
in this paper by the fact that, instead, in the present work, we
use Hamilton equations indirectly for defining an optimization problem for the temporal variations of the model parameters. In doing so, we are basically defining a dynamic
on the parameters that estimate the costate in a similar manner as we would do with the Riccati equation in the Linear
Quadratic control problem. We conjecture that the resulting
time-reversed dynamics will lead to a stabilizing effect on
the state equation, hence opening the possibility to use this
method forward-in-time.

Optimal control deals with optimization problems in which
variables steer a dynamical system, and its outcome contributes to the objective function. Two classical approaches
to solving these problems are Dynamic Programming and the
Pontryagin Maximum Principle. In both approaches, Hamiltonian equations offer an interpretation of optimality through
auxiliary variables known as costates. However, Hamiltonian
equations are rarely used due to their reliance on forwardbackward algorithms across the entire temporal domain. This
paper introduces a novel neural-based approach to optimal
control, with the aim of working forward-in-time. Neural networks are employed not only for implementing state dynamics but also for estimating costate variables. The parameters
of the latter network are determined at each time step using a
newly introduced local policy referred to as the time-reversed
generalized Riccati equation. This policy is inspired by a result discussed in the Linear Quadratic (LQ) problem, which
we conjecture stabilizes state dynamics. We support this conjecture by discussing experimental results from a range of optimal control case studies.

Introduction
Optimal control (Lewis, Vrabie, and Syrmos 2012) offers
a wide framework to set up optimization problems that are
concerned with the steering of a dynamical system in some
parsimonious way. It is therefore clear that its scope is quite
large and it intersects many areas such as, for instance, pure
math, natural sciences and engineering. Being the optimization problem objective defined on the solution of a system
of ODEs over a certain temporal horizon [t0 , T ], it has a
global-in-time nature. Indeed, classical approaches to optimal control such as the Pontryagin Maximum Principle
(see (Gamkrelidze, Pontrjagin, and Boltjanskij 1964; Giaquinta and Hildebrandt 2013)) and dynamic programming
(see (Bardi, Dolcetta et al. 1997)) both characterize solutions in terms of a boundary problem for some differential
conditions (usually a PDE in dynamic programming and a
system of ODEs with the Pontryagin maximum principle).
This means that, in general, the algorithms to find solutions
require iterative forward/backward approaches to glue the
local-in-time computations of the differential equations with
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7935

