The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BARET: Balanced Attention Based Real Image Editing Driven by Target-Text
Inversion
Yuming Qiao1,2 , Fanyi Wang1 * , Jingwen Su1 , Yanhao Zhang1 , Yunjie Yu1 , Siyu Wu3 , Guo-Jun Qi1,4
1

OPPO Research Institute
2
Tsinghua University
3
Zhejiang University
4
Westlake University
qym21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangfanyi@oppo.com, sujingwen@oppo.com, zhangyanhao@oppo.com,
yunjieyu007@gmail.com, 22151365@zju.edu.cn, guojunq@gmail.com
Abstract

conditions, textual condition is the most concise and intuitive. Hence text-guided real image editing has become one
of the most popular research topics.
Previous leading methods on text-guided image editing
have shortcomings in different aspects. (I) limited editing
capabilities such as object editing, background/foreground
editing, and style transfer, etc.(Avrahami, Lischinski, and
Fried 2022; Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022; Bar-Tal et al. 2022),
while incapable of non-rigid image editing. (II) image captions are required for later modification, but make the editing method inconvenient to be applied (Mokady et al. 2023).
(III) fine-tuning the diffusion model on a single image leads
to risks of undermining the pretrained model (Kawar et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023). To combat these deficiencies, we
propose a novel text-based real image editing method named
BARET. Only the original image and a simple target text of
editing are needed to realize highly controllable image editing, including both basic editing scenarios and complex edits
(i.e. non-rigid changes). As shown in the lower left corner of
Fig. 1, when a simple text prompt “a dog lying down on a
stone” is provided, the proposed BARET can realize posture
change from standing to lying down on a stone of the same
dog in the original image.
In this paper, the proposed BARET consists of three components. (I) Target-text inversion schedule circumvents the
requirement of image caption and improves the efficiency
of original image content extraction. Based on DDIM inversion, target text embedding is iteratively fine-tuned in DDIM
sampling process for image reconstruction. (II) Progressive
transition scheme enhances editing capabilities especially
non-rigid edits. It integrates the target text information and
original image content in the generated transition result, by
applying progressive linear interpolation between fine-tuned
embedding and target text embedding. (III) Balanced Attention Module is proposed to interact the self-attention map
of reconstruction process, the cross attention map of transition process and the target embedding in the editing process.
While maintaining the original image layout features, the
capability of non-rigid editing is improved by combination
of non-rigid semantic information from transition process
and target text embedding. We have conducted a user study,
based on a series of comparison experiments with leading

Image editing approaches with diffusion models have been
rapidly developed, yet their applicability are subject to requirements such as specific editing types (e.g., foreground or
background object editing, style transfer), multiple conditions
(e.g., mask, sketch, caption), and time consuming fine-tuning
of diffusion models. For alleviating these limitations and realizing efficient real image editing, we propose a novel editing
technique that only requires an input image and target text for
various editing types including non-rigid edits without finetuning diffusion model. Our method contains three novelties:
(I) Target-text Inversion Schedule (TTIS) is designed to finetune the input target text embedding to achieve fast image reconstruction without image caption and acceleration of convergence. (II) Progressive Transition Scheme applies progressive linear interpolation between target text embedding and
its fine-tuned version to generate transition embedding for
maintaining non-rigid editing capability. (III) Balanced Attention Module (BAM) balances the tradeoff between textual
description and image semantics. By the means of combining self-attention map from reconstruction process and crossattention map from transition process, the guidance of target
text embeddings in diffusion process is optimized. In order to
demonstrate editing capability, effectiveness and efficiency of
the proposed BARET, we have conducted extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments. Moreover, results derived
from user study and ablation study further prove the superiority over other methods.

Introduction
Recently, large Text-to-Image (T2I) models (Ramesh et al.
2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022) have demonstrated powerful generation capabilities that have drawn a
great deal of attentions. Among image generation tasks, real
image editing has been an interesting and valuable topic for a
long time. Real image editing refers to the controllable editing of a real image guided by specific condition (e.g., text,
mask, sketch and additional views of the object) (Mou et al.
2023; Zhang and Agrawala 2023), while preserving the original image features as much as possible. In these numerous
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4560

