The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Huber Loss Minimization Approach to Byzantine Robust Federated Learning
Puning Zhao, Fei Yu, Zhiguo Wan*
Zhejiang Lab
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{pnzhao,yufei,wanzhiguo}@zhejianglab.com

Abstract

deployment of FL, it is important to design effective defense
strategies robust to Byzantine attacks.
There have been many existing works on Byzantine robust
federated learning problems. In particular, various gradient
aggregators have been proposed. Krum (Blanchard et al.
2017) picks the gradient vector uploaded from clients with
small nearest neighbor distances. However, the global convergence is not guaranteed. (Chen, Su, and Xu 2017) proposed a geometric median-of-mean method, which ensures
that the model weights converge to a point near to the global
minimum, as long as ϵ < 1/2, with ϵ being the fraction of
Byzantine machines. This method √
is not perfect since the
error has a suboptimal rate of Õ( ϵd). (Yin et al. 2018)
analyzed two aggregators. The first one, called coordinatewise median, is suboptimal if the sample size per client n is
smaller than the number of clients m. Unfortunately, this is
quite likely in practice. The second one is coordinate-wise
trimmed mean, which has optimal dependence with ϵ when
ϵ is small. However, as will be discussed later, if ϵ is close to
1/2, then coordinate-wise trimmed mean is not efficient. Another drawback is that this method needs the precise knowledge of ϵ, which is usually not practical. Moreover, the analysis of these previous methods are based on some simplified assumption, including independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) assumption, and that all clients have nearly
equal sample sizes. More theoretical analysis is needed in
realistic scenarios with heterogeneous and unbalanced data.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to Byzantine robust federated learning, which aggregates gradients
by minimizing a multi-dimensional Huber loss. As a widely
used loss function in robust statistics (Huber 1964, 2004;
Hall and Jones 1990; Zhao and Wan 2023), Huber loss combines the advantages of ℓ1 and ℓ2 loss, and achieves a tradeoff between robustness and consistency. However, the original definition of Huber loss was for scalars. We generalize the original definition, to make it suitable for vectors. In
each iteration, given a list of gradient vectors uploaded from
clients, the new algorithm obtains the estimated gradient of
the underlying global risk function by minimizing the generalized Huber loss, and then use the outcome as the direction
of parameter update.
We then provide theoretical analysis of the proposed
method. To begin with, it is assumed that training samples
are i.i.d, which is common in most of existing works on

Federated learning systems are susceptible to adversarial attacks. To combat this, we introduce a novel aggregator based
on Huber loss minimization, and provide a comprehensive
theoretical analysis. Under independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) assumption, our approach has several advantages compared to existing methods. Firstly, it has optimal dependence on ϵ, which stands for the ratio of attacked clients.
Secondly, our approach does not need precise knowledge of ϵ.
Thirdly, it allows different clients to have unequal data sizes.
We then broaden our analysis to include non-i.i.d data, such
that clients have slightly different distributions.

Introduction
Due to privacy concerns, there are a large number of isolated information islands, resulting in the difficulty of integrating data from various sources. Under such background, a
novel machine learning framework called Federated Learning (FL) has arisen in recent years (McMahan et al. 2017).
FL consists of numerous clients that store and compute data
locally, and a central server that plays the role as a coordinator. In comparison to traditional centralized learning, FL
offers distinct advantages in terms of both computational efficiency and privacy protection. As a result, FL is gaining
increasing attention and has been widely applied in various
domains, including mobile devices, industrial engineering,
and healthcare (Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020).
Nevertheless, FL is facing several severe challenges
(Kairouz et al. 2021), with one of them being the robustness issue. Due to various factors, including data poisoning,
system malfunctions and transmission errors, some clients
may send wrong gradient vectors to the server. Consider that
these abnormal behaviors are hard to predict and may happen in an unknown manner, it suffices to analyze the most
harmful attack, which is typically modeled as Byzantine failure (Lamport, Shostak, and Pease 1982). Under this model,
an adversary can modify the gradient values uploaded to the
master in arbitrary way. Without proper handling, even a single malicious client can significantly degrade the model performance (Bagdasaryan et al. 2020). Therefore, for the safe
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21806

