The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond TreeSHAP:
Efficient Computation of Any-Order Shapley Interactions for Tree Ensembles
Maximilian Muschalik1, * , Fabian Fumagalli2, * , Barbara Hammer2 , Eyke Hüllermeier1
1

LMU Munich, MCML Munich, D-80539 Munich, Germany
Bielefeld University, CITEC, D-33619 Bielefeld, Germany
maximilian.muschalik@lmu.de, ffumagalli@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de, bhammer@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de, eyke@lmu.de
2

German Credit: n-SII network plot
Model output: 0, True label: 0, Model: GBT, ID: 737

Abstract

emplo.
(2.0)

While shallow decision trees may be interpretable, larger ensemble models like gradient-boosted trees, which often set
the state of the art in machine learning problems involving
tabular data, still remain black box models. As a remedy,
the Shapley value (SV) is a well-known concept in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) research for quantifying additive feature attributions of predictions. The model-specific
TreeSHAP methodology solves the exponential complexity
for retrieving exact SVs from tree-based models. Expanding beyond individual feature attribution, Shapley interactions reveal the impact of intricate feature interactions of any
order. In this work, we present TreeSHAP-IQ, an efficient
method to compute any-order additive Shapley interactions
for predictions of tree-based models. TreeSHAP-IQ is supported by a mathematical framework that exploits polynomial
arithmetic to compute the interaction scores in a single recursive traversal of the tree, akin to Linear TreeSHAP. We apply
TreeSHAP-IQ on state-of-the-art tree ensembles and explore
interactions on well-established benchmark datasets.

savin.
(1.0)

amoun.
(4380.0)

insta.
(3.0)

purpo.
(0.0)
histo.
(2.0)

statu.
(2.0)

other.
(0.0)

Order 2
high pos.
low pos.
low neg.
high neg.

durat.
(18.0)

resid.
(4.0)

check.
(0.0)

prope.
(2.0)

forei.
(0.0)

age.
(35.0)

tele.
(1.0)
liabl.
(2.0)

other.
(2.0)
housi.
(1.0)

Introduction

Order 1
high pos.
low pos.
low neg.
high neg.

cards.
(1.0)

job.
(1.0)

Figure 1: Network Plot after (Inglis, Parnell, and Hurley
2022) for a test instance of the German Credit dataset for
visualizing local feature attribution and interaction.

Tree-based ensemble methods, in particular gradientboosted trees (Friedman 2001), such as XGBoost (Chen and
Guestrin 2016) or LightGBM (Ke et al. 2017), are among
the most popular machine learning (ML) models and often
achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on tabular data
without extensive hyperparameter tuning (Shwartz-Ziv and
Armon 2022). These ensemble methods utilize intricate prediction functions by employing tree structures of high depth,
thereby obstructing interpretation of the model’s internal
reasoning. Yet, understanding a model’s prediction is necessary for safe and reliable deployment, alongside addressing
ethical and regulatory considerations (Adadi and Berrada
2018). Additive feature attributions, which split the individual features’ contributions to the prediction, are a prevalent
approach to improving the local interpretation of ML models (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Covert and Lee 2021; Chen
et al. 2023). However, in complex real-world applications,
such as bioinformatics (Lunetta et al. 2004; Boulesteix et al.
2012; Winham et al. 2012; Wright, Ziegler, and König 2016)

or language-related tasks (Tsang, Rambhatla, and Liu 2020)
features only attain meaningfulness when interacting with
other features. In such scenarios, information about interactions complements additive feature attributions, which only
show part of the picture (Wright, Ziegler, and König 2016).
In this work, we are interested in model-specific local
XAI measures for tree-based models, such as XGBoost. In
particular, the extension of predominant attribution measures based on the Shapley value (SV) (Shapley 1953) to
any-order additive Shapley-based interactions to explain single predictions locally. Our work extends path dependent
TreeSHAP (Lundberg et al. 2020), which exploits the structure of trees to reduce time complexity from exponential to
polynomial, to any-order Shapley-based interactions.
Related Work. The SV (Shapley 1953) is a concept from
cooperative game theory that has been proposed for modelagnostic explanations for local (Strumbelj and Kononenko

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14388

