The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VSFormer: Visual-Spatial Fusion Transformer for Correspondence Pruning
Tangfei Liao1 , Xiaoqin Zhang1 * , Li Zhao1 , Tao Wang2 , Guobao Xiao3 *
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Informatics for Safety and Emergency of Zhejiang Province, Wenzhou University, China
2
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
{tangfeiliao, zhangxiaoqinnan, taowangzj}@gmail.com, lizhao@wzu.edu.cn, x-gb@163.com

Previous Methods

Abstract
Correspondence pruning aims to find correct matches (inliers) from an initial set of putative correspondences, which
is a fundamental task for many applications. The process of
finding is challenging, given the varying inlier ratios between
scenes/image pairs due to significant visual differences. However, the performance of the existing methods is usually limited by the problem of lacking visual cues (e.g., texture, illumination, structure) of scenes. In this paper, we propose
a Visual-Spatial Fusion Transformer (VSFormer) to identify
inliers and recover camera poses accurately. Firstly, we obtain highly abstract visual cues of a scene with the cross
attention between local features of two-view images. Then,
we model these visual cues and correspondences by a joint
visual-spatial fusion module, simultaneously embedding visual cues into correspondences for pruning. Additionally, to
mine the consistency of correspondences, we also design
a novel module that combines the KNN-based graph and
the transformer, effectively capturing both local and global
contexts. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that the
proposed VSFormer outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
outdoor and indoor benchmarks. Our code is provided at the
following repository: https://github.com/sugar-fly/VSFormer.

Correspondence
Eembedder

Context
Capturer

Feature
Extractor

VSFusion

VSFormer

CA

Visualize

Correspondence
Eembedder

ContextFormer

Figure 1: Comparison between previous methods and ours.
Top: the architecture of previous methods, which lack the
visual perception of a scene. Bottom: the architecture of our
VSFormer introduces visual cues of a scene to guide correspondence pruning. For visualization purposes, the correspondences (4D) across two-view images are projected into
a 2D space by t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008).
The circle CA represents the cross-attention layer.

Introduction
Barath, Matas, and Noskova 2019) search for correct correspondences (inliers) using iterative sampling strategies, but
their running time grows exponentially with outlier ratio,
thus making them unsuitable for tackling high-outlier problems. Meanwhile, learning-based methods have achieved
promising performance. PointCN (Yi et al. 2018) is a pioneering work, handling the disordered property of correspondences (visualization in Fig. 1) with the multilayer perceptron (MLP) architecture.
Until recently, the most popular networks commonly employed an iterative network to inherit weights from the previous iteration, which greatly improved the performance of
correspondence pruning. These iterative networks typically
designed some extra structures to mine the geometric consistency within correspondences, such as OANet (Zhang
et al. 2019), ACNet (Sun et al. 2020), MS2 DG-Net (Dai
et al. 2022). While such a direction deserves further exploration, these methods only considered spatial information of
correspondences as input, which significantly hindered the
acquisition of deep information and simultaneously dam-

Two-view correspondence learning aims to establish reliable correspondences/matches across two images and accurately recover camera poses, which is a fundamental task
in computer vision and plays an important role in many
applications such as simultaneous localization and mapping (Mur-Artal, Montiel, and Tardos 2015), structure from
motion (Schonberger and Frahm 2016) and image registration (Xiao et al. 2020). However, the outlier (false match)
ratio in initial correspondences is often over 90% due to various cross-image variations (e.g., low texture, illumination
changes, repetitive structures), which severely undermines
the performance of downstream tasks. Therefore, much recent research has focused on pruning false matches from initial correspondences to obtain accurate two-view geometry.
Some traditional methods such as RANSAC (Fischler
and Bolles 1981) and its variants (Chum and Matas 2005;
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3369

