The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fairness-Aware Structured Pruning in Transformers
Abdelrahman Zayed1,2 , Gonçalo Mordido1,2 , Samira Shabanian3 , Ioana Baldini4 ,
Sarath Chandar1,2,5
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute
2
Polytechnique Montreal
3
Independent Researcher
4
IBM Research
5
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
{zayedabd,sarath.chandar}@mila.quebec, {s.shabanian,goncalomordido}@gmail.com, {ioana}@us.ibm.com
Abstract

(Smith et al. 2022b; Brown et al. 2020; Cohen et al. 2022;
Rae et al. 2021). However, this pursuit of larger models
has introduced challenges for training and inference. To address the issue of increasing model size, model pruning
has emerged as a potential solution. Nevertheless, current
pruning methods tend to focus on removing model components that have minimal impact on performance, often overlooking fairness implications (Fan, Grave, and Joulin 2020;
Voita et al. 2019; Behnke and Heafield 2021a; Prasanna,
Rogers, and Rumshisky 2020). Additionally, these methods
frequently assume that a pruned model will undergo finetuning, which is becoming more and more impractical given
the substantial increase in size of modern language models.
As a result, there is a need for more thoughtful pruning approaches that consider not only performance, but also model
fairness.
Numerous pruning methods have highlighted that certain
attention heads are critical for maintaining language modeling ability, while others appear superfluous to model performance (Voita et al. 2019; Michel, Levy, and Neubig 2019;
He and Choi 2021; Bian et al. 2021). Some studies have
shown that these important heads play an interpretable role
in downstream tasks (Wang et al. 2022; Voita et al. 2019;
He and Choi 2021). In our work, we explore the possibility
of extending this concept to fairness by identifying attention
heads that are responsible for promoting bias. To achieve
this, we compute separate scores to quantify the contribution
of each attention head toward both performance and bias.
These scores serve as our guide in selectively removing attention heads to improve fairness with minimal performance
loss. Put simply, we propose to prioritize pruning the heads
that contribute the most to bias, given that they are not crucial for language modeling. Our contributions in this paper
can be summarized as follows:

The increasing size of large language models (LLMs) has introduced challenges in their training and inference. Removing model components is perceived as a solution to tackle
the large model sizes, however, existing pruning methods
solely focus on performance, without considering an essential aspect for the responsible use of LLMs: model fairness.
It is crucial to address the fairness of LLMs towards diverse groups, such as women, Black people, LGBTQ+, Jewish communities, among others, as they are being deployed
and available to a wide audience. In this work, first, we investigate how attention heads impact fairness and performance
in pre-trained transformer-based language models. We then
propose a novel method to prune the attention heads that
negatively impact fairness while retaining the heads critical
for performance, i.e. language modeling capabilities. Our approach is practical in terms of time and resources, as it does
not require fine-tuning the final pruned, and fairer, model.
Our findings demonstrate a reduction in gender bias by 19%,
19.5%, 39.5%, 34.7%, 23%, and 8% for DistilGPT-2, GPT2, GPT-Neo of two different sizes, GPT-J, and Llama 2 models, respectively, in comparison to the biased model, with only
a slight decrease in performance. WARNING: This work uses
language that is offensive in nature.

Introduction
The extensive adoption of large language models (LLMs) in
diverse natural language processing tasks has proven highly
successful, leading to their integration into various applications (Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020;
Yu, Bohnet, and Poesio 2020). However, this progress has
also brought up concerns about the fairness of these models.
Numerous studies have revealed a troubling trend in which
LLMs generate biased outputs for different genders, races,
or sexual orientations (Nadeem, Bethke, and Reddy 2021;
Zayed et al. 2023b,a). These biases can give rise to serious problems, such as the generation of discriminatory text;
for example, when language models are prompted with sentences about Arabs, they produce continuations with references to terrorism (Nadeem, Bethke, and Reddy 2021).
To further expand their abilities, there has been a trend
of increasingly larger models trained on extensive datasets

1. We investigate the impact of existing head pruning methods on bias across different language models, demonstrating that they do not enhance model fairness.
2. We quantify the effect of removing attention heads on
bias in language models, and use it as a proxy for their
contribution to the model’s overall bias.
3. We propose a novel structured pruning method that considers both fairness and performance. Our method avoids
pruning the heads that are important for language mod-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22484

