The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Liberating Seen Classes: Boosting Few-Shot and Zero-Shot Text Classification
via Anchor Generation and Classification Reframing
Han Liu1 , Siyang Zhao1 , Xiaotong Zhang1 * , Feng Zhang2 , Wei Wang3 ,
Fenglong Ma4 , Hongyang Chen5 , Hong Yu1 , Xianchao Zhang1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, China
4
The Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
5
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, zhao siyang@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zxt.dut@hotmail.com, zfeng.maria@gmail.com,
ehomewang@ieee.org, fenglong@psu.edu, dr.h.chen@ieee.org, {hongyu, xczhang}@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

scenarios, thereby prompting the emergence of few-shot and
zero-shot text classification.
Few-shot text classification (FSTC) and zero-shot text
classification (ZSTC) methods are dedicated to addressing
these challenges by obtaining powerful classifiers using a
sparse set of labeled samples, or even in cases where no labeled samples are available. FSTC focuses on constructing
classifiers from a small number of labeled samples, while
ZSTC endeavors to classify texts into classes that have not
been encountered during the training phase.
For few-shot text classification, meta-learning methods
help the model quickly adapt to novel classes by constructing training tasks that mimic the testing tasks from seen
classes (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017; Liu et al. 2023). Fine-tuning methods pre-train
the model on the base set and adapt it to unseen classes
by fine-tuning a part of parameters with support samples
(Jeremy and Sebastian 2018; Suchin et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020). Recently, prompt-based methods efficiently
utilize pre-trained models and achieve great performance
(Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Wang et al. 2021). For zeroshot text classification, many reliable methods have emerged
in intent recognition, which can be roughly divided into
transformation-based and projection-based methods. The
former methods transform the semantic space of seen classes
into unseen classes through the similarity matrix (Xia et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2019a), and the latter methods calculate the
similarity between labels and samples from unseen classes
by mapping them into the same space (Chen, Hakkani-Tür,
and He 2016; Kumar et al. 2017). Some generation methods are also applied to expand training data in zero-shot
text classification (Schick and Schütze 2021; Ye et al. 2022),
but due to the limitation of generation quality, most of them
are used for simple tasks like binary-classification or threeclassification rather than complex tasks.
After analyzing previous works comprehensively, we find
that whether employing few-shot or zero-shot methods, conventional approaches strive to transfer knowledge from seen
classes to unseen classes, which leads to two unavoidable
problems. First, it is hard to properly adapt the model trained
on seen classes to unseen classes simply using supervision

Few-shot and zero-shot text classification aim to recognize
samples from novel classes with limited labeled samples or
no labeled samples at all. While prevailing methods have
shown promising performance via transferring knowledge
from seen classes to unseen classes, they are still limited by
(1) Inherent dissimilarities among classes make the transformation of features learned from seen classes to unseen classes
both difficult and inefficient. (2) Rare labeled novel samples
usually cannot provide enough supervision signals to enable
the model to adjust from the source distribution to the target
distribution, especially for complicated scenarios. To alleviate the above issues, we propose a simple and effective strategy for few-shot and zero-shot text classification. We aim to
liberate the model from the confines of seen classes, thereby
enabling it to predict unseen categories without the necessity of training on seen classes. Specifically, for mining more
related unseen category knowledge, we utilize a large pretrained language model to generate pseudo novel samples,
and select the most representative ones as category anchors.
After that, we convert the multi-class classification task into
a binary classification task and use the similarities of queryanchor pairs for prediction to fully leverage the limited supervision signals. Extensive experiments on six widely used public datasets show that our proposed method can outperform
other strong baselines significantly in few-shot and zero-shot
tasks, even without using any seen class samples.

Introduction
Text classification is widely used in various real applications, such as intent detection, news classification and so
on (Kumar and Abirami 2021). This fundamental task aims
to assign predefined labels or categories to the given texts.
Conventional text classification approaches typically demand copious amounts of labeled training data for achieving high accuracy (Johnson and Zhang 2017; Devlin et al.
2019). However, the acquisition of such labeled data can be
a challenging and expensive endeavor in many real-world
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18644

