The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exact Algorithms and Lowerbounds for Multiagent Path Finding:
Power of Treelike Topology
Foivos Fioravantes, Dušan Knop, Jan Matyáš Křištan, Nikolaos Melissinos, Michal Opler
Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
{foivos.fioravantes, dusan.knop, kristja6, nikolaos.melissinos, michal.opler}@fit.cvut.cz

Abstract

us to efficiently obtain a useful solution for the given input; see, e.g., the survey (Stern 2019) for overview of
such results. A multitude of techniques was used to tackle
MAPF—A*-based algorithms (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael
1968), SAT-based algorithms (Surynek et al. 2017), scheduling approach (Barták, Švancara, and Vlk 2018), SMTsolvers (Surynek 2019, 2020), to name just a few. Our work
focuses on exact algorithms, that is, the aim is to return an
optimal solution and the central question is on which kinds
of inputs this can be done in an efficient way and where
this is unlikely. While doing so, we initiate parameterised
analysis of the M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING problem with
the focus on natural and structural parameters. Note that
the MAPF problem features two natural parameters—the
number of agents k and the total length of the schedule ℓ
(also called makespan). It is worth noting that two versions
of MAPF are usually studied in the literature—one allows
swapping two agents along an edge while this is prohibited
in the other. Roughly speaking, the first version treats the
input topology as a bidirected graph while the other as undirected. Most of our algorithmic results are independent of allowing or forbidding swaps; therefore, we reserve the name
M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING for the version where we do
not care about swaps. If the result holds only with swaps
allowed, we use M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING S WAPS to
refer to that specific version fo the problem while we use
M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING N O S WAPS for the version
where we explicitly do not allow swaps.

In the M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING problem, we focus on
efficiently finding non-colliding paths for a set of k agents
on a given graph G, where each agent seeks a path from its
source vertex to a target. An important measure of the quality of the solution is the length of the proposed schedule ℓ,
that is, the length of a longest path (including the waiting
time). In this work, we propose a systematic study under the
parameterized complexity framework. The hardness results
we provide align with many heuristics used for this problem,
whose running time could potentially be improved based on
our Fixed-Parameter Tractability (FPT) results.
We show that MAPF is W[1]-hard with respect to k (even if k
is combined with the maximum degree of the input graph).
The problem remains NP-hard in planar graphs even if the
maximum degree and the makespan ℓ are fixed constants. On
the positive side, we show an FPT algorithm for k + ℓ.
As we continue, the structure of G comes into play. We give
an FPT algorithm for parameter k plus the diameter of the
graph G. The MAPF problem is W[1]-hard for cliquewidth
of G plus ℓ while it is FPT for treewidth of G plus ℓ.

Introduction
In this paper, we study the M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING
(MAPF) problem. MAPF has many real-world applications, e.g., in warehouse management (Wurman, D’Andrea,
and Mountz 2008; Li et al. 2021), airport towing (Morris
et al. 2016), autonomous vehicles, robotics (Veloso et al.
2015), digital entertainment (Ma et al. 2017), and computer
games (Snape et al. 2012). In MAPF the task is to find noncolliding paths for a set of k agents on a given graph G,
where each agent seeks a path from its source vertex to a
target.
This important problem has been, to the best of our
knowledge, formally introduced about 20 years ago and attracted many researchers since then. Nowadays, there are
numerous variants of the formal model for the problem;
see (Stern et al. 2019). It is not surprising that the MAPF
problem is in general NP-complete (Surynek 2010); the
hardnes holds even in planar graphs (Yu 2016). Therefore, there are numerous heuristic approaches that allow

Our Contribution
It is well-known that MAPF can be reduced to a shortestpath problem in a graph known as the k-agent search space.
Then, one can apply any algorithm to find a shortest path
in this graph to find a solution to the original problem, e.g.,
using A*. The main downside of this approach is the size of
the search space. We first show that it is unlikely to desing
an efficient pruning algorithm for the k-agent search space:
Theorem 1. The M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING problem
is W[1]-hard parameterised by the number of agents k
plus ∆(G) the maximum degree of the graph G.
Indeed, the above observation yields the following.
Theorem 2. The M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING problem is
in XP parameterised by the number of agents k.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17380

