The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AnomalyGPT: Detecting Industrial Anomalies Using
Large Vision-Language Models
Zhaopeng Gu1,2 * , Bingke Zhu1,3 * , Guibo Zhu1,2† ,
Yingying Chen1,3† , Ming Tang1,2 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,3
1

Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Objecteye Inc., Beijing, China
guzhaopeng2023@ia.ac.cn, {bingke.zhu, gbzhu, yingying.chen, tangm, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) such as MiniGPT-4
and LLaVA have demonstrated the capability of understanding images and achieved remarkable performance in various
visual tasks. Despite their strong abilities in recognizing common objects due to extensive training datasets, they lack specific domain knowledge and have a weaker understanding of
localized details within objects, which hinders their effectiveness in the Industrial Anomaly Detection (IAD) task. On the
other hand, most existing IAD methods only provide anomaly
scores and necessitate the manual setting of thresholds to distinguish between normal and abnormal samples, which restricts their practical implementation. In this paper, we explore the utilization of LVLM to address the IAD problem
and propose AnomalyGPT, a novel IAD approach based on
LVLM. We generate training data by simulating anomalous
images and producing corresponding textual descriptions for
each image. We also employ an image decoder to provide
fine-grained semantic and design a prompt learner to finetune the LVLM using prompt embeddings. Our AnomalyGPT
eliminates the need for manual threshold adjustments, thus
directly assesses the presence and locations of anomalies. Additionally, AnomalyGPT supports multi-turn dialogues and
exhibits impressive few-shot in-context learning capabilities.
With only one normal shot, AnomalyGPT achieves the stateof-the-art performance with an accuracy of 86.1%, an imagelevel AUC of 94.1%, and a pixel-level AUC of 95.3% on the
MVTec-AD dataset.

Figure 1: Comparison between our AnomalyGPT, existing
IAD methods and existing LVLMs. Existing IAD methods
can only provide anomaly scores and need manually threshold setting, while existing LVLMs cannot detect anomalies
in the image. AnomalyGPT can not only provide information about the image but also indicate the presence and location of anomaly.

from the Internet, their domain-specific knowledge is relatively limited and they lack sensitivity to local details within
objects, which restricts their potentiality in IAD task.
IAD task aims to detect and localize anomalies in industrial product images. Due to the rarity and unpredictability
of real-world samples, models are required to be trained only
on normal samples and distinguish anomalous samples that
deviate from normal samples. Current IAD methods (Jeong
et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2022; You et al. 2022) typically only
provide anomaly scores for test samples and require manually specification of thresholds to distinguish between normal and anomalous instances for each class of items, which
is not suitable for real production environments.
As illustrated in Figure 1 and Table 1, neither existing
IAD methods nor LVLMs can address IAD problem well,
so we introduce AnomalyGPT, a novel IAD approach based

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5 (Ouyang
et al. 2022) and LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023) have demonstrated remarkable performance on a range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. More recently, novel methods including MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al. 2023), BLIP-2 (Li et al.
2023), and PandaGPT (Su et al. 2023) have further extended
the ability of LLMs into visual processing by aligning visual features with text features, bringing a significant revolution in the domain of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).
While LVLMs are pre-trained on amounts of data sourced
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1932

