The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Trust Region Methods for Nonconvex Stochastic Optimization
beyond Lipschitz Smoothness
Chenghan Xie* 1,2 , Chenxi Li* 1 , Chuwen Zhang1 , Qi Deng1† , Dongdong Ge1 , Yinyu Ye3
1

School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University
3
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
20307130043@fudan.edu.cn, chenxili@stu.sufe.edu.cn, chuwzhang@gmail.com, qideng@sufe.edu.cn,
ge.dongdong@mail.shufe.edu.cn, yyye@stanford.edu
Abstract

However, the assumption of Lipschitz smoothness may
not hold in many important applications. For instance, in
language models such as LSTM (Zhang et al. 2019) and
transformers (Crawshaw et al. 2022), the function smoothness parameter can exhibit a strong correlation with the gradient norm along the training trajectory. Beyond these challenges in the standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
framework, the L-smoothness condition could also easily fail in distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Delage and Ye 2010; Duchi and Namkoong 2021; Levy et al.
2020a). DRO is particularly significant as it serves as a foundational element for ethical algorithms (Kearns and Roth
2020) arising from accountability and fairness issues in machine learning (Fuster et al. 2022; Tang, Zhang, and Zhang
2023; Berk et al. 2021).
Motivated by this challenge, Zhang et al. (2019) introduced first-order generalized smoothness, also known as
(L0 , L1 )-smoothness, where the Hessian norm is unbounded
but allowed to grow linearly with the gradient norm. This
condition can be further relaxed without the need of twice
differentiability. Specifically, the (L0 , L1 )-smoothness condition (Zhang et al. 2020; Reisizadeh et al. 2023) is defined
as
∥∇F (x) − ∇F (x′ )∥ ≤ (L0 + L1 ∥∇F (x)∥) ∥x − x′ ∥ (2)
holds for any x, x′ ∈ Rn such that ∥x − x′ ∥ ≤ 1/L1 , for
constants L0 > 0, L1 ≥ 0. Jin et al. (2021) showed that
(L0 , L1 )-smoothness (2) holds for a broad class of DRO objectives when expressed in the dual form. Due to the difficulty in handling unbounded Lipschitz parameters, significant effort has been devoted to developing efficient algorithms under (L0 , L1 )-smoothness (Crawshaw et al. 2022;
Reisizadeh et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2022). Typically, these
works focus on developing more stable stepsizes for stochastic gradient descent through techniques like gradient clipping and step size normalization.
Despite these recent progresses, existing research remains limited to identifying approximate first-order stationary points (FOSP), which may be suboptimal in nonconvex
settings. This drawback prompts the central question addressed in this paper: Is it possible to develop an effective
method capable of achieving approximate second-order stationary points under the conditions of generalized smoothness?

In many important machine learning applications, the standard assumption of having a globally Lipschitz continuous
gradient may fail to hold. This paper delves into a more general (L0 , L1 )-smoothness setting, which gains particular significance within the realms of deep neural networks and distributionally robust optimization (DRO). We demonstrate the
significant advantage of trust region methods for stochastic
nonconvex optimization under such generalized smoothness
assumption. We show that first-order trust region methods can
recover the normalized and clipped stochastic gradient as special cases and then provide a unified analysis to show their
convergence to first-order stationary conditions. Motivated by
the important application of DRO, we propose a generalized
high-order smoothness condition, under which second-order
trust region methods can achieve a complexity of O(ϵ−3.5 )
for convergence to second-order stationary points. By incorporating variance reduction, the second-order trust region
method obtains an even better complexity of O(ϵ−3 ), matching the optimal bound for standard smooth optimization. To
our best knowledge, this is the first work to show convergence beyond the first-order stationary condition for generalized smooth optimization. Preliminary experiments show that
our proposed algorithms perform favorably compared with
existing methods.

Introduction
We study the problem of minimizing a nonconvex function
F : Rn → R which is expressed as the expectation of a
stochastic function, i.e.,
min

x∈Rn

F (x) = Eξ [f (x; ξ)],

(1)

where the random variable ξ is realized according to a distribution P. Over the years, substantial progress has been
made in studying functions that possess Lipschitzian gradients, commonly referred to as L-smoothness functions. Notable contributions in this area can be found in (Ghadimi and
Lan 2013; Johnson and Zhang 2013; Fang et al. 2018; Carmon et al. 2019), among others.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16049

