The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Simple Image-Level Classification Improves Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Ruohuan Fang1 , Guansong Pang2* , Xiao Bai1,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
3
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
ruohuanfang@gmail.com, baixiao@buaa.edu.cn, gspang@smu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021),
which are trained using billion-scale internet-crawled imagecaption pairs (see Fig. 1(a) for an example), have been widely
used to empower OVOD.
Existing VLM-based OVOD studies focus on how to adapt
the image-level pre-trained CLIP to a region-level object detection task. Typically they adopt a regional concept learning
method, such as Region-level Knowledge Distillation (Du
et al. 2022; Bangalath et al. 2022) that aligns region embeddings to their corresponding features extracted from the
image encoder of CLIP, Regional Prompt Learning (Wu et al.
2023c; Du et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2022) that learns continuous prompt representations to better pair with region-level
visual embeddings, Region-Text Pre-training (Zhong et al.
2022) that explicitly aligns image regions and text tokens
during vision-language pre-training, or Self-Training (Zhou
et al. 2022) that generates pseudo-labels of novel objects on
the image-level labeled datasets (e.g., ImageNet-21k (Deng
et al. 2009) and Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al. 2018)).
These methods have demonstrated remarkable performance in recognizing regional visual concepts, but they are
weak in exploiting the VLMs’ powerful global scene understanding ability that can capture important relations between
different visual concepts (Wu et al. 2023b; Zhong et al. 2021).
These relations can be the co-occurrence of different objects
such as the tennis ball and the tennis racket, or their interdependence to commonly shared background environment
such as the tennis ball and tennis court, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
This weakness can limit their capability in detecting hard
objects that are of small, blurred, or occluded appearance,
whose detection relies heavily on contextual features of other
objects in the same image. Further, the OV detectors have
naturally learned the context information for base categories
when aligning regional features with corresponding text embeddings, since the network can automatically capture the
context features within the receptive field that are related to
base objects. However, the context features related to novel
objects are not learned due to the absence of novel object
annotations during the training of OV detectors. This can
be one of the key reasons that incurs the performance gap
between base and novel objects, especially the novel hard
objects.
To address this issue, this work instead aims to utilize
the global scene understanding ability for OVOD. The key

Open-Vocabulary Object Detection (OVOD) aims to detect
novel objects beyond a given set of base categories on which
the detection model is trained. Recent OVOD methods focus on adapting the image-level pre-trained vision-language
models (VLMs), such as CLIP, to a region-level object detection task via, e.g., region-level knowledge distillation, regional prompt learning, or region-text pre-training, to expand
the detection vocabulary. These methods have demonstrated
remarkable performance in recognizing regional visual concepts, but they are weak in exploiting the VLMs’ powerful
global scene understanding ability learned from the billionscale image-level text descriptions. This limits their capability
in detecting hard objects of small, blurred, or occluded appearance from novel/base categories, whose detection heavily
relies on contextual information. To address this, we propose a
novel approach, namely Simple Image-level Classification for
Context-Aware Detection Scoring (SIC-CADS), to leverage
the superior global knowledge yielded from CLIP for complementing the current OVOD models from a global perspective.
The core of SIC-CADS is a multi-modal multi-label recognition (MLR) module that learns the object co-occurrence-based
contextual information from CLIP to recognize all possible
object categories in the scene. These image-level MLR scores
can then be utilized to refine the instance-level detection scores
of the current OVOD models in detecting those hard objects.
This is verified by extensive empirical results on two popular benchmarks, OV-LVIS and OV-COCO, which show that
SIC-CADS achieves significant and consistent improvement
when combined with different types of OVOD models. Further, SIC-CADS also improves the cross-dataset generalization
ability on Objects365 and OpenImages. Code is available at
https://github.com/mala-lab/SIC-CADS.

Introduction
Open-Vocabulary Object Detection (OVOD) is a challenging task that requires detecting objects of novel categories
that are not present in the training data. To tackle this problem, conventional approaches focus on leveraging external
image-text data as weak supervisory information to expand
the detection vocabulary of the categories. In recent years,
large-scale pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs), e.g.,
* Corresponding authors: G. Pang and X. Bai
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1716

