The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Contrastive Invariant Learning from the Causal Perspective
1

2∗

3,4

1

Yanhu Mo , Xiao Wang , Shaohua Fan , Chuan Shi *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beihang University
3
Tsinghua University
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education(Beijing Jiaotong University)
{moyanhu, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, xiao wang@buaa.edu.cn, fanshaohua@bupt.cn
Abstract

loss. Most existing GCL methods learn the representations
by comparing the augmentations. First, GCL generates two
augmented graphs from the original graph based on some augmentation strategies, e.g., dropping edges (Velickovic et al.
2019). Then the two augmented graphs are fed into the encoding architecture (e.g., GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017)) to learn
the node representations. Finally, the contrastive loss (e.g.,
InfoNCE (Zhu et al. 2020)) is used to train the GCL model
by making the representations of positive pair in two augmented graphs similar and representations of negative pairs
dissimilar. It is believed that GCL is able to learn the invariant representations by contrasting the positive and negative
pairs (Zhu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022a). The learned invariant
representations will be beneficial for the downstream tasks.
Generically, the question we want to ask is: does GCL
always possess the invariant representation ability in practice? When will it fail and how to enhance this ability? A
well-informed answer can provide a deeper understanding
of the learning mechanism of GCL, identify the weakness
of GCL, and motivate more powerful GCL to be proposed.
The invariant representation usually represents the essential
information, which can also be considered as some kind of
causal variables in a graph (Arjovsky et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2022; Fan et al. 2023a). This natural and intuitive connection
inspires us to explore the GCL from the causal perspective.
We start with a causal analysis of GCL (more details are in
Section 3) based on the structural causal model (SCM). The
SCM indicates that if there are both causal and non-causal
factors in a graph, only when the causal factors are the same
and the non-causal factors are different in the original and
two augmented graphs, GCL is able to learn the invariant
causal factors. However, with the graph structures change
by graph augmentation strategies, e.g., random augmentation, it is very hard to guarantee that and finally weakens the
invariant representation learning ability.
Once the weakness is identified, a natural question is how
can we fix it and improve the invariant learning ability?
Still, SCM offers the following two requirements for GCL:
one is on the augmentation mechanism, i.e., a better graph
augmentation strategy should take the causal and non-causal
factors into account. Without distinguishing the two factors,
the representations obtained by GCL methods may contain
both causal and non-causal information, which might weaken
the performance on downstream tasks. The second is on the

Graph contrastive learning (GCL), learning the node representation by contrasting two augmented graphs in a selfsupervised way, has attracted considerable attention. GCL is
usually believed to learn the invariant representation. However,
does this understanding always hold in practice? In this paper, we first study GCL from the perspective of causality. By
analyzing GCL with the structural causal model (SCM), we
discover that traditional GCL may not well learn the invariant
representations due to the non-causal information contained in
the graph. How can we fix it and encourage the current GCL
to learn better invariant representations? The SCM offers two
requirements and motives us to propose a novel GCL method.
Particularly, we introduce the spectral graph augmentation to
simulate the intervention upon non-causal factors. Then we
design the invariance objective and independence objective
to better capture the causal factors. Specifically, (i) the invariance objective encourages the encoder to capture the invariant
information contained in causal variables, and (ii) the independence objective aims to reduce the influence of confounders
on the causal variables. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach on node classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) learn node representations
by aggregating information from neighborhoods, which have
received a great deal of attention and achieved competitive
performance on various tasks over the past few years (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017). Despite the great success, most GNNs
are trained with node labels, while it is well known that manual annotations are expensive and hard to collect; therefore,
self-supervised learning (SSL) has gained popularity due to
its competitive performance and label-free setting (Chen et al.
2020; He et al. 2020). Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL),
as one of the most successful strategies for self-supervised
representation learning on graphs, has shown state-of-the-art
performance on many downstream tasks (Velickovic et al.
2019; Zhu et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020).
The typical GCL method mainly includes three parts:
graph augmentation, encoding architecture, and contrastive
*

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8904

