The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reducing Spatial Fitting Error in Distillation of Denoising Diffusion Models
Shengzhe Zhou1 , Zejian Li1 , Shengyuan Zhang2 , Lefan Hou2 , Changyuan Yang3 , Guang Yang3 ,
Zhiyuan Yang3 , Lingyun Sun2
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Alibaba Group
{zhoujj7248, zejianlee, zhangshengyuan, houlefan, sunly}@zju.edu.cn, {changyuan.yangcy, adam.yzy}@alibaba-inc.com,
qingyun@taobao.com
2

Abstract
Denoising Diffusion models have exhibited remarkable capabilities in image generation. However, generating high-quality
samples requires a large number of iterations. Knowledge distillation for diffusion models is an effective method to address
this limitation with a shortened sampling process but causes
degraded generative quality. Based on our analysis with biasvariance decomposition and experimental observations, we
attribute the degradation to the spatial fitting error occurring
in the training of both the teacher and student model. Accordingly, we propose Spatial Fitting-Error Reduction Distillation
model (SFERD). SFERD utilizes attention guidance from the
teacher model and a designed semantic gradient predictor to
reduce the student’s fitting error. Empirically, our proposed
model facilitates high-quality sample generation in a few function evaluations. We achieve an FID of 5.31 on CIFAR-10 and
9.39 on ImageNet 64×64 with only one step, outperforming
existing diffusion methods. Our study provides a new perspective on diffusion distillation by highlighting the intrinsic
denoising ability of models.

Figure 1: The process of Spatial Fitting-Error Reduction
Distillation model. In the first step, x̂s is predicted by the
teacher model Tη from xt with attention guidance. The target
function R further calculates the target value xtarget
based
0
on x̂s in the second step. The student model Sθ tries to
regress the target value with semantic gradient predictor in
the final step.

2022). The former aims to reduce errors resulting from largestep sampling by utilizing better numerical methods for integration, whereas the latter enhances performance through
additional model training and fine-tuning. With the advent
of large-scale pre-training models, the latter approach has
become more notable. Among trained schemes, diffusion
models based on knowledge distillation have demonstrated
considerable potential for fast sampling. An illustrative example is Progressive Distillation model (PD) (Salimans and Ho
2022), where the student model learns the two-step inference
output of the teacher model in a single step without compressing the model size. However, these diffusion models based
on distillation face degraded generation quality given limited
distillation sampling step.
In this paper, we investigate scalable enhancements for the
diffusion distillation model to improve the quality of the images generated within few steps or even a single step. We begin by reframing the process of diffusion distillation models
and designing a multi-step training framework for distillation.
We then conduct analysis with bias-variance decomposition
and preliminary experiments to identify the fitting errors of
both the teacher and student models. Our results show that fitting errors have a broad impact on model performance within
our framework. Especially, we observe a positive correlation
between the self-attention maps of the diffusion model and
the spatial fitting error in the predicted noise.
Based on our observations, we propose Spatial Fitting-

Introduction
Diffusion-based (DPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Song and Ermon 2019) and scorebased (Song et al. 2021b) generative models have recently
achieved outstanding performance in synthesizing highquality images. They have already shown comparable or
even superior results to GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2020) in
multiple fields such as 3D generation (Luo and Hu 2021;
Zhou, Du, and Wu 2021), text-to-image generation (Rombach et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023), image restoration (Lugmayr et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022), controllable image editing (Kawar et al. 2022; Couairon et al. 2022) and graph
generation (Huang et al. 2023).
A major problem with diffusion models is the slow sampling speed, as it often requires hundreds of iterations to
achieve satisfactory generative quality. To address this issue, there are two mainstream improvements: fast sampling
schemes without extra training (Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020; Lu et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2022; Kong and Ping 2021)
and trained acceleration schemes (Salimans and Ho 2022;
Dockhorn, Vahdat, and Kreis 2022; Zhang, Zhao, and Lin
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7686

