The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Practical Privacy-Preserving MLaaS:
When Compressive Sensing Meets Generative Networks
Jia Wang1 , Wuqiang Su1 , Zushu Huang1 , Jie Chen 1 , Chengwen Luo2 , Jianqiang Li2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
3688 Nanhai Avenue, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China
{jia.wang, suwuqiang2019}@szu.edu.cn, 2060271076@email.szu.edu.cn, {chenjie, chengwen, lijq}@szu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

for users to upload training data and train models for realtime classification tasks, it has started to gain popularities
and offered services by Google (Google 2020), Microsoft
(Microsoft 2020), Amazon (Amazon 2020), and etc.
In typical MLaaS framework, users are allowed to label
and upload their own data for their customized model training. After the models are trained, users can upload queries
and the cloud returns classification results in realtime. In this
way, the authors do not need to understand the details of the
model training process and can leverage the cloud computation powers in both offline training and online classification
phases. This significantly lowers the barriers for non-expert
users in using the machine learning services, however, it also
greatly increases the potential risks of user privacy leakage.
As shown in Figure 1, in the offline training phase, the plain
training data uploaded to the cloud has no privacy protection guarantees and faces arbitrary attacks with the existence of malicious cloud admins. In the online classification
phase, both the queries containing users’ realtime data and
classification results (i.e., labels) are private to users, and
without efficient privacy protection approaches users will
be put under a circumstances with severe privacy leakage
risks. Therefore, it is crucial for MLaaS providers to design
a mechanism for efficient privacy protection along with the
basic machine learning services.
To achieve practical privacy-preserving MLaaS, several
requirements exist. First, the computational burden imposed
by the privacy protection mechanisms should be minimized.
Second, the communication costs should also be minimized
to meet the increasing demand of MLaaS services. Last but
not the least, the classification performance should meet
the application requirements and should not sacrifice much
on the classification accuracy. Current solutions on privacy
preserving machine learning fail to meet all the above requirements. For example, Secure Multi-party Computation
(SMC) (Knott et al. 2021)and Federated Learning (FL) (Li
et al. 2021)are all promising methods in relative fields. However, SMC and FL involve model training and multi-round
interactions among participants, which doesn’t align with
the MLaaS premise where clients often lack expertise in
model design and training capabilities. Homomorphic encryption (Acar et al. 2018) for machine learning (Takabi,
Hesamifard, and Ghasemi 2016) provides learning capabilities over encrypted data, and has become one promis-

The Machine-Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) framework allows one to grab low-hanging fruit of machine learning techniques and data science, without either much expertise for
this sophisticated sphere or provision of specific infrastructures. However, the requirement of revealing all training data
to the service provider raises new concerns in terms of privacy
leakage, storage consumption, efficiency, bandwidth, etc.
In this paper, we propose a lightweight privacy-preserving
MLaaS framework by combining Compressive Sensing (CS)
and Generative Networks. It’s constructed on the favorable
facts observed in recent works that general inference tasks
could be fulfilled with generative networks and classifier
trained on compressed measurements, since the generator
could model the data distribution and capture discriminative
information which are useful for classification. To improve
the performance of the MLaaS framework, the supervised
generative models of the server are trained and optimized
with prior knowledge provided by the client. In order to prevent the service provider from recovering the original data as
well as identifying the queried results, a noise-addition mechanism is designed and adopted into the compressed data domain. Empirical results confirmed its performance superiority
in accuracy and resource consumption against state-of-the-art
privacy-preserving MLaaS frameworks.

Introduction
The past decades have witnessed the proliferation of AIenhanced systems in various application domains. The
promising performance achieved by recent machine learning approaches have motivated users in different businesses
to apply machine learning algorithms to their own datasets.
The current machine learning frameworks, however, are usually complicated to non-expert users due to large number of
parameters required for configuration and lack of general
knowledge on how machine learning works. The increasing demand on machine learning for non-expert users has
nourished a new computing paradigm known as the Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) (Ribeiro, Grolinger,
and Capretz 2015), in which data uploading interfaces are
provided while learning details are usually appeared as black
boxes for users. Since MLaaS provides a convenient way
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15502

