The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust 3D Tracking with Quality-Aware Shape Completion
Jingwen Zhang1 * , Zikun Zhou2 * † , Guangming Lu1 , Jiandong Tian3 , Wenjie Pei1†
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jingwenz1022, zhouzikunhit}@gmail.com, luguangm@hit.edu.cn, tianjd@sia.cn, wenjiecoder@outlook.com

Abstract
Encoder

3D single object tracking remains a challenging problem due
to the sparsity and incompleteness of the point clouds. Existing algorithms attempt to address the challenges in two
strategies. The first strategy is to learn dense geometric features based on the captured sparse point cloud. Nevertheless,
it is quite a formidable task since the learned dense geometric
features are with high uncertainty for depicting the shape of
the target object. The other strategy is to aggregate the sparse
geometric features of multiple templates to enrich the shape
information, which is a routine solution in 2D tracking. However, aggregating the coarse shape representations can hardly
yield a precise shape representation. Different from 2D pixels, 3D points of different frames can be directly fused by coordinate transform, i.e., shape completion. Considering that,
we propose to construct a synthetic target representation composed of dense and complete point clouds depicting the target
shape precisely by shape completion for robust 3D tracking.
Specifically, we design a voxelized 3D tracking framework
with shape completion, in which we propose a quality-aware
shape completion mechanism to alleviate the adverse effect
of noisy historical predictions. It enables us to effectively
construct and leverage the synthetic target representation. Besides, we also develop a voxelized relation modeling module
and box refinement module to improve tracking performance.
Favorable performance against state-of-the-art algorithms on
three benchmarks demonstrates the effectiveness and generalization ability of our method.

Dense
Geometric Feature

Decoder

Tracking

Sparse Points

(a) Dense geometric feature learning

Dense Points

Backbone
Sparse
Geometric Features

…

Template Feature
Aggregation

Tracking

Backbone
Sparse Points

(b) Sparse geometric feature aggregation

Sparse Points

…

Quality-Aware
Shape Completion

Synthetic Target
Representation
Tracking

(c) Shape completion with real points (Ours)

Figure 1: Different methods for addressing the challenges of
sparsity and incompleteness. (a) Learning dense geometric
features图based
onc的点太淡太小了
sparse points, which is a formidable task
b和图
as the learned dense geometric features are with high uncertainty. (b) Aggregating the sparse geometric features of multiple templates, which is a sub-optimal solution as combining coarse shape representations can hardly obtain a precise
shape. (c) Our method, which performs shape completion
by adaptively fusing the real points of the target object from
multiple frames to depict its shape precisely.

Introduction
3D object tracking in LiDAR point clouds aims to predict the
target position and orientation in subsequent frames, given
the initial state of the target object. Existing 3D trackers (Giancola, Zarzar, and Ghanem 2019; Qi et al. 2020; Hui et al.
2022; Shan et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022) predominantly follow the Siamese tracking paradigm (Bertinetto et al. 2016;
Zhou et al. 2021), which has achieved astonishing success in
2D tracking. The pioneering study SC3D (Giancola, Zarzar,
and Ghanem 2019) calculates the feature similarities between the template and randomly sampled candidates to
track the target. After that, many advanced techniques are

introduced to improve 3D tracking performance, including
end-to-end tracking framework (Qi et al. 2020), transformerbased relation modeling (Shan et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022),
box-aware feature fusion (Zheng et al. 2021), and contextual
information modeling (Xu et al. 2023a; Guo et al. 2022).
Despite the great progress, many existing trackers (Qi
et al. 2020; Hui et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023a; Shan et al.
2021; Zhou et al. 2022) pay less attention to the sparsity and
incompleteness of the point clouds, which are usually caused
by limited sensor capabilities and self-occlusion. For example, 51% of cars in the KITTI (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun
2012) dataset have less than 100 points. A typical challenging case is that only a few points of the template and the
current target are overlapped due to the sparsity and incom-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Zikun Zhou and Wenjie Pei are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7160

