The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mixed Geometry Message and Trainable Convolutional Attention Network for
Knowledge Graph Completion
Bin Shang1,2 , Yinliang Zhao1,2 * , Jun Liu1,2 , Di Wang3 *
1
Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
National Engineering Lab for Big Data Analytics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
binshang0329@163.com, {zhaoy, liukeen}@xjtu.edu.cn, wangdi@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

many missing relations among them. Therefore, knowledge
graph completion (KGC) has attracted extensive attention
and attempts to automatically find out missing facts. Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) is an effective solution for
KGC task, and many of them have been proposed such
as (Bordes et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2015; Dettmers et al. 2018;
Vashishth et al. 2020a; Li et al. 2022; Ge et al. 2023). KGE
approaches aim to embed entities and relations into a lowdimensional vector space and define scoring functions to assess the plausibility of triples for link prediction. Although
these methods are simple and efficient, they are significantly
reliant on the pre-defined scoring function and rather challenging to encode structural information about an entity into
a single vector (Dai et al. 2022).

Knowledge graph completion (KGC) aims to study the embedding representation to solve the incompleteness of knowledge graphs (KGs). Recently, graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) and graph attention networks (GATs) have been
widely used in KGC tasks by capturing neighbor information of entities. However, Both GCNs and GATs based KGC
models have their limitations, and the best method is to analyze the neighbors of each entity (pre-validating), while this
process is prohibitively expensive. Furthermore, the representation quality of the embeddings can affect the aggregation
of neighbor information (message passing). To address the
above limitations, we propose a novel knowledge graph completion model with mixed geometry message and trainable
convolutional attention network named MGTCA. Concretely,
the mixed geometry message function generates rich neighbor message by integrating spatially information in the hyperbolic space, hypersphere space and Euclidean space jointly.
To complete the autonomous switching of graph neural networks (GNNs) and eliminate the necessity of pre-validating
the local structure of KGs, a trainable convolutional attention network is proposed by comprising three types of GNNs
in one trainable formulation. Furthermore, a mixed geometry scoring function is proposed, which calculates scores of
triples by novel prediction function and similarity function
based on different geometric spaces. Extensive experiments
on three standard datasets confirm the effectiveness of our innovations, and the performance of MGTCA is significantly
improved compared to the state-of-the-art approaches.

In order to capture the intrinsic graph structure of KGs,
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017; Javaloy
et al. 2023) have been used for KGC task. GNNs based
KGC models learn the hidden representation of each entity by aggregating its corresponding local neighbors’ information (Dai et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023). Recently,
many studies tend to model KGs by diverse types of
GNNs such as graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2017) based models R-GCN (Schlichtkrull
et al. 2018), CompGCN (Vashishth et al. 2020b), and
LTE-ConvE (Zhang et al. 2022); graph attention networks (GATs) (Veličković et al. 2018) based models MRGAT (Dai et al. 2022), GreenKGC (Wang et al. 2023)
and Ae2KGR (Shang et al. 2023b). Although these approaches have shown promising performance, they still suffer from several evident limitations as follows: (i) Data dependence. Both GCNs and GATs based KGC models have
their strengths and limitations because they are data sensitive, which results in the problem of data dependence. GCNs
based KGC approaches fully summarize neighbor messages
to endow the central entity with sufficient structural information, while they tend to stack redundant information when
there are various neighbors. GATs based KGC approaches
introduces non-uniform score to each neighbors and can reduce the stacking of redundant information, while they tend
to focus on certain neighbor entities and weaken the structural information. Therefore, the local structure of each entity can influence the performance of GCNs and GATs. The
best method is to analyze the neighbors of each entity before selecting GCNs or GATs (pre-validating), while this

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent real-world data as fact
triples (head entity, relation, tail entity), which have shown
great research value and application prospect. KGs are
widely used in many downstream tasks, such as question
answering (Kaiser, Saha Roy, and Weikum 2021), dialogue
generation (Keizer et al. 2017), semantic search (Xiong,
Power, and Callan 2017), and recommender systems (Wang
et al. 2021b). Even though the scale of many public KGs
is noticeably large such as Yago3 (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and
Suchanek 2013) and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), they
are still confronted with incompleteness because there are
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8966

