The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SayCanPay: Heuristic Planning with Large Language Models
Using Learnable Domain Knowledge
Rishi Hazra1 , Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires1 , Luc De Raedt1,2
1

Centre for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems (AASS), Örebro University, Sweden
2
KU Leuven, Belgium
{rishi.hazra, pedro.zuidberg-dos-martires, luc.de-raedt}@oru.se

fail to model action affordances (or pre-conditions)1 due to
difficulty in modeling the state of the world (e.g. grab milk
from the fridge even if the door is closed) or having a pretrained world model that is not aligned with the current environment (e.g. using a controller to regulate the heater where
only a knob exists), leading to infeasible plans. Moreover,
such models focus greedily on the next actionable step without considering its relevance to the ultimate goal, resulting in
longer, cost-inefficient plans (Valmeekam et al. 2023). Recent works like SayCan (Ahn et al. 2022) have sought to
address the affordance problem by using pretrained skills to
evaluate the action’s executability – Can the action be executed in the current state? However, the plan cost remains a
concern.
In contrast, traditional planning provides an established
approach to developing a sequence of actions to transition
from an initial state to a goal state. It uses a domain file (with
action models defined in PDDL specifying pre- and postconditions) and heuristic search planners like Fast Downward (Helmert 2006) to ensure feasibility through grounding in preconditions, and generating cost-effective plans by
employing search trees to select the best (or shortest) sequence of actions. However, obtaining a domain file for
complex real-world environments is difficult, and its use
restricts planning to a closed-world setting. These methods also struggle to handle partial observations, although
approximate planning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra
1998) can alleviate it.
Integrating LLMs with classical planning offers a promising research path, merging the generative abilities and
(open) world knowledge of LLMs with the methodological rigor of planning algorithms. To this end, we extend the
following contributions. (1) We propose to frame language
model planning in the context of heuristic planning, which
to our knowledge, is the first of its kind. (2) We incorporate feasibility and cost-effective elements into the generated
plans using a joint scoring named SayCanPay2 . As shown
in Figure 1, it guides the planning through three key steps:
(i) Say: Given a goal and an initial observation, the LLM

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive planning abilities due to their vast “world knowledge”.
Yet, obtaining plans that are both feasible (grounded in affordances) and cost-effective (in plan length), remains a challenge, despite recent progress. This contrasts with heuristic
planning methods that employ domain knowledge (formalized in action models such as PDDL) and heuristic search
to generate feasible, optimal plans. Inspired by this, we propose to combine the power of LLMs and heuristic planning
by leveraging the world knowledge of LLMs and the principles of heuristic search. Our approach, SayCanPay, employs LLMs to generate actions (Say) guided by learnable
domain knowledge, that evaluates actions’ feasibility (Can)
and long-term reward/payoff (Pay), and heuristic search to
select the best sequence of actions. Our contributions are (1)
a novel framing of the LLM planning problem in the context of heuristic planning, (2) integrating grounding and costeffective elements into the generated plans, and (3) using
heuristic search over actions. Our extensive evaluations show
that our model surpasses other LLM planning approaches.

Introduction
With the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs), there has
been a growing interest in leveraging their generative capabilities for planning tasks (Huang et al. 2022a; Valmeekam
et al. 2022; Silver et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). These models
have the ability to generate long-horizon plans, capitalizing
on their extensive “world knowledge” gained from training
on vast amounts of data (e.g. eggs are typically stored in the
refrigerator, and placing an apple in the fridge will cool it).
Such expansive knowledge can be exploited to plan in an
open-world context (Ding et al. 2023). Moreover, planning
in the natural language space offers significant flexibility
especially, with the advent of multimodal foundation models (Lakhotia et al. 2021; Du et al. 2022; Brohan et al. 2023).
Such models have made it easier to represent various modalities such as vision, speech, and even actions in the form of
natural language, thus bypassing the need to have domainspecific knowledge (e.g. PDDL) that traditional planning approaches require. However, LLM-based planning often faces
challenges, particularly in generating feasible plans. It can

1

In robotics, affordances refer to possible actions that can be
executed, which is conceptually similar to inferring preconditions
in planning – what actions are feasible in a certain situation.
2
Code link: https://rishihazra.github.io/SayCanPay/

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20123

