The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Gaze from Origin: Learning for Generalized Gaze Estimation
by Embedding the Gaze Frontalization Process
Mingjie Xu1 , Feng Lu1, 2 *
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{xumingjie, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Source Domain (Training)
Feature

Abstract
Gaze estimation aims to accurately estimate the direction or
position at which a person is looking. With the development
of deep learning techniques, a number of gaze estimation
methods have been proposed and achieved state-of-the-art
performance. However, these methods are limited to withindataset settings, whose performance drops when tested on unseen datasets. We argue that this is caused by infinite and continuous gaze labels. To alleviate this problem, we propose using gaze frontalization as an auxiliary task to constrain gaze
estimation. Based on this, we propose a novel gaze domain
generalization framework named Gaze Frontalization-based
Auxiliary Learning (GFAL) Framework which embeds the
gaze frontalization process, i.e., guiding the feature so that
the eyeball can rotate and look at the front (camera), without
any target domain information during training. Experimental
results show that our proposed framework is able to achieve
state-of-the-art performance on gaze domain generalization
task, which is competitive with or even superior to the SOTA
gaze unsupervised domain adaptation methods.

Input

Target Domain (Testing)
Gaze Direction

Auxiliary Learning

Estimation Error

1

ResNet-18
Baseline

Ours

7.48°

Generalizability
Improved
5.72°

pitch 𝜃
yaw 𝜓

Gaze
(𝜃, 𝜓)

Original Gaze

Rotate to

Gaze
(0,0)

Rotated Gaze
Looking at the Front

Gaze Frontalization Process as a Constraint (Proposed)

Figure 1: Overall idea of our proposed gaze domain generalization framework GFAL, which is able to improve crossdomain gaze estimation performance.

Introduction

(i.e.the target domain). This problem is defined as crossdomain gaze estimation, which has not been fully addressed
and remains difficult (Cheng, Bao, and Lu 2022; Wang et al.
2022; Bao et al. 2022).
The reason behind the difficulty is that gaze labels are infinite and continuous. Typical classification or recognition
tasks output finite and discrete labels. However, gaze estimation is a regression task and regresses continuous Euler angles of gaze directions, which form an infinite set of
labels. Consequently, accurately estimating these gaze labels is challenging, particularly in cross-domain scenarios.
Moreover, infinite and continuous gaze labels is one of the
major causes for overfitting in the finite training dataset.
We propose using an auxiliary task for auxiliary learning to constrain gaze estimation, which can help to alleviate
these problems. We argue that gaze frontalization is a proper
choice for such an auxiliary task because: 1) Gaze frontalization and gaze estimation are homogeneous. 2) Gaze frontalization is also easier than gaze estimation, which can help
constrain gaze estimation by performing multi-task learning
or serving as a regularization term.
Based on these analyses, we propose a novel gaze domain
generalization framework named Gaze Frontalization-based

Gaze information is important for real applications. It indicates the direction or position at which a person is looking,
and is widely used in many scenarios, such as augmented
reality (Wang, Zhao, and Lu 2022) and autonomous driving (Mole et al. 2021). To obtain this information, a number
of gaze estimation methods have been proposed. In the early
years, model-based gaze estimation methods were popular
in this field. Although they were able to accurately estimate
gaze, they required dedicated devices and calibration (Sun,
Liu, and Sun 2015). To tackle this problem, appearancebased gaze estimation approaches have been widely proposed in recent years (Lu et al. 2011, 2014), especially deeplearning-based gaze estimation methods (Zhang et al. 2017a;
Chen and Shi 2018). Such methods only use RGB images as
input and are capable of achieving competitive performance.
Although all of these gaze estimation methods are capable
of achieving state-of-the-art performance when trained and
tested on the same dataset (i.e.the source domain), they often suffer performance degradation on unseen test datasets
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6333

