The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Peculiar Images by Diffusion Models: Revealing Local Minima’s Role
Jinhyeok Jang, Chan-Hyun Youn* , Minsu Jeon, Changha Lee
KAIST
{jjh6297, chyoun, msjeon, changha.lee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

ing diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020) suggests that a substantial number of sequential steps (approximately 1,000) are required to generate
data. Secondly, the generated images are not always entirely
reliable, often displaying peculiar and imperfect characteristics. Notably, as highlighted in (Perez et al. 2023), diffusion
models often return images of humans with extra fingers,
animals with more or less legs. To address the challenge
of generation cost, several research efforts such as denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021), PNDM(Liu et al. 2021), or DPM solver++ (Lu
et al. 2022b) have been proposed. These methods reshape
the denoising process or utilize ordinary differential equation (ODE) solvers in diffusion sampling. This reduces the
number of steps needed from 1,000 to tens, with only a minor image quality decline. Conversely, these methods do not
directly tackle the second issue of peculiar images, which
continues to persist. Also, the peculiar images are another
kind of degradation, so addressing this problem without extra costs must help mitigate the computation cost issue.
This paper tackles these issues by combining techniques
that evade local minima in SGD. We hypothesize that SGD
and diffusion sampling are categorized as a kind of generalized expectation-maximization (GEM) (Dempster, Laird,
and Rubin 1977), and derive the two methods into a general form. Then, we compare the diffusion process with
SGD-based optimization in terms of equations and visualization. Our analysis reveals that the generation of peculiar
images is equivalent to local minima in SGD optimization.
To surmount this challenge, we incorporate momentum—a
commonly used strategy to escape local minima—along
with its variant, positive-negative momentum, into diffusion
sampling. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
both momentum strategies in alleviating the production of
peculiar artifacts and efficiently generating reasonable images. Our contribution can be summarized as follows:
1. We hypothesize and validate that both SGD and diffusion
sampling are special classes of GEM.
2. We establish an equivalence between the peculiar image
generation and local minima problems.
3. We propose metrics to measure the qualitative failure.
4. We implement momentum and verify its capacity to address qualitative failures without extra computations.

Recent significant advancements in diffusion models have
revolutionized image generation, enabling the synthesis of
highly realistic images with text-based guidance. These
breakthroughs have paved the way for constructing datasets
via generative artificial intelligence (AI), offering immense
potential for various applications. However, two critical challenges hinder the widespread adoption of synthesized data:
computational cost and the generation of peculiar images.
While computational costs have improved through various
approaches, the issue of peculiar image generation remains
relatively unexplored. Existing solutions rely on heuristics,
extra training, or AI-based post-processing to mitigate this
problem. In this paper, we present a novel approach to address both issues simultaneously. We establish that both gradient descent and diffusion sampling are specific cases of the
generalized expectation-maximization algorithm. We hypothesize and empirically demonstrate that peculiar image generation is akin to the local minima problem in optimization.
Inspired by optimization techniques, we apply naive momentum and positive-negative momentum to diffusion sampling.
Last, we propose new metrics to evaluate the peculiarity. Experimental results show momentum effectively prevents peculiar image generation without extra computation.

Introduction
In recent years, significant advancements have been made in
the field of generative artificial intelligence (AI), resulting
in the remarkable ability to generate highly realistic data.
Also, modern generative AI learn a wide range of knowledge and can easily produce images based on text prompts,
enabling intentional control over the outputs. As a result,
they can generate images, from realistic to imaginative, effectively alleviating the burden of dataset construction. Previously, data acquisition was challenging due to high costs
and various limitations, such as risks, dangers, and privacy
concerns. However, generative AI has introduced a novel
approach to data collection, wherein the generated data becomes employed as training data for other AI models.
Nevertheless, current generative AI has some drawbacks
and limitations. Firstly, generating an image demands significant time and computational costs. For instance, denois* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2454

