The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DOGE-Train: Discrete Optimization on GPU with End-to-End Training
Ahmed Abbas1 , Paul Swoboda1,2,3
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
2
University of Mannheim,
3
Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf

Abstract

solver for LP-relaxations of ILPs. LP solving is a key step taking most time in traditional ILP pipelines. State of the art LP
solvers (Gurobi Optimization, LLC 2021; Cplex, IBM ILOG
2019; FICO 2022; MOSEK ApS 2022; Gamrath et al. 2020)
are not amenable to ML since they are non-differentiable, sequential and have very complex implementations. This makes
utilization of neural networks and GPUs for solver improvement difficult. For these reasons we build upon the massively
parallel FastDOG (Abbas and Swoboda 2022) solver and
show that it can be made differentiable. This allows to train
our problem agnostic solver for specific problem classes resulting in equal or better performance as compared to efficient
hand-designed specialized solvers.

We present a fast, scalable, data-driven approach for solving
relaxations of 0-1 integer linear programs. We use a combination of graph neural networks (GNN) and a Lagrange
decomposition based algorithm. We make the latter differentiable for end-to-end training and use GNNs to predict its
algorithmic parameters. This allows to retain the algorithm’s
theoretical properties including dual feasibility and guaranteed
non-decrease in the lower bound while improving it via training. We overcome suboptimal fixed points of the basic solver
by additional non-parametric GNN update steps maintaining
dual feasibility. For training we use an unsupervised loss. We
train on smaller problems and test on larger ones showing
strong generalization performance with a GNN comprising
only around 10k parameters. Our solver achieves significantly
faster performance and better dual objectives than its nonlearned version, achieving close to optimal objective values
of LP relaxations of very large structured prediction problems
and on selected combinatorial ones. In particular, we achieve
better objective values than specialized approximate solvers
for specific problem classes while retaining their efficiency.
Our solver has better any-time performance over a large time
period compared to a commercial solver.

1

Introduction

Integer linear programs (ILP) are a universal tool for solving
combinatorial optimization problems. While great progress
has been made on improving ILP solvers over the past several decades, there is recent interest in leveraging machine
learning to enhance ILP algorithms. Almost all ILP solving subroutines, except ILP relaxation algorithms, have been
recently shown to benefit from learning, including variable
selection for branch-and bound (Nair et al. 2020) or cutting
plane selection (Huang et al. 2022; Turner et al. 2022; Paulus
et al. 2022). Moreover, a number of specialized heuristics as
well as meta-algorithms using heuristics as subroutines (Sun
and Yang 2023; Qiu, Sun, and Yang 2022) have used ML
for greatly improving performance for some problem classes.
However no general purpose ILP relaxation algorithm has
yet benefited from machine learning.
We make a contribution towards general ML-enabled
solvers for optimization by learning a problem-agnostic
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contributions Our high-level contributions are conceptual
and empirical: (i) We show that embedding good inductive
biases coming from non-learned solvers (in our case highly
parallel GPU-based block coordinate ascent (Abbas and Swoboda 2022) and subgradients) into neural networks leads to
greatly improved performance. In particular, we give evidence to the hypothesis that similar to vision (convolutions)
and NLP (sequence models) the right inductive biases coming from solver primitives are a promising way to use the
potential of ML for optimization. (ii) Our approach is more
economical as compared to developing efficient problem
specific heuristics, as is customary for large scale problems
in structured prediction tasks for ML (Haller et al. 2020;
Hutschenreiter et al. 2021). Instead of spending much time
and effort in designing and implementing new algorithms,
one can train our problem agnostic solver with a few problem instances coming from the problem class of interest and
obtain a state of the art GPU-enabled solver for it1 .
In detail, we propose to learn the Lagrange decomposition
algorithm (Abbas and Swoboda 2022) for solving LP relaxations of ILP problems and show its benefits. In particular,
• We generalize the dual optimization algorithm of (Abbas
and Swoboda 2022) to allow for a larger space of parameter
updates.
• We make our dual optimization algorithm efficiently differentiable and embed it as a layer in a neural network. This
enables us to predict parameters of the algorithm leading to
faster convergence compared to manually designed rules.
1

20623

Code available at https://github.com/LPMP/BDD

