The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continuous Piecewise-Affine Based Motion Model for Image Animation
Hexiang Wang1∗ , Fengqi Liu1∗ , Qianyu Zhou1 * , Ran Yi1† , Xin Tan2 , Lizhuang Ma1,2†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
{whxsjtu123, liufengqi, zhouqianyu, ranyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, xtan@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Source

Abstract
Image animation aims to bring static images to life according to driving videos and create engaging visual content that
can be used for various purposes such as animation, entertainment, and education. Recent unsupervised methods utilize affine and thin-plate spline transformations based on keypoints to transfer the motion in driving frames to the source
image. However, limited by the expressive power of the transformations used, these methods always produce poor results
when the gap between the motion in the driving frame and
the source image is large. To address this issue, we propose
to model motion from the source image to the driving frame
in highly-expressive diffeomorphism spaces. Firstly, we introduce Continuous Piecewise-Affine based (CPAB) transformation to model the motion and present a well-designed
inference algorithm to generate CPAB transformation from
control keypoints. Secondly, we propose a SAM-guided keypoint semantic loss to further constrain the keypoint extraction process and improve the semantic consistency between
the corresponding keypoints on the source and driving images. Finally, we design a structure alignment loss to align
the structure-related features extracted from driving and generated images, thus helping the generator generate results
that are more consistent with the driving action. Extensive
experiments on four datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method against state-of-the-art competitors quantitatively and qualitatively. Code will be publicly available at:
https://github.com/DevilPG/AAAI2024-CPABMM.

Generated

Figure 1: Our framework animates static image according
to driving video via Continuous Piecewise-Affine velocity
fields (inset), which divide the image space into a series
of small grids (tessellation), and express the motion transfer from driving image to source image using independent
affine transformations within each grid.

as keypoints, 3D models etc., to perform motion transfer, and achieve the goal of image animation with generation models such like GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2020) and
VAEs (Kingma et al. 2013). However, these methods usually rely on pre-trained models (Cao et al. 2017; Booth et al.
2018) to extract object-specific representations which are
trained using expensive data annotations and cannot be used
for arbitrary object categories.
Recent researchers (Siarohin et al. 2019a,b, 2021; Zhao
and Zhang 2022; Wang et al. 2022) design unsupervised
end-to-end pipelines to perform motion transfer without
prior knowledge about the object to be animated. MonkeyNet (Siarohin et al. 2019a) is the first to propose a framework with a keypoint detector, a dense motion network and
a motion transfer generator, and trains the pipeline with reconstruction loss in an end-to-end manner. FOMM (Siarohin et al. 2019b) and MRAA (Siarohin et al. 2021) both
use linear affine transformations to model motion, which
are not expressive enough for this task. TPSMM (Zhao
and Zhang 2022) utilizes more flexible non-linear thinplate-spline (TPS) transformation to model motion and proposes to use multi-resolution occlusion masks in the generation module. However, TPS transformation tends to significantly distort the overall image to achieve keypoint alignment which can cause large destruction to the information
in source image and thus be detrimental to preserving the

Introduction
Given an input source image and a driving video, the image animation task aims to generate a video of the object
in the source image performing the same action as the object in the driving video. It can be widely used in many
real-world situations such as game production (Lele et al.
2019), short video creation (Zhou et al. 2021), and film animation (Naruniec et al. 2020).
Past researchers use prior knowledge and explicit structural information of specific objects (e.g. faces (Wang
et al. 2018a), human bodies (Ren et al. 2020a,b)), such
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5427

