The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transformer-Based No-Reference Image Quality Assessment via Supervised
Contrastive Learning
Jinsong Shi, Pan Gao* , Jie Qin*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{srache, pan.gao}@nuaa.edu.cn, qinjiebuaa@gmail.com

Abstract

0.90

0.9

Image Quality Assessment (IQA) has long been a research
hotspot in the field of image processing, especially NoReference Image Quality Assessment (NR-IQA). Due to the
powerful feature extraction ability, existing Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and Transformers based NR-IQA methods have achieved considerable progress. However, they still
exhibit limited capability when facing unknown authentic
distortion datasets. To further improve NR-IQA performance,
in this paper, a novel supervised contrastive learning (SCL)
and Transformer-based NR-IQA model SaTQA is proposed.
We first train a model on a large-scale synthetic dataset by
SCL (no image subjective score is required) to extract degradation features of images with various distortion types and
levels. To further extract distortion information from images,
we propose a backbone network incorporating the MultiStream Block (MSB) by combining the CNN inductive bias
and Transformer long-term dependence modeling capability. Finally, we propose the Patch Attention Block (PAB)
to obtain the final distorted image quality score by fusing
the degradation features learned from contrastive learning
with the perceptual distortion information extracted by the
backbone network. Experimental results on six standard IQA
datasets show that SaTQA outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods for both synthetic and authentic datasets. Code is
available at https://github.com/I2-Multimedia-Lab/SaTQA.

PLCC

PLCC

0.88
0.8
HyperIQA
TReS
MANIQA
SaTQA

0.7

0.6
LIVE-FB

KONIQ

MetaIQA
DBCNN
HyperIQA
TReS
MANIQA
SaTQA

0.86
0.84
0.82

LIVE…Challenge 0.82

0.84

0.86
SROCC

0.88

Figure 1: Quantitative comparison of NR-IQA methods. The
left figure presents our PLCC results on three authentic
datasets compared to the latest NR-IQA method. The right
figure presents the average performance of our method compared to other methods on all datasets. Higher coefficient
matches perceptual score better.

2012). The FR-IQA and RR-IQA methods calculate the image quality by comparing the difference between the reference image and the distorted image, while the NR-IQA
method evaluates the image quality based on the distorted
image itself without any reference information, making it
the most challenging task and more promising in practical
applications.
With recent advance of deep learning techniques in computer vision, more and more data-driven approaches have
been developed for NR-IQA (Mittal, Moorthy, and Bovik
2012; Zhang, Zhang, and Bovik 2015; Xue, Zhang, and Mou
2013; Golestaneh, Dadsetan, and Kitani 2022; Yang et al.
2022). However, most existing deep learning based NR-IQA
models are trained using the whole training dataset without
distinguishing different distortion types and levels, which
may render them exhibiting limited capability when facing
a large-scale authentic dataset, such as LIVE-FB (Ying et al.
2020). As shown in Fig 1, even the recent most powerful
Transformer-based NR-IQA model MANIQA (Yang et al.
2022), the PLCC result on LIVE-FB is down to less than
0.6. This is because, for human eyes, even a same level
of distortion but induced by two different types of noises
may result in very different visual perception. Thus, without
distinguishing different noise types and levels during training, the model may not perform well in the face of a largescale dataset containing excessive distortions. Some CNN-

Introduction
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) refers to the quantitative
analysis of the content of an image, thus quantifying the degree of visual distortion of a distorted image. The relevant
evaluation methods are generally divided into two types:
subjective quality assessment (Mantiuk, Tomaszewska, and
Mantiuk 2012) and objective quality assessment (Yang et al.
2009). Among them, the objective quality assessment is divided into three categories according to the extent of information the algorithm needs from reference image (Wang
and Bovik 2006): full reference quality assessment (FRIQA) (Wang et al. 2004), reduced-reference quality assessment (RR-IQA) (Rehman and Wang 2012) and no reference
quality assessment (NR-IQA) (Mittal, Moorthy, and Bovik
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4829

