The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Robust Visual Understanding: from Recognition to Reasoning
Tejas Gokhale
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
gokhale@umbc.edu

The connection between vision and language (V+L) is
now an integral part of AI, with deep impact in not only
in vision, but in adjacent fields such as robotics and humancomputer interaction. I refer to this paradigm as semantic vision, where meaning, and by proxy, natural language, serves
as a critical source of knowledge for modern computer vision algorithms that seek to understand the visual world.
While previous decades in vision were dominated by “the
three R’s” (reconstruction, recognition, and reorganization)
(Malik et al. 2016), the success of semantic vision has created a fourth “R” of computer vision: reasoning. The ability to reason requires not only prediction, but a combination
of active perception, language grounding, world knowledge,
and speculation beyond the observable.
Models that learn from data are widely and rapidly being deployed today for real-world use, but they suffer from
unforeseen failures due to distribution shift, adversarial attacks, noise and corruption, and data scarcity. But many
failures also occur because many modern AI tasks require
reasoning beyond pattern matching – and such reasoning
abilities are difficult to formulate as data-based input-output
function fitting. The reliability problem has become increasingly important under the new paradigm of semantic “multimodal” learning. My research provides avenues to develop
robust and reliable computer vision systems, particularly by
leveraging the interactions between vision and language.
In the AAAI New Faculty highlights talk, I will cover
three thematic areas of my research, described below. Readers are encouraged to refer to my doctoral dissertation
Gokhale (2023) and publications (www.tejasgokhale.com).

between them when using data modification.
(2) Open-Domain Reliability for Visual Reasoning.
Multi-modal tasks involving both vision and language
(V&L) inputs combined with the quirks, complexity, and
ambiguities of human language, open up intriguing domain
discrepancies that can affect model performance at test time.
I will demonstrate our findings of V&L models when dealing with logical compositions, semantic and syntactic perturbations of questions and sentences. This will be followed
by a description of techniques to mitigate these failures
through knowledge-guided regularization and data engineering, resulting in improvements along several dimensions of
robustness. in image-based reasoning, video-based reasoning, and visual question answering tasks.
(3) Evaluation of Generative Vision Models: Challenges
and Opportunities. Text-to-image (T2I) models have seen
exceptional advances in less than a decade. But when it
comes to evaluation of generated images, metrics of photorealism dominate the discourse. T2I models have much more
to offer than photorealism; to do justice to this potential, we
need extensive evaluation tools and benchmarks. My lab is
actively pursuing the development of evaluation frameworks
to quantify the reliability and abilities of T2I – this includes
benchmarking spatial reasoning abilities via a challenging
dataset (SR2D ) and automated evaluation metrics (VISOR)
and evaluation of the ability to learn, reproduce, and compose visual concepts, offered by ConceptBed.
Future Directions: My lab is exploring applications of
vision-language techniques in mission-critical domains
where large-scale image data is unavailable, expensive, or
unlabeled, but expert knowledge about images is available
in language form. Integrating this natural language knowledge will help guide important decisions while also improving their reliability. Rigorous, exhaustive, holistic, and trustworthy evaluation and benchmarking is possibly the biggest
challenge in multimodal systems today, and I intend to be at
the forefront of this community effort.

(1) Knowledge-Guided Adversarial Discovery of Transformations for Robust Image Classifiers. Our efforts towards improving the robustness of image classifiers have focused on leveraging domain knowledge in order to discover
diverse data augmentations that can expose the classifier to a
larger distribution during training. This theme has led to improved robustness in several settings such as attribute-level
shift, style-shift, and domain-shift including applicability to
domain generalization for satellite images and medical images. I will discuss important dimensions of machine learning reliability and our recent finding of curious trade-offs

References
Gokhale, T. 2023. Towards Reliable Semantic Vision. Ph.D.
thesis, Arizona State University.
Malik, J.; et al. 2016. The three R’s of computer vision.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 72: 4–14.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22665

