The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Theory of Non-acyclic Generative Flow Networks
Leo Brunswic12 , Yinchuan Li3* , Yushun Xu1 , Yijun Feng 1 , Shangling Jui1 , Lizhuang Ma2
1

Huawei Shanghai Research Center
2
Shanghai Jiaotong University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
{leo.maxime.brunswic, liyinchuan, jui.shangling}@huawei.com, {xuyushun1, fengyijun1}@hisilicon.com,
ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
GFlowNets is a novel flow-based method for learning a
stochastic policy to generate objects via a sequence of actions and with probability proportional to a given positive reward. We contribute to relaxing hypotheses limiting the application range of GFlowNets, in particular: acyclicity (or lack
thereof). To this end, we extend the theory of GFlowNets
on measurable spaces which includes continuous state spaces
without cycle restrictions, and provide a generalization of cycles in this generalized context. We show that losses used so
far push flows to get stuck into cycles and we define a family of losses solving this issue. Experiments on graphs and
continuous tasks validate those principles.

Figure 1: Paths generated on a grid using: non-acyclic loss
(left, ours); FM loss (right, Bengio et al. (2021a)) .

Introduction

Rubick’s cube. Worse, state space and transitions may be
constrained in such a way that cycles are unavoidable: one
may think of a game in which the adversary may force to return to a previous state. Recent work (Li et al. 2023d; Lahlou
et al. 2023) made attempts at the former but the latter is still
unaddressed.
The main aim of this paper is to clarify the issues brought
up during the training of generative flows on spaces with
cycles. In particular, we study their effects on gradient descent minimizations of the so-called Flow-Matching, Detailed Balance, and Trajectory Balance losses introduced in
the previous aforementioned works to train GFN.
Considering the level of generalization of the present
work is a few steps above that of the initial GFN framework,
we use the term “Generative Flows” so that GFN correspond
to the special case of Generative Flows on DAG.

Bengio et al. (Bengio et al. 2021a,b; Zhang et al.
2022; Madan et al. 2022; Malkin et al. 2022) introduced
GFlowNets (GFN): a new method for diverse candidate generation. The objective of GFN is to sample states of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) proportionally to some reward
function (see Section for quick introduction). In this way,
GFN may be compared to MCMC (Brooks et al. 2011) and
distributional reinforcement learning methods (Bellemare,
Dabney, and Munos 2017). Experiments conducted by Bengio et al. on challenging tasks compared GFN favorably to
MCMC-based methods. GFlowNets has also been successfully used in GNN (Li et al. 2023a,b), domain adaptation
(Zhu et al. 2023), optimization (Zhang et al. 2023a), large
language model training (Li et al. 2023c), offline data (Wang
et al. 2023) and other fields.
Restricting GFN to DAG was initially motivated by specific applications in which solutions are built by applying
sequences of constructors such as in the case of molecule
generation. This seems however too restrictive: both GFN
and MCMC methods sample an unnormalized distribution,
it is tempting to try using GFN as a replacement for MCMC
altogether (raytracing (Veach and Guibas 1997) is a typical
industrial application of MCMC) leading to the need for a
generalization of GFN to continuous state spaces. Moreover,
some tasks have intrinsic symmetries that are better modeled
by a non-acyclic graph, say a Cayley graph like the one of

Main Contributions & Outline of the Paper 1) We describe in section a property of losses on graphs leading
flows to be trapped into loops and define a notion of stability in order to control this behavior which is detrimental to
training and increases inference cost. 2) Section describes
the elementary measure theoretical generalization of GFN
slightly differently from that of Lahlou et al. (2023) lifting
the built-in acyclicity constraint. The mathematical framework is enriched in particular with the definition of a suitable
generalization of cycles. 3) In section , we reformulate Flow
Matching, Detailed Balance, and Trajectory Balance losses
as variations of f -divergences and show that such losses are
unstable in the sense we introduced. We propose a family of

*Corresponding Author: Yinchuan Li
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11124

