The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Weakly-Supervised Mirror Detection via Scribble Annotations
Mingfeng Zha1 , Yunqiang Pei1 , Guoqing Wang1 * , Tianyu Li1 ,
Yang Yang1 , Wenbin Qian2 , Heng Tao Shen1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Jiangxi Agricultural University
zhamf1116@gmail.com, simon1059770342@foxmail.com, gqwang0420@uestc.edu.cn, cosmos.yu@hotmail.com,
yang.yang@uestc.edu.cn, qianwenbin1027@126.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com
Abstract
Mirror detection is of great significance for avoiding false
recognition of reflected objects in computer vision tasks. Existing mirror detection frameworks usually follow a supervised setting, which relies heavily on high quality labels and
suffers from poor generalization. To resolve this, we instead
propose the first weakly-supervised mirror detection framework and also provide the first scribble-based mirror dataset.
Specifically, we relabel 10,158 images, most of which have
a labeled pixel ratio of less than 0.01 and take only about 8
seconds to label. Considering that the mirror regions usually
show great scale variation, and also irregular and occluded,
thus leading to issues of incomplete or over detection, we propose a local-global feature enhancement (LGFE) module to
fully capture the context and details. Moreover, it is difficult
to obtain basic mirror structure using scribble annotation, and
the distinction between foreground (mirror) and background
(non-mirror) features is not emphasized caused by mirror reflections. Therefore, we propose a foreground-aware mask attention (FAMA), integrating mirror edges and semantic features to complete mirror regions and suppressing the influence of backgrounds. Finally, to improve the robustness of
the network, we propose a prototype contrast loss (PCL) to
learn more general foreground features across images. Extensive experiments show that our network outperforms relevant
state-of-the-art weakly supervised methods, and even some
fully supervised methods. The dataset and codes are available
at https://github.com/winter-flow/WSMD.

(a) Image

(b) Scribble

(c) GT

(d) SS

(e) SCWS

(f) Ours

Figure 1: (a) Original image. (b) Scribbled image. (c)
Ground-truth pixel-level annotations. (d) (Zhang et al. 2020)
and (e) (Yu et al. 2021) are weakly supervised SOD models.
(f) is our detection result.

and box-level. We provide scribble annotation and use it to
formulate our framework because it directly gives the location of mirror regions and offers flexibility in handling complex scenes. Therefore, we relabel 10,158 images, including 3,063 from MSD dataset (Yang et al. 2019), 5,095 from
PMD dataset (Lin, Wang, and Lau 2020), 2,000 from MirrorRGBD dataset (Mei et al. 2021) and name the new dataset
S-Mirror. The labeling time for each image slightly differs
as the varying scene complexity of these datasets, averaging
around 5s, 6s, and 8s, respectively. As shown in Figure 2,
the percentage of labeled pixels is less than 0.01 for most
images, significantly lower than full annotation and relevant
weak annotation works (about half of (He et al. 2023)).
Compared to traditional image detection tasks, MD shows
some task-specific challenges: a) the scale of mirror regions
varies greatly with some occupying more than half of the
image and some occupying less than one tenth; b) many of
the mirror regions are irregular and subject to occlusion;
c) the diverse imagings and the varying surroundings of
mirrors cause high noise as reflective property, thus making it a crucial task to distinguish between imagings (re-

Introduction
Mirrors are commonly used in everyday, but their reflective properties can disrupt tasks such as image enhancement (Wu et al. 2023) (Wang et al. 2021a) (Wang, Sun,
and Sowmya 2019) (Wang, Sun, and Sowmya 2021), segmentation (Jain et al. 2021), and visual language navigation (An et al. 2021), making the study of mirror detection (MD) an important topic. Current research on MD utilizes pixel-level labels as supervised signals to train models.
However, obtaining dense pixel labels is expensive. In this
paper, we propose a weakly-supervised MD method. In the
weakly supervised learning paradigm, there are four types of
supervised signals: image-level, point-level, scribble-level,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6953

