The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Joint Framework with Heterogeneous-Relation-Aware Graph and
Multi-Channel Label Enhancing Strategy for Event Causality Extraction
Ruili Pu1 , Yang Li2 , Jun Zhao3 , Suge Wang1, 4 * , Deyu Li1, 4 , Jian Liao1 , Jianxing Zheng1
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China
2
School of Finance, Shanxi University of Finance and Economics, Taiyuan, China
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education,
Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China
{pu ruili, liyangprimrose}@163.com, jzhao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {wsg, lidy, jxzheng, liaoj}@sxu.edu.cn
Abstract

Event Types: Cost
Declination,
Demand
Reduction
Price Rise, Cost Declination, Profit
Reduction, Cost Rise, Earthquake,
Price
Price Declination,
Declination ……

Event Causality Extraction (ECE) aims to extract the causeeffect event pairs with their structured event information from
plain texts. As far as we know, the existing ECE methods
mainly focus on the correlation between arguments, without
explicitly modeling the causal relationship between events,
and usually design two independent frameworks to extract
cause events and effect events, respectively, which cannot
effectively capture the dependency between the subtasks.
Therefore, we propose a joint multi-label extraction framework for ECE to alleviate the above limitations. In particular, 1) we design a heterogeneous-relation-aware graph module to learn the potential relationships between events and
arguments, in which we construct the heterogeneous graph
by taking the predefined event types and all the words in
the sentence as nodes, and modeling three relationships of
“event-event”, “event-argument” and “argument-argument”
as edges. 2) We also design a multi-channel label enhancing module to better learn the distributed representation of
each label in the multi-label extraction framework, and further enhance the interaction between the subtasks by considering the preliminary results of cause-effect type identification and event argument extraction. The experimental results on the benchmark dataset ECE-CCKS show that our
approach outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods, and
that our model also performs well on the complex samples
with multiple cause-effect event pairs.

Causality

Event Type

Cause

Effect

Sentence: The weakening demand for the
iron
iron ore in our country's steel
steel industry will
put downward pressure on the p r i c e o f
iron powder
powder for many domestic enterprises.
iron

Event Roles
Region

Industry

Product

Demand Reduction

our country

steel industry

iron ore

Price Declination

domestic

—

iron powder

Figure 1: An example of ECE.
…

…

…

…

…

…

Demand
Reduction
Price
Declination
…

…

Demand
Reduction
Price
Declination
Cause grid

Effect grid

Figure 2: The dual grid tagging scheme of Cui et al. (2022)
are domesticRegion and iron powderP roduct . It can benefit many NLP tasks, such as event forecasting (Hashimoto
2019), question answering (Shi et al. 2021), and others.
In the ECE task, we note that the following three types of
relationships are essential for understanding the task.
• Event-Event: Modeling the relationships between
events is helpful to capture the potential causality between
them, which is the key to extract cause-effect event pairs.
For example, the event “Earthquake” usually leads to some
negative events, such as “Injury”.
• Event-Argument: Modeling the relationships between
events and arguments can help to extract specific arguments
based on each event type. Specifically, each event has its
specific arguments, and as the event type changes, so does
its arguments. As shown in Figure 1, for the event “Demand
Reduction”, the argument of the role “Product” is “iron ore”,
while for the event “Price Declination”, the argument of the
role “Product” is “iron powder”. Therefore, it is helpful for
the ECE model to better capture the interaction between
events and arguments.
• Argument-Argument: Arguments are the core components of events, and the relationships between events are

Introduction
Event Causality Extraction (ECE) is an important task in the
area of Natural Language Processing (NLP). The ECE task
can be divided into two subtasks: Cause-Effect Type Identification (CET) and Event Argument Extraction (EAE) (Cui
et al. 2022). As shown in Figure 1, given the predefined
event types and sentence as inputs, the ECE model needs
to identify the cause-effect type <Demand Reduction, Price
Declination> and extract their structured event information,
specifically, the arguments of cause event Demand Reduction are our countryRegion , steel industryIndustry , and iron
oreP roduct , the arguments of effect event Price Declination
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18879

