The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Using Clustering to Strengthen Decision Diagram Bounds for Discrete
Optimization
Mohsen Nafar, Michael Römer
Management Science and Business Analytics department, Bielefeld University
mohsen.nafar@uni-bielefeld.de, michael.roemer@uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

The vast majority of the research dedicated to employing ML approaches for discrete optimization either deals
with speeding up exact optimization approaches, e.g. by
learning to take better branching decisions in branch-andbound solvers (Khalil et al. 2016), or with using ML to replace human-designed algorithmic decisions within heuristic solution approaches. As an example, the recent years
have seen tremendous improvements in so-called Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) approaches for routing problems which nowadays come very close to the best handcrafted heuristics that build upon decades of research (Hottung, Kwon, and Tierney 2021). While ML-based heuristics
provide high-quality primal bounds for discrete optimization
problems, there are relatively few works focusing on exploiting ML techniques for obtaining strong dual bounds, despite
the fact that dual bounding mechanisms constitute a critical
ingredient in exact discrete optimization solvers.
Perhaps one of the first works aiming at strengthening
dual bounds with the help of ML was (Cappart et al. 2019)
who proposed to employ DRL to improve bounds obtained
with so-called approximate Decision Diagrams (DDs). DDs,
initially introduced for representing boolean circuits, are
layered graphical data structures that can be used for compactly representing the solution space of a discrete optimization problem. In particular, one can construct two types
of limited-size approximate DDs that provide optimization
bounds: Restricted DDs in which certain feasible nodes are
discarded in order to obtain an under-approximation of the
solution space and relaxed DDs in which certain nodes are
merged in order to obtain an over-approximation that provides a dual bound. As demonstrated by Bergman et al.
(2016), these bounds can be used in a purely DD-based
branch-and-bound algorithm that is able to achieve state-ofthe art performance for certain discrete optimization problems. In addition to their computational efficiency for certain problem types, one of the key benefits of DD-based approaches is that they are highly generic in the sense that in
order to apply them, one basically only needs a Dynamic
Programming (DP) formulation of the problem to be considered along with the specification of a so-called merge operator. For an excellent survey of the recent advancements
in DD-based approaches for solving discrete optimization
problems, we refer to (Castro, Cire, and Beck 2022).
The quality of the bounds obtained with approximate DDs

Offering a generic approach to obtaining both upper and
lower bounds, decision diagrams (DDs) are becoming an
increasingly important tool for solving discrete optimization problems. In particular, they provide a powerful and often complementary alternative to other well-known generic
bounding mechanisms such as the LP relaxation. A standard
approach to employ DDs for discrete optimization is to formulate the problem as a Dynamic Program and use that formulation to compile a DD top-down in a layer-by-layer fashion. To limit the size of the resulting DD and to obtain bounds,
one typically imposes a maximum width for each layer which
is then enforced by either merging nodes (resulting in a socalled relaxed DD that provides a dual bound) or by dropping nodes (resulting in a so-called restricted DD that provides a primal bound). The quality of the DD bounds obtained from this top-down compilation process heavily depends on the heuristics used for the selection of the nodes
to merge or drop. While it is sometimes possible to engineer problem-specific heuristics for this selection problem,
the most generic approach relies on sorting the layer’s nodes
based on objective function information. In this paper, we
propose a generic and problem-agnostic approach that relies
on clustering nodes based on the state information associated
with each node. In a set of computational experiments with
different knapsack and scheduling problems, we show that
our approach generally outperforms the classical generic approach, and often achieves drastically better bounds both with
respect to the size of the DD and the time used for compiling
the DD.

Introduction
Solving discrete optimization problems is a challenging task
which has kept busy generations of researchers from various fields such as Mathematics, Computer Science and and
Operations Research. Given the impressive progress in the
field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) in the recent years, it seems natural that there is an
ever-increasing amount of research that aims at leveraging
the power of ML for solving optimization approaches, see
e.g. the surveys (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021; Kotary
et al. 2021; Cappart et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8082

