The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Disentanglement of Asymmetrical Knowledge Transfer for
Modality-Task Agnostic Federated Learning
Jiayi Chen, Aidong Zhang
University of Virginia
jc4td@virginia.edu, aidong@virginia.edu

Abstract
There has been growing concern regarding data privacy during the development and deployment of Multimodal Foundation Models for Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), while
Federated Learning (FL) allows multiple clients to collaboratively train models in a privacy-preserving manner. This
paper formulates and studies Modality-task Agnostic Federated Learning (AFL) to pave the way toward privacypreserving AGI. A unique property of AFL is the asymmetrical knowledge relationships among clients due to modality
gaps, task gaps, and domain shifts between clients. This raises
a challenge in learning an optimal inter-client informationsharing scheme that maximizes positive transfer and minimizes negative transfer for AFL. However, prior FL methods, mostly focusing on symmetrical knowledge transfer,
tend to exhibit insufficient positive transfer and fail to fully
avoid negative transfer during inter-client collaboration. To
address this issue, we propose DisentAFL, which leverages
a two-stage Knowledge Disentanglement and Gating mechanism to explicitly decompose the original asymmetrical interclient information-sharing scheme into several independent
symmetrical inter-client information-sharing schemes, each
of which corresponds to certain semantic knowledge type
learned from the local tasks. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method on AFL than baselines.

Figure 1: Modality-task Agnostic Federated Learning (AFL)
for Privacy-preserving AGI. Clients learn personal models
for their specific modalities and tasks using local data.

Due to computing resource limitations, clients cannot afford
to train or fine-tune with the entire multimodal foundation
model with billions of parameters. In addition, in the real
world, each client focuses only on its specific modality types
and tasks, making numerous parameters redundant for individual users. Given these facts, we explore Modality-task
Agnostic Federated Learning (AFL), where each client independently trains a personalized model on its own modalities and tasks, while periodically collaborating with each
other to aggregate knowledge onto a central server housing
the large foundation model, as illustrated in Figure 1.
AFL is still an under-explored research direction in FL
community. Because of the inconsistency of input modality types and downstream task types between clients, client
heterogeneity in AFL is complex–there are simultaneous
Modality gaps, Task gaps, Domain shifts, and Concept drifts
(MTDC) among clients. Such an MTDC client heterogeneity imposes a unique property of AFL–the Asymmetrical
Knowledge Relationships (AKR) among clients, meaning
that the mutual knowledge between each pair of clients are
greatly diversified. This raises a crucial challenge in learn-

Introduction
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) aims to build foundation models that emulate human-like intelligence on a variety of cognitive tasks, across diverse modality types and
domains (Bubeck et al. 2023). Yet recently, there has been a
growing concern regarding data privacy of AGI models, in
both pre-training and fine-tuning phases (Xu et al. 2023a).
For example, the massive multimodal data for pre-training
and the user-specific data for downstream task fine tuning
might include sensitive or personal information, thus centralizing these data is not possible. Meanwhile, Federated
Learning (FL) (Zhang et al. 2021) techniques allow multiple clients to collaboratively train models in a privacypreserving manner. In this paper, we attempt to leverage FL
to achieve better data privacy for AGI.
However, simply applying existing FL techniques in training or fine-tuning a large foundation model is impractical.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11311

