The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LDS2 AE: Local Diffusion Shared-Specific Autoencoder for Multimodal Remote
Sensing Image Classification with Arbitrary Missing Modalities
Jiahui Qu* , Yuanbo Yang* , Wenqian Dong† , Yufei Yang
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Network, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
jhqu@xidian.edu.cn, yuanboyang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, wqdong@xidian.edu.cn, yfyang 2021@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent research on the joint classification of multimodal remote sensing data has achieved great success. However, due
to the limitations imposed by imaging conditions, the case
of missing modalities often occurs in practice. Most previous researchers regard the classification in case of different
missing modalities as independent tasks. They train a specific classification model for each fixed missing modality
by extracting multimodal joint representation, which cannot
handle the classification of arbitrary (including multiple and
random) missing modalities. In this work, we propose a local diffusion shared-specific autoencoder (LDS2 AE), which
solves the classification of arbitrary missing modalities with
a single model. The LDS2 AE captures the data distribution
of different modalities to learn multimodal shared feature
for classification by designing a novel local diffusion autoencoder which consists of a modality-shared encoder and
several modality-specific decoders. The modality-shared encoder is designed to extract multimodal shared feature by
employing the same parameters to map multimodal data
into a shared subspace. The modality-specific decoders put
the multimodal shared feature to reconstruct the image of
each modality, which facilitates the shared feature to learn
unique information of different modalities. In addition, we
incorporate masked training to the diffusion autoencoder to
achieve local diffusion, which significantly reduces the training cost of model. The approach is tested on widely-used multimodal remote sensing datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed LDS2 AE in addressing the classification of arbitrary missing modalities. The code is available at
https://github.com/Jiahuiqu/LDS2AE.

Figure 1: The methods for dealing with missing modalities.
(a) Reconstruction of images with missing modalities (Xue,
Zhang, and Cai 2016); (b) Reconstruction of feature with
missing modalities (Ma et al. 2021); (c) Multimodal joint
representation learning (Wei et al. 2023).

et al. 2023), natural resources management (Chen et al.
2019), environmental monitoring (Li et al. 2020; Qu et al.
2023) and water quality monitoring (Mei et al. 2021). However, in practice, the case of missing modalities often occurs,
due to sensor malfunctions, weather conditions, or other factors (Zhang et al. 2018). The most existing methods treat the
joint classification with different modalities as independent
tasks, which makes it hard to put into pratical use (Wang
et al. 2020; Park et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020b). So far,
multimodal remote sensing image classification with arbitrary missing modalities remains unfully explored.
The mainstream approaches to address the challenge of
multimodal image classification with missing modalities can
be summarized in two ways: 1) generative methods (Holloway et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2021), and 2) multimodal joint
representation learning (Zhang et al. 2018).
The generative-based methods can be divided into two
categories: the reconstruction of images with missing
modalities and the reconstruction of feature with missing
modalities. For example, Xue et al. (Xue, Zhang, and Cai
2016) generates the deep channel of RGB-D images by using a low-rank matrix improved by low gradient regularization. Li et al. (Li et al. 2022) introduces the Dynamic
Hierarchical Attention distillation module (DHAD) to gen-

Introduction
Remote sensing images of the same geographic area captured from different sensors can provide complementary
ground feature (Rasti, Ghamisi, and Gloaguen 2017a; Su
et al. 2021; Ghamisi et al. 2018). The joint classification of
multimodal remote sensing data is an effective technique to
integrate the complementary information of different modalities to improve the classification accuracy, and has been
widely used in urban planning (Zhang et al. 2020a; Dong
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14731

