The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Preference Ranking Optimization for Human Alignment
∗

Feifan Song1 , Bowen Yu2 , Minghao Li2
Haiyang Yu2 , Fei Huang2 , Yongbin Li2 , Houfeng Wang1*
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group
songff@stu.pku.edu.cn, wanghf@pku.edu.cn
{yubowen.ybw, lmh397008, yifei.yhy, shuide.lyb}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
ONE

Large language models (LLMs) often contain misleading
content, emphasizing the need to align them with human
values to ensure secure AI systems. Reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) has been employed to achieve
this alignment. However, it encompasses two main drawbacks: (1) RLHF exhibits complexity, instability, and sensitivity to hyperparameters in contrast to SFT. (2) Despite
massive trial-and-error, multiple sampling is reduced to pairwise contrast, thus lacking contrasts from a macro perspective. In this paper, we propose Preference Ranking Optimization (PRO) as an efficient SFT algorithm to directly fine-tune
LLMs for human alignment. PRO extends the pair-wise contrast to accommodate preference rankings of any length. By
iteratively contrasting candidates, PRO instructs the LLM to
prioritize the best response while progressively ranking the
rest responses. In this manner, PRO effectively transforms human alignment into aligning the probability ranking of n responses generated by LLM with the preference ranking of humans towards these responses. Experiments have shown that
PRO outperforms baseline algorithms, achieving comparable
results to ChatGPT and human responses through automaticbased, reward-based, GPT-4, and human evaluations.

PAIR

PAIRS

PRO

LLM

LLM

LLM

LLM

Figure 1: Comparison among different SFT paradigms. PRO
is distinguished from others for multi-positional and multidimensional contrasts.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in meeting the diverse information needs of
users (Brown et al. 2020; Chowdhery et al. 2022; Bubeck
et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023). Despite leveraging the extensive global knowledge and human behavior encoded within their trillion-token pretraining corpus, LLMs are unavoidably impacted by the existence of misleading, toxic, and detrimental content encompassed within it (Bai et al. 2022b; Ouyang et al. 2022).
Consequently, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is introduced to construct secure and manageable AI systems (Stiennon et al. 2020; Xue et al. 2023; Peng
et al. 2023) by aligning linguistic space of LLMs to human
values according to a set of candidates ranked by humans.
Nevertheless, RLHF remains more complex than supervised learning, prone to optimization instability, and sensitive to hyperparameters. These limitations arise mainly from

employing the agent, i.e. LLM to experience repetitive trialand-error rather than directly aligning it to human preference. Hence, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is expected as
the possibility of more direct optimization to replace RLHF.
SFT initially serves as only a warm-up process for RLHF,
where the best candidates are selected to tune LLMs to intimate human-preferred data. Recent works have proposed
more complex strategies to enhance SFT (Rafailov et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2023; Yuan et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2023).
Despite some progress, there remains room for improvement: (1) The essence that powers RLHF to perform well is
ignored. That is multiple sampling with scoring from broad
linguistic space during training. Constrained by the given
ranking length, most methods pay attention to pair-wise contrasts from semantic or scalar perspectives. (2) Even longer
rankings are available, they tend to cut it into pairs, thus
lacking distinction of candidates from a macro perspective.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18990

