The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Debiased Novel Category Discovering and Localization
Juexiao Feng1,2,3 * , Yuhong Yang1,2,3 * , Yanchun Xie4 , Yaqian Li4 , Yandong Guo4 , Yuchen Guo1,2 ,
Yuwei He1,2 , Liuyu Xiang5† , Guiguang Ding1,2†
1

Tsinghua University
2
BNRist
3
Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence
4
OPPO Research Institute
5
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{fjx20, yangyh22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xieyanchun, liyaqian}@oppo.com, yandong.guo@live.com,
{yuchen.w.guo, heyuwei403}@gmail.com, xiangly@bupt.edu.cn, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
In recent years, object detection in deep learning has experienced rapid development. However, most existing object
detection models perform well only on closed-set datasets,
ignoring a large number of potential objects whose categories are not defined in the training set. These objects are
often identified as background or incorrectly classified as
pre-defined categories by the detectors. In this paper, we
focus on the challenging problem of Novel Class Discovery and Localization (NCDL), aiming to train detectors that
can detect the categories present in the training data, while
also actively discover, localize, and cluster new categories.
We analyze existing NCDL methods and identify the core
issue: object detectors tend to be biased towards seen objects, and this leads to the neglect of unseen targets. To address this issue, we first propose an Debiased Region Mining
(DRM) approach that combines class-agnostic Region Proposal Network (RPN) and class-aware RPN in a complementary manner. Additionally, we suggest to improve the representation network through semi-supervised contrastive learning by leveraging unlabeled data. Finally, we adopt a simple and efficient mini-batch K-means clustering method for
novel class discovery. We conduct extensive experiments on
the NCDL benchmark, and the results demonstrate that the
proposed DRM approach significantly outperforms previous
methods, establishing a new state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: For current mainstream object detection models,
they do not detect new objects in unlabeled data. The existing NCDL methods tend to extract biased proposals for
unlabeled data. Our proposed model not only localizes unknown objects but also clusters different unknown objects,
thereby achieving the discovery of new categories.

set of categories as the training set. However, in the in realworld scenario, object detectors are faced with both known
objects and potential unknown objects that have never appeared or been annotated in the training set. Once trained,
they are unaware of any objects that they have not seen during training. They either treat the unknown objects as background or misclassify them as known categories. By contrast, humans have the capability of perceiving, discovering, and recognizing unknown novel objects. Therefore, the
Novel Category Discovery problem, which aims to not only
detect known objects, but also discover novel categories unsupervisedly, has attracted much attention
Most NCD methods involve a pre-training step on labeled
sets and then perform on unlabeled data. For example, (Han,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2019) adds partial information from
known classes to unknown classes, pretending that some
parts are unlabeled, and then runs clustering algorithms in
the expansion phase for model inference. This approach of
handling unlabeled data during pre-training will cause the
model to learn from unknown data. While this can improve

Introduction
Object detection (Girshick et al. 2013; Girshick 2015; Redmon et al. 2015) technology is a fundamental research area
of computer vision and is now widely used in security (He
et al. 2022), autonomous driving (Gu et al. 2021), medical (Guo et al. 2022) field and other areas.
Existing object detection methods are trained on closedset datasets with a fixed number of categories. The majority
of research focuses on improving detection performance on
closed-set datasets. In closed-set datasets scenarios, object
detectors are evaluated on a test set that contains the same
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1753

