The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Code-Style In-Context Learning for Knowledge-Based Question Answering
Zhijie Nie1,3 , Richong Zhang1,2 * , Zhongyuan Wang1 , Xudong Liu1
1

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Shen Yuan Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{niezj,zhangrc,wangzy23,liuxd}@act.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Current methods for Knowledge-Based Question Answering
(KBQA) usually rely on complex training techniques and
model frameworks, leading to many limitations in practical
applications. Recently, the emergence of In-Context Learning
(ICL) capabilities in Large Language Models (LLMs) provides a simple and training-free semantic parsing paradigm
for KBQA: Given a small number of questions and their labeled logical forms as demo examples, LLMs can understand
the task intent and generate the logic form for a new question. However, current powerful LLMs have little exposure
to logic forms during pre-training, resulting in a high format
error rate. To solve this problem, we propose a code-style
in-context learning method for KBQA, which converts the
generation process of unfamiliar logical form into the more
familiar code generation process for LLMs. Experimental results on three mainstream datasets show that our method dramatically mitigated the formatting error problem in generating logic forms while realizing a new SOTA on WebQSP,
GrailQA, and GraphQ under the few-shot setting. The code
and supplementary files are released at https://github.com/
Arthurizijar/KB-Coder.

Figure 1: A comparison between our proposed ICL method
and the existing method. Intuitively, our method achieves
better performance by transforming the original KBQA task
into a more familiar code form for the LLM.

Introduction
Knowledge-Based Question Answering (KBQA) (Yih et al.
2016; Lan and Jiang 2020; Yu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023b) is
a long-studied problem in the NLP community. Due to the
complexity and diversity of the questions, the models with
good performance usually have complex modeling frameworks or special training strategies. However, these designs
also lead to models that require a lot of labeled data to
help the parameters converge, making them difficult to apply in the new domains. Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have strong generalization capabilities, benefiting from pre-training on vast amounts of natural language
corpus and open source code (Figure 1 Top). In addition,
the emergence of In-Context Learning (ICL) capabilities
(Brown et al. 2020) allows LLMs to accomplish even complex reasoning tasks while observing a small amount of labeled data (Wei et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2022).
Recently, Pangu (Gu, Deng, and Su 2023) first proposed
a KBQA method based on the ICL paradigm, which con-

sists of a symbolic agent and a language model. The agent
is responsible for constructing effective programs step-bystep, while the language model is responsible for guiding
the search process to evaluate the plausibility of candidate
plans. KB-BINDER (Li et al. 2023b) proposes a trainingfree paradigm, which uses multiple (question, logical form)
pairs as the demo examples, and leads the LLM to generate the correct logic form for the new question based on
these demo examples (Figure 1 Middle). However, we find
that this latest method still has several serious problems: (1)
High format error rate. Due to the highly specialized nature of the logic forms, all of them can hardly ever appear
in the training corpus of LLM. As a result, it is challenging
to generate the logical form with the correct formatting with
a few demo examples. In our preliminary experiments, the
logic forms generated by the powerful GPT3.5-turbo have
a more than 15% format error rate on GrailQA (Gu et al.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18833

