The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SeTformer Is What You Need for Vision and Language
Pourya Shamsolmoali1 , Masoumeh Zareapoor2* , Eric Granger3 , Michael Felsberg4
1

School of Communication and Electronic Eng., East China Normal University
2
Department of Electrical Eng., Shanghai Jiaotong University
3
LIVIA, Department of Systems Eng., ETS Montreal
4
Computer Vision Laboratory, Linköping University
mzarea@ieee.org
Accuracy (%)

Abstract
The dot product self-attention (DPSA) is a fundamental component of transformers. However, scaling them to long sequences, like documents or high-resolution images, becomes
prohibitively expensive due to the quadratic time and memory complexities arising from the softmax operation. Kernel
methods are employed to simplify computations by approximating softmax but often lead to performance drops compared to softmax attention. We propose SeTformer, a novel
transformer where DPSA is purely replaced by Self-optimal
Transport (SeT) for achieving better performance and computational efficiency. SeT is based on two essential softmax
properties: maintaining a non-negative attention matrix and
using a nonlinear reweighting mechanism to emphasize important tokens in input sequences. By introducing a kernel
cost function for optimal transport, SeTformer effectively satisfies these properties. In particular, with small and basesized models, SeTformer achieves impressive top-1 accuracies of 84.7% and 86.2% on ImageNet-1K. In object detection, SeTformer-base outperforms the FocalNet counterpart
by +2.2 mAP, using 38% fewer parameters and 29% fewer
FLOPs. In semantic segmentation, our base-size model surpasses NAT by +3.5 mIoU with 33% fewer parameters. SeTformer also achieves state-of-the-art results in language modeling on the GLUE benchmark. These findings highlight SeTformer applicability for vision and language tasks.

SeTformer-T

Focal
MViTv2

MViTv2-B

SeTformer-S

85
84

Swin
NAT

SeTformer-B

86

CSWin
SeTformer

CSWin-B

NAT-B

Focal-B

NAT-S

CSWin-S

Focal-S

83

CSWin-T

Swin-B
Swin-S

82

SeTformer-M

81

NAT-M

Focal-T
20M

3

30M

50M

~90M

Swin-T

7

11

15

GFLOPs

Figure 1: Top-1 classification accuracy vs. FLOPs on the
ImageNet-1k, where the bubble size represents the number
of parameters. SeTformer improves upon the baseline accuracy yet require fewer parameters and FLOPs.

of increasing the efficiency of transformers (Touvron et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Hassani et al. 2023;
Grainger et al. 2023) are proposed. Although these methods have achieved impressive results on ImageNet-1K (an
area where ViT has struggled), the increased complexity
makes these models slower overall (Figure 1). One main
bottleneck in attention mechanisms is the softmax operator,
which affects the efficiency (Zandieh et al. 2023). Thus, recent research has proposed kernel-based methods as a way
to approximate the attention matrix and improve computational efficiency (Choromanski et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021;
Chowdhury et al. 2022; Choromanski et al. 2023; Zandieh
et al. 2023; Reid et al. 2023). The approximate attention
matrix is an unbiased estimate of the original attention matrix, encoding token similarities via a softmax-kernel without explicit construction. However, the improved efficiency
achieved through kernelization often comes with additional,
sometimes impractical assumptions on the attention matrix
(Wang et al. 2020) or with approximations of the softmax
operation under specific theoretical conditions (Choromanski et al. 2023). However, when these assumptions are not
satisfied or approximation errors occur, the performance of
these methods may not be consistently better than the vanilla
transformer. For example, transformer variants with linear
complexity, such as ScatterBrain (Chen et al. 2021), and

Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017), initially introduced for
natural language processing (NLP), have gained significant
popularity in computer vision following the groundbreaking work of Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2021). Its promise has been demonstrated in various vision
tasks, including image classification, object detection, segmentation and beyond (Khan et al. 2022). Dot-product selfattention (DPSA) with softmax normalization plays a crucial role in transformers for capturing long-range dependencies. However, the computation of this model leads to
quadratic time and memory complexities, making it challenging to train long sequence models. Therefore, research
on “efficient” transformers has gained significant importance in the last two years. Several methods with the aim
* Work done at Inria, CNRS-ENS.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4713

