The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robustness-Guided Image Synthesis for Data-Free Quantization
Jianhong Bai1 , Yuchen Yang1 , Huanpeng Chu2 , Hualiang Wang3 , Zuozhu Liu1 ,
Ruizhe Chen1 , Xiaoxuan He1 , Lianrui Mu1 , Chengfei Cai4 , Haoji Hu1 *
1

Zhejiang University
Kuaishou Technology
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Tencent Data Platform
jianhongbai@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Quantization has emerged as a promising direction for
model compression. Recently, data-free quantization has
been widely studied as a promising method to avoid privacy
concerns, which synthesizes images as an alternative to real
training data. Existing methods use classification loss to ensure the reliability of the synthesized images. Unfortunately,
even if these images are well-classified by the pre-trained
model, they still suffer from low semantics and homogenization issues. Intuitively, these low-semantic images are sensitive to perturbations, and the pre-trained model tends to have
inconsistent output when the generator synthesizes an image
with poor semantics. To this end, we propose RobustnessGuided Image Synthesis (RIS), a simple but effective method
to enrich the semantics of synthetic images and improve
image diversity, further boosting the performance of downstream data-free compression tasks. Concretely, we first introduce perturbations on input and model weight, then define the inconsistency metrics at feature and prediction levels
before and after perturbations. On the basis of inconsistency
on two levels, we design a robustness optimization objective
to enhance the semantics of synthetic images. Moreover, we
also make our approach diversity-aware by forcing the generator to synthesize images with small correlations in the label
space. With RIS, we achieve state-of-the-art performance for
various settings on data-free quantization and can be extended
to other data-free compression tasks.

Figure 1: Visualization of the loss landscape. Note that we
reverse the y-axis for visual convenience.

However, accessibility to the original training data during
the quantization process is not always possible due to privacy and security reasons, especially in medical and industrial scenarios. Data-driven methods would fail in this case.
Therefore, data-free quantization has been proposed for
compression under privacy protection. Among some excellent works (Nagel et al. 2019; Banner et al. 2018; Cai et al.
2020; Nagel et al. 2019), generative methods (Choi et al.
2021; Xu et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Choi et al. 2022; Qian
et al. 2023b,a; Li et al. 2023; Shang et al. 2023; Choi et al.
2020) have drawn much attention due to their great performance. These methods synthesize fake data through generators and use them to calibrate or fine-tune the quantified
model. Hence, the quality of synthesized images influences
the quantization performance greatly.
Beyond various image priors (e.g., match BN statistics (Cai et al. 2020)) being used during image synthesis,
most of the existing methods feed the synthesized images
to the pre-trained model, then minimize the cross-entropy
loss to guarantee the semantics of images (Xu et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021). Nevertheless, even if the images are wellclassified, they still suffer from low semantics, limiting the
performance of downstream model compression tasks. The
phenomenon can be explained in two aspects. On one hand,

Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have achieved great accomplishment in many areas, including computer vision (He
et al. 2016; Girshick 2015; Sandler et al. 2018) and natural language processing (Zia and Zahid 2019; Mikolov et al.
2010; Devlin et al. 2018). Despite their satisfactory performance, the huge number of parameters and high computational cost prevent them from being deployed to edge
computing devices. Quantization, which converts parameters from full-precision to low-precision, has become a
promising method for model compression. A large number
of methods (Liu et al. 2020, 2018; Fan et al. 2020; Zhuang
et al. 2018) minimize the quantization error through training
data and achieve great performance in low-bit quantization.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10971

