The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improve Robustness of Reinforcement Learning against Observation
Perturbations via l∞ Lipschitz Policy Networks
Buqing Nie, Jingtian Ji, Yangqing Fu, Yue Gao*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence and AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{niebuqing, jijingtian, frank79110, yuegao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

in application scenarios such as sensor noise (Zang et al.
2019) and adversarial attacks (Huang et al. 2017). These
slight perturbations can deceive typical DRL policies easily, leading to irrational and unpredictable decisions by the
agent (Fischer et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020b; Oikarinen
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021b; Sun et al. 2022). This may
affect the policy effectiveness and user experience, even
causing safety issues, especially in safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving and robot manipulation
tasks (Zhao et al. 2022). The lack of robustness to observation perturbations renders applications of DRL unreliable
and risky, thereby limiting potential applications in realworld scenarios.
In the recent decade, plenty of works have been proposed to certify and enhance the robustness of DRL policies against perturbations on observations. Some researchers
propose various robust policy regularizers to enforce policy smoothness, i.e. the policy output similar actions given
similar observations (Zhang et al. 2020b; Shen et al. 2020;
Oikarinen et al. 2021). For example, Shen et al. (Shen et al.
2020) propose a smoothness-inducing regularizer inspired
by Lipschitz continuity to encourage the policy function to
become smooth, which improves sample efficiency and policy robustness in continuous control tasks. Despite the excellent performance achieved, the incorporation of a smoothness regularizer may hinder the expressive power of the policy network, resulting in a partial compromise of optimality
and performance, especially in tasks with strong perturbation strength (Wu and Vorobeychik 2022).
Another approach to enhancing the policy robustness is
based on attacking and adversarial samples (Mandlekar et al.
2017; Pattanaik et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2021b). For instance, Pattanaik et al. (Pattanaik et al. 2018) improve policy robustness utilizing adversarial observations found by
gradient-based attackers. Recently, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al.
2021b) propose Alternating Training with Learned Adversaries (ATLA), which trains an RL adversary online with the
agent policy alternately. ALTA significantly improves the
policy robustness in continuous control tasks. Despite the
excellent robustness, these methods require training extra
attackers or finding adversaries for the observations, which
incurs additional computational and sampling costs, thereby
limiting their practical applications.
In this work, we propose a novel method called SortRL to

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has achieved remarkable advances in sequential decision tasks. However, recent
works have revealed that DRL agents are susceptible to slight
perturbations in observations. This vulnerability raises concerns regarding the effectiveness and robustness of deploying such agents in real-world applications. In this work,
we propose a novel robust reinforcement learning method
called SortRL, which improves the robustness of DRL policies against observation perturbations from the perspective
of the network architecture. We employ a novel architecture
for the policy network that incorporates global l∞ Lipschitz
continuity and provide a convenient method to enhance policy robustness based on the output margin. Besides, a training
framework is designed for SortRL, which solves given tasks
while maintaining robustness against l∞ bounded perturbations on the observations. Several experiments are conducted
to evaluate the effectiveness of our method, including classic control tasks and video games. The results demonstrate
that SortRL achieves state-of-the-art robustness performance
against different perturbation strength.

Introduction
Recently, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has
achieved breakthrough success in various application
scenarios, including video games (Mnih et al. 2015), recommender systems (Afsar, Crump, and Far 2022), and robotics
control (Lee et al. 2020). These achievements typically
rely on the Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) as function
approximators for their strong expressive power, which
enables the end-to-end learning of policies in complex
environments with high-dimension state spaces, such as
images observations (Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White
1989; Mnih et al. 2015; Kaiser et al. 2020).
However, DNNs typically lack robustness due to their
highly non-linear and black-box nature, resulting in unreasonable and unpredictable outputs when inputs are perturbed
slightly (Madry et al. 2018; Yuan et al. 2019). Similarly, recent works have shown that typical DNN-based policies are
also vulnerable to imperceptible perturbations on observations, also known as “state adversaries”, which are prevalent
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14457

