The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

G-Adapter: Towards Structure-Aware Parameter-Efficient
Transfer Learning for Graph Transformer Networks
Anchun Gui, Jinqiang Ye, and Han Xiao*
Department of Artificial Intelligence
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
{anchungui, jinqiangye}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, bookman@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

2023; Yuan et al. 2023). For instance, based on multi-layer
Transformer encoders (Vaswani et al. 2017), Graphormer
(Ying et al. 2021) first performs the well-designed unsupervised tasks on large-scale molecular datasets, and then
fine-tunes the entire pre-trained parameters of the model on
downstream molecular tasks of interest, which is also known
as full fine-tuning. However, full fine-tuning poses several
issues in practice: (i) Given that the labels of graph data
from some domains (e.g., chemistry, biology) are inaccessible without the expertise and labor-heavy annotations (Xia
et al. 2022), it is common that there are insufficient labeled
samples in downstream tasks of interest. Therefore, full finetuning would incur serious over-fitting and catastrophic forgetting issues (Houlsby et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021). (ii)
When handling multiple diverse downstream tasks, full finetuning has to duplicate a modified copy of all parameters per
task, which hinders the flexibility and applicability of largescale models, especially in scenarios with constrained storage resources (e.g., mobile detection devices).

It has become a popular paradigm to transfer the knowledge
of large-scale pre-trained models to various downstream tasks
via fine-tuning the entire model parameters. However, with
the growth of model scale and the rising number of downstream tasks, this paradigm inevitably meets the challenges
in terms of computation consumption and memory footprint
issues. Recently, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
(e.g., Adapter, LoRA, BitFit) shows a promising paradigm
to alleviate these concerns by updating only a portion of parameters. Despite these PEFTs having demonstrated satisfactory performance in natural language processing, it remains
under-explored for the question: whether these techniques
could be transferred to graph-based tasks with Graph Transformer Networks (GTNs)? Therefore, in this paper, we fill
this gap by providing extensive benchmarks with traditional
PEFTs on a range of graph-based downstream tasks. Our empirical study shows that it is sub-optimal to directly transfer existing PEFTs to graph-based tasks due to the issue of
feature distribution shift. To address this issue, we propose
a novel structure-aware PEFT approach, named G-Adapter,
which leverages graph convolution operation to introduce
graph structure information (e.g., graph adjacency matrix)
as an inductive bias to guide the updating process. Further,
we propose Bregman proximal point optimization to alleviate feature distribution shift by preventing the model from
aggressive update. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
G-Adapter obtains state-of-the-art performance compared to
counterparts on nine graph benchmark datasets based on diverse pre-trained GTNs, and delivers tremendous memory
footprint efficiency compared to the conventional paradigm.

Recently, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), as an
alternative to full fine-tuning, has been proposed and widely
investigated in NLP (Houlsby et al. 2019; Ben-Zaken, Goldberg, and Ravfogel 2022; Ding et al. 2022; He et al. 2022;
Hu et al. 2022). PEFT aims to achieve competitive performance with full fine-tuning while consuming computation
and storage resources as few as possible. Instead of updating the entire parameters during the fine-tuning phase,
PEFT only updates a small fraction of parameters within
the original model or additionally introduced modules, while
freezing the remaining parameters. For example, Adapter
(Houlsby et al. 2019) inserts two compact modules in each
encoder of Transformer, while BitFit (Ben-Zaken, Goldberg, and Ravfogel 2022) only updates the bias terms in the
model parameters, as shown in Fig. 3. Despite the remarkable achievements of traditional PEFTs in natural language
understanding tasks, the question is still under-explored
whether these PEFTs from the language domain are feasible for various GTNs under graph-based tasks, given that
the intrinsic discrepancy between graph and text modalities
(e.g., the graph has rich structure information). Therefore, in
this paper, we shall fill this gap by answering the following
questions: Can PEFTs from the language domain be transferred directly to graph-based tasks? If not, how to design a
graph-specific PEFT method?

Introduction
Pre-training then fine-tuning has become a prevalent training paradigm, with the remarkable success of large-scale
pre-trained models in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
(Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020; Lewis
et al. 2020; Brown et al. 2020). Recently, more researchers
are striving to apply this paradigm to graph-based tasks with
Graph Transformer Networks (GTNs) (Maziarka et al. 2020;
Ying et al. 2021; Mialon et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021; Kim
et al. 2022; Kreuzer et al. 2022; Bo et al. 2023; Jin et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12226

