The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Large Language Models Are Clinical Reasoners:
Reasoning-Aware Diagnosis Framework with Prompt-Generated Rationales
Taeyoon Kwon1 * , Kai Tzu-iunn Ong1 * , Dongjin Kang2 , Seungjun Moon2 , Jeong Ryong Lee3 ,
Dosik Hwang3 , Beomseok Sohn4 , Yongsik Sim4 , Dongha Lee1 , Jinyoung Yeo1
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Yonsei University
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
4
Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, Yonsei University
2

Abstract

et al. 2022). These approaches entirely exclude the aforementioned clinical reasoning in their modeling and focus on
fine-tuning high-capacity models for better feature extraction (Jang and Hwang 2022). However, such a data-driven
approach can be limited by the data-scarcity problem in
biomedical domains. Moreover, high-capacity models are
shown to memorize the dataset, rather than solving the diagnosis task through logical reasoning (Mitra et al. 2020), and
they cannot provide explanations justifying their diagnoses.
Since whether a diagnosis can be explained and whether it
matches the reasoning of humans are important for gaining
clinicians’ trust in DL techniques (Holzinger et al. 2017),
this naive approach largely limits models’ potential to be implemented for real-world applications.
Meanwhile, large language models have demonstrated
their ability to perform multi-step reasoning as well as
present the thinking process behind it, which is known as
chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al. 2022). Previous works have applied such reasoning ability to various
domains (Wei et al. 2022; Kojima et al. 2022; Wu, Zhang,
and Huang 2023; Liévin, Hother, and Winther 2023). In
these works, LLMs serve as reasoners that generate natural language rationales guiding and explaining the solution.
Despite such success, the use of LLMs to address clinical
reasoning in disease diagnosis for real-world applications is
still an under-explored area at the moment.
Motivated by these, in this work, we make a step toward
clinical reasoning in disease diagnosis, where the models are
aware of the clinical reasoning behind the diagnosis, as illustrated in Figure 1. To this end, we formulate the clinical
reasoning in disease diagnosis as chain-of-thought reasoning, namely Clinical Chain-of-Thought (Clinical CoT). Our
goal is to facilitate clinical reasoning by leveraging LLMs
to reason over patient data, refer to relevant knowledge, and
generate rationales that guide and explain the diagnosis.
Our contributions are two-fold: (i) We propose a practical
framework for reasoning-aware diagnosis. Our framework
involves clinical rationalization that augments the existing
clinical data with clinical rationales, few-shot reasoning and
diagnosis with LLMs, and distillation towards smaller models. (ii) We conduct a thorough analysis of the framework
in our testbed diagnosis dataset to gain a deep understanding of the clinical reasoning task. We show that by reason-

Machine reasoning has made great progress in recent years
owing to large language models (LLMs). In the clinical domain, however, most NLP-driven projects mainly focus on
clinical classification or reading comprehension, and underexplore clinical reasoning for disease diagnosis due to the expensive rationale annotation with clinicians. In this work, we
present a “reasoning-aware” diagnosis framework that rationalizes the diagnostic process via prompt-based learning in
a time- and labor-efficient manner, and learns to reason over
the prompt-generated rationales. Specifically, we address the
clinical reasoning for disease diagnosis, where the LLM generates diagnostic rationales providing its insight on presented
patient data and the reasoning path towards the diagnosis,
namely Clinical Chain-of-Thought (Clinical CoT). We empirically demonstrate LLMs/LMs’ ability of clinical reasoning via extensive experiments and analyses on both rationale
generation and disease diagnosis in various settings. We further propose a novel set of criteria for evaluating machinegenerated rationales’ potential for real-world clinical settings,
facilitating and benefiting future research in this area.

Introduction
Reasoning is the ability to assess things logically based on
available information of various types. Reasoning in clinical diagnosis, also known as clinical reasoning or diagnostic
reasoning, is a dynamic thinking process between the observed clinical evidence and the identification of disease.
It involves an integration of patient data, relevant medical knowledge, clinicians’ experience, and other contextual
or situational factors (Norman 2005; Cook, Sherbino, and
Durning 2018). Poor clinical reasoning has been directly
linked to misdiagnoses and eventually causing hospital adverse events including patient death (Balogh, Miller, and
Ball 2015). Therefore, effective clinical reasoning is crucial
for diagnosis in real clinical settings (Kassirer 1989).
Recently, deep learning (DL) models are widely utilized
for disease diagnosis. However, a predominant portion of existing approaches formulates the process simply as image
or text classification (Bakator and Radosav 2018; Kumar
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18417

