The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Novel Class Discovery in Chest X-rays via Paired Images and Text
Jiaying Zhou1, 2 , Yang Liu3 , Qingchao Chen1, 2, 4 *
2

1
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{zhoujiaying, qingchao.chen, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Novel class discover(NCD) aims to identify new classes undefined during model training phase with the help of knowledge of known classes. Many methods have been proposed
and notably boosted performance of NCD in natural images. However, there has been no work done in discovering new classes based on medical images and disease categories, which is crucial for understanding and diagnosing
specific diseases. Moreover, most of the existing methods
only utilize information from image modality and use labels as the only supervisory information. In this paper, we
propose a multi-modal novel class discovery method based
on paired images and text, inspired by the low classification accuracy of chest X-ray images and the relatively higher
accuracy of the paired text. Specifically, we first pretrain
the image encoder and text encoder with multi-modal contrastive learning on the entire dataset and then we generate
pseudo-labels separately on the image branch and text branch.
We utilize intra-modal consistency to assess the quality of
pseudo-labels and adjust the weights of the pseudo-labels
from both branches to generate the ultimate pseudo-labels for
training. Experiments on eight subset splits of MIMIC-CXRJPG dataset show that our method improves the clustering
performance of unlabeled classes by about 10% on average
compared to state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/zzzzzzzzjy/MMNCD-main.

(a) Pseudo-label accuracy.

(b) Validation set accuracy.

Figure 1: (a)Pseudo-label accuracy of different methods and
different datasets. (b)Validation set accuracy of unlabeled
classes in SET1 under supervision.

from semi-supervised learning. Most of the existing methods start with supervised pretraining on the labeled set,
while others adopt self-supervised pretraining on the whole
dataset. Two-stage methods then employ learned similarity prediction networks or feature extraction networks to
classify the unlabeled set through clustering or (pairwise)
pseudo-labeling(Hsu, Lv, and Kira 2017; Hsu et al. 2019;
Han, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2019). Some one-stage methods tune the feature representation while classifying/clustering by using different objective functions for labeled set and
unlabeled set(Han et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2021a; Han et al.
2021). Others unify the objective function as cross-entropy
loss by assigning pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples(Fini
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a; Yang et al. 2022). In this paper,
we mainly focus on one-stage methods that unify the objective function through pseudo-labels.
Despite abundant research on the topic of NCD, most of
these works are conducted on benchmark datasets of natural
images. The usability and effectiveness of the NCD methods on large-scale medical image datasets are not yet known.
NCD for medical images is of great importance for disease
diagnosis and precision medicine because of its ability to
uncover new disease types or unknown disease subtypes. In
this paper, we focus on NCD in Chest X-Ray (CXR) images that are widely used in medical diagnostics for detecting lung diseases, tumors, and other abnormalities.
The success of pseudo-label-based one-stage methods relies heavily on the quality of the pseudo-labels(Lee et al.
2013). Existing methods (Fini et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a)

Introduction
The success of deep learning based classification methods
greatly depends on labeled data. However, it is difficult to
gather high-quality labeled data, especially for medical data.
And in real-world scenarios, it is almost impossible to collect labeled data for all classes because of missing definitions, vague categories, infinite categories, etc. To address
this problem, a new paradigm called novel class discovery(NCD) has been proposed and gained significant attention due to its potential applications in various domains, such
as surveillance, medical image analysis, and anomaly detection.
Given a labeled set, the goal of NCD is to discover undefined categories in the unlabeled set, which distinguishes it
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7650

