The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MFOS: Model-Free & One-Shot Object Pose Estimation
JongMin Lee1 , Yohann Cabon2 , Romain Brégier2 , Sungjoo Yoo1 , Jerome Revaud2
1

Seoul National University
2
Naver Labs Europe
sdrjseka96@naver.com, sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com, {romain.bregier, yohann.cabon, jerome.revaud}@naverlabs.com

Abstract

pose of an object from an image, given sufficient training
data (images of the same object in various poses). While
significantly improving in robustness and accuracy, these
methods have the disadvantage of being model-specific: they
can only cope with objects seen during training.
While some works have broadened the model scope to
object categories rather than object instances (Wang et al.
2019; Tian, Jr., and Lee 2020; Lee et al. 2021; Chen, Li, and
Xu 2020; Chen et al. 2020), the trained model is still only
suitable for objects or categories seen during training. To
remedy this shortcoming, recent learning-based methods that
can generalize to objects unseen during training, denoted as
one-shot, have been proposed. In practice however, they rely
on 3D models (Cai, Heikkilä, and Rahtu 2022; Shugurov et al.
2022), video sequences (Wen and Bekris 2021) or additional
depth maps (He et al. 2022) of the objects at test time. These
requirements severely hinder the practicality and scalability
of such approaches.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to address the
limitations of previous methods for object pose estimation.
As illustrated in Figure 1, our method can estimate the pose
of a target object from a single image, denoted as query
image in the following. To specify the object of interest at
inference, we provide as input the object’s 2D bounding box,
a rough estimate of the object size, and a small collection
of reference images of the target object with known poses.
These inputs can be obtained via scalable and straightforward
methods, e.g. fiducial markers (AprilTags) (Olson 2011) or
SfM (Schönberger and Frahm 2016). Similar to previous
work, our model outputs a dense 2D-3D mapping from which
the object pose can be obtained straightforwardly (Zakharov,
Shugurov, and Ilic 2019; Li, Wang, and Ji 2019; Park, Patten,
and Vincze 2019).
Our approach is entirely implemented using Vision Transformer (ViT) blocks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). Doing so enables us to leverage a powerful pretraining technique specifically tailored to 3D vision that can embed strong geometric
priors in the network. Specifically, we initialize our network
from an off-the-shelf model pretrained using Cross-View
Completion (CroCo) (Weinzaepfel et al. 2022a). We show
that this pretraining considerably boost the generalization
capabilities of our method, making it possible to estimate
the pose of target objects unseen during training. Inspired
by BB8 (Rad and Lepetit 2017), we simply yet effectively

Existing learning-based methods for object pose estimation
in RGB images are mostly model-specific or category based.
They lack the capability to generalize to new object categories
at test time, hence severely hindering their practicability and
scalability. Notably, recent attempts have been made to solve
this issue, but they still require accurate 3D data of the object
surface at both train and test time. In this paper, we introduce
a novel approach that can estimate in a single forward pass
the pose of objects never seen during training, given minimum
input. In contrast to existing state-of-the-art approaches, which
rely on task-specific modules, our proposed model is entirely
based on a transformer architecture, which can benefit from recently proposed 3D-geometry general pretraining. We conduct
extensive experiments and report state-of-the-art one-shot performance on the challenging LINEMOD benchmark. Finally,
extensive ablations allow us to determine good practices with
this relatively new type of architecture in the field.

Introduction
Being able to estimate the pose of objects in an image is a
mandatory requirement for any tasks involving some kind of
interactions with objects. The past decade has seen a surge
of research in 3D vision, with potential applications ranging from robotics (Hietanen et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2019)
to VR/AR (Belghit et al. 2018; Marchand, Uchiyama, and
Spindler 2016). These applications require pose estimators
that are accurate, robust and scalable. In this context, we
tackle the problem of object pose estimation from a single
image, i.e. we aim at extracting the 6D pose of a target object
relatively to the camera.
Object pose estimation is a long-studied research topic.
Earlier approaches were holistic (Hinterstoisser et al. 2011,
2012a,b; Rios-Cabrera and Tuytelaars 2013; Kehl et al. 2016),
based on sliding-window template-based matching (Song
2017; Henriques et al. 2014) or local features (Brachmann
et al. 2014, 2016; Tejani et al. 2014). These methods were
heavily handcrafted to exploit 3D priors. With the advent
of deep learning, a new training-based paradigm emerged
for object pose estimation (Xiang et al. 2017; Li, Wang, and
Ji 2019; Wang et al. 2021; Park, Patten, and Vincze 2019),
the idea of letting a deep network end-to-end predict the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2911

