The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BLiRF: Band Limited Radiance Fields for Dynamic Scene Modeling
Sameera Ramasinghe, Violetta Shevchenko, Gil Avraham, Anton van den Hengel
Amazon, Australia

Abstract

yielded impressive results, we show that their over-reliance
on implicit neural priors gives rise to fundamental problems;
a) Dependency on a canonical frame which harms modeling
long range motion, b) Entanglement of the light and density
fields c) Limited expressiveness due to network bottlenecks,
and d) substandard localization of motion due to the difference in the spectral properties of space and time, i.e., space
typically consists of sharp/high-frequency details, whereas
temporal dynamics are generally smooth and continuous.
To overcome the above drawbacks, we propose a theoretical framework that enables efficient integration of implicit
neural priors and well-defined explicit priors. On this basis
we also propose a set of explicit priors, partially inspired
by non-rigid-structure-from-motion (NRSf M). In particular,
we model the light and density fields of a 3D scene as bandlimited, high-dimensional signals. This standpoint enables
complete factorization of spatio-temporal dynamics, allowing us to inject explicit priors on the time and space dynamics independently. To demonstrate the practical utility
of our framework, we offer an example implementation that
enforces 1) a low-rank constraint on the shape space, along
with 2) a neural prior over the frequency domain and 3) a
union-of-subspaces prior on the deformation of a shape over
time. We show that the strong regularization effects of these
priors enable our model to reconstruct long-range dynamics
and localize motion accurately. Further, our model does not
rely on complex optimization procedures (Pumarola et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021a; Yoon et al. 2020;
Park et al. 2021b) or multiple explicit loss regularizations
(Tretschk et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021a; Li
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021) that are common in existing
dynamic NeRF works, indicating the stability of our formulation. Finally, our implementation efficiently disentangles
light and density fields, allowing the model to capture challenging scenes with dynamic lighting and textures. Our contributions are summarized as follows.

Inferring the 3D structure of a non-rigid dynamic scene from
a single moving camera is an under-constrained problem. Inspired by the remarkable progress of neural radiance fields
(NeRFs) in photo-realistic novel view synthesis of static
scenes, it has also been extended to dynamic settings. Such
methods heavily rely on implicit neural priors to regularize
the problem. In this work, we take a step back and investigate
how current implementations may entail deleterious effects
including limited expressiveness, entanglement of light and
density fields, and sub-optimal motion localization. Further,
we devise a factorisation-based framework that represents the
scene as a composition of bandlimited, high-dimensional signals. We demonstrate compelling results across complex dynamic scenes that involve changes in lighting, texture and
long-range dynamics.

Introduction
The problem of scene modeling (Kolmogorov and Zabih
2002; Dyer 2001) is one of the fundamental challenges in
computer vision, and underpins many of the field’s most
prominent applications including novel view synthesis (Avidan and Shashua 1997; Daribo and Pesquet-Popescu 2010),
augmented and virtual reality (Azuma 1997; Burdea and
Coiffet 2003), and SLAM (Grisetti et al. 2010; Mur-Artal,
Montiel, and Tardos 2015). In this vein, Neural Rendering
Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) have recently exhibited remarkable progress in synthesizing photorealistic
novel views from sparse 2D images.
One of the factors underpinning the success of NeRFs is
the architectural bias of neural networks. The (Lipschitz)
smoothness of neural networks acts as an implicit neural
prior for self-regularizing the optimization process, which
is otherwise ill posed (Zhang et al. 2020). Recently, multiple
works have extended NeRFs to dynamic settings, leveraging
the same neural smoothness prior that made NeRFs successful. For modeling the evolution of scene geometry over time,
these works have primarily resorted to using ray deformation
paradigms, which parameterize rays cast from the camera as
functions of time (Pumarola et al. 2021; Tretschk et al. 2021;
Park et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021; Xian et al.
2021; Park et al. 2021b). Although these approaches have

• We show that existing extensions of NeRF to dynamic
scenes suffer from critical drawbacks, primarily due to
their over-reliance on implicit neural priors.
• We propose a novel framework for modeling dynamic 3D
scenes that overcomes the above drawbacks by formulating radiance fields as bandlimited signals.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We empirically validate the efficacy of our framework by

4641

