The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Plug-and-Play Quaternion Message-Passing Module for
Molecular Conformation Representation
Angxiao Yue1 , Dixin Luo2 , Hongteng Xu1,3 *
1

2

Gaoling School of Artifical Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
angxiaoyue@ruc.edu.cn, dixin.luo@bit.edu.cn, hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

Finzi et al. 2020; Schütt, Unke, and Gastegger 2021; Köhler,
Klein, and Noé 2020) often treat molecules as point clouds
and embed equivariant information (i.e., atoms’ coordinates (Satorras, Hoogeboom, and Welling 2021) or orientations (Thomas et al. 2018)) and relative position information (i.e., pairwise distances among atoms) jointly. Invariant
GNNs (Schütt et al. 2017; Gasteiger, Groß, and Günnemann
2020; Gasteiger et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022) often model molecules as graphs and consider their
SE(3)/E(3)1 -invariant information, e.g., bond lengths, rotations, and torsions caused by twisting bonds.
Although these GNNs have been applied in many tasks,
they suffer from some computational efficiency issues and
have limited performance on molecular conformation analysis. On the one hand, the equivariant GNNs have high
computational complexity due to their high-order messagepassing (Thomas et al. 2018; Fuchs et al. 2020; Finzi et al.
2020; Köhler, Klein, and Noé 2020) within atoms’ point
clouds, and the lack of bonds’ rotation and torsion angles
make them unable to distinguish molecular conformations.
On the other hand, an ideal SE(3)-invariant GNN represents
3D structures of molecules by recording the dihedrals defined on each bond’s 2-hop neighborhood, whose computational complexity can be as high as O(N D3 ) for a 3D
molecule with N atoms and D degrees on average. The simplified invariant GNNs (Gasteiger, Groß, and Günnemann
2020; Gasteiger et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022) can reduce the
complexity to O(N D2 ) but sacrifice the power for distinguishing molecular conformations.
This study proposes a plug-and-play quaternion messagepassing (QMP) module to improve invariant GNNs in
molecular conformation representation and analysis tasks.
As illustrated in Figure 1, our QMP achieves a new mechanism to encode the 3D rotation information of chemical
bonds. For each bond of a 3D molecule, we consider the
3D rotations from its 1-hop neighboring bonds to itself. The
QMP represents each 3D rotation as a quaternion (Dam,
Koch, and Lillholm 1998) and achieves a novel messagepassing mechanism, i.e., sorting the quaternions in descending order of the corresponding bond rotation angles and

Graph neural networks have been widely used to represent
3D molecules, which capture molecular attributes and geometric information through various message-passing mechanisms. This study proposes a novel quaternion messagepassing (QMP) module that can be plugged into many existing 3D molecular representation models and enhance their
power for distinguishing molecular conformations. In particular, our QMP module represents the 3D rotations between
one chemical bond and its neighbor bonds as a quaternion
sequence. Then, it aggregates the rotations by the chained
Hamilton product of the quaternions. The real part of the
output quaternion is invariant to the global 3D rotations of
molecules but sensitive to the local torsions caused by twisting bonds, providing discriminative information for training
molecular conformation representation models. In theory, we
prove that considering these features enables invariant GNNs
to distinguish the conformations caused by bond torsions. We
encapsulate the QMP module with acceleration, so combining existing models with the QMP requires merely one-line
code and little computational cost. Experiments on various
molecular datasets show that plugging our QMP module into
existing invariant GNNs leads to consistent and significant
improvements in molecular conformation representation and
downstream tasks.

Introduction
With the advent of 3D graph neural networks (GNNs) (Duvenaud et al. 2015; Fout et al. 2017; Xie and Grossman
2018; Gao and Ji 2019; Liu et al. 2021b; Li et al. 2022a), 3D
molecular representation learning has shown great promise
in molecular dynamics tasks, e.g., predicting the energy (Li
et al. 2022b; Hu et al. 2021), atomic force (Zitnick et al.
2022; Gasteiger, Yeshwanth, and Günnemann 2021), and
other quantum mechanical properties (Cai et al. 2022;
Stärk et al. 2022; Li, Zhao, and Zeng 2022) of molecules.
Message-passing is the most widely used mechanism to realize such GNNs, whose input features and model architectures significantly impact the quality and efficiency of
3D molecular representation. When implementing messagepassing, existing equivariant GNNs (Thomas et al. 2018;
Satorras, Hoogeboom, and Welling 2021; Fuchs et al. 2020;

1
SE(3) is shorthand for “the special Euclidean group of rigid
body displacements in 3D”. E(3) = SE(3) ⊗ {E, I}, is the Euclidean group in 3D space which contains translations, rotations,
and reflection.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16633

