The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CariesXrays: Enhancing Caries Detection in Hospital-Scale
Panoramic Dental X-rays via Feature Pyramid Contrastive Learning
Bingzhi Chen1, 3 , Sisi Fu1 , Yishu Liu2 * , Jiahui Pan1 , Guangming Lu2, 3 , Zheng Zhang2∗
1

South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
{chenbingzhi, fusisi, panjiahui}@m.scnu.edu.cn, {liuyishu, luguangm}@stu.hit.edu.cn, darrenzz219@gmail.com
Abstract
Dental caries has been widely recognized as one of the most
prevalent chronic diseases in the field of public health. Despite advancements in automated diagnosis across various
medical domains, it remains a substantial challenge for dental caries detection due to its inherent variability and intricacies. To bridge this gap, we release a hospital-scale panoramic
dental X-ray benchmark, namely “CariesXrays”, to facilitate the advancements in high-precision computer-aided diagnosis for dental caries. It comprises 6,000 panoramic dental X-ray images, with a total of 13,783 instances of dental
caries, all meticulously annotated by dental professionals. In
this paper, we propose a novel Feature Pyramid Contrastive
Learning (FPCL) framework, that jointly incorporates feature
pyramid learning and contrastive learning within a unified
diagnostic paradigm for automated dental caries detection.
Specifically, a robust dual-directional feature pyramid network (D2D-FPN) is designed to adaptively capture rich and
informative contextual information from multi-level feature
maps, thus enhancing the generalization ability of caries detection across different scales. Furthermore, our model is augmented with an effective proposals-prototype contrastive regularization learning (P2P-CRL) mechanism, which can flexibly bridge the semantic gaps among diverse dental caries with
varying appearances, resulting in high-quality dental caries
proposals. Extensive experiments on our newly-established
CariesXrays benchmark demonstrate the potential of FPCL
to make a significant social impact on caries diagnosis.

Figure 1: Illustration of panoramic dental X-ray image from
our newly-established CariesXrays dataset, which can showcase the diverse variants and appearances of dental caries.

Introduction

paradigm for the screening and detection of dental caries
holds a significant social impact on public health, but it still
remains largely unexplored and understudied.
With the development of deep learning technologies and
the accessibility of digital medical data, the domain of medical image analysis has witnessed significant advancements
in various automated diagnosis applications, e.g., breast cancer detection (Wang et al. 2017), pulmonary disease classification (Yan et al. 2018), and brain injury localization (He
et al. 2021). However, these advanced techniques heavily
rely on the existence of well-annotated medical datasets that
typically require expert interpretation and meticulous annotation of the regions of interest. Despite progress made
across numerous medical domains, the lack of standardized
datasets poses a foundational challenge to researchers working on automated dental caries diagnosis. Technically, the

Dental caries, known as tooth decay, has become one of the
most widespread oral diseases impacting individuals across
all age groups (Pitts et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2022). As a
commonly utilized imaging technique for diagnosing dental caries in clinical settings, dental panoramic radiography
can provide an encompassing overview of the entire dentition structures (Schroder et al. 2019). However, as illustrated
in Figure 1, the process of human-visual examinations faces
substantial challenges due to many clinical factors, such as
diverse lesion appearances, varying sizes, locations, and instances of overlapping structures (Reia et al. 2021). Therefore, the exploration of an AI-driven automated diagnostic
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21940

