The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Underspecification in Language Modeling Tasks:
A Causality-Informed Study of Gendered Pronoun Resolution
Emily McMilin
Independent Researcher
emily.mcmilin@gmail.com

Abstract
Modern language modeling tasks are often underspecified:
for a given token prediction, many words may satisfy the
user’s intent of producing natural language at inference time,
however only one word will minimize the task’s loss function
at training time. We introduce a simple causal mechanism
to describe the role underspecification plays in the generation of spurious correlations. Despite its simplicity, our causal
model directly informs the development of two lightweight
black-box evaluation methods, that we apply to gendered pronoun resolution tasks on a wide range of LLMs to 1) aid in
the detection of inference-time task underspecification by exploiting 2) previously unreported gender vs. time and gender vs. location spurious correlations on LLMs with a range
of A) sizes: from BERT-base to GPT-3.5, B) pre-training
objectives: from masked & autoregressive language modeling to a mixture of these objectives, and C) training stages:
from pre-training only to reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF). Code and open-source demos available at
https://github.com/2dot71mily/uspec.

1

Figure 1: Causal DAGs for which the prediction could be
‘right for the wrong reasons’ as related to task-specification:
(a) is well-specified, yet the model mostly relies on genderoccupation shortcut features; (b) through (d) are increasingly underspecified, with X lacking any causal features for
Y ; where X & Y are the dataset’s text-based features & labels, B & G are common causes of X & Y : one a shortcut
and one intended, and W & S are not causes of Y , but included due to their involvement in sample selection bias, S.

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) often face severely underspecified prediction and generation tasks, infeasible for both
LLMs and humans, for example the language modeling task
in Figure 1d. Lacking sufficient specification, a model may
resort to learning spurious correlations based on available
but perhaps irrelevant features. This is distinct from the more
well-studied form of spurious correlations: shortcut learning, in which the label is often specified given the features,
yet the shortcut features are simply easier to learn than the
intended features (Figure 1a) (Geirhos et al. 2020; Park et al.
2022).
In this work we describe a causal mechanism by which
task underspecification can induce spurious correlations
that may not otherwise manifest, had the task been wellspecified. Models may exhibit spurious correlations due to
multiple mechanisms. For example, underspecification in
Figure 1b may serve to amplify its gender-occupation shortcut bias relative to that of Figure 1a.
To help disambiguate, we develop a challenge set
(Lehmann et al. 1996) to study tasks that are both unspeci-

fied and lacking shortcut features (Figure 1c & d). Yet spurious correlations between feature & label pairs can nonetheless arise in such tasks due to sample selection bias. We hypothesize, and measure empirically, that underspecification
serves to induce latent selection bias, that is otherwise effectively absent in well-specified tasks.
Unspecified Tasks are defined in this paper by the task’s
features (X) containing no causes, or causal features, for
the label (Y ): X ̸→ Y . The causal directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) in Figure 1b to d encode this relationship with the
absence of an arrow between features, X, and labels, Y.
Similar to how language modeling tasks can be further decomposed into multiple NLP ‘subtasks’, an underspecified
task can be decomposed into well-specified and unspecified
subtasks. For example, the ‘fill-mask’ task in Figure 1c is
well-specified for the named-entity recognition task and unspecified for the gendered pronoun resolution task.
At inference time we can impose unspecified tasks upon
LLMs. However, as we do not have direct access to most
LLMs’ pre-training, we can only presume that models en-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18778

