The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Shaping Up SHAP: Enhancing Stability through Layer-Wise Neighbor Selection
Gwladys Kelodjou1 , Laurence Rozé2 , Véronique Masson1 , Luis Galárraga1 ,
Romaric Gaudel1 , Maurice Tchuente3 , Alexandre Termier1
1

Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA - UMR 6074, F35000 Rennes, France
Univ Rennes, INSA Rennes, CNRS, Inria, IRISA - UMR 6074, F35000 Rennes, France
3
Sorbonne University, IRD, University of Yaoundé I, UMI 209 UMMISCO, P.O. Box 337 Yaoundé, Cameroon
gwladys.kelodjou@irisa.fr, laurence.roze@irisa.fr
2

Abstract

Among the explainability methods based on feature attribution, SHAP is particularly popular because its attribution
scores, the SHAP values, are inspired by the well-founded
Shapley values (Shapley et al. 1953) from coalitional game
theory. In practice, SHAP implementations typically compute approximations of the theoretical SHAP values because
of the exponential complexity of the exact calculation. For
instance, the widely used Kernel SHAP – SHAP’s modelagnostic flavor – estimates the attribution scores by solving a
linear regression on a random sample of neighbor instances,
constructed by perturbing the target instance.
While local post-hoc explanations based on perturbations
are widely used to explain black-box models (LIME also
falls in this category), this class of methods are known to suffer from instability. Zhou, Hooker, and Wang (2021) argue
that a key property of any explanation technique is its stability or reproducibility, defined as the method’s ability to deliver the same results under the same conditions across multiple executions. They therefore propose a framework to determine the number of perturbation points required to ensure
stable LIME explanations. Visani et al. (2022) introduced
two metrics to quantify the stability of LIME explanations:
the Variable Stability Index, which measures the variation of
the reported explanatory features, and the Coefficient Stability Index, which captures the variation of the coefficients associated to those features. Visani, Bagli, and Chesani (2020)
offer a framework that allows users to choose the level of
stability and fidelity for LIME explanations.
We highlight the difference between stability and the criterion called robustness introduced by Alvarez-Melis and
Jaakkola (2018). An explanation method is robust if similar,
but not identical, inputs entail similar explanations. AlvarezMelis and Jaakkola (2018) quantify robustness as the maximum change in explanations obtained when small perturbations are applied to a given instance. They demonstrate that
state-of-the-art methods (including LIME and SHAP) do not
satisfy the robustness criterion. Stability and robustness are
different concepts, however stability is a necessary condition
for robustness.
While stability has been well studied for LIME, and stable improvements of LIME have been proposed, this is not
the case for SHAP. In this paper, we show that the Kernel
SHAP’s estimator also suffers from stability issues, which
stem from its stochastic neighbor selection. Given the popu-

Machine learning techniques, such as deep learning and ensemble methods, are widely used in various domains due to
their ability to handle complex real-world tasks. However,
their black-box nature has raised multiple concerns about
the fairness, trustworthiness, and transparency of computerassisted decision-making. This has led to the emergence of
local post-hoc explainability methods, which offer explanations for individual decisions made by black-box algorithms.
Among these methods, Kernel SHAP is widely used due
to its model-agnostic nature and its well-founded theoretical framework. Despite these strengths, Kernel SHAP suffers from high instability: different executions of the method
with the same inputs can lead to significantly different explanations, which diminishes the relevance of the explanations. The contribution of this paper is two-fold. On the one
hand, we show that Kernel SHAP’s instability is caused by
its stochastic neighbor selection procedure, which we adapt
to achieve full stability without compromising explanation
fidelity. On the other hand, we show that by restricting the
neighbors generation to perturbations of size 1 – which we
call the coalitions of Layer 1 – we obtain a novel featureattribution method that is fully stable, computationally efficient, and still meaningful.

Introduction and Related Work
Modern machine learning techniques, such as deep learning and ensemble methods, have become invaluable tools in
diverse high-stakes fields such as healthcare and banking,
due to their accuracy at handling complex real-world tasks.
Yet, their “black-box” nature has raised concerns about their
fairness and trustworthiness, which in turns has motivated
the interest in explainability. In particular, local post-hoc
explainability is concerned with providing a posteriori explanations for the decisions of black-box algorithms on single instances. Notable approaches in this line are LIME
(Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), SHAP (Lundberg and
Lee 2017), and Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017), which
compute feature-attribution explanations. A feature attribution explanation assigns a contribution score to each of the
model’s input features. This tells users how (positively or
negatively) and how much an input feature influenced the
black-box’s answer on a target instance.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13094

