The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Few-Shot Named Entity Recognition with
Boundary Discrimination and Correlation Purification
Xiaojun Xue, Chunxia Zhang* , Tianxiang Xu, Zhendong Niu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{xiaojunx, cxzhang, txxu, zniu}@bit.edu.cn

Examples in Source Domain

Abstract

Pease Park [park] was the site of a popular disc golf course
running along shoal creek.

Few-shot named entity recognition (NER) aims to recognize
novel named entities in low-resource domains utilizing existing knowledge. However, the present few-shot NER models
assume that the labeled data are all clean without noise or
outliers, and there are few works focusing on the robustness
of the cross-domain transfer learning ability to textual adversarial attacks in few-shot NER. In this work, we comprehensively explore and assess the robustness of few-shot NER
models under textual adversarial attack scenario, and found
the vulnerability of existing few-shot NER models. Furthermore, we propose a robust two-stage few-shot NER method
with Boundary Discrimination and Correlation Purification
(BDCP). Specifically, in the span detection stage, the entity
boundary discriminative module is introduced to provide a
highly distinguishing boundary representation space to detect
entity spans. In the entity typing stage, the correlations between entities and contexts are purified by minimizing the
interference information and facilitating correlation generalization to alleviate the perturbations caused by textual adversarial attacks. In addition, we construct adversarial examples for few-shot NER based on public datasets Few-NERD
and Cross-Dataset. Comprehensive evaluations on those two
groups of few-shot NER datasets containing adversarial examples demonstrate the robustness and superiority of the proposed method.

Cross-domain Transfer Learning
Examples in Target Domain
The gift makes the Bibliotheca Alexandrina [library] the
sixth-largest francophone library.

Textual Adversarial Attack
Adversarial Examples in Target Domain
The gift makes the Edifice Alexandrina [hotel] the sixthlargest francophone library.

Figure 1: Vulnerabilities exhibited in few-shot NER under textual adversarial attack (i.e. synonym substitution) scenario. The subscripts indicate entity types.

Present few-shot NER methods are usually developed on
token-level metric learning (Fritzler, Logacheva, and Kretov
2019; Hou et al. 2020; Yang and Katiyar 2020) and span
level metric learning (Yu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a). In
the former family, novel entities in target domain are recognized by measuring the distance between each query token
and the prototype of each entity category or each token of
support examples (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017). In contrast, the latter family bypasses the token-wise label dependency issue by measuring the distance between spans (Ma
et al. 2022). However, existing few-shot NER methods typically assume that the examples are all clean without noise
or outliers (Lu et al. 2021), which is overly idealistic in the
real world. Thus, it is essential to maintain robust crossdomain transfer learning ability when handling adversarial
examples with interferences for few-shot NER. In addition,
at present, some works have investigated the robustness of
NER task (Lin et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b), emphasizing the context-based reasoning. Different from NER task,
few-shot NER focuses on learning the correlation transfer
between entity and contexts from source domain to target
domain. Our deep investigation on literature reveals that this
particular topic has not gained enough attention.
Therefore, in this paper, we explore and assess the adver-

Introduction
Few-shot named entity recognition (NER) aims to locate and
classify new named entities in the target domain where there
are only a few labeled examples (Lample et al. 2016; Kato
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022b; Ma et al. 2023), which is trained
using the present data within the source domain. Recently,
few-shot NER has attracted increasing attention, largely due
to the fact that it reduces the dependence on labeled data
in NER (Yang and Katiyar 2020; Li et al. 2022a). Few-shot
NER can reflect the generalized learning and cross-domain
knowledge transfer abilities of humans (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2013; Lu et al. 2021), who can infer new knowledge from a few examples based on existing
knowledge.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19341

