The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Boosting Few-Shot Learning via Attentive Feature Regularization
Xingyu Zhu1, 2 , Shuo Wang1, 2 * , Jinda Lu1, 2 , Yanbin Hao1, 2 , Haifeng Liu3 , Xiangnan He1, 2
2

1
Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China;
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China;
3
Brain-Inspired Technology Co., Ltd.
{xingyuzhu, lujd}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {shuowang.edu, xiangnanhe}@gmail.com,
haoyanbin@hotmail.com, haifeng@leinao.ai

Abstract

Unrelated

MixUp

CutMix

Classifier

Linnet

Manifold
Regularization

Few-shot learning (FSL) based on manifold regularization
aims to improve the recognition capacity of novel objects
with limited training samples by mixing two samples from
different categories with a blending factor. However, this mixing operation weakens the feature representation due to the
linear interpolation and the overlooking of the importance of
specific channels. To solve these issues, this paper proposes
attentive feature regularization (AFR) which aims to improve
the feature representativeness and discriminability. In our approach, we first calculate the relations between different categories of semantic labels to pick out the related features used
for regularization. Then, we design two attention-based calculations at both the instance and channel levels. These calculations enable the regularization procedure to focus on two
crucial aspects: the feature complementarity through adaptive interpolation in related categories and the emphasis on
specific feature channels. Finally, we combine these regularization strategies to significantly improve the classifier performance. Empirical studies on several popular FSL benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of AFR, which improves the
recognition accuracy of novel categories without the need to
retrain any feature extractor, especially in the 1-shot setting.
Furthermore, the proposed AFR can seamlessly integrate into
other FSL methods to improve classification performance.

Query
Sample
Inference
Prediction

Retriever
PatchMix

Retriever Linnet

Obvious Deviation

Figure 1: The analysis of manifold regularization methods.
a classifier for recognizing novel objects. Manifold regularization (Rodrı́guez et al. 2020; Deutsch et al. 2017; Velazquez et al. 2022) is a popular strategy to improve classification performance. These methods involve mixing two
samples (features) and their labels from randomly selected
categories to generate a regularized feature. However, the
mixing operation with randomness is easy to weaken the
representation ability (Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019; Chou
et al. 2020). This is primarily due to the direct interpolation without considering the complementarity of two features and the neglect of specific feature channels (Hou, Liu,
and Wang 2017; Shi, Wu, and Wang 2023; Luo, Xu, and Xu
2022; Zhu et al. 2023), which in turn impacts the distribution of prediction results. As illustrated in Figure 1, given
a novel sample of “Retriever” and another randomly picked
out sample “Linnet”, the manifold regularization methods,
e.g., Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018), CutMix (Yun et al. 2019),
and PatchMix (Liu et al. 2021), interpolate their images and
labels to train the classifier for predicting both categories.
It’s evident that the “Retriever” and the “Linnet” are unrelated in terms of both vision and semantics. Consequently,
the regularized features deviate from the novel feature “Retriever” (as indicated by the five yellow squares in the lowerleft corner of Figure 1). This deviation leads to an increase
in the prediction score for “Linnet” and results in misclassification. This deviation leads to an increase in the prediction
score of the “Linnet” and limits the classification results.
To address the aforementioned issue arising from manifold regularization, we first incorporate semantics to select
categories related to the novel categories from the base set.

Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities on various visual classification tasks, particularly provided with sufficient training data. However, collecting and labeling such datasets is
a time-consuming and expensive procedure. As a remedy to
address this challenge, few-shot learning (FSL) is proposed
to classify a novel object with a scarcity of labeled data. (Ye
et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020).
The conventional solution of FSL involves using a CNN
trained on the base categories to directly extract the global
features of novel objects (Hariharan and Girshick 2017;
Wang et al. 2018). It aims to yield a transferable feature
representation (textures and structures) to describe a novel
category. Subsequently, these features are employed to train
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7793

