The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Referred by Multi-Modality:
A Unified Temporal Transformer for Video Object Segmentation
Shilin Yan1,2 * , Renrui Zhang2,3 * , Ziyu Guo3 * , Wenchao Chen1 , Wei Zhang1† , Hongyang Li2†
Yu Qiao2 , Hao Dong4,5 , Zhongjiang He6 , Peng Gao2†
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
School of CS, Peking University
5
PKU-agibot Lab
6
China Telecom Corporation Ltd. Data&AI Technology Company
yansl21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhangrenrui, guoziyu, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn, weizh@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

VOS (Xu et al. 2018; Yan et al. 2023) with only visual information, the multi-modal VOS is more challenging and in
urgent demand, which requires a comprehensive understanding of different modalities and their temporal correspondence
across frames.

Recently, video object segmentation (VOS) referred by multimodal signals, e.g., language and audio, has evoked increasing attention in both industry and academia. It is challenging
for exploring the semantic alignment within modalities and
the visual correspondence across frames. However, existing
methods adopt separate network architectures for different
modalities, and neglect the inter-frame temporal interaction
with references. In this paper, we propose MUTR, a Multimodal Unified Temporal transformer for Referring video object segmentation. With a unified framework for the first time,
MUTR adopts a DETR-style transformer and is capable of
segmenting video objects designated by either text or audio
reference. Specifically, we introduce two strategies to fully explore the temporal relations between videos and multi-modal
signals. Firstly, for low-level temporal aggregation before the
transformer, we enable the multi-modal references to capture multi-scale visual cues from consecutive video frames.
This effectively endows the text or audio signals with temporal knowledge and boosts the semantic alignment between
modalities. Secondly, for high-level temporal interaction after
the transformer, we conduct inter-frame feature communication for different object embeddings, contributing to better
object-wise correspondence for tracking along the video. On
Ref-YouTube-VOS and AVSBench datasets with respective
text and audio references, MUTR achieves +4.2% and +8.7%
J &F improvements to state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating our significance for unified multi-modal VOS. Code is
released at https://github.com/OpenGVLab/MUTR.

There exist two main challenges in multi-modal VOS.
Firstly, it requires to not only explore the rich spatial-temporal
consistency in a video, but also align the multi-modal semantics among image, language, and audio. Current approaches
mainly focus on the visual-language or visual-audio modal
fusion within independent frames, simply by cross-modal
attention (Chen et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2018) or
dynamic convolutions (Margffoy-Tuay et al. 2018) for feature
interaction. This, however, neglects the multi-modal temporal
information across frames, which is significant for consistent
object segmentation and tracking along the video. Secondly,
for the given references of two modalities, language and audio, existing works adopt different architecture designs and
training strategies to separately tackle their modal-specific
characteristics. Therefore, a powerful and unified framework
for multi-modal VOS still remains an open question.
To address these challenges, we propose MUTR, a Multimodal Unified Temporal transformer for Referring video object segmentation. Our approach, for the first time, presents a
generic framework for both language and audio references,
and enhances the interaction between temporal frames and
multi-modal signals. In detail, we adopt a DETR-like (Carion
et al. 2020) encoder-decoder transformer, which serves as the
basic architecture to process visual information within different frames. On top of this, we introduce two attention-based
modules respectively for low-level multi-modal temporal
aggregation (MTA), and high-level multi-object temporal interaction (MTI). Firstly before the transformer, we utilize the
encoded multi-modal references as queries to aggregate informative visual and temporal features via the MTA module. We
concatenate the visual features of adjacent frames and adopt
sequential attention blocks for multi-modal tokens to progressively capture temporal visual cues of different image scales.
This contributes to better low-level cross-modal alignment

Introduction
Multi-modal video object segmentation (VOS) aims to track
and segment particular object instances across the video
sequence referred by a given multi-modal signal, including referring video object segmentation (RVOS) with language reference, and audio-visual video object segmentation
(AV-VOS) with audio reference. Different from the vanilla
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6449

