The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Symmetric Q-learning: Reducing Skewness of Bellman Error in Online
Reinforcement Learning
Motoki Omura1 , Takayuki Osa1, 2 , Yusuke Mukuta1, 2 , Tatsuya Harada1, 2
1

The University of Tokyo,
2
RIKEN
{omura, osa, mukuta, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Density

Abstract
In deep reinforcement learning, estimating the value function
to evaluate the quality of states and actions is essential. The
value function is often trained using the least squares method,
which implicitly assumes a Gaussian error distribution. However, a recent study suggested that the error distribution for
training the value function is often skewed because of the
properties of the Bellman operator, and violates the implicit
assumption of normal error distribution in the least squares
method. To address this, we proposed a method called Symmetric Q-learning, in which the synthetic noise generated
from a zero-mean distribution is added to the target values
to generate a Gaussian error distribution. We evaluated the
proposed method on continuous control benchmark tasks in
MuJoCo. It improved the sample efficiency of a state-of-theart reinforcement learning method by reducing the skewness
of the error distribution.

0.3

y − f(x)
−η

y − f(x)
+η

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0.0
−5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
Bellman error

3

4

5

0.0

−6

−4

−2
0
2
Bellman error

4

6

Figure 1: Bellman error, negative values of correction noise,
and corrected Bellman error from Symmetric REDQ on
Hopper-v2. Left: The blue histogram shows the distribution
of Bellman errors. The orange histogram represents the distribution of the negative noise added to reduce skewness. It
can be observed that the noise distribution fits well with the
negative Bellman errors. Right: The green histogram represents the distribution of Bellman errors after adding correction noise. The skewness decreased compared to the blue
distribution.

Introduction
of the error distribution y − f (x). This resulted in a more
symmetric error distribution with increased symmetry when
noise was added to the target, as shown in the right panel of
the plot. By applying least squares to this symmetric error
distribution, we can better satisfy the assumption of the error distribution and improve performance. The effectiveness
of the proposed method was verified in combination with
the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al. 2018) and Randomized Ensemble Double Q-learning (REDQ) (Chen et al.
2021), which we refer to as Symmetric SAC (SymSAC) and
Symmetric REDQ (SymREDQ), respectively. We evaluated
our proposed method on five challenging tasks in MuJoCo
(Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012; Brockman et al. 2016) and
achieved comparable or better sample efficiency than that
of state-of-the-art online RL methods. We also confirm that
our method corrects skewed error distributions to become
symmetric by visualizing the error distributions during the
learning process. The contributions of this study are as follows.

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown remarkable
performance in control (Haarnoja et al. 2018) and gameplay
(Mnih et al. 2013). In RL, it is necessary to estimate a value
function to evaluate states and actions. In many cases, the
value function is learned through least squares, implicitly
assuming that the error distribution is a normal distribution
through maximum likelihood estimation. However, during
learning, the Bellman operator is used to derive the estimated value for the target. Because of the properties of the
Bellman operator, the error distribution can become skewed,
which depreciates the performance by not meeting the assumption of a normal error distribution while performing
least squares. This issue was addressed in (Garg et al. 2023)
by learning the value function using maximum likelihood estimation with a nonnormal error distribution. However, the
error distribution can vary depending on the task or learning
algorithm, making it unsuitable when the error distribution
is unknown.
Therefore, in this study, we propose a method to reduce
the skewness of arbitrary error distributions. We corrected
the skewed error distributions to be symmetric by adding
noise to the target values. As shown in the left panel of Figure 1, we learned the noise η distribution which is the inverse

• We propose a method of adding noise to target variables
and reducing the skewness of error distributions, which
is a problem when using least squares.
• We evaluated the proposed method in continuous control
benchmark tasks and showed that the proposed method
can reduce the skewness of error distribution.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14474

