The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Predicting Real-World Penny Auction Durations
by Integrating Game Theory and Machine Learning
Yujia Wang, Haoran Yu*
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Insititute of Technology
yjwang.yoga@gmail.com, yhrhawk@gmail.com

Abstract

behavior (e.g., risk preference, myopia, framing effect, and
altruism). Moreover, deriving the equilibria given a sophisticated behavior model can be computationally intractable,
particularly when the economic mechanisms or policies involve complex rules and humans exhibit heterogeneous rationalities and knowledge.
There has been a growing trend to predict human strategic
behavior using machine learning models, especially neural
networks (Hartford, Wright, and Leyton-Brown 2016; Zhao
et al. 2018; Cai et al. 2018; Kolumbus and Noti 2019; Shen
et al. 2020; Ben-Porat et al. 2020). With sufficient data about
historical behavior, machine learning models can be trained
to make accurate behavior predictions, even when analytically characterizing the human behavior model is challenging. However, the machine learning-based prediction approach suffers from the domain shift problem (Noti and
Syrgkanis 2021; Andrews et al. 2022). For example, if an
auction designer collects sufficient data about bidder behavior under a specific auction rule, using the machine learning
model trained on these data may not accurately predict bidder behavior under a different auction rule. The reason is that
bidders behave differently when the auction rule changes,
causing a shift in behavioral data distribution across different auction rules (i.e., domains).
Our work aims at integrating the above two prediction
approaches to combine the strengths of game theory and
machine learning. First, we use game theory to make a
preliminary prediction of human behavior, which is robust
to the domain shift. For example, when the auction rule
changes, without any actual behavioral data under the new
auction rule, game theory can still characterize bidder behavior by making rationality assumptions and conducting
equilibrium analysis. Second, we use machine learning to refine the game-theoretic prediction. Due to bounded rationalities, a gap exists between the game-theoretic prediction and
real human behavior, and can be highly correlated with the
strategic environment. To bridge the gap, we treat the gametheoretic prediction as domain knowledge and use machine
learning to learn the mapping from the domain knowledge
and strategic environment to real human behavior.
We focus on predicting strategic behavior in penny auctions (i.e., pay-to-bid auctions), where bidders should pay a
non-refundable bid fee to place a bid and each new bid increases the item price by a constant increment (Platt, Price,

Game theory and machine learning are two widely used techniques for predicting the outcomes of strategic interactions
among humans. However, the game theory-based approach
often relies on strong rationality and informational assumptions, while the machine learning-based approach typically
requires the testing data to come from the same distribution
as the training data. Our work studies how to integrate the two
techniques to address these weaknesses. We focus on the interactions among real bidders in penny auctions, and develop
a three-stage framework to predict the distributions of auction
durations, which indicate the numbers of bids and auctioneer
revenues. Specifically, we first leverage a pre-trained neural
network to encode the descriptions of products in auctions
into embeddings. Second, we apply game theory models to
make preliminary predictions of auction durations. In particular, we tackle the challenge of accurately inferring parameters
in game theory models. Third, we develop a Multi-Branch
Mixture Density Network to learn the mapping from product
embeddings and game-theoretic predictions to the distributions of actual auction durations. Experiments on real-world
penny auction data demonstrate that our framework outperforms both game theory-based and machine learning-based
prediction approaches.

1

Introduction

Predicting human behavior in strategic environments is crucial for designing effective economic mechanisms and policies, such as auctions and tax policies. One conventional prediction approach is reasoning about human strategic behavior through game theory. In classical game theory, humans
are assumed to be fully rational and always employ equilibrium strategies. Behavioral game theory considers bounded
rational humans, and assumes that they behave according to
more sophisticated models, such as quantal response equilibria and cognitive hierarchy (Wright and Leyton-Brown
2010; Goeree, Holt, and Palfrey 2005; Kagel and Roth
2020; Camerer 2011). However, game theory models may
not accurately predict human behavior in practice (Hartford,
Wright, and Leyton-Brown 2016; Kolumbus and Noti 2019;
Bourgin et al. 2019). It is challenging to manually design a
behavior model that captures all factors influencing human
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9926

