The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MetaMix: Meta-State Precision Searcher for Mixed-Precision Activation
Quantization
Han-Byul Kim1,2∗ , Joo Hyung Lee2 , Sungjoo Yoo1 , Hong-Seok Kim2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Google, Mountain View, California, USA
shinestarhb@gmail.com, rinolee@google.com, sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com, hongseok@google.com

Abstract

such a combination of bit selection and weight training, the
bit-width of each layer can be changed (due to bit selection)
across training iterations. Such a bit-width change during
model training incurs a new problem called activation instability due to bit selection.
Figure 1 illustrates the input activation distribution before quantizer in the MobileNet-v2 model across different
bit-widths of weight and activation. The figure shows, for
a given activation bit-width, the activation distribution remains consistent across different weight bit-widths, e.g., the
distribution of 8-bit activation across FP (full-precision), 8bit and 4-bit weights in the first columns. However, given a
bit-width (e.g., 8-bit) of weight, the distribution of the activation significantly varies across different bit-widths (e.g.,
8-bit, 4-bit and 3-bit) of activations, which demonstrates activation instability due to bit selection.
Activation instability, due to weight quantization, has
been reported in previous works (Park and Yoo 2020; Li
et al. 2019). The problem is encountered when singleprecision models are quantized in low bits. In this paper,
we report a new activation instability problem encountered
in the exploration of bit selections under model training. In
order to address these activation instabilities, we propose a
new training method called MetaMix. Our contribution is
summarized as follows.

Mixed-precision quantization of efficient networks often suffer from activation instability encountered in the exploration
of bit selections. To address this problem, we propose a novel
method called MetaMix which consists of bit selection and
weight training phases. The bit selection phase iterates two
steps, (1) the mixed-precision-aware weight update, and (2)
the bit-search training with the fixed mixed-precision-aware
weights, both of which combined reduce activation instability in mixed-precision quantization and contribute to fast and
high-quality bit selection. The weight training phase exploits
the weights and step sizes trained in the bit selection phase
and fine-tunes them thereby offering fast training. Our experiments with efficient and hard-to-quantize networks, i.e.,
MobileNet v2 and v3, and ResNet-18 on ImageNet show that
our proposed method pushes the boundary of mixed-precision
quantization, in terms of accuracy vs. operations, by outperforming both mixed- and single-precision SOTA methods.

Introduction
The ever increasing demand of efficiency requires the quantization of efficient models, e.g., MobileNet-v1 (Howard
et al. 2017), v2 (Sandler et al. 2018) and v3 (Howard
et al. 2019), in lower precision. Mixed-precision quantization looks promising due to the supports available on existing computing systems, e.g., 8-bit, 4-bit and 1-bit integer (NVIDIA 2018; Sharma et al. 2018).
In this work, we address per-layer mixed-precision quantization for activation while utilizing a single bit-width of
weight. Mixed-precision quantization of efficient models,
however, is challenging in that the design space of bit-width
selection (in short, bit selection) is prohibitively large. Especially, each candidate of bit selection needs to be trained,
e.g., on ImageNet dataset, for evaluation, which incurs prohibitively high training cost.
In order to address the training cost problem, we often explore bit selections while training the network
weights (Habi, Jennings, and Netzer 2020; Uhlich et al.
2020; Wang, Lu, and Blankevoort 2020; Wang et al. 2019;
Yang and Jin 2021; Huang et al. 2022; Shin et al. 2023; Wu
et al. 2018; Cai and Vasconcelos 2020; Yu et al. 2020). In

• We demonstrate a new problem called activation instability due to bit selection which disrupts exploring bit selection while training the network thereby offering suboptimal results.
• Our proposed MetaMix mitigates activation instability
problem. MetaMix consists of two phases: bit selection
and weight training. The bit selection phase offers fast
and high-quality bit selection by both bit-meta training
step and bit-search training step.
• In the bit-meta training step, we train the network
weights at multiple bit-widths to obtain a state called
meta-state which provides consistent activation distribution across different activation bit-widths. Then, in the
bit-search training step, on the fixed meta-state, we learn
architectural parameters for per-layer bit-width probabilities. We iterate both steps, which proves effective for fast
and high-quality bit selection while mitigating the effect
of activation instability.

∗

Work done during internship at Google
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13132

