The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DexFuncGrasp: A Robotic Dexterous Functional Grasp Dataset
Constructed from a Cost-Effective Real-Simulation Annotation System
Jinglue Hang, Xiangbo Lin * , Tianqiang Zhu, Xuanheng Li,
Rina Wu, Xiaohong Ma, Yi Sun
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
{dllgdxhjl0907, zhutq, hswrn}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {linxbo, xhli, maxh, lslwf}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Robot grasp dataset is the basis of designing the robot’s grasp
generation model. Compared with the building grasp dataset
for Low-DOF grippers, it is harder for High-DOF dexterous
robot hand. Most current datasets meet the needs of generating stable grasps, but they are not suitable for dexterous hands
to complete human-like functional grasp, such as grasp the
handle of a cup or pressing the button of a flashlight, so as
to enable robots to complete subsequent functional manipulation action autonomously, and there is no dataset with functional grasp pose annotations at present. This paper develops
a unique Cost-Effective Real-Simulation Annotation System
by leveraging natural hand’s actions. The system is able to
capture a functional grasp of a dexterous hand in a simulated
environment assisted by human demonstration in real world.
By using this system, dexterous grasp data can be collected
efficiently as well as cost-effective. Finally, we construct the
first dexterous functional grasp dataset with rich pose annotations. A Functional Grasp Synthesis Model is also provided to
validate the effectiveness of the proposed system and dataset.
Our project page is: https://hjlllll.github.io/DFG/.

Figure 1: Visualization of our DFG dataset(Dexterous Functional Grasp) and comparison with DexGraspNet(stable
grasp).

Introduction
Robotic grasp has the potential to assist humans in performing various operations. Vision-based works of paralleljaw grippers have already gained wide applications in recent years, however, achieving human-like, task-oriented
grasps with high-DoF dexterous robot hand is highly underexplored. These grasps go beyond simple pick-and-place
tasks and require not only stable grasp but also making
preparation for performing post-grasp manipulation to complete a specific task, such as putting the index finger on the
handle to use the spray bottle. For clarity, we refer to this
type of grasp as functional grasp, which is the first step
towards robot functional manipulation. As shown in Fig.1,
functional grasps (top) and stable grasps (bottom) on the
same objects are presented and compared.
Currently, one of the challenges in generating dexterous
robot functional grasp using deep learning model is the lack
of relevant datasets, because annotating dexterous hands

with high-DoF is exceptionally difficult. Prior datasets (Liu
et al. 2019b; Wei et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023) obtain stable grasp annotations using the sampling-based method or
synthesis method based on differentiable force closure criteria. However, these grasps lack anthropomorphic qualities and do not satisfy human-like functional grasp requirements. (Zhu et al. 2021) firstly provide a dataset related to
functional grasp of dexterous hand. They annotate the relationship between the hand and the object with touch codes
on the object point clouds, however, the entire process requires manual segmentation of point clouds and then labels
each part manually. Conversely, we develop an annotationefficient method that can collect large amounts of functional
grasp poses directly.
For the high-DoF dexterous robot hand dataset annotation system, it is supposed to be as efficient as possible.
Previous works commonly use wearable gloves (Liu et al.
2017, 2019a) or haptic sensors (Elsner et al. 2022; Kumar and Todorov 2015) to collect robot actions from human demonstrations, however, the high costs limit their wide

* Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Fundation of China(61873046, U1708263).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10306

