The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Peer Learning: Learning Complex Policies in Groups from Scratch via Action
Recommendations
Cedric Derstroff1,2 , Mattia Cerrato3 , Jannis Brugger1,2 , Jan Peters1,2,4,5 , Stefan Kramer3
1

Technische Universität Darmstadt
Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI)
3
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz
4
German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
5
Centre for Cognitive Science
{cedric.derstroff, jannis.brugger, jan.peters}@tu-darmstadt.de, mcerrato@uni-mainz.de, kramer@informatik.uni-mainz.de

Abstract
A1t,2 ∼ π1 A1t,2 |St,2
2

Peer learning is a novel high-level reinforcement learning
framework for agents learning in groups. While standard reinforcement learning trains an individual agent in trial-anderror fashion, all on its own, peer learning addresses a related setting in which a group of agents, i.e., peers, learns
to master a task simultaneously together from scratch. Peers
are allowed to communicate only about their own states and
actions recommended by others: “What would you do in my
situation?”. Our motivation is to study the learning behavior
of these agents. We formalize the teacher selection process in
the action advice setting as a multi-armed bandit problem and
therefore highlight the need for exploration. Eventually, we
analyze the learning behavior of the peers and observe their
ability to rank the agents’ performance within the study group
and understand which agents give reliable advice. Further, we
compare peer learning with single agent learning and a stateof-the-art action advice baseline. We show that peer learning
is able to outperform single-agent learning and the baseline
in several challenging discrete and continuous OpenAI Gym
domains. Doing so, we also show that within such a framework complex policies from action recommendations beyond
discrete action spaces can evolve.

1

St,2 !
At,2 ?

A0t,2 ∼ π0 A0t,2 |St,2



Figure 1: Peer learning: Agent 2 (right) asks for advice about
which action to perform at the current step St,2 it finds itself in, and receives action suggestions A0t,2 and A1t,2 from
agents 0 and 1, on the left and center, respectively. The
agents operate in their own environment and on their own
complex (motor) task, here: learning how to handle a ball.

Learning as trial-and-error under a reinforcement signal
has since been the core idea of reinforcement learning (RL)
as a subfield of AI and machine learning (ML), as discussed by Sutton and Barto (Sutton and Barto 2018). Another classic line of investigation in learning theory seeks
to account for the social aspects of learning. This approach
was pioneered by Rotter (Rotter 1954) and further developed
by Bandura (Bandura and Walters 1977). Bandura’s social
learning theory augments trial-and-error, stimulus-response
behaviorism with more cognitively informed accounts of
learning. More specifically, Bandura posits that reinforcement may be vicarious, i.e., obtained through a model that is
separate from the learning subject. Models may be live, verbal or symbolic: a live model demonstrates some behavior
by acting it out, whereas a verbal model gives an instruction or suggestion. Lastly, symbolic models may be fictional
characters presented through print or some other media. Beyond observation and blind imitation, learners in the social
learning theory framework are afforded motivation: the capability to observe the reinforcement signal obtained by the
model and reason about whether they should actually imitate
it.

Introduction

Learning by trial-and-error is one of the most influential theories of learning. Its roots go deeper than theories of human learning, in ethology and particularly in Morgan’s observations on animal behavior (Thorpe et al. 1979). Edward
Thorndike’s “Law of Effect”, for instance, posits that animals select responses (actions) to a given situation or stimulus (state) based on the satisfaction that followed in previous occurrences of the same situation and action (Thorndike
1898). The Law of Effect is the basis for the behaviorist
view of biological learning as pioneered by Skinner (Skinner 1988), who introduced the term “reinforcement” to describe the conditioning effect of certain operants (responses,
or rewards) on the behavior of lab mice. Computational investigations of behaviorism closely followed, from both Turing (Turing 1951) and Minsky, who explicitly referenced the
work done by Skinner in studying animal behavior as an influence to early artificial intelligence (AI) (Minsky 1961).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11766

