The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Uncertainty-Based Learning for Text-Based Person Retrieval
Shenshen Li, Chen He, Xing Xu* , Fumin Shen, Yang Yang, Heng Tao Shen
School of Computer Science and Engineering and Center for Future Media,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
lishenshen727@gmail.com, chen he1219@outlook.com, xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn, fumin.shen@gmail.com,
yang.yang@uestc.edu.cn, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract
Text-based person retrieval aims at retrieving a specific
pedestrian image from a gallery based on textual descriptions. The primary challenge is how to overcome the inherent heterogeneous modality gap in the situation of significant intra-class variation and minimal inter-class variation.
Existing approaches commonly employ vision-language pretraining or attention mechanisms to learn appropriate crossmodal alignments from noise inputs. Despite commendable
progress, current methods inevitably suffer from two defects:
1) Matching ambiguity, which mainly derives from unreliable matching pairs; 2) One-sided cross-modal alignments,
stemming from the absence of exploring one-to-many correspondence, i.e., coarse-grained semantic alignment. These
critical issues significantly deteriorate retrieval performance.
To this end, we propose a novel framework termed Adaptive Uncertainty-based Learning (AUL) for text-based person retrieval from the uncertainty perspective. Specifically,
our AUL framework consists of three key components: 1)
Uncertainty-aware Matching Filtration that leverages Subjective Logic to effectively mitigate the disturbance of unreliable matching pairs and select high-confidence cross-modal
matches for training; 2) Uncertainty-based Alignment Refinement, which not only simulates coarse-grained alignments
by constructing uncertainty representations but also performs
progressive learning to incorporate coarse- and fine-grained
alignments properly; 3) Cross-modal Masked Modeling that
aims at exploring more comprehensive relations between vision and language. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our AUL method consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance on three benchmark datasets in supervised, weakly
supervised, and domain generalization settings. Our code is
available at https://github.com/CFM-MSG/Code-AUL.

Figure 1. Illustrative examples of existing problems: (a) A
representative failure case of the latest method APTM. (b)
The presence of one-to-many correspondence is evident. (c)
Unreliable matching pairs that stem from large intra-class
variation and minimal inter-class variation.

means for describing the attributes of the target person, making it a popular and active area of research. However, owing to the substantial intra-class variation and minimal interclass variation, the text-based person retrieval task faces
increased challenges in overcoming the inherent heterogeneous modality gap (Jiang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a), which
considerably hampers the overall retrieval performance.
To tackle the above problem, previous methods mainly focus on cross-modal alignments by the utilization of supplementary information (Zhu et al. 2021) or the incorporation
of diverse attention mechanisms (Suo et al. 2022). Moreover, recent approaches (Jiang and Ye 2023) have been influenced by the capabilities of vision-language pre-training to
enhance representation learning, which can effectively characterize the association between vision and language.
As shown in Figure 1(a), while the mentioned methods have made advancements, they still suffer from matching ambiguity and one-sided cross-modal alignments, thus
leading to decreased performance and limited generalization. Such two problems can be attributed to the following aspects: 1) Absence of one-to-many correspondence,
that stems from the limitation of considering only one-to-

Introduction
The text-based person retrieval task (Li et al. 2017; Ding
et al. 2021) aims at locating the specific pedestrian image from a collection of candidates with a provided textual
description query. Compared with the conventional imagebased (Specker, Cormier, and Beyerer 2023) or video-based
person retrieval (Hou et al. 2021), the query of text-based
person retrieval provides a readily accessible and intuitive
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3172

