The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Monte Carlo Tree Search in the Presence of Transition Uncertainty
Farnaz Kohankhaki1 * , Kiarash Aghakasiri1, 2 * , Hongming Zhang1 , Ting-Han Wei1 , Chao Gao2 ,
Martin Müller1
1
University of Alberta
Edmonton Research Center, Huawei Canada
{kohankha, aghakasi, hongmin2, tinghan, mmueller}@ualberta.ca, chao.gao4@huawei.com
2

Abstract

world interactions. The resulting learned model, when used
for lookahead search, can either be for planning or for producing more accurate training targets (Silver, Sutton, and
Müller 2008). It can also be used to generate simulated training samples for better sample efficiency (Sutton and Barto
2018). The learned model may be inaccurate for many reasons, including stochasticity of the environment, insufficient
training, insufficient capacity, non stationary environments,
etc. Consequently, there is a rich body of research on uncertainty in MBRL (Abbas et al. 2020; Xiao et al. 2019;
Buckman et al. 2018).
While previous approaches to using search with imperfect models exist (Vemula et al. 2020; Vemula, Bagnell, and
Likhachev 2021), to the best of our knowledge, there is no
prior work that directly adapts MCTS to deal with model
uncertainty. In our work, we define transition uncertainty as
a measure of difference between the state transitions in the
perfect model and in the model that is available to the agent.
We use a neural network to estimate this uncertainty.
Our Uncertainty Adapted MCTS (UA-MCTS) approach
implements the main components of the MCTS framework
in a way that guides the search away from states with high
uncertainty. We compare the performance of our proposed
methods with MCTS baselines in three deterministic MinAtar environments (Young and Tian 2019). In each case
the search agent “believes” it is playing the real game. However, the rules of the game itself have changed, and the agent
only learns about this change slowly when it acts in the real
environment. The results show that UA-MCTS is able to outperform the baseline MCTS with an imperfect model.
Our approach is inspired by the work of (Vemula et al.
2020) where a robotic arm has to solve tasks despite being handicapped, e.g. by a broken motor or by an unmodeled weight restriction. To show how an agent should adapt
UCB-based exploration strategy in the presence of environment uncertainties, we first consider a case of stochastic bandits (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020) along with corrupted
feedback. We prove that incorporating uncertainty information can enhance the performance of UCB, yielding a regret bound that is more constrained compared to the standard UCB. We also prove that in the general case of tree
search, with similar modification of UCT, our UA-MCTS
approach maintains its completeness property, ensuring that
as the number of iterations goes to infinity, all nodes will be

Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is an immensely popular
search-based framework used for decision making. It is traditionally applied to domains where a perfect simulation model
of the environment is available. We study and improve MCTS
in the context where the environment model is given but imperfect. We show that the discrepancy between the model and
the actual environment can lead to significant performance
degradation with standard MCTS. We therefore develop Uncertainty Adapted MCTS (UA-MCTS), a more robust algorithm within the MCTS framework. We estimate the transition uncertainty in the given model, and direct the search towards more certain transitions in the state space. We modify
all four MCTS phases to improve the search behavior by considering these estimates. We prove, in the corrupted bandit
case, that adding uncertainty information to adapt UCB leads
to tighter regret bound than standard UCB. Empirically, we
evaluate UA-MCTS and its individual components on the deterministic domains from the MinAtar test suite. Our results
demonstrate that UA-MCTS strongly improves MCTS in the
presence of model transition errors.

1

Introduction

The Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) framework (Browne
et al. 2012) approaches sequential decision-making problems by selective lookahead search. It manages the balance
of exploration and exploitation with techniques such as UCT
(Kocsis, Szepesvári, and Willemson 2006). Often combined
with machine learning, it has been enormously successful
in both games (Silver et al. 2016; Gao, Müller, and Hayward 2018; Gao 2020; Saffidine 2008; Nijssen and Winands
2010) and non-game applications (Lu et al. 2016; Mansley,
Weinstein, and Littman 2011; Sabharwal, Samulowitz, and
Reddy 2012; Cazenave 2010). In these applications, a perfect simulation model allows for efficient lookahead search.
However, in many practical applications, only an imperfect
model is available to the agent. Yet lookahead using such a
model can still be useful. We improve MCTS for this setting.
One research area that studies imperfect models of the environment is model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL).
Here, an agent builds its own model through limited real
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20151

