The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

V2A-Mapper: A Lightweight Solution for Vision-to-Audio Generation by
Connecting Foundation Models
Heng Wang1 * , Jianbo Ma2 , Santiago Pascual2 , Richard Cartwright2 , Weidong Cai1
1

University of Sydney
Dolby Laboratories
{heng.wang, tom.cai}@sydney.edu.au, {jianbo.ma, santiago.pascual, richard.cartwright}@dolby.com
2

Abstract
Building artificial intelligence (AI) systems on top of a set
of foundation models (FMs) is becoming a new paradigm
in AI research. Their representative and generative abilities learnt from vast amounts of data can be easily adapted
and transferred to a wide range of downstream tasks without extra training from scratch. However, leveraging FMs
in cross-modal generation remains under-researched when
audio modality is involved. On the other hand, automatically generating semantically-relevant sound from visual input is an important problem in cross-modal generation studies. To solve this vision-to-audio (V2A) generation problem,
existing methods tend to design and build complex systems
from scratch using modestly sized datasets. In this paper, we
propose a lightweight solution to this problem by leveraging foundation models, specifically CLIP, CLAP, and AudioLDM. We first investigate the domain gap between the latent space of the visual CLIP and the auditory CLAP models. Then we propose a simple yet effective mapper mechanism (V2A-Mapper) to bridge the domain gap by translating the visual input between CLIP and CLAP spaces. Conditioned on the translated CLAP embedding, pretrained audio generative FM AudioLDM is adopted to produce highfidelity and visually-aligned sound. Compared to previous approaches, our method only requires a quick training of the
V2A-Mapper. We further analyze and conduct extensive experiments on the choice of the V2A-Mapper and show that
a generative mapper is better at fidelity and variability (FD)
while a regression mapper is slightly better at relevance (CS).
Both objective and subjective evaluation on two V2A datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method compared to current state-of-the-art approaches - trained with
86% fewer parameters but achieving 53% and 19% improvement in FD and CS, respectively. Supplementary materials
such as audio samples are provided at our demo website:
https://v2a-mapper.github.io/.

melspectrogram
encoder

melspectrogram
generator

vision
encoder

latent code
generator

melspectrogram
encoder

vocoder

vision
encoder

Training
latent code
generator

melspectrogram
generator

vocoder

Inference

(a) Previous V2A generation approaches.
Visual
FM

V2AMapper

Audio
Generator
FM

Inference

train from scratch separately

Training

Audio
FM

pretrained & frozen
supervision

(b) Our lightweight solution to V2A generation.

Figure 1: Schematic illustrations of training and inference
pipelines from previous V2A algorithms and our lightweight
solution, respectively. Leveraging foundation models (FMs),
we only require the training of a single V2A-Mapper while
current works involve multiple modules to train.

have demonstrated robust generalization and knowledge
transfer ability across a broad spectrum of tasks in recent
AI research (Zhou et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2023; Yin et al.
2023). Despite success in many uni-modal tasks spanning
language (Paaß and Giesselbach 2023), vision (Awais et al.
2023), and audio (Li et al. 2023), the adaptation of FMs
in problems involving multiple modalities such as crossmodal generation is greatly dominated by vision-language
research (Du et al. 2022). Although attempts (Ao et al. 2022;
Kreuk et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2023a,b; Yuan et al. 2023; Ghosal et al. 2023) have
been made lately to bring FMs into text-to-audio generation and achieved remarkable performance, the viability of
adopting FMs in vision-to-audio generation is still unclear.
Vision and audio are two essential and correlated sources
through which people perceive the world. Humans have the

Introduction
Foundation models (FMs), trained on large-scale data and
often making use of self-supervised learning, offer problemagnostic representative or generative capabilities to downstream tasks via adaptation (Bommasani et al. 2021). They
* Work done during an internship at Dolby.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15492

