The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Introduction to the Special Track on Artificial Intelligence and COVID-19
(Abstract Reprint)
Martin Michalowski1 , Robert Moskovitch2 , Nitesh V. Chawla3
1

2

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN USA
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba Israel
3
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame IN USA

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Michalowski, Moskovitch, and Chawla (2023).

Abstract
The human race is facing one of the most meaningful public
health emergencies in the modern era caused by the COVID19 pandemic. This pandemic introduced various challenges,
from lock-downs with significant economic costs to fundamentally altering the way of life for many people around
the world. The battle to understand and control the virus
is still at its early stages yet meaningful insights have already been made. The uncertainty of why some patients are
infected and experience severe symptoms, while others are
infected but asymptomatic, and others are not infected at
all, makes managing this pandemic very challenging. Furthermore, the development of treatments and vaccines relies
on knowledge generated from an ever evolving and expanding information space. Given the availability of digital data
in the modern era, artificial intelligence (AI) is a meaningful tool for addressing the various challenges introduced by
this unexpected pandemic. Some of the challenges include:
outbreak prediction, risk modeling including infection and
symptom development, testing strategy optimization, drug
development, treatment repurposing, vaccine development,
and others.

References
Michalowski, M.; Moskovitch, R.; and Chawla, N. V. 2023.
Introduction to the Special Track on Artificial Intelligence
and COVID-19. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
76: 523–525.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22707

