The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiffAIL: Diffusion Adversarial Imitation Learning
Bingzheng Wang, Guoqiang Wu* , Teng Pang, Yan Zhang, Yilong Yin*
Shandong University
binzhwang@gmail.com, guoqiangwu@sdu.edu.cn ,
silencept7@gmail.com, yannzhang9@gmail.com, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

straightforward to implement, they are prone to serious
extrapolation errors when visiting out-of-distribution data
while practically interacting with environments. To alleviate the aforementioned errors, Dagger (Ross, Gordon, and
Bagnell 2011) proposes access to expert policies, where the
agent continuously interacts with the environment online
and asks for expert-level actions from the expert policy to
expand the dataset. AdapMen (Liu et al. 2023) proposes
an active imitation learning framework based on teacherstudent interaction, and theoretical analysis shows that it can
avoid compounding errors under mild conditions.
To effectively tackle the aforementioned extrapolation error, Adversarial imitation learning (AIL) (Ho and Ermon
2016; Fu, Luo, and Levine 2017; Kostrikov et al. 2018;
Ghasemipour, Zemel, and Gu 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Garg
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022) has become the most popular
approach in imitation learning. Rather than minimizing the
divergence between the expert policy and the agent policy,
AIL employs online interactive learning to focus on minimizing the divergence between the joint state-action distribution induced by the expert policy and the learned policy.
However, typical AIL methods often use a simplistic discriminator that does not learn a distribution, which may not
accurately classify specific expert-level actions generated by
the policy during interactions with the environment. This can
result in the naive discriminator failing to distinguish expertlevel behaviors generated by the policy, potentially hindering agent learning. Therefore, a powerful discriminator that
can accurately capture the distribution of expert data is crucial for AIL.
Currently, diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
processes a powerful distribution matching capability
and has achieved remarkable success in image generation, surpassing other popular generative models such as
GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and VAE (Kingma and
Welling 2013) in producing higher-quality and more diverse
samples.
Based on diffusion model’s powerful ability to capture
data distribution, we propose a new method called Diffusion Adversarial Imitation Learning (DiffAIL) in this work.
DiffAIL employs the same framework as traditional AIL
but incorporates the diffusion model to model joint stateaction distribution. Therefore, DiffAIL enables the discriminator to accurately capture expert demonstration and im-

Imitation learning aims to solve the problem of defining reward functions in real-world decision-making tasks. The current popular approach is the Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL) framework, which matches expert state-action occupancy measures to obtain a surrogate reward for forward
reinforcement learning. However, the traditional discriminator is a simple binary classifier and doesn’t learn an accurate distribution, which may result in failing to identify
expert-level state-action pairs induced by the policy interacting with the environment. To address this issue, we propose a method named diffusion adversarial imitation learning (DiffAIL), which introduces the diffusion model into the
AIL framework. Specifically, DiffAIL models the state-action
pairs as unconditional diffusion models and uses diffusion
loss as part of the discriminator’s learning objective, which
enables the discriminator to capture better expert demonstrations and improve generalization. Experimentally, the results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance and significantly surpasses expert demonstration on
two benchmark tasks, including the standard state-action setting and state-only settings.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning has achieved significant
success in many decision-making tasks, including AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016), Atari games (Mnih et al.
2013), MuJoCo environment tasks (Todorov, Erez, and
Tassa 2012), and robot control tasks (Mnih et al. 2015),
where these tasks are typically defined with clear reward
functions to guide the agent for decision-making. However,
in real-world scenarios, the reward function is regularly
challenging to obtain or define, such as in the case of autonomous driving, where it is complicated to delineate what
behavior is beneficial for the agent. The emergence of Imitation Learning provides a practical solution to the problem
of inaccessible rewards. In imitation learning, the agent does
not rely on actual rewards but instead utilizes expert demonstration data to learn a similar expert policy.
A relatively old method in imitation learning is clone
learning (Pomerleau 1991), which uses supervised learning to learn from expert data. Although such methods are
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15447

