The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DreamStyler: Paint by Style Inversion with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Namhyuk Ahn1 , Junsoo Lee1 , Chunggi Lee1,2 , Kunhee Kim3 , Daesik Kim1 , Seung-Hun Nam1 ,
Kibeom Hong4
1

NAVER WEBTOON AI
2
Harvard University
3
KAIST
4
SwatchOn

Abstract

“a
market
place”

Recent progresses in large-scale text-to-image models have
yielded remarkable accomplishments, finding various applications in art domain. However, expressing unique characteristics of an artwork (e.g. brushwork, colortone, or composition) with text prompts alone may encounter limitations due
to the inherent constraints of verbal description. To this end,
we introduce DreamStyler, a novel framework designed for
artistic image synthesis, proficient in both text-to-image synthesis and style transfer. DreamStyler optimizes a multi-stage
textual embedding with a context-aware text prompt, resulting in prominent image quality. In addition, with content and
style guidance, DreamStyler exhibits flexibility to accommodate a range of style references. Experimental results demonstrate its superior performance across multiple scenarios, suggesting its promising potential in artistic product creation.
Project page: https://nmhkahn.github.io/dreamstyler/.

“a dog”

“a
waterfall
in the
forest”

Introduction
“Painting is silent poetry.” — Simonides, Greek poet
Recent text-to-image models have shown unprecedented
proficiency in translating natural language into compelling
visual imagery (Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022;
Rombach et al. 2022). These have emerged in the realm of
art, providing inspiration and even assisting in crafting tangible art pieces. In the AI-assisted art production workflow,
artists typically utilize various descriptive prompts that depict the style and context to generate their desired image.
However, the unique styles of a painting, its intricate brushwork, light, colortone, or composition, cannot be easily described in a single word. For instance, dare we simplify the
entirety of Vincent Van Gogh’s lifelong artworks as just one
word, ‘Gogh style’? Text descriptions cannot fully evoke his
unique style in our imagination — his vibrant color, dramatic light, and rough yet vigorous brushwork.
Beyond text description, recent studies (Gal et al. 2022;
Ruiz et al. 2023) embed specific attributes of input images
into latent space. While they effectively encapsulate a novel
object, we observed that they struggle to personalize style
of a painting. For instance, model optimization-based methods (Ruiz et al. 2023; Kumari et al. 2023) are highly susceptible to overfitting and often neglect inference prompts,

Figure 1: DreamStyler synthesizes outputs based on a given
context along with a style reference. Note that each model is
trained on a single style image shown in this figure.

which is not ideal for real-world production (please refer to
the Suppl. for more details). Textual inversion-based methods (Gal et al. 2022; Voynov et al. 2023), in contrast, effectively reflect the inference prompt but fail to replicate style,
possibly due to the limited capacity of the learned embeddings. This is because capturing style, from global elements
(e.g. colortone) to local details (e.g. detailed texture), is challenging when relying solely on a single embedding token.
In this work, we present DreamStyler, a novel single
(one-shot) reference-guided artistic image synthesis framework designed for the text-to-image generation and style
transfer tasks (Figure 1). We encapsulate the intricate styles
of artworks into CLIP text space. DreamStyler is grounded
in textual inversion (TI), chosen for the inherent flexibility
that stems from its prompt-based configuration. To overcome the limitations of TI, we introduce an extended textual embedding space, S by expanding textual embedding
into the denoising timestep domain (Figure 2). Based on this
space, we propose a multi-stage TI, which maps the textual

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

674

