The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Uncertainty Quantification for Forward and Inverse Problems of PDEs
via Latent Global Evolution
Tailin Wu1 * , Willie Neiswanger2 * , Hongtao Zheng1 * ,
Stefano Ermon3 , Jure Leskovec3
1
School of Engineering, Westlake University
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
3
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
{wutailin, zhenghongtao}@westlake.edu.cn, neiswang@usc.edu, {ermon, jure}@cs.stanford.edu
2

Abstract

just a few. When addressing real-world challenges in science and engineering, the sheer volume of cells per time
step can readily escalate into the millions or beyond. This
complexity poses a substantial hurdle for conventional PDE
solvers to ensure rapid solutions. In addition, inverse optimization such as inverse inference of system parameters also
face similar scale challenges, besides the modeling of forward evolution (Biegler et al. 2003). Consequently, numerous deep learning-based alternative models have emerged
that can accelerate the speed of partial differential equation
solving by orders of magnitude (typically 10 to 1000 times),
such as (Li et al. 2020).
However, recent neural network-based PDE solvers share
a common drawback – they typically fail to provide any
form of uncertainty estimation for their proposed solutions.
This can lead to an overconfidence or underconfidence in
the accuracy of the approximate solutions generated by PDE
solvers, potentially resulting in relying on inaccurate approximations without any indication of associated risks. The
concept of uncertainty quantification refers to the process
of assessing and measuring the uncertainty associated with
outcomes during prediction or optimization. In various scientific and engineering applications, the predictive results
of models can be influenced by multiple factors, such as
data noise, model uncertainty, parameter estimation, and
more. Uncertainty quantification aims to provide information about the credibility or confidence level of the predictive outcomes, enhancing the understanding of the model’s
reliability. This information is valuable for considering uncertainty during decision-making processes. By quantifying
uncertainty, we can better assess the stability, accuracy, and
reliability of the model’s predictions across different scenarios, enabling more informed decision-making.
Currently, most of the work related to uncertainty quantification in the process of PDE solving largely excludes
consideration of temporal states (Winovich, Ramani, and
Lin 2019; Zhu et al. 2019). This is mainly because, for timedomain partial differential equations, surrogate models need
to perform autoregressive rollouts, which result in the accumulation of uncertainty over time. In the Julia programming language, there are libraries for uncertainty quantification (UQ), but none is designed specifically for neural surrogate models dealing with time-varying PDEs. An important

Deep learning-based surrogate models have demonstrated remarkable advantages over classical solvers in terms of speed,
often achieving speedups of 10 to 1000 times over traditional
partial differential equation (PDE) solvers. However, a significant challenge hindering their widespread adoption in both
scientific and industrial domains is the lack of understanding
about their prediction uncertainties, particularly in scenarios
that involve critical decision making. To address this limitation, we propose a method that integrates efficient and precise
uncertainty quantification into a deep learning-based surrogate model. Our method, termed Latent Evolution of PDEs
with Uncertainty Quantification (LE-PDE-UQ), endows deep
learning-based surrogate models with robust and efficient uncertainty quantification capabilities for both forward and inverse problems. LE-PDE-UQ leverages latent vectors within
a latent space to evolve both the system’s state and its corresponding uncertainty estimation. The latent vectors are decoded to provide predictions for the system’s state as well
as estimates of its uncertainty. In extensive experiments, we
demonstrate the accurate uncertainty quantification performance of our approach, surpassing that of strong baselines including deep ensembles, Bayesian neural network layers, and
dropout. Our method excels at propagating uncertainty over
extended auto-regressive rollouts, making it suitable for scenarios involving long-term predictions. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/AI4Science-WestlakeU/le-pde-uq.

Introduction
Partial differential equations have wide-ranging applications
in both scientific and engineering domains. It is noteworthy that time-dependent partial differential equations characterize the evolution of complex system states over time,
serving as crucial tools for forward prediction and reverse
optimization across various disciplines. These applications
span a wide spectrum, including weather forecasting (Lynch
2008; Bi et al. 2023), nuclear fusion (Carpanese 2021), jet
engine design (Sircombe, Arber, and Dendy 2006), astronomical simulation (Courant, Friedrichs, and Lewy 1967),
molecular modeling (Lelievre and Stoltz 2016), and physical simulation modeling (Wu et al. 2022, 2023), to name
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

320

