The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Visual Adversarial Examples Jailbreak Aligned Large Language Models
Xiangyu Qi* , Kaixuan Huang* , Ashwinee Panda,
Peter Henderson, Mengdi Wang, Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
{xiangyuqi,kaixuanh,ashwinee,peter.henderson,mengdiw,pmittal}@princeton.edu

Abstract

OpenAI’s GPT-4V (OpenAI 2023b,c). Parallel to the enthusiasm for this integrative approach, this paper is motivated
to study the security and safety implications of this trend.

Warning: this paper contains data, prompts, and model
outputs that are offensive in nature. Recently, there has
been a surge of interest in integrating vision into Large
Language Models (LLMs), exemplified by Visual Language
Models (VLMs) such as Flamingo and GPT-4. This paper
sheds light on the security and safety implications of this
trend. First, we underscore that the continuous and highdimensional nature of the visual input makes it a weak link
against adversarial attacks, representing an expanded attack
surface of vision-integrated LLMs. Second, we highlight that
the versatility of LLMs also presents visual attackers with a
wider array of achievable adversarial objectives, extending
the implications of security failures beyond mere misclassification. As an illustration, we present a case study in which we
exploit visual adversarial examples to circumvent the safety
guardrail of aligned LLMs with integrated vision. Intriguingly, we discover that a single visual adversarial example
can universally jailbreak an aligned LLM, compelling it
to heed a wide range of harmful instructions (that it otherwise would not) and generate harmful content that transcends
the narrow scope of a ‘few-shot’ derogatory corpus initially
employed to optimize the adversarial example. Our study underscores the escalating adversarial risks associated with the
pursuit of multimodality. Our findings also connect the longstudied adversarial vulnerabilities of neural networks to the
nascent field of AI alignment. The presented attack suggests
a fundamental adversarial challenge for AI alignment, especially in light of the emerging trend toward multimodality in
frontier foundation models.

Expansion of Attack Surfaces. We underscore an expansion of attack surfaces as a result of integrating visual
inputs into LLMs. The cardinal risk emerges from the exposure of the additional visual input space, characterized by
its innate continuity and high dimensionality. These characteristics make it a weak link against visual adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Madry et al. 2017), an adversarial threat which is fundamentally difficult to defend
against (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Athalye, Carlini, and
Wagner 2018; Tramer 2022). In contrast, adversarial attacks in a purely textual domain are generally more demanding (Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2017; Alzantot et al. 2018; Jones
et al. 2023), due to the discrete nature of the textual space.
Thus, the transition from a purely textual domain to a composite textual-visual domain inherently expands the attack
surfaces while escalating the burden of defenses.
Extended Implications of Security Failures. The versatility of LLMs also presents a visual attacker with a wider
array of achievable adversarial objectives, moving beyond
mere misclassification, thereby extending the implications
of security breaches. Examples of these extended implications include jailbreaking models (Wei, Haghtalab, and
Steinhardt 2023) to induce toxicity (Gehman et al. 2020) or
enable misuse (OpenAI 2023a). As LLMs are incorporated
into downstream systems for managing broader resources,
attacks on these models may also further compromise the integrity of those systems and their resources (Abdelnabi et al.
2023). This outlines a shift from the conventional adversarial machine learning mindset, centered on the accuracy of a
classifier, towards a more holistic consideration encapsulating the entire use-case spectrum of LLMs.

Introduction
Numerous cognitive tasks executed on a daily basis necessitate both language and visual cues to yield effective outcomes (Antol et al. 2015; Zellers et al. 2019). Recognizing
the integral roles of the two modalities and spurred by breakthroughs in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al.
2020; OpenAI 2022), there is a surge of interest in merging
vision into LLMs, leading to the rise of large Visual Language Models (VLMs) such as Google’s Flamingo (Alayrac
et al. 2022) and Gemini (Pichai and Hassabis 2023) and

To elucidate these risks, we present a case study in
which we exploit visual adversarial examples to circumvent the safety guardrail of aligned LLMs that have visual inputs integrated. Figure 1 shows an example of our
attack. Given an aligned LLM that is finetuned to be helpful
and harmless (Ouyang et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022) with the
ability to refuse harmful instructions, we optimize an adversarial example image x′ on a few-shot corpus comprised of

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21527

