The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LatestEval: Addressing Data Contamination in Language Model Evaluation
through Dynamic and Time-Sensitive Test Construction
Yucheng Li1 , Frank Guerin1 , Chenghua Lin2 *
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Surrey, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK
{yucheng.li, f.guerin}@surey.ac.uk, chenghua.lin@manchester.ac.uk
2

Abstract

is considered as trade secret and thus confidential, eliminating any possibility for the community to address contamination by decontaminating benchmarks. One potential solution to avoid contaminated evaluation is to create new test
data constantly or use human evaluation (Liu, Zhang, and
Liang 2023; Jacovi et al. 2023), just like how examination
for human works. However, this is extremely inefficient and
costly, requiring huge human efforts periodically.
In this paper, we propose LatestEval, an automatic
method that leverages the most recent texts to create novel
uncontaminated reading comprehension evaluations. Before
starting to create the data, we conduct the first manual analysis of real-world Human-AI chat data on document comprehension, to identify the most frequently asked types of
knowledge and thus determine the scope of LatestEval. As
for data construction, LatestEval, as a reading comprehension benchmark, typically consists of three components:
passage, query, and answer. Here we start by 1) collecting
recently created texts across various time-sensitive sources
as the passages. Three different sources are used in our experiments: arXiv, BBC, and GitHub. We then 2) extract key
information from these texts using various tools as the answers. At last we 3) construct questions targeting the extracted information. The questions are generated automatically via template-filling or large language models. During
the testing stage, we remove the extracted answers from the
original context, which encourages models to infer answers
through reasoning based on the remaining context rather
than short-cutting via copy-paste. Overall, LatestEval avoids
data contamination by using the latest materials for testing,
ensuring that it does not overlap with models’ pretraining
data.
Experimental results show that, in contrast to existing
reading comprehension benchmarks where language models show significant memorisation, models exhibit negligible
memorisation behaviour on LatestEval. Additional human
evaluation and performance experiments further demonstrate LatestEval is reliable and effective in benchmarking
state-of-the-art language models.

Data contamination in evaluation is getting increasingly
prevalent with the emergence of language models pre-trained
on super large, automatically crawled corpora. This problem
leads to significant challenges in the accurate assessment of
model capabilities and generalisations. In this paper, we propose LatestEval, an automatic method that leverages the most
recent texts to create uncontaminated reading comprehension
evaluations. LatestEval avoids data contamination by only using texts published within a recent time window, ensuring
no overlap with the training corpora of pre-trained language
models. We develop the LatestEval automated pipeline to 1)
gather the latest texts; 2) identify key information, and 3) construct questions targeting the information while removing the
existing answers from the context. This encourages models to
infer the answers themselves based on the remaining context,
rather than just copy-paste. Our experiments demonstrate that
language models exhibit negligible memorisation behaviours
on LatestEval as opposed to previous benchmarks, suggesting
a significantly reduced risk of data contamination and leading
to a more robust evaluation. Data and code are publicly available at: https://github.com/liyucheng09/LatestEval.

Introduction
Recent years have seen the ubiquity of pretrained language models in natural language processing (NLP) due
to their strong performance and generalisation capability.
These models are usually pre-trained on super large internetcrawled corpora. However, many widely used benchmarks
are also largely constructed from web resources (Hendrycks
et al. 2020), which are very likely to be unintentionally included in the pretraining stage. This leads to a major emerging issue called data contamination.
Recent analysis has revealed that data contamination is
widespread in model evaluations (Achiam et al. 2023; Sainz
et al. 2023), which greatly undermines the credibility of
evaluation results (Marie 2023; Li, Guerin, and Lin 2023)
and prevents fair comparisons between models (Dickson
2023). Moreover, the massive scale of training data makes
decontaminating existing benchmarks extremely difficult
(Kreutzer et al. 2022). For many closed models, training data

Data Contamination
What is data contamination? Data contamination refers
to the phenomenon that examples from the evaluation set are
also found in the training data. This might lead to the eval-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18600

