The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Opponent-Model Search in Games with Incomplete Information*
Junkang Li1,2 , Bruno Zanuttini2 , Véronique Ventos1
1

2

NukkAI, Paris, France
Normandie Univ.; UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS, GREYC, 14 000 Caen, France
junkang.li@nukk.ai, bruno.zanuttini@unicaen.fr, vventos@nukk.ai

Abstract

models to the recursive modelling of opponents, where a
level-k player assumes that their opponent reasons at some
level lower than k, and recursively down to level 0.

Games with incomplete information are games that model situations where players do not have common knowledge about
the game they play, e.g. card games such as poker or bridge.
Opponent models can be of crucial importance for decisionmaking in such games. We propose algorithms for computing
optimal and/or robust strategies in games with incomplete information, given various types of knowledge about opponent
models. As an application, we describe a framework for reasoning about an opponent’s reasoning in such games, where
opponent models arise naturally.

1

2

Related Work

When no opponent model is available, one typically aims
to be robust against all possible strategies of an opponent.
Koller and Megiddo (1992); Koller, Megiddo, and von Stengel (1996); von Stengel (1996) study the complexity of
computing maxmin strategies in this case under a variety
of settings; in particular, for mixed strategies, they give
polynomial-time algorithms based on linear programming
for two-player extensive-form games with perfect recall,
a more general setting than ours. McMahan, Gordon, and
Blum (2003) propose a double-oracle algorithm for computing optimal mixed strategies for Markov decision processes
with adversarial cost functions, which can also be regarded
as a polynomial-time algorithm for computing the maxmin
strategies of a normal-form game. Bosanský et al. (2014)
combine these ideas to propose an algorithm for zero-sum
extensive-form games with perfect recall, which is efficient
when optimal mixed strategies have small supports.
Opponent models can come in diverse forms. Iida et al.
(1993, 1994) propose opponent models for games with perfect information, where models are given by the evaluation
function and the search depth of the opponent. Sturtevant,
Zinkevich, and Bowling (2006) propose opponent models
given by opponents’ preferences over the outcomes of a
game. Rebstock et al. (2019) use opponent models learnt
from human games for imperfect information (card) games.
A survey of opponent modelling approaches is also provided by Albrecht and Stone (2018). Our work is related
to these in the sense that we assume opponent models to be
given (called “type-based reasoning” by Albrecht and Stone
(2018, Section 4.2)). However, an important stream of work
also studies the learning of opponent models; we refer the
reader to the survey by Nashed and Zilberstein (2022).
An important class of opponent models is that of recursive
models, where MAX searches a strategy (at level k) assuming that MIN themselves searches a strategy (at level k − 1)
assuming that MAX searches. . . , etc., down to level 0.
Such models have been studied in behavioural game theory (Dhami 2019) to capture human reasoning. For instance,
Camerer, Ho, and Chong (2004) propose a cognitive hierar-

Introduction

Opponent models are models that describe or predict how
an opponent reasons or behaves in a game. Such models
have been explicitly incorporated into game tree search algorithms (e.g. minimax, αβ search, MCTS) for games with
perfect information (Iida et al. 1993, 1994; Sturtevant and
Bowling 2006; Sturtevant, Zinkevich, and Bowling 2006) to
find robust strategies against a given opponent model, i.e.
strategies that guarantee a given payoff against any strategy
deemed possible by the opponent model. The knowledge of
opponent models can accelerate the game tree search (e.g.
by pruning branches not considered by an opponent) and
improve the performance of the strategies obtained (e.g. by
exploiting the weakness of an opponent).
In this paper, we extend the idea of opponent-model
search to (two-player, zero-sum) games with incomplete information. In such games, players do not share the same
information. Notable examples include card games, where
players cannot see the set of cards (i.e. hand) of the other
players. We present three contributions to this subject. We
first propose different ways of taking opponent models into
account (which is of interest beyond the setting of incomplete information), and give algorithms for computing the
corresponding robust strategies for such games. We then
propose a principled method for taking into account a probability that the opponent does not behave according to any of
the given models. Finally, we show an application of these
* A long version with proofs of all claims is available at
https://hal.science/hal-04100646.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9840

