The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine-Tuning Graph Neural Networks by Preserving Graph Generative Patterns
Yifei Sun1 , Qi Zhu2 , Yang Yang1 * , Chunping Wang3 , Tianyu Fan1 , Jiajun Zhu1 , Lei Chen3
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
3
FinVolution Group, Shanghai, China
{yifeisun, yangya, fantianyu, junnian}@zju.edu.cn, qiz3@illinois.edu, {wangchunping02, chenlei04}@xinye.com
2

Abstract

The success of “pre-train and fine-tune” paradigm is generally attributed to the structural consistency between pretraining and downstream graphs (Hu et al. 2020b,a; Qiu et al.
2020; Sun et al. 2021; Jiarong et al. 2023). However, in realworld scenarios, structural patterns vary dramatically across
different graphs, and patterns in the downstream graphs may
not be readily available in the pre-training graph. In the context of molecular graphs, a well-known out-of-distribution
problem arises when the training and testing graphs originate
from different environments, characterized by variations in
size or scaffold. As a consequence, the downstream molecular
graph data often encompasses numerous novel substructures
that has not been encountered during training. Hence, structural consistency does not always hold. Fig 1(a) shows that
while structural consistency (shown in orange) between the
pre-training and downstream dataset A ensures the promotion of performance, the structural divergence (shown in
green) causes a degradation of performance when fine-tuned
on downstream dataset B. In some cases, it can even lead to
worse results than those obtained without pre-training.

Recently, the paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning graph
neural networks has been intensively studied and applied in a
wide range of graph mining tasks. Its success is generally attributed to the structural consistency between pre-training and
downstream datasets, which, however, does not hold in many
real-world scenarios. Existing works have shown that the structural divergence between pre-training and downstream graphs
significantly limits the transferability when using the vanilla
fine-tuning strategy. This divergence leads to model overfitting
on pre-training graphs and causes difficulties in capturing the
structural properties of the downstream graphs. In this paper,
we identify the fundamental cause of structural divergence
as the discrepancy of generative patterns between the pretraining and downstream graphs. Furthermore, we propose
G-T UNING to preserve the generative patterns of downstream
graphs. Given a downstream graph G, the core idea is to tune
the pre-trained GNN so that it can reconstruct the generative
patterns of G, the graphon W . However, the exact reconstruction of a graphon is known to be computationally expensive.
To overcome this challenge, we provide a theoretical analysis
that establishes the existence of a set of alternative graphons
called graphon bases for any given graphon. By utilizing a
linear combination of these graphon bases, we can efficiently
approximate W . This theoretical finding forms the basis of
our model, as it enables effective learning of the graphon bases
and their associated coefficients. Compared with existing algorithms, G-T UNING demonstrates consistent performance
improvement in 7 in-domain and 7 out-of-domain transfer
learning experiments.

1

In light of this, we are intrigued by the relationship between structural divergence and the extent of performance improvements on downstream graphs. Specifically, graphon is a
well-known non-parametric function on graph that has been
proved to effectively describe the generative mechanism of
graphs (i.e., generative patterns) (Lovász 2012). In Fig 1(b),
we calculate the Gromov-Wasserstain (GW) discrepancy (a
distance metric between geometry objects) of graphons between different pre-training and one test graph and report
the corresponding performance on the same downstream
graph. Interestingly, as the difference between graphons of
pre-training dataset and that of downstream dataset increases,
the performance improvement diminishes. To further validate
this, we compute the Pearson CC (Correlation Coefficient)
between other representative graph measurements (e.g., density, transitivity, etc.) and the performance improvement. As
Fig 1(c) suggests, most of them cannot reflect the degree
of performance improvement, and only the graphon discrepancy is consistently negatively correlated with the degree
of performance promotion. Hence, we attribute the subpar
performance of fine-tuning to the disparity in the generative patterns between the pre-training and fine-tuning graphs.
Nevertheless, fine-tuning with respect to generative patterns
poses significant challenges: (1) the structural information

Introduction

The development of graph neural networks (GNNs) has revolutionized many tasks of various domains in recent years.
However, labeled data is extremely scarce due to the timeconsuming and laborious labeling process. To address this
obstacle, the “pre-train and fine-tune” paradigm has made
substantial progress (Xia et al. 2022; Li, Zhao, and Zeng
2022; Jiao et al. 2023) and attracted considerable research
interests. Specifically, this paradigm involves pre-training a
model on a large-scale graph dataset, followed by fine-tuning
its parameters on downstream graphs by specific tasks.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9053

