The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EAN: An Efficient Attention Module Guided by Normalization for Deep Neural
Networks
Jiafeng Li1 , Zelin Li2 , Ying Wen1 *
1

School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University
2
New York University Shanghai
51205904113@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zelin.li.nyu@gmail.com, ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

networks, ensuring stability during training and faster convergence. The process of normalization consists of two components: feature standardization and affine transformation.
For feature standardization, different methods are proposed
for computing the mean and standard deviation to model the
general data distribution. Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015) is one of the early proposed and widely
used normalization methods. It normalizes the feature map
with the mean and standard deviation calculated along with
the mini-batch, height, and width dimensions of a feature
map. Based on BN, many normalization variants, such as
Layer Normalization (LN) (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016), Instance Normalization (IN) (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky
2016), Group Normalization (GN) (Wu and He 2018), and
Representative Batch Normalization (RBN) (Gao et al. 2021)
have successively been proposed. These methods differ in
their statistical computations. For instance, LN, IN, and GN
normalize the features using statistics from the channel, sample, and channel group dimensions. For affine transformation,
the standardized data is scaled and shifted independently for
each channel to modulate feature distribution. This step helps
to ensure that the standardized data aligns with the desired
range and distribution required for a given task. Different
strategies for learning the affine transformation parameters
have been introduced, such as Switchable Normalization (SN)
(Luo et al. 2018) and Exemplar Normalization (EN) (Zhang
et al. 2020). For example, SN aims to learn a set of scaling
parameters to adaptively choose the type of normalization
that is most effective for the given input, while EN addresses
a dynamic learning-to-normalize problem by adapting and
learning data-dependent normalizations for different inputs.
After standardization and affine transformation, these normalization techniques significantly enhance the training stability,
optimization efficiency, and generalization ability of DNNs.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various fields, and two powerful techniques, feature normalization and attention mechanisms, have been widely used
to enhance model performance. However, they are usually considered as two separate approaches or combined in a simplistic
manner. In this paper, we investigate the intrinsic relationship
between feature normalization and attention mechanisms and
propose an Efficient Attention module guided by Normalization, dubbed EAN. Instead of using costly fully-connected
layers for attention learning, EAN leverages the strengths of
feature normalization and incorporates an Attention Generation (AG) unit to re-calibrate features. The proposed AG
unit exploits the normalization component as a measure of
the importance of distinct features and generates an attention
mask using GroupNorm, L2 Norm, and Adaptation operations.
By employing a grouping, AG unit and aggregation strategy,
EAN is established, offering a unified module that harnesses
the advantages of both normalization and attention, while
maintaining minimal computational overhead. Furthermore,
EAN serves as a plug-and-play module that can be seamlessly
integrated with classic backbone architectures. Extensive quantitative evaluations on various visual tasks demonstrate that
EAN achieves highly competitive performance compared to
the current state-of-the-art attention methods while sustaining
lower model complexity.

Introduction
Due to the powerful ability of feature extraction, Convolutional Neural Networks have proven to be critical and robust
in many computer vision tasks, such as image classification
(Wang et al. 2023), object detection (Woo et al. 2023) and semantic segmentation (Li et al. 2023). Within this context, two
techniques, namely feature normalization and attention mechanisms, play a pivotal role in boosting model performance
due to their simplicity and effectiveness. Both techniques
have gained considerable interest and are extensively employed in vision models, as they share a common goal of
improving the feature extraction process.
Normalization techniques (Huang et al. 2023) have been
widely studied for their crucial role in training deep neural

At the same time, the attention mechanism has emerged as
a widely adopted approach to augment the feature representation ability of networks by focusing on regions with essential
semantic features while suppressing irrelevant ones. Various
types of attention methods tailored to different feature dimensions have been explored, including spatial attention, channel
attention, and self-attention. Among these, channel attention
has gained widespread popularity, as it learns importance
weights for different channels using fully-connected layers.
To ensure computational efficiency, Global Average Pooling

* Corresponding author: Ying Wen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3100

