The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Large-Scale Non-convex Stochastic Constrained Distributionally Robust
Optimization
Qi Zhang 1 , Yi Zhou 2 , Ashley Prater-Bennette 3 , Lixin Shen 4 , Shaofeng Zou 1

1
University at Buffalo
The University of Utah
3
Air Force Research Laboratory
4
Syracuse University
qzhang48@buffalo.edu, yi.zhou@utah.edu, ashley.prater-bennette@us.af.mil, lshen03@syr.edu, szou3@buffalo.edu
2

Abstract

Specifically, DRO aims to solve the following problem:

Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) is a powerful
framework for training robust models against data distribution shifts. This paper focuses on constrained DRO, which
has an explicit characterization of the robustness level. Existing studies on constrained DRO mostly focus on convex loss
function, and exclude the practical and challenging case with
non-convex loss function, e.g., neural network. This paper develops a stochastic algorithm and its performance analysis for
non-convex constrained DRO. The computational complexity of our stochastic algorithm at each iteration is independent of the overall dataset size, and thus is suitable for largescale applications. We focus on the general Cressie-Read
family divergence defined uncertainty set which includes 2 divergences as a special case. We prove that our algorithm
finds an ✏-stationary point with an improved computational
complexity than existing methods. Our method also applies
to the smoothed conditional value at risk (CVaR) DRO.

inf

sup

x Q⇠U (P )
0

ES⇠Q `(x; S),

where U (P0 ) is an uncertainty set of distributions centered
at P0 , P0 is the empirical distribution of the training dataset,
` is the loss function, and x is the optimization variable. For
example, the uncertainty set can be defined as
U (P0 ) := {Q : D(QkP0 )  ⇢},

(2)

where D is some distance-like metric, e.g., Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence and 2 divergence, and ⇢ is the uncertainty
level. In practice, for ease of implementation and analysis,
a relaxed formulation of eq. (1), which is referred to as the
penalized DRO, is usually solved (Levy et al. 2020; Jin et al.
2021; Qi et al. 2021; Sinha et al. 2017):
inf sup ES⇠Q `(x; S)

1

(1)

x

Introduction

Q

D(QkP0 ),

(3)

where > 0 is a fixed hyperparameter that needs to be chosen manually. In contrast to constrained DRO in eq. (1), a
regularization term is added to the objective function to keep
the distribution Q and the distribution P0 close, and the hyperparameter is manually chosen beforehand to control the
tradeoff with minimizing the loss. Compared with the penalized DRO setting, the constrained DRO problem in eq. (1)
requires that the distribution Q to be strictly in the uncertainty set, and searches for the optimal solution under the
worst-case distribution in the uncertainty set. Therefore, the
obtained solution from the constrained DRO is minimax optimal for distributions in the uncertainty set, whereas it is
hard to get such a guarantee for the penalized DRO relaxation. In this paper, we focus on the challenging constrained
DRO problem in eq. (1).
Existing studies on constrained DRO are limited to convex loss functions or require some additional assumptions
(Soma and Yoshida 2020; Hashimoto et al. 2018; Levy
et al. 2020; Duchi and Namkoong 2018; Duchi, Glynn, and
Namkoong 2021; Qi et al. 2022; Wang, Gao, and Xie 2021).
Little understanding on the practical non-convex loss functions, e.g., neural network, is known. In this paper, we focus
on the constrained DRO problem with non-convex loss.
DRO problems under different uncertainty sets are fundamentally different. As will be discussed later in related

Machine learning algorithms typically employ the approach
of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), which minimizes
the expected loss under the empirical distribution P0 of the
training dataset and assumes that test samples are generated from the same distribution. However, in practice, there
usually exists a mismatch between the training and testing
distributions due to various reasons, for example, in domain adaptation tasks domains differ from training to testing
(Blitzer, McDonald, and Pereira 2006; Daume III and Marcu
2006); test samples were selected from minority groups
which are underrepresented in the training dataset (Grother
et al. 2011; Hovy and Søgaard 2015) and there might exist potential adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2017). Such a mismatch may
lead to a significant performance degradation.
This challenge spurred noteworthy efforts on developing a framework of Distributionally Robust Optimization
(DRO) e.g., (Ben-Tal et al. 2013; Shapiro 2017; Rahimian
and Mehrotra 2019). Rather than minimizing the expected
loss under one fixed distribution, in DRO, one seeks to optimize the expected loss under the worst-case distribution in
an uncertainty set of distributions.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8217

