The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Personalization as a Shortcut for Few-Shot Backdoor Attack
against Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Yihao Huang1 , Felix Juefei-Xu2 , Qing Guo3 * , Jie Zhang1 , Yutong Wu1 ,
Ming Hu1 , Tianlin Li1 , Geguang Pu4 , Yang Liu1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
New York University, USA
3
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
4
East China Normal University, China
Abstract
Although recent personalization methods have democratized
high-resolution image synthesis by enabling swift concept acquisition with minimal examples and lightweight computation,
they also present an exploitable avenue for highly accessible backdoor attacks. This paper investigates a critical and
unexplored aspect of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models their potential vulnerability to backdoor attacks via personalization. By studying the prompt processing of popular personalization methods (epitomized by Textual Inversion and
DreamBooth), we have devised dedicated personalizationbased backdoor attacks according to the different ways of
dealing with unseen tokens and divide them into two families:
nouveau-token and legacy-token backdoor attacks.
In comparison to conventional backdoor attacks involving
the fine-tuning of the entire text-to-image diffusion model,
our proposed personalization-based backdoor attack method
can facilitate more tailored, efficient, and few-shot attacks.
Through comprehensive empirical study, we endorse the utilization of the nouveau-token backdoor attack due to its
impressive effectiveness, stealthiness, and integrity, markedly
outperforming the legacy-token backdoor attack.

Introduction
Diffusion models (DM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) are
versatile tools with a wide array of applications, such as
image denoising, super-resolution, and image generation.
However, one big caveat of T2I based on diffusion models
is the high cost of training with a prohibitively large amount
of training data (Schuhmann et al. 2022) and compute. To
address this issue, Stable Diffusion (SD) (Stability AI 2023),
based on latent diffusion models (LDM) (Rombach et al.
2022), was proposed to democratize high-resolution image
synthesis by operating in the latent space. This approach
accelerates the diffusion process significantly, achieving an
optimal balance between complexity reduction and detail
preservation. Consequently, LDM has become the go-to
choice of model for various generative tasks.
Despite the extensive training of DMs or LDMs, they may
struggle to generate unique or personalized concepts that are
* Qing Guo is the corresponding author (tsingqguo@ieee.org).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21169

absent in the large-scale training corpus, such as personalized styles or specific faces. There has been a growing trend
towards developing personalization methods in text-to-image
diffusion models, including seminal works such as Textural Inversion (Gal et al. 2023a), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al.
2022), and LoRA on SD (Hu et al. 2021; Ryu 2023), along
with recent proposals like Domain Tuning (Gal et al. 2023b),
SVDiff (Han et al. 2023), InstantBooth (Shi et al. 2023), and
Perfusion (Tewel et al. 2023). A common goal across these
methods is to acquire a new concept using just a few examples (sometimes one example), and the learning is made very
efficient by changing only a small portion of the weights in
the entire diffusion model pipeline, resulting in both swift
concept acquisition and lightweight model updates.
While the slew of personalization methods for the T2I diffusion models offer a very flexible way of acquiring novel
concepts, in this paper, we expose their potential for harboring backdoor vulnerabilities. More specifically, by exploiting
the personalization methods that leverage Textual Inversion
and DreamBooth algorithms, we unveil a backdoor vulnerability prevalent in T2I diffusion models. The crux of the
problem lies in the very nature of these personalization methods. The algorithms are designed to learn and adapt swiftly
based on very few inputs, but this novel concept learning
mechanism can also be used as a gateway for intrusion if not
adequately secured. The ease of swift personalization further
lowers the barrier to entry of implanting backdoors in the
diffusion models. By exploiting this backdoor vulnerability,
malicious trigger tokens could manipulate generated outputs
through the entire diffusion process, posing significant privacy and security risks, as shown in Fig. 1.
Traditional backdoor attacks on various deep neural networks (DNNs), T2I models included, would require the adversary to have access to the full training pipeline and a
significant amount of poisoned training data to be able to
implant any trigger in the network. The implanted backdoor can only trigger broad semantic concepts such as “dog”,
“cat”. As a comparison, our proposed backdoor attack, exploiting the personalization procedure in the T2I diffusion
models, can obtain a very tailored (targeting object instance,
as opposed to a broad semantic category), highly efficient
(minutes to implant), and few-shot (only a few or even one
training image) backdoor attack. Given the same amount of

