The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Motion Deblurring via Spatial-Temporal Collaboration of Frames and Events
Wen Yang1,2 , Jinjian Wu1,2∗ , Jupo Ma1,2∗ , Leida Li1 , Guangming Shi1,2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Huangpu, 510555, China
wen.yang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {jinjian.wu, majupo, ldli, gmshi}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Motion deblurring can be advanced by exploiting informative
features from supplementary sensors such as event cameras,
which can capture rich motion information asynchronously
with high temporal resolution. Existing event-based motion
deblurring methods neither consider the modality redundancy
in spatial fusion nor temporal cooperation between events and
frames. To tackle these limitations, a novel spatial-temporal
collaboration network (STCNet) is proposed for event-based
motion deblurring. Firstly, we propose a differential-modality
based cross-modal calibration strategy to suppress redundancy for complementarity enhancement, and then bimodal
spatial fusion is achieved with an elaborate cross-modal coattention mechanism to weight the contributions of them for
importance balance. Besides, we present a frame-event mutual spatio-temporal attention scheme to alleviate the errors
of relying only on frames to compute cross-temporal similarities when the motion blur is significant, and then the
spatio-temporal features from both frames and events are aggregated with the custom cross-temporal coordinate attention. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance. Project website: https://github.com/wyangvis/STCNet.

Blurry Image

DS-Deblur

ERDNet

Event

EFNet

STCNet(Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison of visualized deblurring results with
state-of-the-art event-based motion deblurring methods DSDeblur (Yang et al. 2022), ERDNet (Chen et al. 2022a),
EFNet (Sun et al. 2022), and our STCNet.

frames and motion blur. Due to the success of deep neural networks (DNNs), some deep convolutional neural network (CNN)-based methods (Zhang et al. 2019; Zamir et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021; Cho et al. 2021), recurrent neural
network (RNN)-based methods (Nah, Son, and Lee 2019;
Zhong et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2022) and
Transformer-based methods (Liang et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022b; Liang et al. 2022b,a) have been proposed for motion deblurring, which implicitly learn more general prior information from large-scale training data. Despite their good
performance, these learning-based deblurring methods may
fail to deal with severe blur. Motion deblurring cannot be
solved trivially from the input blur set alone, as it is a highly
ill-posed problem with infinite feasible solutions.
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that can record
per-pixel intensity changes asynchronously with high temporal resolution and output a stream of events encoding
time, location and polarity of intensity changes (Vitoria
et al. 2023) if the intensity changes surpass a threshold. Understandably, with the attractive properties that offer motion information with microsecond accuracy, event cameras have been attempted to address motion deblurring. Recently, some event-based motion deblurring methods are
proposed (Pan et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2020;

Introduction
Motion blur is commonly inevitable due to camera shake
or object motion over the period of exposure time, which
not only deteriorates the visual experience for humans but
hinders other computer vision tasks such as tracking (Jin,
Favaro, and Cipolla 2005; Mei and Reid 2008), video stabilization (Matsushita et al. 2006), etc. To eliminate the adverse effects, the task of motion deblurring has received
much research attention recently.
Traditional motion deblurring techniques explicitly utilize image priors and various constraints (Bar et al. 2007;
Cho, Wang, and Lee 2012; Wulff and Black 2014; Bahat,
Efrat, and Irani 2017; Kotera, Šroubek, and Milanfar 2013;
Levin et al. 2009) that are handcrafted with empirical observations. However, it is challenging to design such priors
and constraints to model the inherent properties of latent
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6531

