The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Squeezing-Averse Virtual Try-On via Sequential Deformation
Sang-Heon Shim, Jiwoo Chung, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{ekzmwww, wldn0202, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract

2022), greatly alleviates the misalignment problem by introducing a multi-task learning (MTL) approach for virtual
try-on. Specifically, HR-VITON fuses the layout generation
and clothes deformation tasks into a shared backbone with
different prediction layers, which can be regarded as MTL.
Nonetheless, repeated failures have been observed in
samples with long sleeves, as shown in the upper row of
Fig. 1(a). In more detail, a recent VITON approach (Lee
et al. 2022) generates virtual try-on samples with squeezed
textures at sleeves when the clothes have long sleeves. We
denote it as a sleeve-squeezing artifact throughout this paper.
Since there are many clothes with long sleeves, this issue can
disturb the utilization of VITON in real-world applications.
The sleeve-squeezing artifact is mainly caused by the integration of two different tasks into a single model. In MTL,
a task conflict problem (Shi et al. 2022) is widely known that
a model is prone to converge toward a dominant task when
the objectives of different tasks are misaligned. We observed
that there is a conflict between two popular losses, the Total
Variation (TV) loss for clothes deformation and the adversarial loss for layout generation. TV loss aims to smooth
the deformation field to preserve the texture of clothes after warping, while adversarial loss aims to generate a layout with a realistic shape according to segmentation maps of
training data. Thus, both losses are essential for each task.
However, the TV loss leads to disconnect the boundaries between the sleeve and torso in a warped clothes mask, since
they are separated in clothes with long sleeves. On the other
hand, the adversarial loss for layout generation tries to produce a layout with a connected boundary between the sleeve
and the torso following the training data distribution. Since
the warped clothes feed into a prediction layer of layout generation, the adversarial loss in layout generation also affects
the clothes deformation.
Our raised artifact becomes more serious in a cascaded
appearance flow estimation (Ge et al. 2021; Zhou et al.
2016). Specifically, the clothes are deformed by appearance
flows that are a set of 2D coordinate vectors, where each vector denotes which pixel in clothes image is used to fill a pixel
in person image. In a multi-scale scheme, since the appearance flows are inferred and then accumulated in the subsequent layers through residual paths, all appearance flow prediction layers directly contribute to the warped clothes that
are fed to the prediction layer for layout generation. As a

In this paper, we first investigate a visual quality degradation problem observed in recent high-resolution virtual tryon approach. The tendency is empirically found that the textures of clothes are squeezed at the sleeve, as visualized in
the upper row of Fig. 1(a). A main reason for the issue arises
from a gradient conflict between two popular losses, the Total Variation (TV) and adversarial losses. Specifically, the
TV loss aims to disconnect boundaries between the sleeve
and torso in a warped clothing mask, whereas the adversarial loss aims to combine between them. Such contrary objectives feedback the misaligned gradients to a cascaded appearance flow estimation, resulting in undesirable squeezing artifacts. To reduce this, we propose a Sequential Deformation (SD-VITON) that disentangles the appearance flow
prediction layers into TV objective-dominant (TVOB) layers and a task-coexistence (TACO) layer. Specifically, we
coarsely fit the clothes onto a human body via the TVOB
layers, and then keep on refining via the TACO layer. In addition, the bottom row of Fig. 1(a) shows a different type of
squeezing artifacts around the waist. To address it, we further propose that we first warp the clothes into a tuckedout shirts style, and then partially erase the texture from
the warped clothes without hurting the smoothness of the
appearance flows. Experimental results show that our SDVITON successfully resolves both types of artifacts and outperforms the baseline methods. Source code will be available
at https://github.com/SHShim0513/SD-VITON.

1

Introduction

The goal of image-based virtual try-on (VITON) (Han et al.
2018) is to fit the clothes onto a person. A general approach
is to synthesize a sample through three tasks, which are layout generation, clothes deformation, and full-body image
generation. Its recent advances have reached to synthesize
high resolution results with convincing qualities.
A major challenge in high-resolution synthesis is the misalignment between the layout and the warped clothes, since
it leads unrealistic textures and is especially more serious
in higher resolutions, as shown in (Choi et al. 2021). The
latest and state-of-the-art method, HR-VITON (Lee et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4856

