The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GSENet: Global Semantic Enhancement Network for Lane Detection
∗

∗

∗

†

Junhao Su1 , Zhenghan Chen4 , Chenghao He2 , Dongzhi Guan1 , Changpeng Cai1 ,
†
Tongxi Zhou5 , Jiasheng Wei6 , Wenhua Tian1 , Zhihuai Xie3
1
Southeast University
East China University of Science and Technology
3
Tsinghua University
4
Peking University
5
Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Fudan University
2

Abstract
Lane detection is the cornerstone of autonomous driving. Although existing methods have achieved promising results,
there are still limitations in addressing challenging scenarios such as abnormal weather, occlusion, and curves. These
scenarios with low visibility usually require to rely on the
broad information of the entire scene provided by global semantics and local texture information to predict the precise
position and shape of the lane lines. In this paper, we propose
a Global Semantic Enhancement Network for lane detection,
which involves a complete set of systems for feature extraction and global features transmission. Traditional methods
for global feature extraction usually require deep convolution layer stacks. However, this approach of obtaining global
features solely through a larger receptive field not only fails
to capture precise global features but also leads to an overly
deep model, which results in slow inference speed. To address these challenges, we propose a novel operation called
the Global feature Extraction Module (GEM). Additionally,
we introduce the Top Layer Auxiliary Module (TLAM) as a
channel for feature distillation, which facilitates a bottom-up
transmission of global features. Furthermore, we introduce
two novel loss functions: the Angle Loss, which account for
the angle between predicted and ground truth lanes, and the
Generalized Line IoU Loss function that considers the scenarios where significant deviations occur between the prediction of lanes and ground truth in some harsh conditions.
The experimental results reveal that the proposed method exhibits remarkable superiority over the current state-of-theart techniques for lane detection. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/crystal250/GSENet.

Figure 1: Some challenging scenarios for lane detection. (a)
Demonstrates curved lanes, and our Angle Loss significantly
improves the detection results in such scenarios. (b) Illustrates lanes under dazzle conditions, where lane detection
heavily relies on global semantics. (c) Represents a no line
scenario. (d) Depicts lanes are occupied by other vehicles,
making lane detection exceptionally challenging.

Most traditional lane detection techniques (Canny 1986;
Hough 1962; Sobel, Feldman et al. 1968) require manual
parameter tuning to adapt to different road conditions and
lighting environments, which can introduce variability and
potential errors, leading to decreased stability and performance of the system. In these methods, operators often engage in the extraction of edge features (Canny 1986) or convert the color space of lane from RGB to HSV or HLS.
Subsequent steps include binary thresholding, denoising,
and other color-based processing methods are applied to acquire information on the lanes. Ultimately, the Hough Transform (Hough 1962) and lane fitting techniques, such as the
Least Squares method and Random Sampling Consensus
(RANSAC) (Fischler and Bolles 1981), are utilized to determine the lanes. Therefore, the manual parameter adjustments and feature extraction instability in traditional lane
detection methods have led to inconsistencies and caused
many difficulties in practical applications.

Introduction
The rise of deep neural network (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio
2011) has led to increased applications in autonomous driving and advanced driver-assistance systems. Among these,
lane detection is a fundamental task that plays a crucial
role in controlling vehicle maneuvers and identifying lane
boundaries. However, lane detection remains challenging,
especially in complex scenarios.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding author: Zhihuai Xie (xzhuai.me@gmail.com)
and Dongzhi Guan (guandongzhi@seu.edu.cn).

15108

