The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Finding ϵ and δ of Statistical Disclosure Control Systems
Saswat Das1 , Keyu Zhu2 , Christine Task3 , Pascal Van Hentenryck2 , Ferdinando Fioretto1
1

University of Virginia
Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Knexus Research Corporation
saswatdas@email.virginia.edu, keyu.zhu@gatech.edu, pvh@isye.gatech.edu,
christine.task@knexusresearch.com, fioretto@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

many data agencies and organizations around the world continue to rely on traditional SDC techniques to protect their
data confidentiality. While these approaches can be effective
at protecting against accidental or intentional disclosures, it
is unclear what privacy guarantees they provide when compared to differential privacy. On the other hand, while differential privacy can provide formal privacy guarantees, it
may come with a cost in terms of accuracy, fairness, and equity (Kuppam et al. 2019; Tran et al. 2021; Fioretto et al.
2022; Tran, Dinh, and Fioretto 2021; Zhu, Hentenryck, and
Fioretto 2021), a topic of considerable debate recently.
Considering their significant societal and economic consequences, a rigorous comparison of traditional SDC and DP
is essential. Conducting this comparison, however, is challenged by the absence of a standardized framework for evaluating privacy protections: While DP provides quantifiable
privacy guarantees, traditional SDC techniques often lack a
distinct set of privacy metrics, complicating direct comparisons of the privacy protection levels they offer.
Contributions. This paper aims to address this challenge:
it proposes a framework to compare traditional SDC to differential privacy for the first time and makes four distinct
contributions. (1) It first proposes carefully randomized versions of two widely adopted SDC: suppression and swapping. The resulting randomized mechanisms are designed to
closely resemble their original counterparts to preserve fidelity while allowing us to derive (ϵ, δ)-DP bounds. Given
these bounds, a key takeaway of the paper is the recognition that SDC mechanisms often fail to provide meaningful
privacy guarantees. (2) The paper then derives bounds for
the bias and variance of the SDC mechanisms, allowing for
a direct comparison with classical DP techniques for which
such bounds exist. (3) Next, we analyze the fairness impact
induced by the considered SDC systems and show that the
fairness violations incurred by the randomized SDC algorithms are close to those of their traditional counterparts. A
second takeaway of the paper is the recognition that traditional SDC algorithms can induce much higher fairness violations than those reported by classical DP mechanisms. (4)
Finally, the paper provides an extensive empirical analysis
of the performance of the SDC mechanisms and a comparison with two classical DP algorithms on data release and
classification tasks.
From a broader perspective, the paper demonstrates that,

This paper analyzes the privacy of traditional Statistical Disclosure Control (SDC) systems under a differential privacy
interpretation. SDCs, such as cell suppression and swapping,
promise to safeguard the confidentiality of data and are routinely adopted in data analyses with profound societal and
economic impacts. Through a formal analysis and empirical
evaluation on demographic data from real household in the
U.S., the paper shows that widely adopted SDC systems not
only induce vastly larger privacy losses than classical differential privacy mechanisms, but, they may also come at a cost
of larger accuracy and fairness.

1

Introduction

Statistical Disclosure Control (SDC) techniques are used to
protect confidentiality while still enabling data analyses and
dissemination in various fields with profound societal impacts, such as economics, public health, social science, and
data science. These techniques have a long history, with their
use dating back to the 1930 decennial release by the US
Census Bureau, which leveraged traditional SDC techniques
such as suppressing certain tables based on the number of
people or households in a given area and swapping data in
records with similar characteristics (Kelly, Golden, and Assad 1992; Dalenius and Reiss 1982).
While SDC techniques have traditionally been important
for protecting against accidental or intentional disclosure,
they lack formal guarantees that quantify the privacy risks
that individuals incur upon data releases. This limitation restricts the ability of participants to assess the impact of these
protections on published data, leading to potential vulnerabilities and privacy leaks. In contrast, differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al. 2006) offers a rigorous definition of privacy and provides quantifiable privacy guarantees. Its deployments are increasing at a fast rate, with the US Census
Bureau adopting DP for their 2020 release (Abowd et al.
2022), marking a significant shift towards more rigorous
privacy protections. However, this adoption has also created controversy among data users, citing errors introduced
by the noisy process adopted to ensure differential privacy,
leading to skepticism and even legal action to block the bureau from using DP (US Court 2021). Despite the debate,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22013

