The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FAVOR: Full-Body AR-Driven Virtual Object Rearrangement
Guided by Instruction Text
Kailin Li1 * , Lixin Yang1 * , Zenan Lin3 , Jian Xu2 , Xinyu Zhan1 , Yifei Zhao1 , Pengxiang Zhu1 ,
Wenxiong Kang3 , Kejian Wu2 , Cewu Lu1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
XREAL
3
South China University of Technology
{kailinli, siriusyang, kelvin34501, yifei zhao, zhu peng xiang, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{jianxu, kejian}@xreal.com, {auzenanlin, auwxkang}@mail.scut.edu.cn
Abstract

     

Rearrangement operations form the crux of interactions between humans and their environment. The ability to generate natural, fluid sequences of this operation is of essential
value in AR/VR and CG. Bridging a gap in the field, our study
introduces FAVOR: a novel dataset for Full-body AR-driven
Virtual Object Rearrangement that uniquely employs motion
capture systems and AR eyeglasses. Comprising 3k diverse
motion rearrangement sequences and 7.17 million interaction
data frames, this dataset breaks new ground in research data.
We also present a pipeline FAVORITE for producing digital
human rearrangement motion sequences guided by instructions. Experimental results, both qualitative and quantitative,
suggest that this dataset and pipeline deliver high-quality motion sequences. Our dataset, code, and appendix are available
at https://kailinli.github.io/FAVOR.

 

 

  

Introduction
Envision yourself immersed in augmented reality, arriving
at a restaurant, your avatar utters, “Do me a FAVOR, make
a burger for me”. In response, the cook avatar precisely retrieves bread from the toaster, carefully placing it onto the
plate. Subsequently, he gathers an array of ingredients and
arranges them on top of the bread slice. Hence, for this application, it’s crucial for the avatar to discern the relative positions of the on-scene objects, comprehend spatial preposition logic (such as ‘on top of’), and accurately grasp and
place the ingredients. Simply put, this involves grounding
(text-scene alignment) and rearrangement (grasping-andplacement). The capability to generate such sequences of
fluid and natural rearrangement actions is indispensable for
the applications of digital human synthesis.
Over recent years, the field of full-body human motion
generation has experienced rapid progression. For example,
certain studies focused on body motion generation founded
on language-based instruction (Tevet et al. 2022; Jiang et al.
2023), or on dynamics involving interaction with the scenes
(Wang et al. 2022).

Figure 1: Illustration of the FAVOR data collection pipeline.
The researcher directs the task through textual instructions
and projects the scene onto the AR glasses. Subjects then
rearrange the objects via interaction within the AR space.
However, the task of generating human-object interactions has been relatively less explored. Within this niche,
the GRAB (Taheri et al. 2020) dataset serves as the benchmark for the generation of human-object motion. Nonetheless, its scope is limited to fundamental interactions (e.g.
grasp-and-use) involving a human and a singular object, typically situated at the center of a desk. The lack of paired
‘instruction-motion’ sequence data hinders progress toward
complex motion generation – specifically, tasks that require
a nuanced understanding of both the interactive scene and
textual instructions.
We aspire to endow digital humans with capabilities for
grounding and rearrangement, effectively merging scenes

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3136

