The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fairness without Demographics through Shared Latent Space-Based Debiasing
Rashidul Islam, Huiyuan Chen, Yiwei Cai
Visa Research, USA
{raislam, hchen, yicai}@visa.com

Abstract

VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act prevents employers from
inquiring about an applicant’s gender and race (Blankenship 1993). Similarly, the EU GDPR imposes constraints
on collecting such data (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017).
Yet, the imperative to achieve fairness is undiminished, especially to counteract harmful biases against specific protected groups. For example, the CFPB mandates creditors to
implement fair lending practices but concurrently restricts
them from collecting demographic details from applicants.1
This paradox is well-acknowledged within the AI community, spanning both the public sector (Veale and Binns 2017)
and industry (Holstein et al. 2019), and highlights the urgent
need of ensuring fairness without demographics.
Present state-of-the-art solutions to this conundrum
(Hashimoto et al. 2018; Lahoti et al. 2020; Chai and Wang
2022) mainly adopt the idea of Rawlsian max-min fairness
(Rawls 2001) that maximizes the utility such as accuracy
for the most disadvantaged group without demographic information. These methods effectively tackle representation
bias adhering to the infra-marginality principle, which posits
that a system is biased if and only if its behavior exhibits
disparities greater than those in society or the underlying
data (Simoiu, Corbett-Davies, and Goel 2017). However,
our experiments reveal that they frequently fail to satisfy
established parity-based group fairness standards, like demographic parity (Dwork et al. 2012; Zemel et al. 2013;
Creager et al. 2019) or the legally recognized 80%-Rule,
as specified in the Code of Federal Regulations (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 1978). Besides addressing representation bias, parity-based fairness notions also
capture other critical biases such as societal and intentional
prejudices, and societal disadvantages, all of which can often skew the behavior of ML systems (Barocas and Selbst
2016). Furthermore, groups or regions found by these existing fair algorithms without demographics may not necessarily align with the intended protected attributes. For instance,
a model may be optimized to maximize utility in terms of
race when the desired protected attribute is gender.

Ensuring fairness in machine learning (ML) is crucial, particularly in applications that impact diverse populations. The
majority of existing works heavily rely on the availability of
protected features like race and gender. However, practical
challenges such as privacy concerns and regulatory restrictions often prohibit the use of this data, limiting the scope
of traditional fairness research. To address this, we introduce
a Shared Latent Space-based Debiasing (SLSD) method that
transforms data from both the target domain, which lacks protected features, and a separate source domain, which contains
these features, into correlated latent representations. This allows for joint training of a cross-domain protected group estimator on the representations. We then debias the downstream
ML model with an adversarial learning technique that leverages the group estimator. We also present a relaxed variant of
SLSD, the R-SLSD, that occasionally accesses a small subset
of protected features from the target domain during its training phase. Our extensive experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our methods consistently outperform existing state-of-the-art models in standard group fairness metrics.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a surge in evidence suggesting that, when trained on historical data without necessary
precautions, ML systems can inadvertently exhibit discrimination across various demographic groups (House 2016;
Barocas and Selbst 2016; O’neil 2016; Campolo et al. 2017;
Noble 2018). Such bias can have a serious impact on diverse aspects of everyday life, ranging from movie recommendations (Islam et al. 2021) to more serious domains like
credit scoring (Nedlund 2019), and criminal recidivism prediction (Angwin et al. 2016). Consequently, significant research has been directed towards developing and enforcing
various mathematical constructs of bias and fairness in algorithms (Dwork et al. 2012; Zemel et al. 2013; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Kusner et al. 2017; Kearns et al. 2018;
Foulds et al. 2020b). However, a common constraint in these
works is their dependence on the model’s access to protected
attributes such as race and gender, during their training.
In practical contexts, factors such as privacy concerns, legal constraints, and regulatory measures often limit the acquisition or use of protected attributes. For instance, Title

Our Contributions. In this paper, we introduce a novel
method that leverages a shared latent space to approximate
the inherent protected groups for fair learning. Despite the
1
CFBP Law and Regulations, 12 CFR § 1002.5 Rules concerning requests for information: https://tinyurl.com/mr2hw8km.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12717

