The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data-Free Hard-Label Robustness Stealing Attack
Xiaojian Yuan1 , Kejiang Chen* 1 , Wen Huang1 , Jie Zhang2 ,
Weiming Zhang1 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Nanyang Technological University
xjyuan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenkj@ustc.edu.cn, hw2000@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
jie zhang@ntu.edu.sg, zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn, ynh@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

model for other black-box attacks, e.g., adversarial examples
(AE) (Zhang et al. 2022b), membership inference (Shokri
et al. 2017), and model inversion (Yuan et al. 2023).
Furthermore, numerous security-sensitive scenarios require deployed models are not only accurate but also robust
to various attacks, such as adversarial attacks. To address
this issue, MLaaS providers can employ adversarial training
(AT) techniques (Madry et al. 2018) to improve the robustness of their models (Goodman and Xin 2020; Shafique et al.
2020). Despite the target model’s robustness, most existing
MSA are limited to Accuracy Stealing, i.e., reconstructing
a model with similar accuracy to the target model, and fail
at Robustness Stealing, i.e., acquiring the adversarial robustness of the target model while maintaining accuracy. Since
the improvement of model robustness requires much more
computational resources and extra data (Schmidt et al. 2018;
Gowal et al. 2021), robustness stealing will bring greater
losses to MLaaS providers. Moreover, if an attacker seeks
to train a clone model for transfer-based adversarial attacks
against a robust target model, then it becomes crucial to employ robustness stealing to achieve effective attack performance (Dong et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2020).
In addition, most previous MSA require MLaaS to provide prediction logits, i.e., soft labels. However, this requirement is overly stringent in typical scenarios where MLaaS
can only return top-1 prediction, i.e., hard label, for each
query. Since models that require robustness are more likely
trained on sensitive or private datasets, it is difficult for attackers to obtain public data with similar distributions, let
alone access to the original data. Hence, the investigation of
MSA targeting robustness in a data-free hard-label setting is
highly valuable and remains unexplored.
To tackle the above issues, we propose Data-Free HardLabel Robustness Stealing (DFHL-RS) attack, which can
effectively steal both the accuracy and robustness of the target model. We first demonstrate that direct use of AT during MSA is suboptimal and point out the limitations of using Uncertain Example (UE) (Li et al. 2023a) for robustness
stealing. Then the concept of High-Entropy Example (HEE)
is introduced, which can characterize a more complete classification boundary shape of the target model. By imitating the target model’s prediction of HEE, the clone model
gradually approaches its classification boundaries, so as to
achieve prediction consistency for various samples. More-

The popularity of Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
has led to increased concerns about Model Stealing Attacks (MSA), which aim to craft a clone model by querying MLaaS. Currently, most research on MSA assumes that
MLaaS can provide soft labels and that the attacker has a
proxy dataset with a similar distribution. However, this fails
to encapsulate the more practical scenario where only hard labels are returned by MLaaS and the data distribution remains
elusive. Furthermore, most existing work focuses solely on
stealing the model accuracy, neglecting the model robustness,
while robustness is essential in security-sensitive scenarios,
e.g., face-scan payment. Notably, improving model robustness often necessitates the use of expensive techniques such
as adversarial training, thereby further making stealing robustness a more lucrative prospect. In response to these identified gaps, we introduce a novel Data-Free Hard-Label Robustness Stealing (DFHL-RS) attack in this paper, which enables the stealing of both model accuracy and robustness by
simply querying hard labels of the target model without the
help of any natural data. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The clone model
achieves a clean accuracy of 77.86% and a robust accuracy
of 39.51% against AutoAttack, which are only 4.71% and
8.40% lower than the target model on the CIFAR-10 dataset,
significantly exceeding the baselines. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/LetheSec/DFHL-RS-Attack.

Introduction
Machine learning as a service (MLaaS) has gained significant popularity due to its ease of deployment and costeffectiveness, which provides users with pre-trained models
and APIs. Unfortunately, MLaaS is susceptible to privacy
attacks, with Model Stealing Attacks (MSA) being particularly harmful (Tramèr et al. 2016; Orekondy, Schiele, and
Fritz 2019; Jagielski et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022), where an attacker can train a clone model
by querying its public API, without accessing its parameters or training data. This attack not only poses a threat
to intellectual property but also compromises the privacy
of individuals whose data was used to train the original
model. Moreover, the clone model can serve as a surrogate
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6853

