The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sunshine to Rainstorm: Cross-Weather Knowledge Distillation
for Robust 3D Object Detection
Xun Huang1 * , Hai Wu1 * , Xin Li2 , Xiaoliang Fan1 , Chenglu Wen1† , Cheng Wang1
1

Xiamen University,
Texas A & M University
{huangxun,wuhai}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {clwen, fanxiaoliang, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, xinli@tamu.edu
2

Sunny point cloud

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D object detection models inevitably struggle under rainy conditions due to the degraded and noisy
scanning signals. Previous research has attempted to address
this by simulating the noise from rain to improve the robustness of detection models. However, significant disparities exist between simulated and actual rain-impacted data points.
In this work, we propose a novel rain simulation method,
termed DRET, that unifies Dynamics and Rainy Environment
Theory to provide a cost-effective means of expanding the
available realistic rain data for 3D detection training. Furthermore, we present a Sunny-to-Rainy Knowledge Distillation
(SRKD) approach to enhance 3D detection under rainy conditions. Extensive experiments on the Waymo-Open-Dataset
show that, when combined with the state-of-the-art DSVT
model and other classical 3D detectors, our proposed framework demonstrates significant detection accuracy improvements, without losing efficiency. Remarkably, our framework
also improves detection capabilities under sunny conditions,
therefore offering a robust solution for 3D detection regardless of whether the weather is rainy or sunny.

y
z

x

Simulated rainy point cloud

y
z

x

Moving Car
LiDAR Points
Rain Points

Figure 1: Visualization of rain noise points in groundtruth
and different rain simulations.
obstructs 3D detectors. Analysis of rainy point clouds in
the WOD reveals two critical phenomena: 1) Dense rain
noise. As LiDAR light pulses cannot penetrate water particles (Hahner et al. 2021), resulting in noise from water
droplets generated by moving vehicles. 2) Missing points.
Atmospheric parameters like attenuation substantially differ
in rain. Thus, many points fall below the LiDAR intensity
threshold and are missed. These phenomena create a considerable domain gap between sunny and rainy data. Robust
rainy 3D object detection needs to address both data and
model challenges.
Prior work, including LISA (Kilic et al. 2021) and SPRAY
(Shih et al. 2022), has sought to address the challenge of insufficient training data by simulating adverse weather conditions. While these approaches are valuable, they overlook
the rainy environmental theory and object-scene dynamics,
leading to limitations in the realism of simulated rain. For
example, as depicted in Fig. 1, a significant gap exists between simulated and real rain points, especially in the case
of LISA. SPRAY also fails to simulate the phenomenon of
missing points that usually occur in rainy scenes.
In addition to creating realistic simulations, the effective
utilization of simulated data is also crucial. Many existing methods (Teufel et al. 2022; Hahner et al. 2021, 2022)
simply augment training data with simulations, but this ap-

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed growing research interest
in 3D object detection utilizing point cloud data. For
widespread application in autonomous driving, such models
must demonstrate robust performance under diverse conditions. Despite progress in 3D object detection on benchmark
datasets, achieving consistent and reliable performance, particularly under adverse weather conditions (e.g., rain) remains an open challenge.
Unfortunately, 3D object detection research under rainy
weather presents significant challenges at both the data and
methods levels. At the data level, a pressing issue is data
scarcity. Extant datasets exhibit highly limited rainy samples
owing to the high annotation and collection costs. For instance, merely 0.6% of samples in the Waymo Open Dataset
(WOD) (Sun et al. 2020) perception subset in rain. This
shortage seriously hinders the research on 3D object detection under rainy weather. The low quality of rainy data
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2409

