The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Prompting Multi-Modal Image Segmentation with Semantic Grouping
Qibin He
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
qibin.he@outlook.com

Abstract
Multi-modal image segmentation is one of the core issues
in computer vision. The main challenge lies in integrating
common information between modalities while retaining specific patterns for each modality. Existing methods typically
perform full fine-tuning on RGB-based pre-trained parameters to inherit the powerful representation of the foundation
model. Although effective, such paradigm is not optimal due
to weak transferability and scarce downstream data. Inspired
by the recent success of prompt learning in language models, we propose the Grouping Prompt Tuning Framework
(GoPT), which introduces explicit semantic grouping to learn
modal-related prompts, adapting the frozen pre-trained foundation model to various downstream multi-modal segmentation tasks. Specifically, a class-aware uni-modal prompter is
designed to balance intra- and inter-modal semantic propagation by grouping modality-specific class tokens, thereby improving the adaptability of spatial information. Furthermore,
an alignment-induced cross-modal prompter is introduced to
aggregate class-aware representations and share prompt parameters among different modalities to assist in modeling
common statistics. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our GoPT, which achieves SOTA performance on various downstream multi-modal image segmentation tasks by
training only < 1% model parameters.

Figure 1: Multi-modal images with complex structural relations. Here, red dots indicate objects with solid lines indicating similarity to each other and dashed lines indicating
dissimilarity.

details, which benefit greatly from joint training on multimodal data sources. According to the type of fusion, existing
methods are generally classified into alignment-based fusion (Valada et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020) and aggregationbased fusion (Wang et al. 2022a; Zhou et al. 2022a). Despite the fruitful progress, these methods still face great challenges: integrating common information between modalities
while retaining the specific patterns of each modality remains dilemmatic.
More specifically, (i) Cross-modal Gaps. Modalities with
different imaging mechanisms may have heterogeneous
gaps, i.e., the same object has different descriptions in different data sources and requires inter-modal alignment, as
shown in fig. 1. However, alignment-based fusion mostly
provides invalid inter-modal fusion due to weak information
exchange through only training the alignment loss (Zhou
et al. 2022b; Shivakumar et al. 2020). (ii) Information Imbalances. The effective information that different modalities
can provide differs due to various features across domains,
e.g., acquisition frequency, visual disparity, etc. However,
aggregation-based fusion tends to ignore intra-modal propagation, resulting in insufficient balance between inter-modal
knowledge sharing and intra-modal information processing
(Xu et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2021; Ordun 2023).
Given the above challenges, we attempt to learn discriminative and compact modality-specific and shared patterns
via multi-modal grouping to alleviate cross-modal gaps and
information imbalances in multi-modal image segmentation.
Grouping aims to reorganize pixels into candidate groups

Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign a semantic category
to each pixel in the observed scene, which plays an important role in various applications (Zhao et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2022a; Zheng et al. 2021). With the development of sensor
technology, multi-modal fusion using multiple data sources
for segmentation has become one of the core issues in image
interpretation (Hazirbas et al. 2017; Zhou, Ruan, and Canu
2019; Zhang et al. 2021).
Thanks to the success of deep learning, multi-modal fusion has recently been specifically referred to as deep multimodal fusion (Hazirbas et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2022b)
through end-to-end neural integration of multiple image
modalities, and has shown significant advantages over unimodal segmentation (Park et al. 2017; Li et al. 2023). Deep
learning pipelines for multi-modal segmentation are usually expected to capture strong semantics and rich spatial
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2094

