The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Big Learning Expectation Maximization
Yulai Cong* , Sijia Li
Sun Yat-sen University
yulaicong@gmail.com, lisijia57@163.com

Abstract

to be sensitive to parameter initialization (Bishop 2006; Jin
et al. 2016; Kolouri, Rohde, and Hoffmann 2018), which
alternatively restricts their actual performance. For example, the representative Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm has been proven to converge to a bad local optimum
that could be arbitrarily worse than the optimal solution with
an exponentially high probability, when the number of mixture components exceeds three (Jin et al. 2016).
To address that long-lasting bad-local-optima challenge,
we draw inspiration from the recent ground-breaking foundation models, by noticing that they benefit significantly
from their massive diverse pretraining tasks, such as maskand-predict (Devlin et al. 2018; He et al. 2022) and nextword-prediction (Radford et al. 2018, 2019; Brown et al.
2020). Specifically, Cong and Zhao (2022) reveal that most
of those pretraining strategies actually fall under the big
learning principle, i.e., leveraging one foundation model to
simultaneously and consistently implement many/all joint,
conditional, marginal matchings, as well as their transformed matchings, between data and model distributions.
Inspired by that, we propose to leverage the big learning principle to upgrade the conventional EM algorithm to a
newly presented Big Learning EM (BigLearn-EM), demonstrating knowledge feedback from cutting-edge foundation
models to conventional machine learning. Specifically, the
BigLearn-EM exhaustively exploits its training data with a
tailored big learning setup, where joint, marginal, and orthogonally transformed marginal matchings between data
and model distributions are simultaneously considered. On
simulated data, the BigLearn-EM delivers the optimal solution with high probability, manifested as an encouraging
direction to address the bad-local-optima challenge.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.

Mixture models serve as one fundamental tool with versatile applications. However, their training techniques, like the
popular Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm, are notoriously sensitive to parameter initialization and often suffer
from bad local optima that could be arbitrarily worse than the
optimal. To address the long-lasting bad-local-optima challenge, we draw inspiration from the recent ground-breaking
foundation models and propose to leverage their underlying big learning principle to upgrade the EM. Specifically,
we present the Big Learning EM (BigLearn-EM), an EM
upgrade that simultaneously performs joint, marginal, and
orthogonally transformed marginal matchings between data
and model distributions. Through simulated experiments, we
empirically show that the BigLearn-EM is capable of delivering the optimal with high probability; comparisons on
benchmark clustering datasets further demonstrate its effectiveness and advantages over existing techniques. The code
is available at https://github.com/YulaiCong/Big-LearningExpectation-Maximization.

Introduction
As a fundamental and prominent tool in statistical machine
learning and data science, mixture models are ubiquitously
used in versatile practical applications that are associated
with density estimation (Correia et al. 2023), clustering
(Chandra, Canale, and Dunson 2023), anomaly detection
(Qu et al. 2020; An, Wang, and Zhang 2022), feature extraction (Saire and Rivera 2022; Lin et al. 2023), model explanation (Xie et al. 2023), flexible multi-modal prior (Saseendran
et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2021), deblurring (Guerrero-Colón,
Mancera, and Portilla 2007; Yu, Sapiro, and Mallat 2011),
etc. Among many variants of mixture models (Li, Yu, and
Mandic 2020; Li et al. 2020), the most popular one is the
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), thanks both to its simplicity and to its capability in approximating any continuous distribution arbitrarily well (Lindsay 1995; Peel and
MacLahlan 2000). In this paper, we focus on the GMM for
presentation, but the presented techniques can be readily extended to other mixture models.
Although mixture models are widely utilized in practical applications, most of their training techniques are known

• We propose the BigLearn-EM, a novel, effective, and
easy-to-use algorithm for training mixture models with
only EM-type analytical parameter update formulas.
• We reveal that marginal/conditional matching could help
joint matching getting out of bad local optima, which
serves as one explanation justifying the successes of
foundation models and the big learning principle.
• Comprehensive clustering experiments are conducted to
demonstrate the superiority of the BigLearn-EM and its
robustness to the scarcity of training data.

* Corresponding author: Yulai Cong.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11669

