The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Accelerating Text-to-Image Editing via Cache-Enabled Sparse Diffusion Inference
Zihao Yu1 , Haoyang Li1 , Fangcheng Fu1 , Xupeng Miao2 , Bin Cui1,3
1

School of Computer Science & Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao), China
{zihao.yu, ccchengff, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn, lihaoyang@stu.pku.edu.cn, xupeng@cmu.edu

Our target scenario. In real-world cases, after an image has been generated, it is common that the user may
be unsatisfied with some specific regions of the generated
image and desire to make subsequent semantic edits. Figure 1 demonstrates a concrete example. The user may wish
to interactively edit the image by making minor modifications to the textual description. These modifications involve adding specifications (e.g., adding a “river” or the
“fireworks”) or replacing words/phrases (e.g., replacing the
“river” with “snow mountain”). And in each round of editing, the user expects to make changes to only a small, specific region (affected region) and keep the rest (non-affected
regions) untouched.
Challenges. However, we find that the current implementations fall short in supporting such a semantic editing task
effectively and efficiently. First, due to the diversity nature
of diffusion models, existing methods tend to make significant changes to the image. Although there are applications
that allow users to provide masks to control the in-painting
regions, it would lead to poor user experience. Second, even
though only a small region is expected to be modified, existing works typically follow the vanilla inference process
of diffusion models, which generates the entire image from
scratch, without taking the spatial property into account.
Undoubtedly, this is a waste of time and computational resources since the generation of non-affected regions is pointless.
In essence, to support the semantic editing task effectively
and efficiently, there involves two technical issues: (1) how
to automatically and accurately detect the affected region
to be revised given the original image and the modified description and (2) how to focus on the target region during
the generation while skipping the non-affected regions?
Summary of contributions. In this paper, we develop
a brand new framework for the semantic editing task. The
technical contributions of this work are summarized as follows.

Abstract
Due to the recent success of diffusion models, text-to-image
generation is becoming increasingly popular and achieves a
wide range of applications. Among them, text-to-image editing, or continuous text-to-image generation, attracts lots of attention and can potentially improve the quality of generated
images. It’s common to see that users may want to slightly
edit the generated image by making minor modifications to
their input textual descriptions for several rounds of diffusion
inference. However, such an image editing process suffers
from the low inference efficiency of many existing diffusion
models even using GPU accelerators.
To solve this problem, we introduce Fast Image Semantically
Edit (FISEdit), a cached-enabled sparse diffusion model inference engine for efficient text-to-image editing. The key intuition behind our approach is to utilize the semantic mapping between the minor modifications on the input text and
the affected regions on the output image. For each text editing step, FISEdit can 1) automatically identify the affected
image regions and 2) utilize the cached unchanged regions’
feature map to accelerate the inference process. For the former, we measure the differences between cached and ad hoc
feature maps given the modified textual description, extract
the region with significant differences, and capture the affected region by masks. For the latter, we develop an efficient
sparse diffusion inference engine that only computes the feature maps for the affected region while reusing the cached
statistics for the rest of the image. Finally, extensive empirical
results show that FISEdit can be 3.4× and 4.4× faster than
existing methods on NVIDIA TITAN RTX and A100 GPUs
respectively, and even generates more satisfactory images.

Introduction
The recent months have witnessed the astonishing improvement of diffusion models. Text-to-image generation is one of
the most popular applications of diffusion models, which involves generating realistic images based on textual descriptions. While diffusion models have been shown to generate
high-quality images with good coverage of the data distribution, they require substantial computational power to generate high-quality images. Thus, it is an emerging research
area to make the generation process of diffusion models
more effective and efficient.

• We introduce Fast Image Semantically Edit (FISEdit), a
framework for minor image editing with semantic textual
changes. FISEdit is a direct application to the inference
process of pre-trained diffusion models and does not need
to train new models from scratch. To support the interactive semantic editing task, FISEdit caches the feature
maps of the latest generation process and addresses the

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16605

