The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relightable and Animatable Neural Avatars from Videos
Wenbin Lin, Chengwei Zheng, Jun-Hai Yong, Feng Xu
School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University
lwb20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhengcw18@gmail.com, yongjh@tsinghua.edu.cn, xufeng2003@gmail.com

Abstract

Alldieck, and Sminchisescu 2021; Weng et al. 2022; Jiang
et al. 2022a,b; Wang et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2022; Yu et al.
2023; Su, Bagautdinov, and Rhodin 2023). Also, NeRF can
be used for intrinsic decomposition to achieve impressive
relighting results for static objects (Zhang et al. 2021; Yao
et al. 2022; Boss et al. 2021a; Srinivasan et al. 2021; Boss
et al. 2021b; Zhang et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2023). However,
NeRF-based dynamic object relighting is rarely studied. One
key challenge is that the dynamics cause dramatic changes
in object shading, which is hard to model with the current
NeRF techniques.
In this work, we propose to reconstruct both relightable
and animatable 3D human avatars from sparse videos
recorded under uncalibrated illuminations. To achieve this
goal, we need to reconstruct the body geometry, material,
and environmental light. The dynamic body geometry is
modeled by a static geometry in a canonical space and the
motion to deform it to the shape in the observation space
of each frame. We propose an invertible neural deformation
field that builds a bidirectional mapping between points of
the canonical space and all observation spaces. With this
bidirectional mapping, we can easily leverage the body mesh
extracted in the canonical pose to better solve the inverse linear blend skinning problem, thus achieving high-quality geometry reconstruction. After the geometry reconstruction of
all frames, we propose a light visibility estimation module to
better model the dynamic self-occlusion effect for material
and light reconstruction. We transfer the global pose-related
visibility estimation task into multiple, part-wise, local ones,
which dramatically simplifies the complexity of light visibility estimation. This model has good generalization capability with limited training data benefiting from the part-wise
architecture, and thus successfully estimates the light visibility under various body poses and lighting conditions. Finally, we optimize the body material and lighting parameters, and then our method can render photorealistic images
under any desired body pose, lighting, and viewpoint. In
summary, the contributions include:
• the first method that is able to reconstruct both relightable
and animatable human avatars with plausible shadow effects from sparse multiview videos,
• an invertible deformation field that better solves the inverse skinning problem, leading to accurate dense correspondence between different body poses,

Lightweight creation of 3D digital avatars is a highly desirable but challenging task. With only sparse videos of a person
under unknown illumination, we propose a method to create
relightable and animatable neural avatars, which can be used
to synthesize photorealistic images of humans under novel
viewpoints, body poses, and lighting. The key challenge here
is to disentangle the geometry, material of the clothed body,
and lighting, which becomes more difficult due to the complex geometry and shadow changes caused by body motions.
To solve this ill-posed problem, we propose novel techniques
to better model the geometry and shadow changes. For geometry change modeling, we propose an invertible deformation field, which helps to solve the inverse skinning problem and leads to better geometry quality. To model the spatial and temporal varying shading cues, we propose a poseaware part-wise light visibility network to estimate light occlusion. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real datasets
show that our approach reconstructs high-quality geometry
and generates realistic shadows under different body poses.
Code and data are available at https://wenbin-lin.github.io/
RelightableAvatar-page/.

1

Introduction

Human digitizing has been rapidly developed in recent
years, in which the reconstruction and animation of 3D
clothed human avatars have many applications in telepresence, AR/VR, and virtual try-on. One important goal here
is to render the human avatar in desired lighting environment with desired poses. Therefore, the human avatars need
to be both relightable and animatable and achieve photorealistic rendering quality. Usually, the generation of these highquality human avatars relies on high-quality data like the
ones recorded by Light Stages (Debevec et al. 2000) which
are complicated and expensive.
Recently, the emergence of Neural Radiance Fileds
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) opens a new window to
generate animatable and relightable 3D human avatars just
from the daily recorded videos. NeRF-based methods have
achieved remarkable success in 3D object representation
and photorealistic rendering of both static and dynamic objects including human bodies (Peng et al. 2021b,a; Xu,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3486

