The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Arithmetic Feature Interaction Is Necessary for Deep Tabular Learning
Yi Cheng123 * , Renjun Hu4∗ , Haochao Ying135† , Xing Shi4 , Jian Wu135 , Wei Lin4
1

State Key Laboratory of Transvascular Implantation Devices of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, China
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, China
3
Institute of Wenzhou, Zhejiang University, China
4
Alibaba Group
5
School of Public Health, Zhejiang University, China
{chengy1, haochaoying, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn, {renjun.hrj, shubao.sx, weilin.lw}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

largely relies on the tree growth strategy, where each leaf
exhaustively enumerates the splitting features and values,
selecting the feature-value pair with the highest improvement on a certain criterion to divide the sample space. As
a result, complex non-linear relationships between variables
can be effectively captured. Meanwhile, since raw features
directly involve, tree models often assume the features have
been well-engineered (Micci-Barreca 2001).

Until recently, the question of the effective inductive bias
of deep models on tabular data has remained unanswered.
This paper investigates the hypothesis that arithmetic feature interaction is necessary for deep tabular learning. To
test this point, we create a synthetic tabular dataset with a
mild feature interaction assumption and examine a modified
transformer architecture enabling arithmetical feature interactions, referred to as AMFormer. Results show that AMFormer outperforms strong counterparts in fine-grained tabular data modeling, data efficiency in training, and generalization. This is attributed to its parallel additive and multiplicative attention operators and prompt-based optimization,
which facilitate the separation of tabular samples in an extended space with arithmetically-engineered features. Our extensive experiments on real-world data also validate the consistent effectiveness, efficiency, and rationale of AMFormer,
suggesting it has established a strong inductive bias for deep
learning on tabular data. Code is available at https://github.
com/aigc-apps/AMFormer.

1

In recent years, deep learning has become increasingly
popular as a means to reduce the need for time-consuming
and cumbersome feature engineering when dealing with tabular data. Early attempts at integrating deep neural networks
(DNNs) aim to model high-order feature interactions (Cheng
et al. 2016; Guo et al. 2017; Lian et al. 2018; Cheng et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022); however, this paradigm requires a
careful balance between model expressiveness and overfitting. To overcome this, researchers have turned to extending generalized additive models with DNNs to boost expressiveness in a more constrained manner (Agarwal et al.
2021; Radenovic, Dubey, and Mahajan 2022; Enouen and
Liu 2022; Chen et al. 2023a), thereby preventing overfitting
and increasing interpretability. Others have explored treeinspired architectures that emulate key elements of tree models using neural networks, taking advantage of the strengths
of both techniques (Popov, Morozov, and Babenko 2020;
Katzir, Elidan, and El-Yaniv 2021). Transformer has also
been investigated for its success in the natural language and
vision fields (Song et al. 2019; Gorishniy et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2023b; Yan et al. 2023).

Introduction

Tabular data is an extensively utilized and essential data format that finds its applications in diverse fields, including
finance, marketing, medical science, and recommendation
systems (Moro, Cortez, and Laureano 2011; Johnson et al.
2016; Goldberger et al. 2000; Harper and Konstan 2016;
Cheng et al. 2022). Such data often contains both categorical
and numerical features, each of which holds its own specific
meaning and relates to various modeling aspects. Due to the
heterogeneity and potential sparsity of features, analyzing
tabular data has remained a subject of research in the machine learning community. Among the many solutions proposed, tree ensemble models (Chen and Guestrin 2016; Ke
et al. 2017; Prokhorenkova et al. 2018) have emerged as the
predominant choice, owing to their performance on various
domains and robustness to data quality issues. Their success

Despite multiple attempts, the effectiveness of deep learning on tabular data remains questionable (Qin et al. 2021)
due to the unstable improvement over tree ensemble baselines, and tabular datasets have been considered as the last
“unconquered castle” for deep learning (Kadra et al. 2021).
The central question is whether deep models have an effective inductive bias on tabular data. In this paper, we argue
that arithmetic feature interaction is necessary for deep tabular learning. More specifically, the classic transformer is
found to be proficient at obtaining a compressed and sparse
representation for the input (Yu et al. 2023) to benefit the
downstream tasks. We contend that, however, it is less capa-

* Equal contribution. Work done during Cheng’s internship at

Alibaba Group, under the guidance of Hu.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11516

