The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

No Head Left Behind - Multi-Head Alignment Distillation for Transformers
Tianyang Zhao1,2 * , Kunwar Yashraj Singh1 † , Srikar Appalaraju1 ‡ , Peng Tang1 ,
Vijay Mahadevan1 , R. Manmatha1 , Ying Nian Wu1,2
1
AWS AI Labs,
University of California, Los Angeles
tyzhao@ucla.edu, {sinkunwa, srikara, tangpen, vmahad, manmatha, wunyin}@amazon.com
2

Abstract

e.g. VL-BERT (Su et al. 2019), VL-T5 (Cho et al. 2021),
Oscar (Li et al. 2020b), BLIP (Li et al. 2022b, 2023), OFA
(Wang et al. 2022a), Flamingo (Alayrac et al. 2022), Florence (Yuan et al. 2021), PALI (Chen et al. 2022c). These
large vision-language (VL) models exhibit promising performances on a variety of visual-linguistic tasks, including
visual question answering (VQA), image captioning, visual
grounding and image-text matching. Increasing model size
(BERT-L (340M), OFA (930M), T5 (11B), GPT-3 (175B)
(Brown et al. 2020)) leads to better performance, but also increases memory consumption during deployment and leads
to large increases in inference latency.
To alleviate this problem, researchers (Jiao et al. 2020;
Sun et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020b; Fang et al. 2021; Sanh
et al. 2019) have applied knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) approaches to large Transformers, aiming at compressing these large models into
smaller ones without compromising much performance. In
general, KD involves a large trained and frozen Teacher network, and a small Student network to be trained. The goal
is to distill the knowledge from the larger Teacher into the
smaller Student to bridge the performance gap between the
two caused by difference of model sizes. In the distillation
process, the Student learns to mimic the soft response and
the latent representation of the Teacher. Specifically, this
may involve minimizing the divergence between the Student’s and the Teacher’s output classification logits, and the
divergence between their intermediate representations.
In case of distilling Transformers, their attention maps
are often important and contain intermediate representations
to be transferred. (Cao et al. 2020) show that certain attention matrices of the pre-trained vision-language Transformers contain extensive intra- and cross-modal co-reference
relations. (Fang et al. 2021) further show that minimizing
the divergence between these attention maps of Teacher and
Student can boost distillation performance.
However, conventional attention map distillation methods
for multi-head attention modules, either for language (Jiao
et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020b; Sanh et al.
2019) or VL (Fang et al. 2021) Transformers, directly minimize the divergence between the attention maps of Teacher
and Student for each of their heads in a one-to-one fashion,
i.e. the Teacher’s first attention head instructs the Student’s
first head, the second teaches the second, and so forth, as in

Knowledge distillation aims at reducing model size without
compromising much performance. Recent work has applied
it to large vision-language (VL) Transformers, and has shown
that attention maps in the multi-head attention modules of
vision-language Transformers contain extensive intra-modal
and cross-modal co-reference relations to be distilled. The
standard approach is to apply a one-to-one attention map distillation loss, i.e. the Teacher’s first attention head instructs
the Student’s first head, the second teaches the second, and
so forth, but this only works when the numbers of attention
heads in the Teacher and Student are the same. To remove this
constraint, we propose a new Attention Map Alignment Distillation (AMAD) method for Transformers with multi-head
attention, which works for a Teacher and a Student with different numbers of attention heads. Specifically, we soft-align
different heads in Teacher and Student attention maps using
a cosine similarity weighting. The Teacher head contributes
more to the Student heads for which it has a higher similarity weight. Each Teacher head contributes to all the Student
heads by minimizing the divergence between the attention
activation distributions for the soft-aligned heads. No head
is left behind. This distillation approach operates like crossattention. We experiment on distilling VL-T5 and BLIP, and
apply AMAD loss on their T5, BERT, and ViT sub-modules.
We show, under vision-language setting, that AMAD outperforms conventional distillation methods on VQA-2.0, COCO
captioning, and Multi30K translation datasets. We further
show that even without VL pre-training, the distilled VLT5 models outperform corresponding VL pre-trained VL-T5
models that are further fine-tuned by ground-truth signals,
and that fine-tuning distillation can also compensate to some
degree for the absence of VL pre-training for BLIP models.

Introduction
Recently, large pre-trained Transformers-based (Vaswani
et al. 2017) models, such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
T5 (Raffel et al. 2020), and GPT (Radford et al. 2018),
have shown great capabilities for language modeling. Researchers have further extended these language Transformers to multi-modal Transformers for visual-linguistic tasks,
* Work conducted during an internship at Amazon.
†

Corresponding Author
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

7514

