The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Non-flat ABA Is an Instance of Bipolar Argumentation
Markus Ulbricht1 , Nico Potyka2 , Anna Rapberger3 , Francesca Toni3
1

ScaDS.AI, Department of Computer Science, Leipzig University
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
mulbricht@informatik.uni-leipzig.de, PotykaN@cardiff.ac.uk, {f.toni,a.rapberger}@imperial.ac.uk
2

Abstract

the need for additional tools (Toni 2014). Additionally, ABA
can be naturally expanded to include more advanced reasoning with preferences (Cyras and Toni 2016) and probabilities (Dung and Thang 2010), can support applications
(e.g. in healthcare (Craven et al. 2012; Cyras et al. 2021a),
law (Dung, Thang, and Hung 2010) and robotics (Fan et al.
2016)), and can be suitably deployed in multi-agent settings
to support dialogues (Fan and Toni 2014).
An ABA framework (ABAF) amounts to a set of
rules from some deductive system, candidate assumptions
amongst the sentences in its language, and a contrary for
each assumption: at an abstract level, arguments are deductions supported by rules and assumptions, and attacks are directed at assumptions in the support of arguments, by means
of arguments for their contraries. Thus, assumptions constitute the defeasible part of an ABAF. There are no restrictions in ABA, in general, as to where the assumptions
may appear in the rules (Čyras et al. 2018). A common
restriction adopted in the study and deployment of ABA,
however, is that ABAFs are flat, i.e., each set of assumptions is closed (Bondarenko et al. 1997). Intuitively speaking, flatness means that assumptions cannot be inferred,
only assumed to be true or not. Flat ABA is well-studied
and, because of its relative simplicity (Cyras, Heinrich, and
Toni 2021), it is equipped with a variety of computational
mechanisms (Toni 2013; Bao, Cyras, and Toni 2017; Lehtonen, Wallner, and Järvisalo 2022). However, general, nonflat ABAFs have not yet been studied as comprehensively
(except for aspects of computational complexity, e.g. as
in (Cyras, Heinrich, and Toni 2021)), despite their potential
for a broader range of applications than restricted flat ABA.
The following example gives a simple illustration.
Example 1.1. Consider the following discussion about climate change. It is an abstraction of an idealised but realistic debate: is climate change actually happening? We
cannot prove it for sure, so it makes sense to see it as an
assumption (cc), but we can try and establish it by looking at its consequences: if it is actually happening we may
expect an increased amount of rain (assumption mr), but
then may need to deal with arguments against the validity
of this assumption: one may argue that there has always
been more rain at times, and so it is standard (assumption sr
for “standard rain”) and thus object against mr (using rule
not mr ← sr), which in turn can be defeated by looking at

Assumption-based Argumentation (ABA) is a well-known
structured argumentation formalism, whereby arguments and
attacks between them are drawn from rules, defeasible assumptions and their contraries. A common restriction imposed on ABA frameworks (ABAFs) is flatness, that is, each
of the defeasible assumptions can only be assumed, but not
derived. While it is known that flat ABAFs can be translated
into abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) as proposed
by Dung, no translation exists from general, possibly non-flat
ABAFs into any kind of abstract argumentation formalism.
In this paper, we close this gap and show that bipolar AFs
(BAFs) can instantiate general ABAFs. To this end we develop suitable, novel BAF semantics which borrow from the
notion of deductive support. We investigate basic properties
of our BAFs, including computational complexity, and prove
the desired relation to ABAFs under several semantics.

1

Introduction

Computational models of argumentation (Baroni et al. 2018)
play a central role in non-monotonic reasoning and have
a wide range of applications in various fields such as
law and healthcare (Atkinson et al. 2017). One key aspect of these models is the use of structured argumentation formalisms (Besnard et al. 2014), which outline formal argumentative workflows from building blocks. Prominent approaches include assumption-based argumentation
(ABA) (Bondarenko et al. 1997), ASPIC+ (Modgil and
Prakken 2013), DeLP (Garcı́a and Simari 2004), and deductive argumentation (Besnard and Hunter 2008). The reasoning process within these formalisms typically involves creating argument structures and identifying conflicts among
them in a systematic manner from rule-based knowledge
bases. The resulting arguments and conflicts are known
as argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995). These
frameworks are then evaluated using semantics to resolve
conflicts, determine the acceptability of arguments and draw
conclusions based on the original knowledge bases.
In this paper, we focus on ABA, as a versatile structured
argumentation formalism that, despite its simplicity, is able
to handle reasoning with certain types of preferences, strict
and defeasible rules, and different types of attacks without
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10723

