The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DC-NAS: Divide-and-Conquer Neural Architecture Search
for Multi-Modal Classification
Xinyan Liang1 , Pinhan Fu1 , Qian Guo2 , Keyin Zheng1 , Yuhua Qian1∗
1

2

Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Taiyuan University of Science and Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China
{liangxinyan48, fupinhan168, czguoqian, zhengkeyin1221}@163.com, jinchengqyh@126.com

Abstract

In the pursuit of optimal multi-modal feature fusion strategies, researchers have turned their attention to neural architecture search (NAS) that is one state-of-the-art
technique for automating the process of designing highperforming neural network architectures. NAS has demonstrated remarkable success in discovering optimal multimodal feature fusion strategies that outperform hand-crafted
ones (Liang et al. 2021). For instance, in specific domains,
MMnas (Yu et al. 2020) applies NAS to multi-modal learning with the aim of discovering Transformer model architectures for visual-text alignment, while MMIF (Peng et al.
2020) seeks the optimal CNN structures for extracting multimodality image features from tomographic scans. MFAS
(Perez Rua et al. 2019) and BM-NAS (Yin et al. 2022),
on the other hand, are two more general frameworks capable of efficiently searching for multi-modal fusion strategies
and enhancing the performance of multi-modal classification tasks.
Although the existing multi-modal NAS methods have
achieved promising results in various multi-modal tasks,
most of them need to train extensive multi-modal neural networks in each update step, tending to cost more time than
non-NAS ones. The gradient-based multi-modal NAS methods greatly improve search efficiency, but their search spaces
heavily depend on the super-networks that are predefined.
As the number of modalities increases and the scale of data
grows, it is necessary to propose multi-modal NAS methods
with high computational efficiency and large search space.
In this paper, we propose a population-based multi-modal
NAS method called divide-and-conquer neural architecture
search (DC-NAS) with a high computational efficiency and
large search space. DC-NAS can efficiently adapt to various multi-modal feature fusion strategies and learns DNN
networks to tackle diverse multi-modal classification tasks.
It primarily relies on evolutionary NAS as the main framework where features extracted from various single-modal
DNNs and basic fusion operators are encoded in a tree-based
representation. Following the principles of biological evolution, it iteratively searches for the optimal individual to construct the best multi-modal feature fusion network. During
the population iteration process, DC-NAS employs a divideand-conquer search strategy, breaking down the larger problem into a set of smaller and simpler subproblems that are
solved iteratively. This strategy has been widely applied to

Neural architecture search-based multi-modal classification
(NAS-MMC) methods can individually obtain the optimal
classifier for different multi-modal data sets in an automatic manner. However, most existing NAS-MMC methods are dramatically time consuming due to the requirement for training and evaluating enormous models. In this paper, we propose an efficient evolutionary-based NAS-MMC
method called divide-and-conquer neural architecture search
(DC-NAS). Specifically, the evolved population is first divided into k + 1 sub-populations, and then k sub-populations of
them evolve on k small-scale data sets respectively that are
obtained by splitting the entire data set using the k-fold stratified sampling technique; the remaining one evolves on the entire data set. To solve the sub-optimal fusion model problem
caused by the training strategy of partial data, two kinds of
sub-populations that are trained using partial data and entire
data exchange the learned knowledge via two special knowledge bases. With the two techniques mentioned above, DCNAS achieves the training time reduction and classification
performance improvement. Experimental results show that
DC-NAS achieves the state-of-the-art results in term of classification performance, training efficiency and the number of
model parameters than the compared NAS-MMC methods on
three popular multi-modal tasks including multi-label movie
genre classification, action recognition with RGB and body
joints and dynamic hand gesture recognition.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-modal learning has emerged as a powerful approach to enhance the performance of various machine learning tasks by leveraging complementary information from multiple data modalities (Xu et al. 2023c; Wen
et al. 2023; Zhuge et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023a,b; Jiang
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022; Han et al. 2023; Zhou et al.
2022). This fusion of information from different sources,
such as images, texts, audios, and other forms of data, has
shown great potential in tackling complex real-world problems, ranging from image and speech recognition to healthcare and autonomous driving. However, achieving an effective and efficient fusion of multi-modal features remains a
challenging task.
∗

The corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13754

