The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Safe Policy Learning under Partial Identifiability: A Causal Approach
Shalmali Joshi* 1 , Junzhe Zhang* 2 , Elias Bareinboim2
1

Department of Biomedical Informatics
2
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY

Abstract

when learning personalized medicine from electronic health
records (EHR), the physician might unintentionally prescribe a new drug to patients with access to better healthcare,
making the drug appear more effective than it is.
A common remedy for the presence of UCs is to perform direct experimentation. The NUC assumption could be
made to hold by directly controlling the treatment assignment in specific environments, as sometimes done in randomized trials (Fisher 1926) and online reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 2018). Still, the challenge of policy
evaluation could arise when experimental data are partially
observed, i.e., it lacks critical measurements or has a mismatch in the measured covariates that will be used as input
for candidate policies. For example, the Affordable Care Act
required hospitals to collect demographic variables such as
race that were not routinely collected before 2010 (NuruJeter et al. 2018; of Sciences Engineering, Medicine et al.
2016). Consequently, even with randomized controlled trials being performed and the NUC holds, one could not learn
a personalized policy to treat patients that accounts for race
using past medical data.
Broadly, causal inference provides a collection of principles and tools for evaluating the effects of policies from
the combination of data and structural assumptions about
the environment (Pearl 2009; Spirtes et al. 2000; Bareinboim and Pearl 2016). There exist conditions and algorithms
to infer the effect of a new intervention from observational
studies by leveraging knowledge encoded in its causal models (Pearl 1995; Tian and Pearl 2002; Tian 2002; Shpitser
and Pearl 2006; Huang and Valtorta 2006). Further, causal
effects can also be inferred from randomized experiments
with a mismatch in the intervened treatments (Bareinboim
and Pearl 2012; Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2019) and
the measured covariates (Lee and Bareinboim 2020). Recent
advancements also lead to complete algorithmic solutions
to combine observational and experimental data to identify
causal effects (Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2019). However, when the unobserved confounders (UCs) generally exist, and critical covariates are partially observed, the effects
of treatment policies are not necessarily always identifiable
(Pearl 2009, Def. 3.2.3). The treatment effects may not be
not uniquely computable from data, despite extensive synthesis and analysis of numerous samples collected across
multiple regimes.

Learning personalized treatment policies is a formative challenge in many real-world applications, including in healthcare, econometrics, artificial intelligence. However, the effectiveness of candidate policies is not always identifiable, i.e., it
is not uniquely computable from the combination of the available data and assumptions about the generating mechanisms.
This paper studies policy learning from data collected in various non-identifiable settings, i.e., (1) observational studies
with unobserved confounding; (2) randomized experiments
with partial observability; and (3) their combinations. We derive sharp, closed-formed bounds from observational and experimental data over the conditional treatment effects. Based
on these novel bounds, we further characterize the problem
of safe policy learning and develop an algorithm that trains
a policy from data guaranteed to achieve, at least, the performance of the baseline policy currently deployed. Finally, we
validate our proposed algorithm on synthetic data and a large
clinical trial, demonstrating that it guarantees safe behaviors
and robust performance.

Introduction
Learning optimal personalized treatment policies that maximize a primary outcome by drawing insights from a fixed
dataset is a ubiquitous challenge in many real-world applications, including in healthcare, social science, robotics. Several conditions and algorithms have been proposed to solve
this problem, including reinforcement learning (Strehl et al.
2010; Li, Munos, and Szepesvari 2015; Swaminathan and
Joachims 2015; Levine et al. 2020) and causal inference
(Murphy 2003, 2005; Chakraborty and Murphy 2014). Most
of these algorithms require the critical assumption of no unmeasured confounding (NUC) (Robins 1997), also known
as unconfoundedness, ignorability (Rubin 1974; Rosenbaum
and Rubin 1983), or backdoor admissibility (Pearl 2009,
Def. 3.3.1). This requires that the treatment allocation policy that generates the data considers only the observed covariates; no unobserved confounder affects the treatment
and outcome simultaneously. However, the NUC assumption could be fragile and does not necessarily hold in consequential domains with human interactions. For example,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13004

