The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Manipulate Artistic Images
Wei Guo* , Yuqi Zhang* , De Ma† , Qian Zheng†
Zhejiang University
{snailforce, yq zhang, made, qianzheng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Correspondence
Module

Recent advancement in computer vision has significantly
lowered the barriers to artistic creation. Exemplar-based image translation methods have attracted much attention due to
flexibility and controllability. However, these methods hold
assumptions regarding semantics or require semantic information as the input, while accurate semantics is not easy to
obtain in artistic images. Besides, these methods suffer from
cross-domain artifacts due to training data prior and generate imprecise structure due to feature compression in the
spatial domain. In this paper, we propose an arbitrary Style
Image Manipulation Network (SIM-Net), which leverages
semantic-free information as guidance and a region transportation strategy in a self-supervised manner for image generation. Our method balances computational efficiency and
high resolution to a certain extent. Moreover, our method facilitates zero-shot style image manipulation. Both qualitative
and quantitative experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our method over state-of-the-art methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/SnailForce/SIM-Net.

Generation
Module

Conditional input
Warped exemplar
Spatial
and exemplar
with size ℎ ∗ 𝑤
with image size 𝐻 ∗ 𝑊 compression (ℎ ≪ 𝐻, 𝑤 ≪ 𝑊)

Output

Training data
(real images)

(a) The framework of state-of-the art methods
Input

MCL-Net

SIM-Net

Exemplar

(c) Imprecise local manipulation
Input

Sun

Sky

Tree

(b) Inaccurate semantic

CoCosNet v2

SIM-Net

Exemplar

(d) Cross-domain artifacts

Figure 1: (a) The framework of state-of-the-art exemplarbased image translation methods, such as CoCosNet v2
(Zhou et al. 2021), MCL-Net (Zhan et al. 2022), and
MATEBIT (Jiang et al. 2023). (b) These methods require accurate semantic conditional input, while accurate semantic
information of artistic images is difficult to extract. (c) The
spatial compression in the cross-domain alignment phase
leads to imprecise local details. (d) The conditional generation phase might introduce cross-domain artifacts.

Introduction
Art can cultivate sentiment, improve self-cultivation, and inherit culture. The use of artificial intelligence in the process
of creating art was significantly accelerated with rapid advances in machine learning. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has
endowed art with more possibilities in various artistic fields,
such as calligraphy, imagery, design, and others, thereby
bridging the gap between people and art. Particularly, image
manipulation has unique creativity and strong interactivity,
thereby further lowering the barrier to the artistic creation.
Image manipulation essentially falls into the category of
image-to-image translation, which has demonstrated success
across a wide range of applications (Isola et al. 2017; Liu,
Breuel, and Kautz 2017). Different from other conditional
image-to-image translation methods, exemplar-based image
translation enables more flexible user control and better generation quality, which especially is well-suited for manipulating artistic images. These methods (Zhang et al. 2020;
Zhou et al. 2021; Zhan et al. 2022, 2021; Zhang, Zheng, and

Pan 2022) consist of two main phases: cross-domain alignment (align exemplar and conditional input to get aligned
representation) and conditional generation (Figure 1(a)).
However, such methods have following problems when
applied to artistic images. Semantic input. Existing methods are either based on specific semantic scenarios (e.g., face
(Liu et al. 2015; Fan et al. 2022), human pose (Ma et al.
2017; Men et al. 2020; Zhang, Zhan, and Chang 2021), etc.)
or require semantic labels (Zhang et al. 2020; Zhou et al.
2021; Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023). However, extracting accurate semantic information from artistic images as
input is challenging (Figure 1(b)). Imprecise control. Image manipulation requires fine-grained control, while feature compression like multi-level feature pyramids (Zhou
et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2023) leads to imprecise local de-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1994

