The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NeRF-LiDAR: Generating Realistic LiDAR Point Clouds with Neural Radiance
Fields
Junge Zhang1 , Feihu Zhang2 , Shaochen Kuang3 , Li Zhang1 *
1

Fudan University
University of Oxford
3
South China University of Technology
jgzhang17@fudan.edu.cn, lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Labelling LiDAR point clouds for training autonomous driving is extremely expensive and difficult. LiDAR simulation
aims at generating realistic LiDAR data with labels for training and verifying self-driving algorithms more efficiently. Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have been proposed
for novel view synthesis using implicit reconstruction of 3D
scenes. Inspired by this, we present NeRF-LIDAR, a novel
LiDAR simulation method that leverages real-world information to generate realistic LIDAR point clouds. Different
from existing LiDAR simulators, we use real images and
point cloud data collected by self-driving cars to learn the 3D
scene representation, point cloud generation and label rendering. We verify the effectiveness of our NeRF-LiDAR by
training different 3D segmentation models on the generated
LiDAR point clouds. It reveals that the trained models are
able to achieve similar accuracy when compared with the
same model trained on the real LiDAR data. Besides, the
generated data is capable of boosting the accuracy through
pre-training which helps reduce the requirements of the real
labeled data. Code is available at https://github.com/fudanzvg/NeRF-LiDAR

Introduction
LiDAR sensor plays a crucial role in autonomous driving
cars for 3D perception and planning. However, labelling the
3D point clouds for training 3D perception models is extremely expensive and difficult. In view of this, LiDAR simulation that aims at generating realistic LiDAR point clouds
for different types of LiDAR sensors becomes increasingly
important for autonomous driving cars. It can generate useful LiDAR data with labels for developing and verifying the
self-driving system.
Many previous works have studied the LiDAR simulation, which can be mainly categorized into two types: the
virtual environment creation method and the reconstructionbased method. The former creates the 3D virtual world by
graphics-based 3D modeling and then generates the 3D LiDAR point clouds by physics-based simulation (ray tracing).
These kinds of works (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017; Koenig and

(a) CARLA

(b) LiDARGen

(c) Our NeRF-LiDAR

(d) Real LiDAR sensor

Figure 1: Comparisons of results between our NeRF-LiDAR
and other existing LiDAR simulation methods. (a) Method
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2017) that creates virtual world for LiDAR simulation. (b) Diffusion model used for LiDAR generation (Zyrianov, Zhu, and Wang 2022). (c) Our NeRFLiDAR can generate realistic point clouds that is nearly the
same as the real LiDAR point clouds (d).

Howard 2004) have natural limitations as it’s impossible for
3D modelers to create a virtual world that is the same as
the complex real world. The simulated LiDAR points have
significant domain differences from the real LiDAR points
and cannot be used to train robust deep neural network models. The latter (Manivasagam et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2020)
relies on multiple LiDAR scans to densely reconstruct the
street background and then place the foreground objects into
the background. However, it’s expensive to collect dense LiDAR scans which may need special devices (Fang et al.

* Li Zhang is the corresponding author with School of Data Science, Fudan University.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7178

