The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Batch Normalization Is Blind to the First and Second Derivatives of the Loss
Zhanpeng Zhou1 * , Wen Shen1 * , Huixin Chen1 * , Ling Tang1 , Yuefeng Chen2 , Quanshi Zhang1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Alibaba Group
{zzp1012, wen shen, lural chen, tling, zqs1022}@sjtu.edu.cn
yuefeng.chenyf@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

output of the BN. That is, for a DNN with an arbitrary loss
function (e.g., MSE loss, logistic loss, etc.), network layers
before the BN layer cannot learn from all first derivatives
and some second derivatives of the loss function.
Note that for some certain tasks on benchmark datasets,
the BN’s blocking of certain derivatives may not lead to a
significant damage of the network learning. However, clean
and analytic insights into BN’s potential risks may provide
a new perspective for further understanding of DNNs.
In this paper, we consider using the Taylor series expansion to represent the loss1 Loss(y(i) ), where y(i) ∈ RD denotes the output feature of the standardization phase (subtracting the mean and dividing the standard deviation) of the
BN operation, given the i-th input sample. We find that no
matter whether or not all samples share the same analytic
formula of the loss, we always can use the same form of Taylor series expansion to represent the loss, i.e., Loss(y(i) ; ỹ) =
1
b (i) , where
b (i) − ỹ) + ∆
b + 2!
Loss(ỹ) + (y(i) − ỹ)⊤ g
(y(i) − ỹ)⊤ H(y
b
b and H represent the gradient and the Hessian matrix of
g
Loss(y(i) ; ỹ), or alternatively, the substitute gradient and Hessian matrix2 to alleviate errors caused by discontinuous and
unpredictable gating states in ReLU layers and influences of
different analytic formulas of the loss. ỹ is an arbitrary vector close to y(i) . When y(i) is not close to the fixed point ỹ,
b (i) will be relatively large. Nevertheless,
the residual term ∆
the blocking of the first-order and the second-order terms
still has certain effects on learning.
Therefore, we have discovered and proved the following
conclusions, as shown in Theorem 2 and Corollary 1.
1. The gradient bg at the point ỹ cannot affect the learning of
network parameters before the BN layer.
b at the point ỹ
2. Diagonal elements in the Hessian matrix H
cannot affect the learning of parameters before the BN layer.
b at the point ỹ, their impacts
3. For off-diagonal elements in H
on learning parameters before BN are significantly reduced.
4. It is the derivatives of the mean and the standard deviation

We prove that when we do the Taylor series expansion of the
loss function, the BN operation will block the influence of the
first-order term and most influence of the second-order term
of the loss. We also find that such a problem is caused by the
standardization phase of the BN operation. We believe that
proving the blocking of certain loss terms provides an analytic perspective for potential detects of a deep model with
BN operations, although the blocking problem is not fully
equivalent to significant damages in all tasks on benchmark
datasets. Experiments show that the BN operation significantly affects feature representations in specific tasks.

Introduction
Explaining the representation capacity of a deep neural network (DNN) has received increasing attention in recent
years. Since people have grasped much experimental experience in applying DNNs, the next challenge has been
gradually shifted to a verifiable and analytic explanation for
technical flaws of current heuristic network designs, or analytic insights into how DNNs learn features. For example,
Tian et al. (2021) provided conceptual insights into how
non-contrastive self-supervised learning methods avoided
representational collapse. Deng et al. (2022) proved that
it was usually difficult for a DNN to encode interactions
between an intermediate number of input variables. Some
studies proved that the BN operation was not compatible
with both the dropout (Li et al. 2019) and the weight decay (Van Laarhoven 2017; Li, Chen, and Yang 2020).
Therefore, in this paper, we aim to analyze the distinctive behavior of information processing for any DNNs
with batch-normalization (BN) layers. Specifically, this paper discovers and theoretically proves that in a regression
task, for a DNN with stacked BN layers, each BN operation blocks the back-propagation of the first and second
derivatives of the loss function w.r.t. features, when we
do the Taylor series expansion of the loss function w.r.t. the

Loss(y) is a simplification of Loss(h(y)), where h(·) : RD →
R denotes the function of network layers between the BN operation
and the loss function. We omit h(·) to simplify the description.
2
Subsection “Case 2: A More General Case” introduces how
b to approximate input samples with
to compute substitute b
g and H
different loss formulas.
1

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft
Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20010

