The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GLOP: Learning Global Partition and Local Construction for Solving Large-Scale
Routing Problems in Real-Time
Haoran Ye1 , Jiarui Wang1 , Helan Liang1 * , Zhiguang Cao2 , Yong Li3 , Fanzhang Li1
1

Soochow University, China
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Tsinghua University, China
{hrye,jrwangfurffico}@stu.suda.edu.cn, {hlliang,lfzh}@suda.edu.cn
zgcao@smu.edu.sg, liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

GLOP hybridizes non-autoregressive (NAR) global partition and autoregressive (AR) local construction policies,
where the global policy learns the first partition and the local policy learns to solve SHPPs. We intend to integrate the
strengths while circumventing the drawbacks of NAR and
AR paradigms (further discussed in Appendix B). In particular, partitioning nodes into subsets (each corresponding
to a TSP) well suits NAR heuristics, because it is a largescale but coarse-grained task agnostic of within-subset node
ordering. On the other hand, solving SHPPs could be efficiently handled with the AR heuristic because it is a smallscale but fine-grained task.
The solution pipeline of GLOP is applicable to variations
of routing problems, such as those tackled in (Li et al. 2021a;
Zhang et al. 2022a, 2021; Alesiani, Ermis, and Gkiotsalitis 2022; Miranda-Bront et al. 2017; Li et al. 2021b). We
evaluate GLOP on canonical TSP, Asymmetric TSP (ATSP),
Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP), and Prize
Collecting TSP (PCTSP). GLOP for (A)TSP, as opposed
to most methods that require scale-specific and distributionspecific training, can perform consistently and competitively
across scales, across distributions, and on real-world benchmarks, using the same set of local policies. Notably, it is the
first neural solver to effectively scale to TSP100K, obtaining a 5.1% optimality gap and a 174× speedup compared
with 1-run 1-trial LKH-3. GLOP for CVRP clearly outperforms prior state-of-the-art (SOTA) real-time solvers (Hou
et al. 2023) while using 10× less execution time. On PCTSP,
GLOP surpasses both recent neural solvers and conventional
solvers.
Accordingly, we summarize our contributions as follows:
• We propose GLOP, a versatile framework that extends
existing neural solvers to large-scale problems. To our
knowledge, it makes the first effective attempt at hybridizing NAR and AR end-to-end NCO paradigms.
• We propose to learn global partition heatmaps for decomposing large-scale routing problems, leveraging NAR
heatmap learning in a novel way.
• We propose a one-size-fits-all real-time (A)TSP solver
that learns small SHPP solution construction for arbitrarily large (A)TSP. We dispense with learning upper-level
TSP policies suggested in (Kim, Park, and Kim 2021;
Pan et al. 2023) while achieving better performance.

The recent end-to-end neural solvers have shown promise for
small-scale routing problems but suffered from limited realtime scaling-up performance. This paper proposes GLOP
(Global and Local Optimization Policies), a unified hierarchical framework that efficiently scales toward large-scale
routing problems. GLOP partitions large routing problems
into Travelling Salesman Problems (TSPs) and TSPs into
Shortest Hamiltonian Path Problems. For the first time, we
hybridize non-autoregressive neural heuristics for coarsegrained problem partitions and autoregressive neural heuristics for fine-grained route constructions, leveraging the scalability of the former and the meticulousness of the latter. Experimental results show that GLOP achieves competitive and
state-of-the-art real-time performance on large-scale routing
problems, including TSP, ATSP, CVRP, and PCTSP. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/henry-yeh/GLOP.

Introduction
Routing problems pervade logistics, supply chain, transportation, robotic systems, etc. Modern industries have witnessed ever-increasing demands for the massive and expeditious routing of goods, services, and people. The traditional solvers based on mathematical programming or iterative heuristics struggle to keep pace with such growing complexity and real-time requirements.
Recent advances in Neural Combinatorial Optimization
(NCO) (Bogyrbayeva et al. 2022) seek end-to-end solutions
for routing problems, where neural solvers are exploited and
empowered by massive training while enjoying potentially
efficient inference. However, most existing NCO methods
still struggle with real-time scaling-up performance; they are
unable to solve routing problems involving thousands or tens
of thousands of nodes in seconds, falling short of the need
of modern industries (Hou et al. 2023).
In answer to that, this work proposes GLOP (Global
and Local Optimization Policies) which partitions a large
routing problem into sub-Travelling Salesman Problems
(TSPs) and further partitions potentially large (sub-)TSPs
into small Shortest Hamiltonian Path Problems (SHPPs).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20284

