The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Causal Impact of Credit Lines on Spending Distributions
Yijun Li* 1 , Cheuk Hang Leung* 1 , Xiangqian Sun2 , Chaoqun Wang1 , Yiyan Huang1 ,
Xing Yan3 , Qi Wu† 1 , Dongdong Wang4 , Zhixiang Huang4
1
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
Department of Financial and Actuarial Mathematics, Xi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University
3
Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University of China
4
JD Digits
{yijunli5-c, cqwang5-c, yiyhuang3-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, {chleung87, qiwu55}@cityu.edu.hk,
Xiangqian.Sun@xjtlu.edu.cn, xingyan@ruc.edu.cn, {wangdongdong9, huangzhixiang}@jd.com
2

Abstract
Consumer credit services offered by electronic commerce platforms provide customers with convenient loan access during
shopping and have the potential to stimulate sales. To understand the causal impact of credit lines on spending, previous
studies have employed causal estimators, (e.g., direct regression (DR), inverse propensity weighting (IPW), and double
machine learning (DML)) to estimate the treatment effect.
However, these estimators do not treat the spending of each individual as a distribution that can capture the range and pattern
of amounts spent across different orders. By disregarding the
outcome as a distribution, valuable insights embedded within
the outcome distribution might be overlooked. This paper thus
develops distribution valued estimators which extend from
existing real valued DR, IPW, and DML estimators within
Rubin’s causal framework. We establish their consistency and
apply them to a real dataset from a large electronic commerce
platform. Our findings reveal that credit lines generally have
a positive impact on spending across all quantiles, but consumers would allocate more to luxuries (higher quantiles) than
necessities (lower quantiles) as credit lines increase.

Figure 1: An example for the impact of credit lines change
on spending distribution shift (one point stands for spending
of one order).

are different. For example, in Figure 7, the spending distribution of some consumers may exhibit a long tail, indicating
a preference for both low-price necessities and high-price
luxury items, whereas other consumers focus more on middlevalued products.
An essential question for e-commerce platforms is whether
and how credit lines affect the consumption behavior of consumers. Previous studies have shown that increasing credit
lines can lead to increased spending amounts, e.g., (Aydin
2022; Soman and Cheema 2002). Nevertheless, they use a
scalar quantity (e.g., average spending of all orders) to represent the spending of each consumer, which overlooks the
complexity of consumption behaviors. For example, consider
two consumers (A and B) in Figure 1. When the credit lines
of them both equal 5,000, their spending distributions formed
by 50 orders are the same, with an average spending of 30
dollars. Supposing the platform increases their credit lines
to 10,000, consumer A prefers to increase the spending of
all the orders by 20 dollars, and thus the shape of spending
distribution does not change but parallelly shifts to the right
by 20. On the other hand, consumer B prefers to purchase
more luxury goods and remains the spending amounts of
orders for necessities unchanged. The shape of consumer B’s
spending distribution has shifted dramatically, but the average spending is the same as the first consumer (also increased

Introduction
“Buy now, pay later” (BNPL) is a FinTech credit product
offered by e-commerce platforms that allow consumers to
make purchases first and defer payments later. BNPL is becoming increasingly popular due to its convenience in online
shopping (Guttman-Kenney, Firth, and Gathergood 2023).
In practice, e-commerce platforms assign different credit
lines (the total amount of money that the platforms lends to
a consumer) to potential customers according to their personal information and the history of purchases, payments,
and default behaviors.
The primary goal of e-commerce platforms in introducing BNPL is to alter the consumption behavior of consumers,
which is usually characterized as a specific spending distribution formed by the consumption amounts of the consumer’s
all orders. The spending distributions of various consumers
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

180

