The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Responding to the Call: Exploring Automatic Music Composition Using a
Knowledge-Enhanced Model
Zhejing Hu1 , Yan Liu1 * , Gong Chen1 , Xiao Ma1 , Shenghua Zhong2 , Qianwen Luo1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
zhejing.hu@connect.polyu.hk, yan.liu@polyu.edu.hk, gong-cg.chen@polyu.edu.hk, edward-xiao.ma@connect.polyu.hk,
csshzhong@szu.edu.cn, qianwenluo@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Example 1: Growth (“My Heart Will Go On”)

Call-and-response is a musical technique that enriches the
creativity of music, crafting coherent musical ideas that mirror the back-and-forth nature of human dialogue with distinct
musical characteristics. Although this technique is integral to
numerous musical compositions, it remains largely uncharted
in automatic music composition. To enhance the creativity
of machine-composed music, we first introduce the CallResponse Dataset (CRD) containing 19,155 annotated musical pairs and crafted comprehensive objective evaluation metrics for musical assessment. Then, we design a knowledgeenhanced learning-based method to bridge the gap between
human and machine creativity. Specifically, we train the composition module using the call-response pairs, supplementing
it with musical knowledge in terms of rhythm, melody, and
harmony. Our experimental results underscore that our proposed model adeptly produces a wide variety of creative responses for various musical calls.

Call
Response

Example 2: Extension (“My Heart Will Go On”)

Example 3: Liquidation (“My Heart Will Go On”)

Example 4: Conversion (“Part of Your World”)

Introduction
Automatic music composition, a classic research topic
in computational creativity (Carnovalini and Rodà 2020;
Mateja and Heinzl 2021), has garnered significant research
attention (Dong et al. 2018; Ferreira et al. 2022; Hsiao et al.
2021; Bretan et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2020b) and applications (Hu et al. 2020; Wesseldijk, Mosing, and Ullén 2021;
Engels, Tong, and Chan 2015). Compared to visual arts like
painting, music is inherently abstract, lacking a tangible reference such as a definitive image. Studying this abstraction allows machines to emulate human musicians, offering
promising advancements in genuine machine intelligence.
Recent trends leverage sequence-to-sequence models to capture creativity in music composition (Ramesh et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2018; Huang and Yang 2020; Ens
and Pasquier 2020; Muhamed et al. 2021). The effectiveness
of data-driven models largely depends on extensive training
datasets. However, the specialized nature of music composition results in smaller datasets compared to those for text and
images. This data limitation challenges the ability of these
models to master complex creative composition techniques
for evoking aesthetic and emotional depth.

Example 5: Condensation (“The Sound of Silence”)

Figure 1: Different types of call-and-response effects to express creativity in human-composed music.

Call-and-response, a fundamental compositional technique in human-composed music, expresses creativity and
is also known as antecedent and consequent phrases in
musicology. In this technique, one musical phrase acts as
the “call” and is “answered” by a corresponding phrase
(Titon 2016; Benward 2018). Pivotal in improvisation and
choral settings (Benetatos, VanderStel, and Duan 2020;
Biles et al. 1994), this technique enriches compositional
structures, adding layers of creativity, diversity, and narrative depth, especially in crafting verses or choruses (Schoenberg, Stein, and Strang 1967). Creativity shines through calland-response with effects such as growth, extension, liquidation, conversion, and condensation (Figure 1). These effects

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

521

