The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

You Only Read Once: Constituency-Oriented Relational Graph Convolutional
Network for Multi-Aspect Multi-Sentiment Classification
Yongqiang Zheng, Xia Li*
School of Information Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China
yqzheng@gdufs.edu.cn, xiali@gdufs.edu.cn

Abstract

2016; Fan, Feng, and Zhao 2018; Huang, Ou, and Carley
2018; Gu et al. 2018; Li, Liu, and Zhou 2018; Phan and
Ogunbona 2020). 2) Modeling the dependencies between
the words and aspects using graph convolutional networks
(GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017)), where the main idea is to
aggregate the syntactic and semantic dependencies between
words into aspects, so as to obtain semantically and syntactically related aspect representations (Liang et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021; Zhang, Zhou, and Wang 2022; Tian, Chen,
and Song 2021; Bai, Liu, and Zhang 2021). For example,
Tian, Chen, and Song (2021) proposed a type-aware GCN
to encode different types of dependency relations; Bai, Liu,
and Zhang (2021) incorporated dependency tags to graph
attention networks to better learn the correlation between
words; Liang et al. (2020) proposed two independent GCNs
to model the aspect-focused and inter-aspect features. These
models have proven that relational information is significant for determining the contribution of different words. 3)
Aspect-oriented tree construction. In addition to using existing dependency trees to model relational information, some
researchers transform dependency trees into aspect-oriented
tree structures to enhance GCN structure and better capture
aspect-related information (Wang et al. 2020; Zhou et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2022). For example, Wang et al. (2020) reshaped and pruned a dependency parsing tree to construct an
aspect-oriented tree to capture aspect-related information;
Chen et al. (2022) used reinforcement learning and regularization to induce discrete opinion trees to shorten the distance of corresponding opinion words.
Although the above works achieved remarkable results,
there is still a limitation, which is that they primarily focus
on enhancing the representation of a single specific target
aspect based on other contexts or aspects and only predict
the sentiment polarity of the target aspect at a time. A natural question arises: can we encode all aspects simultaneously with their local specific contexts, fuse their relationships with the global shared contexts, and predict the sentiments of all aspects simultaneously?
To answer this question, we propose a one-to-many
ABSA framework named you only read once (YORO),
which takes only one sentence as input and outputs the sentiment of all aspects, simultaneously. We treat the ABSA
task as a token-level classification task and use the representations of all aspect words for the final classification.

Most of the existing aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA)
models only predict the sentiment polarity of a single aspect at a time, focusing primarily on enhancing the representation of this single aspect based on the other contexts
or aspects. This one-to-one paradigm ignores the fact that
multi-aspect, multi-sentiment sentences contain not only distinct specific descriptions for distinct specific aspects, but also
shared global context information for multiple aspects. To
fully consider these issues, we propose a one-to-many ABSA
framework, called You Only Read Once (YORO), that can simultaneously model representations of all aspects based on
their specific descriptions and better fuse their relationships
using globally shared contextual information in the sentence.
Predicting the sentiment polarity of multiple aspects simultaneously is beneficial to improving the efficacy of calculation and prediction. Extensive experiments are conducted on
three public datasets (MAMS, Rest14, and Lap14). Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of YORO in handling multi-aspect, multi-sentiment scenarios and highlight
the promise of one-to-many ABSA in balancing efficiency
and accuracy.

Introduction
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) is a task of finegrained sentiment analysis that focuses on inferring the sentiment polarity (positive, negative, or neutral) of multiple
aspects in a sentence. For example, consider the sentence
“Food was served very promptly but our wait for drinks was
surprisingly long.” which contains three aspects: “served”,
“wait”, and “drink”. The goal of ABSA is to predict the
sentiment of “served” as positive, “wait” as negative, and
“drink” as neutral. ABSA can be widely used in product reviews, social media, and user feedback texts to mine emotional information in various aspects of data.
Considering the contexts related to aspects are crucial for
understanding sentiment cues, how to accurately learn and
represent this relevant context information is important for
ABSA. Previous works have modeled aspect-related information in multiple ways: 1) Modeling position information
using attention mechanisms, where the core idea is that contexts close to the aspect receive greater attention (Wang et al.
* Corresponding author: xiali@gdufs.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19715

