The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Partial Label Learning
with Local-Adaptive Augmentation and Regularization
Yan Yan1 , Yuhong Guo1, 2
1

School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
2
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii
yanyan@cunet.carleton.ca, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Abstract

a global model by enabling collaborations between the individual clients without compromising their data privacy, has
hence received increasing attention from the research community (McMahan et al. 2017; Konečnỳ et al. 2016). Nevertheless existing FL methods assume the availability of precise data labels (Li et al. 2020b) that often induces high data
annotation cost, and lack the capacity of exploiting weak annotations such as overcomplete partial labels that can often
be produced from inexpensive crowdsourcing or high-level
text summaries (Feng and An 2018, 2019).
In this paper, we aim to bridge the gap between the existing separate research studies on PLL and FL by formalizing a new learning problem named as federated partial label
learning (FedPLL), which extends partial label learning into
a federated learning setting where data are distributed across
local clients with privacy constraints for data sharing, and
the local data is annotated with imprecise partial labels. FedPLL can be degenerated into the standard FL problem when
the local data can be precisely annotated. As high quality
data annotations often require human expertise in many domains, FedPLL provides a more practical distributed learning scenario by enabling federated learning with imprecise
local data annotations. Meanwhile, FedPLL inherits challenges from both PLL and FL, while the entangled challenges can be even more difficult to handle: as data privacy
constraints prevent data sharing, the model training process
can be more prone to noisy labels with limited data accessibility. Such integrated challenges prevent the direct deployment of the off-the-shelf PLL or FL methods for effectively
addressing the FedPLL problem.
To address this new FedPLL problem, we propose a novel
federated PLL method with local-adaptive augmentation and
regularization mechanisms, named as FedPLL-LAAR, to induce good prediction models across multiple clients with
limited communication cost without data sharing. The approach simultaneously handles partial labels and local data
insufficiency under a federated learning framework. Specifically, FedPLL-LAAR dynamically disambiguates the noisy
candidate labels by consulting the prediction outputs of each
local model in a moving-average manner, while the disambiguated labels are in turn used as prediction targets for local model training with MixUp-based local-adaptive data
augmentation and local-global gradient alignment regularization. The MixUp-based local-adaptive data augmentation

Partial label learning (PLL) expands the applicability of
supervised machine learning models by enabling effective
learning from weakly annotated overcomplete labels. Existing PLL methods however focus on the standard centralized
learning scenarios. In this paper, we expand PLL into the distributed computation setting by formalizing a new learning
scenario named as federated partial label learning (FedPLL),
where the training data with partial labels are distributed
across multiple local clients with privacy constraints. To address this challenging problem, we propose a novel Federated
PLL method with Local-Adaptive Augmentation and Regularization (FedPLL-LAAR). In addition to alleviating the partial label noise with moving-average label disambiguation,
the proposed method performs MixUp-based local-adaptive
data augmentation to mitigate the challenge posed by insufficient and imprecisely annotated local data, and dynamically incorporates the guidance of global model to minimize
client drift through adaptive gradient alignment regularization between the global and local models. Extensive experiments conducted on multiple datasets under the FedPLL setting demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed FedPLLLAAR method for federated partial label learning.

Introduction
Partial label learning (PLL) addresses a weakly supervised
learning problem, where each training instance is associated
with a noisy set of overcomplete candidate labels, only one
of which is the true label (Yu and Zhang 2016; Lyu et al.
2019; Feng et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022). With the capacity
of handling noisy overcomplete labels, PLL expands the applicability of standard supervised learning by substantially
reducing its dependence on high quality precise data annotations. Current study on PLL however entirely focuses on
a centralized learning scenario where all the training data
samples are collected to the training center.
Recently, with the advent of edge computing over distributed data sources across different clients such as personal
devices (Konečnỳ et al. 2016), financial institutions (Long
et al. 2020), and hospitals (Guo et al. 2021), data privacy
and security concerns raise significant demands for decentralized learning methodologies (Kairouz et al. 2021). Federated learning (FL), as a decentralized paradigm of training
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16272

