The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robustly Improving Bandit Algorithms with Confounded and Selection Biased
Offline Data: A Causal Approach
Wen Huang, Xintao Wu
University of Arkansas
{wenhuang, xintaowu}@uark.edu

Abstract

To overcome this limitation and make good use of the offline data for online bandit learning, we formulate our framework from a causal inference perspective. Causal inference
provides a family of methods to infer the effects of actions from a combination of data and qualitative assumptions
about the underlying mechanism. Based on Pearl’s structural
causal model (Pearl 2009) we can derive a truncated factorization formula that expresses the target causal quantity with
probability distributions from the data. Appropriately adopting that prior knowledge on the reward distribution of each
arm can accelerate the learning speed and achieve lower cumulative regret for online bandit algorithms.
Previous studies along this direction (Zhang and Bareinboim 2017; Sharma et al. 2020; Tennenholtz et al. 2021)
only focused on one specific bias and have not dealt with
compound biases in the offline data. It was shown in (Bareinboim, Tian, and Pearl 2014) that biases could be classified
into confounding bias and selection bias based on the causal
structure they imply. Due to the orthogonality of confounding and selection bias, simply deconfounding and estimating causal effects in the presence of selection bias using observational data is in general impractical without further assumptions, such as strong graphical conditions (Correa and
Bareinboim 2017) or the accessibility of external unbiasedly
measured data (Bareinboim and Tian 2015). In this paper,
we address this limitation by non-parametrically bounding
the target conditional causal effect when confounding and
selection biases can not be mitigated simultaneously. We
propose two novel strategies to extract prior causal bounds
for the reward distribution of each arm and use them to effectively guide the bandit agent to learn a nearly-optimal decision policy. We demonstrate that our approach could further
reduce cumulative regret and is resistant to different levels
of compound biases in offline data.
Our contributions can be summarized into three parts: 1)
We derive causal bounds for conditional causal effects under confounding and selection biases based on c-component
factorization and substitute intervention methods; 2) we propose a novel framework that leverages the prior causal bound
obtained from biased offline data to guide the arm-picking
process in bandit algorithms, thus robustly decreasing the
exploration of sub-optimal arms and reducing the cumulative regret; and 3) we develop one contextual bandit algorithm (LinUCB-PCB) and one non-contextual bandit al-

This paper studies bandit problems where an agent has access
to offline data that might be utilized to potentially improve the
estimation of each arm’s reward distribution. A major obstacle in this setting is the existence of compound biases from
the observational data. Ignoring these biases and blindly fitting a model with the biased data could even negatively affect the online learning phase. In this work, we formulate this
problem from a causal perspective. First, we categorize the
biases into confounding bias and selection bias based on the
causal structure they imply. Next, we extract the causal bound
for each arm that is robust towards compound biases from
biased observational data. The derived bounds contain the
ground truth mean reward and can effectively guide the bandit agent to learn a nearly-optimal decision policy. We also
conduct regret analysis in both contextual and non-contextual
bandit settings and show that prior causal bounds could help
consistently reduce the asymptotic regret.

Introduction
The past decade has seen the rapid development of contextual bandit as a legit framework to model interactive
decision-making scenarios, such as personalized recommendation (Li et al. 2010), online advertising (Tang et al. 2013;
Avadhanula et al. 2021), and anomaly detection (Ding, Li,
and Liu 2019). The key challenge in a contextual bandit
problem is to select the most beneficial item (i.e. the corresponding arm or intervention) according to the observed
context at each round. In practice it is common that the agent
has additional access to logged data from various sources,
which may provide some useful information. A key issue is
how to accurately leverage offline data such that it can efficiently assist the online decision-making process. However,
one inevitable problem is that there may exist compound biases in the offline dataset, probably due to the data collection
process, the existence of unobserved variables, the policies
implemented by the agent, and so on (Chen et al. 2023). As
a consequence, blindly fitting a model without considering
those biases will lead to an inaccurate estimator of the reward distribution for each arm, ending up inducing a negative impact on the online learning phase.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20438

