The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Safe Reinforcement Learning with Instantaneous Constraints: The Role of
Aggressive Exploration
Honghao Wei1 , Xin Liu2 , Lei Ying3
1

Washington State University
2
ShanghaiTech University
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
honghao.wei@wsu.edu, liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn, leiying@umich.edu
Abstract
This paper studies safe Reinforcement Learning (safe RL)
with linear function approximation and under hard instantaneous constraints where unsafe actions must be avoided at
each step. Existing studies have considered safe RL with hard
instantaneous constraints, but their approaches rely on several key assumptions: piq the RL agent knows a safe action
set for every state or knows a safe graph in which all the
state-action-state triples are safe, and piiq the constraint/cost
functions are linear. In this paper, we consider safe RL with
instantaneous hard constraints without assumption piq and
generalize piiq to Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
? (RKHS).
Our proposed algorithm,
LSVI-AE,
achieves
d3 H 4 Kq
Õp
?
regret and ÕpH dKq hard constraint
violation
when
the cost
?
function is linear and OpHγK Kq hard constraint violation
when the cost function belongs to RKHS. Here K is the learning horizon, H is the length of each episode, and γK is the
information gain w.r.t the kernel used to approximate cost
functions. Our results achieve the optimal dependency on the
learning horizon K, matching the lower bound we provide
in this paper and demonstrating the efficiency of LSVI-AE.
Notably, the design of our approach encourages aggressive
policy exploration, providing a unique perspective on safe RL
with general cost functions and no prior knowledge of safe
actions, which may be of independent interest.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown significant empirical success in improving online decision-making in various
applications, including games (Silver et al. 2017), robotic
control (Andrychowicz et al. 2020), etc. However, in many
real-world scenarios, it is essential to consider more than just
maximizing rewards. Safety, ethical considerations, and adherence to predefined constraints are crucial aspects, particularly in critical domains like robotics, finance, and healthcare.
RL with instantaneous constraints addresses this need by
introducing constraints that the agent must adhere to at every
single time step during the learning process. Unlike constraints imposed on the entire trajectory or episode (Wei, Liu,
and Ying 2022a,b; Ghosh, Zhou, and Shroff 2022; Ding et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021a; Bura et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2023;
Singh, Gupta, and Shroff 2020; Ding et al. 2021; Chen, Jain,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21708

and Luo 2022; Efroni, Mannor, and Pirotta 2020), instantaneous constraints demand strict compliance with specified
limitations at each moment of decision-making so that unsafe actions should be avoided at each step. For instance, in
autonomous vehicles, RL agents must consistently adhere to
traffic rules and avoid dangerous maneuvers in any time to ensure safety. In healthcare, RL algorithms that respect privacy
and confidentiality restrictions can recommend personalized
treatment plans without violating patient data protection regulations. By enforcing instantaneous hard constraints, RL
agents can be trusted and relied upon to operate responsibly
in complex and dynamic environments while avoiding unnecessary exploratory actions and adhering to safety guidelines.
Existing literature on safe RL with hard instantaneous constraints has explored various aspects of this complex problem.
(Amani, Alizadeh, and Thrampoulidis 2019; Pacchiano et al.
2021) studied the linear bandit problem with instantaneous
constraints, which was extended to safe linear MDP with instantaneous constraints in (Amani, Thrampoulidis, and Yang
2021). The most recent work (Shi, Liang, and Shroff 2023)
studied designing a safe policy for both unsafe states and actions. However, it is important to note that all of the existing
works have made restrictive assumptions. (Amani, Thrampoulidis, and Yang 2021) requires the knowledge of a safe
action for every state, while (Shi, Liang, and Shroff 2023)
relies on a known safe subgraph where all state-action-state
transitions are guaranteed to be safe. Additionally, all of these
approaches require the cost function to have a linear structure,
which imposes practical limitations on its applicability. In
light of these assumptions, their approaches can ensure safe
learning during the entire learning process with high probability due to the inherent capability of the algorithm to construct
confidence sets along the state feature vector associated with
the known safe actions. This, in turn, engenders a more conservative exploration strategy for the agent. A comparison of
the theoretical results and the basic assumptions between our
paper and the existing results can be found in Table 1.
In this paper, we study safe RL with minimal assumptions,
where we neither assume any prior knowledge of cost/constraint functions nor any form of safe guidance (e.g., safe
actions or graphs), except the necessary assumption that
the cost functions are within Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) to guarantee the learnability of cost functions. Since the agent is required to explore the environ-

