The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Automatic VQA Evaluation Using Large Language Models
Oscar Mañas1, 2 , Benno Krojer1, 3 , Aishwarya Agrawal1, 2
1

Mila
Université de Montréal
3
McGill University
oscar.manas@mila.quebec
2

Abstract
8 years after the visual question answering (VQA) task was
proposed, accuracy remains the primary metric for automatic
evaluation. VQA Accuracy has been effective so far in the
IID evaluation setting. However, our community is undergoing a shift towards open-ended generative models and OOD
evaluation. In this new paradigm, the existing VQA Accuracy
metric is overly stringent and underestimates the performance
of VQA systems. Thus, there is a need to develop more robust
automatic VQA metrics that serve as a proxy for human
judgment. In this work, we propose to leverage the in-context
learning capabilities of instruction-tuned large language
models (LLMs) to build a better VQA metric. We formulate
VQA evaluation as an answer-rating task where the LLM is
instructed to score the accuracy of a candidate answer given
a set of reference answers. We demonstrate the proposed
metric better correlates with human judgment compared to
existing metrics across several VQA models and benchmarks.
We hope wide adoption of our metric will contribute to better
estimating the research progress on the VQA task. We plan to
release the evaluation code and collected human judgments.

VQA Accuracy

METEOR

0.00

0.52

BERTScore

Human Score

0.59
Question: What color is the plane?
Reference answers: ‘red white
blue’, ‘white, red, blue’, ‘white, red,
and blue’, ‘white red blue black’, …
Candidate answer: white and red

LAVE

1.00

Rationale: The candidate
answer is correct
because it includes both
'white' and 'red', which
are mentioned in the
reference answers.

VQA Accuracy

METEOR

0.00

0.00

BERTScore

Human Score

0.09

Question: When will the train
move?
Reference answers: after the
passengers have boarded
Candidate answer: soon

Introduction

1.00

LAVE

0.50

0.50

Rationale: The candidate
answer is ambiguous
because 'soon' does not
provide a specific
timeframe for when the
train will move.

Figure 1: Existing VQA metrics and other strong baselines
tend to miss out on correct answers generated by VQA models. Our proposed metric, LAVE, is more aligned with human judgment and provides a rationale for its rating, making
it also more interpretable.

Visual question answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015) has
become an essential benchmark for assessing the progress of
multimodal vision-language systems. 8 years after the task
was proposed, accuracy remains the primary metric for automatically evaluating model performance. VQA Accuracy is
based on exact string matching between a candidate answer
predicted by the model and a set of reference answers annotated by humans. As pointed out in Agrawal et al. (2023),
this metric has been effective so far because the VQA evaluation primarily followed the the independent and identically
distributed (IID) paradigm, where the training and testing
data distributions are quite similar. Thus, models could learn
to adapt to the test answer distribution. However, recently,
our community has been shifting its focus towards out-ofdistribution (OOD) evaluation, either via zero-shot transfer
to unseen VQA tasks or via finetuning on one VQA dataset
and evaluating on another (Agrawal et al. 2023). In these
settings, the answers generated by VQA models might not

match any of the reference answers, while still being correct
answers to the question! For instance, the generated answer
might differ from the reference answers due to the format,
specificity, different interpretations of the question, etc.
(Sec. ). To address this limitation, some recent methods (Li
et al. 2023b) have attempted to artificially modify the format
of generated answers to align with the reference answers.
However, we argue this adjustment is a consequence of the
flawed evaluation metric and should not influence modeling.
Although human evaluation is the most reliable method for
assessing generative models, it is costly and not scalable.
Thus, there is a need to develop more robust automatic
VQA metrics that serve as a proxy for human judgment.
A potential solution towards this issue would be to use
soft evaluation metrics based on answer similarity (e.g.,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
arXiv version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02567

4171

