The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Level Cross-Modal Alignment for Image Clustering
Liping Qiu* , Qin Zhang* , Xiaojun Chen† , Shaotian Cai
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
qiuliping2021@email.szu.edu.cn, {qinzhang, xjchen}@szu.edu.cn, cai.st@foxmail.com

Abstract
Recently, the cross-modal pretraining model has been employed to produce meaningful pseudo-labels to supervise
the training of an image clustering model. However, numerous erroneous alignments in a cross-modal pretraining
model could produce poor-quality pseudo labels and degrade
clustering performance. To solve the aforementioned issue,
we propose a novel Multi-Level Cross-Modal Alignment
method to improve the alignments in a cross-modal pretraining model for downstream tasks, by building a smaller
but better semantic space and aligning the images and
texts in three levels, i.e., instance-level, prototype-level, and
semantic-level. Theoretical results show that our proposed
method converges, and suggests effective means to reduce the
expected clustering risk of our method. Experimental results
on five benchmark datasets clearly show the superiority of our
new method.

Figure 1: The nearest noun for images in STL10 from WordNet, where the image and text embeddings are obtained via
CLIP. The green words correspond to the correct alignments,
while the red words indicate incorrect alignments.

Introduction
2021). To utilize the VLP models for image clustering, Cai
et al. (Cai et al. 2023) proposed to use CLIP (Radford et al.
2021) to produce meaningful pseudo-labels and achieved
significant improvements on a wide range of datasets in
comparison with conventional image clustering methods.
Li et al. (Li, Savarese, and Hoi 2022) also used CLIP for
a zero-shot image classification task. The success of these
methods suggests a promising direction for image clustering. However, as depicted in Figure 1, there are instances
where the alignments between images and texts in CLIP
may be incorrect for downstream tasks, resulting in subpar pseudo labels and poor clustering performance. SIC (Cai
et al. 2023) simply uses CLIP to obtain the embeddings of
images and texts and cannot deal with incorrect alignments.
While MUST (Li, Savarese, and Hoi 2022) strives to optimize the image encoder in CLIP, its efficiency is hampered
by using the pretraining task to update the image encoder,
resulting in a slow process.
To address the above problem, we propose a novel
method, namely Multi-Level Cross-Modal Alignment
(MCA), an efficient way to improve the alignments between
images and texts in CLIP for clustering tasks. In general, our
main contributions are as follows:

Image clustering which groups images into different clusters without labels is an essential task in unsupervised learning. Many methods are proposed to utilize the large-scale
pre-training models such as Resnet (He et al. 2016) or
ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) to extract high-quality representations for image clustering (Ji, Vedaldi, and Henriques
2019; Li et al. 2021; Zhong et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2019;
Van Gansbeke et al. 2020; Dang et al. 2021). Then, to unsupervised classification models, multiple indirect loss functions are used (e.g. sample relations (Chang et al. 2017a),
invariant information (Ji, Vedaldi, and Henriques 2019; Li
et al. 2021), mutual information (Wu et al. 2019) and entropy (Huang, Gong, and Zhu 2020; Van Gansbeke et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021). However, as pointed out in (Cai et al.
2023), the aforementioned techniques have difficulties in
handling examples that are semantically different but visually comparable by focusing only on images.
Recently, many vision-language pre-training (VLP) models have been developed to align images and texts into a unified semantic space (Li et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Ramesh
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose to use the hierarchical structure in WordNet
(see Figure 1) to filter irrelevant words and construct a

14695

