The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recasting Regional Lighting for Shadow Removal
Yuhao Liu, Zhanghan Ke, Ke Xu* , Fang Liu, Zhenwei Wang, Rynson W.H. Lau∗
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{yuhaoLiu7456, kkangwing, fawnliu2333}@gmail.com, {zhanghake2-c, zhenwwang2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk,
rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Removing shadows requires an understanding of both lighting conditions and object textures in a scene. Existing
methods typically learn pixel-level color mappings between
shadow and non-shadow images, in which the joint modeling
of lighting and object textures is implicit and inadequate. We
observe that in a shadow region, the degradation degree of
object textures depends on the local illumination, while simply enhancing the local illumination cannot fully recover the
attenuated textures. Based on this observation, we propose
to condition the restoration of attenuated textures on the corrected local lighting in the shadow region. Specifically, We
first design a shadow-aware decomposition network to estimate the illumination and reflectance layers of shadow regions explicitly. We then propose a novel bilateral correction
network to recast the lighting of shadow regions in the illumination layer via a novel local lighting correction module, and
to restore the textures conditioned on the corrected illumination layer via a novel illumination-guided texture restoration
module. We further annotate pixel-wise shadow masks for the
SRD dataset, which originally contains only image pairs. Experiments on three benchmarks show that our method outperforms existing SOTA shadow removal methods.

(a) Shadow

(b) AEF

(c) DCGAN

(d) BMNet

(e) SGNet

(f) Ours-R

(g) Ours-L

(h) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of shadow removal results. Existing
methods (b-e) may fail to completely remove the shadow in
the homogenous region and to recover the details in the textured region. Our method explicitly estimates the reflectance
(f) and illumination (g) of the shadow image, based on which
we recast the lighting and correct the texture in the shadow
region, resulting in a more visually pleasing prediction (h).

Deep learning-based shadow removal methods can learn
the mapping between shadow and shadow-free images from
large-scale training data. They are typically based on different network structures and learning strategies (e.g., directional convolution (Hu et al. 2019a), coarse-to-fine strategy (Ding et al. 2019; Wan et al. 2022), GANs (Wang,
Li, and Yang 2018; Ding et al. 2019; Cun, Pun, and Shi
2020), and multi-exposure fusion (Fu et al. 2021)) to learn
color mapping directly, which may produce color-shifted artifacts (Zhu et al. 2022a). Recent methods (Chen et al. 2021;
Jin, Sharma, and Tan 2021; Zhu et al. 2022a) propose to
model shadow-invariant color priors by, e.g., averaging the
color of the whole image (Chen et al. 2021), using handcrafted statistics (Jin, Sharma, and Tan 2021), and training
an auxiliary network (Zhu et al. 2022a). Nonetheless, as
shown in Fig. 1(b-e), although these existing methods may
be able to recover the lighting of shadow regions to some
extent, they fail to remove shadow remnants in the homogeneous region and to recover the details in the texture region.
In this work, we observe that in a shadow region, the
degradation degree of object textures depends on the local illumination, and enhancing only the local illumination alone
would not be able to fully recover the attenuated textures.
There are two reasons for this. First, shadows may have

Introduction
Shadows manifest on surfaces where light is partially or entirely blocked, resulting in image areas with reduced intensity, darker colors, and diminished textures. These shadows
can create recognition ambiguities in existing visual models, such as text recognition (Brown and Tsoi 2006), remote
traffic monitoring (Zhang et al. 2020b), and object localization (Mei et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023a). Consequently, the
study of shadow removal becomes crucial.
There are a number of shadow removal methods proposed. Previous non-deep learning-based methods (Finlayson, Hordley, and Drew 2002; Guo, Dai, and Hoiem
2012; Gryka, Terry, and Brostow 2015; Finlayson, Drew,
and Lu 2009; Finlayson and Drew 2001; Finlayson et al.
2005; Yang, Tan, and Ahuja 2012; Zhang, Zhang, and Xiao
2015) typically use hand-crafted priors and/or leverage user
interactions to remove shadows, which often fail in complex
real-world scenes (Khan et al. 2015).
* Joint corresponding authors. Rynson Lau leads this project.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3810

