The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Gaussian Mixture Proposals with Pull-Push Learning Scheme
to Capture Diverse Events for Weakly Supervised Temporal Video Grounding
Sunoh Kim1 , Jungchan Cho2 , Joonsang Yu3 , YoungJoon Yoo3 , Jin Young Choi1
1

ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng., Seoul National University
2
School of Computing, Gachon University,
3
NAVER CLOVA
{suno8386, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, thinkai@gachon.ac.kr, {joonsang.yu, youngjoon.yoo}@navercorp.com
Abstract
In the weakly supervised temporal video grounding study,
previous methods use predetermined single Gaussian proposals which lack the ability to express diverse events described
by the sentence query. To enhance the expression ability of
a proposal, we propose a Gaussian mixture proposal (GMP)
that can depict arbitrary shapes by learning importance, centroid, and range of every Gaussian in the mixture. In learning GMP, each Gaussian is not trained in a feature space but
is implemented over a temporal location. Thus the conventional feature-based learning for Gaussian mixture model is
not valid for our case. In our special setting, to learn moderately coupled Gaussian mixture capturing diverse events,
we newly propose a pull-push learning scheme using pulling
and pushing losses, each of which plays an opposite role to
the other. The effects of components in our scheme are verified in-depth with extensive ablation studies and the overall scheme achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our code is
available at https://github.com/sunoh-kim/pps.

1

Attention

Time

Time

(a) Previous methods
Query “A man yells to them on the side as they continue dancing and ends with them
cheering and audience members crying.”

Ground truth

Video
Attention

Time
Pulling

Pushing

Pushing

Pushing

“A man yells to them on the side”
“Ends with them cheering”
“They continue dancing”
“Audience members crying”

(b) Proposed methods

Figure 1: Weakly supervised temporal video grounding. (a)
Previous methods use sliding windows (left) or a single
Gaussian proposal (right), which has a predetermined shape.
(b) The proposed method generates a Gaussian mixture proposal trained to be moderately coupled with a pull-push
learning scheme to capture diverse query-relevant events.

Introduction

Temporal video grounding is a challenging task in computer vision, where the goal is to find the temporal location of starting and ending points described by a sentence
query in an untrimmed video. The task has potential for applications such as video understanding (Carreira and Zisserman 2017), video summarization (Ma et al. 2002), and
video retrieval (Dong et al. 2019), because it can automatically extract temporal video locations of interest described
by given sentences. For temporal video grounding, a fully
supervised approach has made remarkable progress (Kim,
Yun, and Choi 2021; Kim et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2017) but
require manual annotations of temporal locations for every
video-sentence pair. These manual annotations are usually
labor-intensive and noisy due to the subjectivity of annotators, which limits their scalability to real-world scenarios
and makes trained models biased (Yuan et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2021).
To overcome the limitation, a weakly supervised approach
has been proposed to solve the temporal video grounding
problem, where only video-sentence pairs are required for
training. Some existing methods (Huang et al. 2021; Lin

et al. 2020; Mithun, Paul, and Roy-Chowdhury 2019; Tan
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020b) use a sliding window strategy to generate proposals for a temporal location but use a lot of pre-defined proposals, which require
heavy computation. To reduce the required number of proposals, (Zheng et al. 2022a,b) generate learnable Gaussian
proposals. However, these single Gaussian proposals with
a peak at its center lack the expression ability for diverse
query-relevant events in a video.
To enhance the expression ability, we propose a Gaussian
mixture proposal (GMP) that can depict arbitrary shapes by
learning importance, centroid, and range of every Gaussian
in the mixture. Since our GMP is implemented over a temporal location, conventional feature-based learning for Gaussian mixture model (Zong et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2018) is not
applicable to our approach. In our special setting, our goal is
to train the GMP to capture a temporal location semantically
relevant to a sentence query that includes diverse events coupled moderately. In Fig. 1, for instance, one sentence query
includes two semantic events coupled by “A man yells to

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2795

