The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Diverse Risk Preferences in Population-Based Self-Play
Yuhua Jiang* , Qihan Liu* , Xiaoteng Ma, Chenghao Li, Yiqin Yang,
Jun Yang† , Bin Liang, Qianchuan Zhao†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{jiangyh22, lqh20, ma-xt17, lch18, yangyiqi19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{yangjun603, bliang, zhaoqc}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

In this study, we focus on the problem of training agents
that are both robust and high-performing against any type
of opponent. We argue that the key to addressing this problem lies in producing a diverse set of training opponents,
or in other words, learning diverse strategies in self-play. A
promising paradigm to address this problem is populationbased approaches (Vinyals et al. 2019; Jaderberg et al.
2019), where a collection of agents is gathered and trained
against each other. However, the diversity achieved in such
methods mainly stems from various hyperparameter setups
and falls short. Recent research has increasingly focused
on enhancing population diversity (Lupu et al. 2021; Zhao
et al. 2022; Parker-Holder et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2021). These methods introduce diversity as a learning objective and incorporate additional auxiliary losses on
a population-wide scale. Nonetheless, this population-wide
objective increases implementation complexity and necessitates careful hyperparameter tuning to strike a balance between diversity and performance.
Here, we propose a novel perspective on introducing diversity within the population: agents should possess diverse
risk preferences. In this context, risk refers to the uncertainty arising from stochastic transitions within the environment, while risk preference encompasses the agent’s sensitivity to such uncertainty, typically including risk-seeking,
risk-neutral, and risk-averse tendencies. Taking inspiration
from the fact that humans are risk-sensitive (Tversky and
Kahneman 1992), we argue that the lack of diversity in
self-play arises from agents solely optimizing their expected
winning rate against opponents without considering other
optimization goals that go beyond the expectation, such as
higher-order moments of the winning rate distribution. Intuitively, the population of agents should be diverse, including conservative (risk-averse) agents that aim to enhance
their worst performance against others, as well as aggressive (risk-seeking) agents that focus on improving their best
winning record.
To achieve risk-sensitive learning with minimal modifications, we introduce the expectile Bellman operator, which
smoothly interpolates between the worst-case and best-case
Bellman operators. Building upon this operator, we propose
Risk-sensitive Proximal Policy Optimization (RPPO), which
utilizes a risk level hyperparameter to control the risk preference during policy learning. To strike a balance between

Among the remarkable successes of Reinforcement Learning
(RL), self-play algorithms have played a crucial role in solving competitive games. However, current self-play RL methods commonly optimize the agent to maximize the expected
win-rates against its current or historical copies, resulting in a
limited strategy style and a tendency to get stuck in local optima. To address this limitation, it is important to improve the
diversity of policies, allowing the agent to break stalemates
and enhance its robustness when facing with different opponents. In this paper, we present a novel perspective to promote diversity by considering that agents could have diverse
risk preferences in the face of uncertainty. To achieve this,
we introduce a novel reinforcement learning algorithm called
Risk-sensitive Proximal Policy Optimization (RPPO), which
smoothly interpolates between worst-case and best-case policy learning, enabling policy learning with desired risk preferences. Furthermore, by seamlessly integrating RPPO with
population-based self-play, agents in the population optimize
dynamic risk-sensitive objectives using experiences gained
from playing against diverse opponents. Our empirical results
demonstrate that our method achieves comparable or superior
performance in competitive games and, importantly, leads to
the emergence of diverse behavioral modes. Code is available
at https://github.com/Jackory/RPBT.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has witnessed significant advancements in solving challenging decision problems, particularly in competitive games such as Go (Silver et al.
2016), Dota (Berner et al. 2019), and StarCraft (Vinyals et al.
2019). One of the key factors contributing to these successes
is self-play, where an agent improves its policy by playing against itself or its previous policies. However, building
expert-level AI solely through model-free self-play remains
challenging, as it requires no access to a dynamic model or
the prior knowledge of a human expert. One of the difficulties is that agents trained in self-play only compete against
themselves, leading to policies that often become stuck in
local optima and struggle to generalize to different opponents (Bansal et al. 2018).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12910

