The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Concept-Guided Prompt Learning for Generalization in Vision-Language Models
Yi Zhang1,2 , Ce Zhang3 , Ke Yu2 , Yushun Tang2 , Zhihai He2,4 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
Pengcheng Laboratory
zhangyi2021@mail.sustech.edu.cn, cezhang@cs.cmu.edu
{yuk2020, tangys2022}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, hezh@sustech.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) model has
exhibited remarkable efficacy in establishing cross-modal
connections between texts and images, yielding impressive
performance across a broad spectrum of downstream applications through fine-tuning. However, for generalization tasks,
the current fine-tuning methods for CLIP, such as CoOp and
CoCoOp, demonstrate relatively low performance on some
fine-grained datasets. We recognize the underlying reason is
that these previous methods only projected global features
into the prompt, neglecting the various visual concepts, such
as colors, shapes, and sizes, which are naturally transferable across domains and play a crucial role in generalization tasks. To address this issue, in this work, we propose
Concept-Guided Prompt Learning (CPL) for vision-language
models. Specifically, we leverage the well-learned knowledge
of CLIP to create a visual concept cache to enable conceptguided prompting. In order to refine the text features, we further develop a projector that transforms multi-level visual features into text features. We observe that this concept-guided
prompt learning approach is able to achieve enhanced consistency between visual and linguistic modalities. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that our CPL method significantly improves generalization capabilities compared to
the current state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Recent studies in pre-trained Vision-Language Models
(VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia
et al. 2021), highlight a promising direction for foundation
models in performing a variety of open-vocabulary tasks. By
understanding various visual concepts learned from extensive image-text pairs, these models exhibit impressive capabilities across a broad spectrum of downstream tasks in
a zero/few-shot manner (Radford et al. 2021; Alayrac et al.
2022; Yu et al. 2022).
Although the zero-shot CLIP model demonstrates competitive performance in various visual tasks, its nature as
a pre-trained model hinders its ability to generalize to unseen domains. Therefore, several works focus on fine-tuning
these pre-trained VLMs for downstream tasks through designing learnable prompts derived from training instances.

Figure 1: Examples and performance comparisons on baseto-novel generalization and cross-dataset transfer tasks. Our
proposed CPL exhibits remarkable generalization capabilities in comparison to other state-of-the-art methods.

For example, CoOp (Zhou et al. 2022b) firstly introduces
learnable prompts to distill task-relevant knowledge; CoCoOp (Zhou et al. 2022a) suggests adjusting the prompt
based on each individual image; and TaskRes (Yu et al.
2023) proposes to incorporate a prior-independent task
residual that doesn’t undermine the well-learned knowledge
of CLIP. For clarification, we provide an overview of each
of the aforementioned methods in Figure 2.
For the generalization tasks as shown in Figure 1, we ob-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7377

