The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SafeAR: Safe Algorithmic Recourse by Risk-Aware Policies
Haochen Wu1 , Shubham Sharma2 , Sunandita Patra2 , Sriram Gopalakrishnan2
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
J.P. Morgan AI Research
haochenw@umich.edu, shubham.x2.sharma@jpmchase.com, sunandita.patra@jpmchase.com,
sriram.gopalakrishnan@jpmchase.com

Abstract
With the growing use of machine learning (ML) models in
critical domains such as finance and healthcare, the need to
offer recourse for those adversely affected by the decisions
of ML models has become more important; individuals ought
to be provided with recommendations on actions to take for
improving their situation and thus receiving a favorable decision. Prior work on sequential algorithmic recourse—which
recommends a series of changes—focuses on action feasibility and uses the proximity of feature changes to determine
action costs. However, the uncertainties of feature changes
and the risk of higher than average costs in recourse have not
been considered. It is undesirable if a recourse could (with
some probability) result in a worse situation from which recovery requires an extremely high cost. It is essential to incorporate risks when computing and evaluating recourse. We
call the recourse computed with such risk considerations as
Safe Algorithmic Recourse (SafeAR). The objective is to empower people to choose a recourse based on their risk tolerance. In this work, we discuss and show how existing recourse desiderata can fail to capture the risk of higher costs.
We present a method to compute recourse policies that consider variability in cost and connect algorithmic recourse literature with risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. We also
adopt measures “Value at Risk” and “Conditional Value at
Risk” from the financial literature to summarize risk concisely. We apply our method to two real-world datasets and
compare policies with different risk-aversion levels using risk
measures and recourse desiderata (sparsity and proximity).

Figure 1: Recourse policies for loan approvals. Policy A has
only one feature change (low sparsity) but with a high failure rate; Policy B has the lowest expected cost but might
result in a situation that costs more to recover; Policy C has
a slightly higher expected cost than Policy B but lower variance in cost (risk), which can be considered as a safer Policy.

but not their age. Existing recourse work has considered
the cost of taking the recommended actions (Von Kügelgen
et al. 2022; Verma, Hines, and Dickerson 2022; Poyiadzi
et al. 2020). However, they do not consider the risk of higher
costs. In this work, risk means the potential for higher costs
during the recourse due to the possibility of reaching adverse
states; this can happen due to uncertainties in action effects
(not deterministic). The cost could be in terms of time required, effort, financial resources, etc. Without incorporating
risks—which is ignoring uncertainties or only minimizing
the expected costs—the recipient of an algorithmic recourse
may be caught unaware and unprepared for situations with
high costs. By offering recourse policies with risk measures,
we can help people be aware of how much risk is involved in
each policy and choose a safer one. The recourse policy here
refers to the recommended actions for all possible states a

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly being used
to make decisions in a wide array of scenarios including
healthcare (Beam and Kohane 2018), insurance premiums
(ul Hassan et al. 2021), and loan approvals (Li et al. 2020).
Given the impact of ML models on society, the importance
of algorithmic recourse has increased (Venkatasubramanian
and Alfano 2020). Algorithmic recourse refers to a computed recommendation provided to an end user that suggests
specific changes they can make to convert an unfavorable
outcome (e.g., loan rejection), into a favorable one. For a
recourse to be helpful, the suggested change ought to be actionable; for example, one can change their savings balance
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15915

