The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LSTKC: Long Short-Term Knowledge Consolidation for Lifelong Person
Re-identification
Kunlun Xu1 , Xu Zou2 , Jiahuan Zhou1∗
1

2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
xkl@stu.pku.edu.cn, zoux@hust.edu.cn, jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Data of step t

Lifelong person re-identification (LReID) aims to train a unified model from diverse data sources step by step. The severe
domain gaps between different training steps result in catastrophic forgetting in LReID, and existing methods mainly
rely on data replay and knowledge distillation techniques
to handle this issue. However, the former solution needs to
store historical exemplars which inevitably impedes data privacy. The existing knowledge distillation-based models usually retain all the knowledge of the learned old models without any selections, which will inevitably include erroneous
and detrimental knowledge that severely impacts the learning performance of the new model. To address these issues,
we propose an exemplar-free LReID method named LongShort Term Knowledge Consolidation (LSTKC) that contains
a Rectification-based Short-Term Knowledge Transfer module (R-STKT) and an Estimation-based Long-Term Knowledge Consolidation module (E-LTKC). For each learning iteration within one training step, R-STKT aims to filter and
rectify the erroneous knowledge contained in the old model
and transfer the rectified knowledge to facilitate the shortterm learning of the new model. Meanwhile, once one training step is finished, E-LTKC proposes to further consolidate
the learned long-term knowledge via adaptively fusing the parameters of models from different steps. Consequently, experimental results show that our LSTKC exceeds the state-ofthe-art methods by 6.3%/9.4% and 7.9%/4.5%, 6.4%/8.0%
and 9.0%/5.5% average mAP/R@1 on seen and unseen domains under two different training orders of the challenging
LReID benchmark respectively.

𝐴1

𝐴2

𝐵1

𝐵2

𝐵3
Long-Term
Knowledge Consolidation

𝐌𝑡

𝐌𝑡−1

𝐌𝑡∗

𝐌𝑡

K

Short-Term
Knowledge Transfer
𝐴1 𝐴2 𝑩𝟏 𝐵2 𝐵3

Erroneous
Knowledge
Distllation

𝐴1 𝐴2 𝑩𝟏 𝐵2 𝐵3

𝐴1
𝐴2
𝑩𝟏
𝐵2
𝐵3

(a) Existing Method

𝐴1
𝐴2
𝑩𝟏
𝐵2
𝐵3

Affinity

1

0

Rectification
(b) Ours

Figure 1: To prevent erroneous knowledge distillation and
facilitate old knowledge consolidation, we propose a ShortTerm Knowledge Transfer mechanism to distill the correct
knowledge of the old model and a Long-Term Knowledge
Consolidation mechanism to accomplish knowledge-guided
model fusion.

datasets (Pu et al. 2021). Similar to other lifelong learning tasks (Liang et al. 2022), the challenge of catastrophic
forgetting emerges as a critical obstacle due to the discrepancy in knowledge across diverse datasets. To handle this issue, several LReID approaches aim to retain exemplars from
the old datasets as the rehearsal of historical knowledge for
the learning of new models (Wu and Gong 2021; Ge et al.
2022; Yu et al. 2023). However, this solution will indeed
impede data privacy and suffer from considerable computational overheads. Therefore, we concentrate on a more practical but challenging LReID setting where no exemplars can
be preserved for new model learning.
In addition to exemplar preservation, a majority of existing LReID approaches strive to alleviate catastrophic forgetting through knowledge distillation (Pu et al. 2021; Sun and
Mu 2022; Yu et al. 2023), primarily aimed at ensuring out-

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve the person of interest from a collection of images. However, numerous investigations (Wang et al. 2022a; Zhao et al.
2021b) have observed that ReID models trained on a specific and stationary dataset often exhibit inadequate performance when confronted with new datasets. This limitation has sparked increasing interest in lifelong person re-identification (LReID), which focuses on continuously learning informative knowledge from a stream of
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16202

