The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Divergence-Guided Simultaneous Speech Translation
Xinjie Chen1 * , Kai Fan2 , Wei Luo2 , Linlin Zhang1 * , Libo Zhao3 *
Xinggao Liu1† , Zhongqiang Huang2†
1

Zhejiang University
Alibaba DAMO Academy
3
South China University of Technology
{xinjiechen, zhanglinlinlin, lxg}@zju.edu.cn, {z.huang, k.fan, w.luo}@alibaba-inc.com, wilbzhao@mail.scut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

in SimulMT, researchers have investigated both fixed and
adaptive read/write policies for SimulST. The absence of
explicit linguistic boundaries in continuous speech signals
presents a unique challenge. To adapt the wait-k policy (Ma
et al. 2019) for speech input, various approaches have been
proposed, including segmenting audio streams into fixedlength chunks (Ma, Pino, and Koehn 2020; Ma et al. 2021),
or at the subword/word level (Dong et al. 2022; Zhang and
Feng 2023). Adaptive policies have also been studied to
leverage contextual information when making read/write decisions. Zhang et al. (2022) propose the detection of meaningful units in speech that can be independently translated
without considering future inputs, while Papi, Negri, and
Turchi (2023) experiment with the use of attention scores
to develop adaptive policies for the inference process.
In spite of their demonstrated improvements, there remains significant discrepancies with respect to the desirable
attributes for the translation model and the policy module
in SimulST. First, most prior research has employed offline
models trained on complete audio utterances to translate
partial speech input, which raises questions about their effectiveness given the apparent gap between training and inference. Second, fixed policies, even when grounded in the
detection of subword/word boundaries, disregard available
context and cannot make informed read or write decisions.
While existing adaptive policies can take into account the
partial input and translation history to make dynamic decisions, they are based on heuristics and lack any direct measure of the potential impact of such decisions on the quality
of translation, which is essential for achieving a delicate balance between translation quality and latency.
Recently, Transducer-based approaches (Liu et al. 2021;
Tang et al. 2023) have achieved success in addressing the
aforementioned issues using synchronized audio inputs and
translation outputs, without explicitly modeling read/write
decisions. However, these approaches are computationally
intensive and requires training a distinct model for each latency configuration. In this paper, we adhere to the conventional approach of separately modeling and improving translation and read/write decisions, and introduce an integrated
approach called Divergence-Guided Simultaneous Speech
Translation (DiG-SST). Specifically, we propose:
Prefix-enhanced Translation: We include prefix-toprefix and prefix-to-full ST samples, in addition to the

To achieve high-quality translation with low latency, a Simultaneous Speech Translation (SimulST) system relies on
a policy module to decide whether to translate immediately
or wait for additional streaming input, along with a translation model capable of effectively handling partial speech input. Prior research has tackled these components separately,
either using “wait-k” policies based on fixed-length segments
or detected word boundaries, or dynamic policies based on
different strategies (e.g., meaningful units), while employing offline models for prefix-to-prefix translation. In this paper, we propose Divergence-Guided Simultaneous Speech
Translation (DiG-SST), a tightly integrated approach focusing on both translation quality and latency for streaming input. Specifically, we introduce a simple yet effective prefixbased strategy for training translation models with partial
speech input, and develop an adaptive policy that makes read/write decisions for the translation model based on the expected divergence in translation distributions resulting from
future input. Our experiments on multiple translation directions of the MuST-C benchmark demonstrate that our approach achieves a better trade-off between translation quality
and latency compared to existing methods.

Introduction
Simultaneous Speech Translation (SimulST) aims to achieve
real-time, high-quality translation from streaming speech input while maintaining low latency. Early efforts have conventionally employed a cascaded approach involving both a
streaming Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) model and
a Simultaneous Text Machine Translation (SimulMT) model
(Oda et al. 2014; Dalvi et al. 2018). While this approach has
its merits, it nevertheless suffers from issues such as error
propagation and latency accumulation (Le, Lecouteux, and
Besacier 2017; Xue et al. 2020).
In response to these challenges, recent progress in speech
translation (ST) has been primarily focused on end-to-end
approaches, leading to significant improvements in both offline and simultaneous ST tasks (Berard et al. 2016; Weiss
et al. 2017; Berard et al. 2018; Bansal et al. 2019; Ren
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021). Following the advancements
* Work done when interning at Alibaba DAMO Academy
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17799

