The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Keep the Faith: Faithful Explanations in Convolutional Neural Networks for
Case-Based Reasoning
Tom Nuno Wolf1, 2, 3 , Fabian Bongratz1, 2, 3 , Anne-Marie Rickmann1, 2 ,
Sebastian Pölsterl2 , Christian Wachinger1, 2, 3
1

2

Department of Radiology, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany
Lab for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
tom_nuno.wolf@tum.de
Abstract

to locally approximate the decision-making of neural networks in a post-hoc fashion (Vale, El-Sharif, and Ali 2022).
However, such explanations can vary dramatically between
explanation techniques and models (Rudin 2019): For example, pixel-wise attribution maps aim at highlighting the
contribution of each pixel to the output logit, which is realized in Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman (2013) via propagation of gradients from the output logit to the input pixels. Such approaches are directly influenced by the model
parameters. Alternatively, classifying image latents with a
k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) algorithm allows showing the k
most similar images as explanations. Although the theoretic motivation of pixel-wise attributions is to mimic the visual cortex, prior studies (Jeyakumar et al. 2020; Kim et al.
2023; Nguyen, Kim, and Nguyen 2021) have concluded that
example-based explanations are easiest to understand for
humans. While case-based reasoning, as in kNN, answers
what contributed to a prediction, it does not allow to explain
how the model transformed the image to arrive at its prediction. In other words, the explanations give insight into the
decision-making of the model but lack to give insight into
the high-dimensional non-linear function that a neural network represents. To compare and analyze explanation techniques from a theoretical point of view, several axioms have
been introduced previously (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017). In this work, we refer to an
explanation method that satisfies all axioms as faithful.

Explaining predictions of black-box neural networks is crucial when applied to decision-critical tasks. Thus, attribution
maps are commonly used to identify important image regions,
despite prior work showing that humans prefer explanations
based on similar examples. To this end, ProtoPNet learns
a set of class-representative feature vectors (prototypes) for
case-based reasoning. During inference, similarities of latent
features to prototypes are linearly classified to form predictions and attribution maps are provided to explain the similarity. In this work, we evaluate whether architectures for casebased reasoning fulfill established axioms required for faithful explanations using the example of ProtoPNet. We show
that such architectures allow the extraction of faithful explanations. However, we prove that the attribution maps used
to explain the similarities violate the axioms. We propose
a new procedure to extract explanations for trained ProtoPNets, named ProtoPFaith. Conceptually, these explanations
are Shapley values, calculated on the similarity scores of each
prototype. They allow to faithfully answer which prototypes
are present in an unseen image and quantify each pixel’s contribution to that presence, thereby complying with all axioms.
The theoretical violations of ProtoPNet manifest in our experiments on three datasets (CUB-200-2011, Stanford Dogs,
RSNA) and five architectures (ConvNet, ResNet, ResNet50,
WideResNet50, ResNeXt50). Our experiments show a qualitative difference between the explanations given by ProtoPNet and ProtoPFaith. Additionally, we quantify the explanations with the Area Over the Perturbation Curve, on which
ProtoPFaith outperforms ProtoPNet on all experiments by a
factor >103 .

ProtoPNet (Chen et al. 2019) is a prominent implementation of case-based reasoning and has been widely adopted,
for image classification (Chen et al. 2019; Donnelly, Barnett,
and Chen 2022) and decision-critical tasks, like automated
diagnosis from chest radiography (Kim et al. 2021) and
dementia-diagnosis (Wolf, Pölsterl, and Wachinger 2023).
It linearly classifies similarities between trainable classrepresentative feature vectors (prototypes) and latent features of unseen images. Importantly, its inherently interpretable architecture allows the extraction of explanations on
a pixel-level. The model’s decision-making is explained by
visualizing image crops that each prototype represents next
to pixel-level explanations of the unseen image, as seen in
Fig. 1, leading to the type of explanations that humans prefer (Jeyakumar et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2023; Rudin 2019).
Therefore, its pixel-level explanations can, supposedly, be
incorporated to answer the question how it came to the con-

Introduction
With continued progress in deep learning, AI models become ubiquitous in daily life. For many tasks, they are
able to outperform humans (Shin et al. 2023). At the same
time, it is difficult for humans to understand the decisionmaking of such complex black-box models with millions of
parameters (Adadi and Berrada 2018; Arrieta et al. 2020).
This fundamental issue is particularly relevant in decisioncritical areas, such as medicine, finance, or justice. To increase transparency, methods have been developed that try
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5921

