The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SDGMNet: Statistic-Based Dynamic Gradient Modulation for
Local Descriptor Learning
Yuxin Deng, Jiayi Ma∗
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
dyx_acuo@whu.edu.cn, jyma2010@gmail.com

Abstract

or local patches into descriptors, and then predict whether
pairs of images belong to the same category or not according to distances between descriptors. To train the encoder,
we need to minimize the distance of correspondence/positive pairs and maximize non-correspondences/negative ones
in the loss function. To this end, various pair-wise losses are
used, such as triplet loss (Mishchuk et al. 2017; Xue, Budvytis, and Cipolla 2023), negative cross entropy loss (Tian,
Fan, and Wu 2017; Gleize, Wang, and Feiszli 2023), and
ranking loss (He, Lu, and Sclaroff 2018).
So, what is the principle for advanced loss design? Hard
example mining (HEM) is one basic principle. Specifically,
a positive pair of descriptors would be a hard example, if the
distance between the two descriptors is too large. To optimize the hard positive example, its back-propagated gradients from the loss should be weighted as shown in Fig. 1. In
contrast, the magnitude of the gradients i.e., the weights for
a hard negative pair that is closer should be larger. Moreover,
the hardness of Siamese pairs that share the same anchor can
be measured by relative distance and also deserves attention. Those hard Siamese pairs should be emphasized with
weights increasing with the relative distance. Many efforts
have been made to modulate the weights of back-propagated
gradients in the field of general contrastive learning (Huang
et al. 2020; Boutros et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023). Their
successes demonstrate the significance of gradient modulation. However, most modulations are static. The values of
the modulation functions depend on the distance of a few
sampled pairs, but do not involve the training phase or the
global information. Such modulations might suffer from the
changes in training phases and datasets. Thus, making the
gradients adapt to global statistics, which vary over time and
datasets, is reasonable for learning better descriptors.
In this paper, we propose SDGMNet, a statistic-based dynamic gradient modulation strategy for contrastive local descriptor learning. Firstly, we analyze the back-propagated
gradient of pair-wise loss, and explore that angular distance
provides flattening magnitude of gradients before modulation. SDGMNet is easily implemented in pseudo loss composite of weighted included angles. Secondly, we propose
auto-focus modulation to modulate gradients for individual
pairs. Auto-focus modulation utilizes the statistics of distances between individual pairs. Rather than following strict
HEM, it mines reliable pairs whose distances lay around

Rescaling the backpropagated gradient of contrastive loss has
made significant progress in descriptor learning. However,
current gradient modulation strategies have no regard for the
varying distribution of global gradients, so they would suffer from changes in training phases or datasets. In this paper,
we propose a dynamic gradient modulation, named SDGMNet, for contrastive local descriptor learning. The core of
our method is formulating modulation functions with dynamically estimated statistical characteristics. Firstly, we introduce angle for distance measure after deep analysis on
backpropagation of pair-wise loss. On this basis, auto-focus
modulation is employed to moderate the impact of statistically uncommon individual pairs in stochastic gradient descent optimization; probabilistic margin cuts off the gradients
of proportional triplets that have achieved enough optimization; power adjustment balances the total weights of negative pairs and positive pairs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our novel descriptor surpasses previous state-ofthe-art methods in several tasks including patch verification,
retrieval, pose estimation, and 3D reconstruction.

Introduction
Feature extraction is a fundamental problem in many computer vision tasks, such as image classification, matching,
and retrieval. In the image matching pipeline, features are
firstly extracted and then matched for downstream applications (Fan et al. 2022). Undoubtedly, the quality of the feature determines the upper limit of the pipeline (Fan et al.
2019). Moreover, the independent studies on feature extraction (Gleize, Wang, and Feiszli 2023; Wang et al. 2023), especially those involving feature descriptions only (Tian et al.
2020; Wang, Zhang, and Huang 2022, 2023) are more compatible with mature pipelines and applicable to more tasks.
Thus, we think feature description deserves further study.
Benefiting from the great potentials of Deep Neural
Networks (DNN), deep feature description dispenses with
heuristic designs to acquire transform or illumination invariance as early efforts (Lowe 2004) did. Overall, descriptor learning is exactly a branch of contrastive learning (Cui
et al. 2023). Specifically, this task aims to encode images
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1510

