The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CIDR: A Cooperative Integrated Dynamic Refining Method for Minimal Feature
Removal Problem
Qian Chen1 , Taolin Zhang2 , Dongyang Li1 , Xiaofeng He1,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Alibaba Group
3
NPPA Key Laboratory of Publishing Integration Development, ECNUP, Shanghai, China
qianchen901005@gmail.com, zhangtl0519@gmail.com, dongyangli0612@gmail.com
hexf@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Input: Despite facing numerous challenges , we remain

Abstract

steadfast .

The minimal feature removal problem in the post-hoc explanation area aims to identify the minimal feature set (MFS).
Prior studies using the greedy algorithm to calculate the minimal feature set lack the exploration of feature interactions under a monotonic assumption which cannot be satisfied in general scenarios. In order to address the above limitations, we
propose a Cooperative Integrated Dynamic Refining method
(CIDR) to efficiently discover minimal feature sets. Specifically, we design Cooperative Integrated Gradients (CIG) to
detect interactions between features. By incorporating CIG
and characteristics of the minimal feature set, we transform
the minimal feature removal problem into a knapsack problem. Additionally, we devise an auxiliary Minimal Feature
Refinement algorithm to determine the minimal feature set
from numerous candidate sets. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first to address the minimal feature removal
problem in the field of natural language processing. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that CIDR is capable of tracing representative minimal feature sets with improved interpretability across various models and datasets.

Minimal feature set:
Input: Despite facing
numerous challenges ,
we remain steadfast .
Input: Despite facing
numerous challenges ,
we remain [PAD].

steadfast

Positive

Negative

Figure 1: An illustration of the minimal feature removal
problem. The bottom part shows that removing the feature
of MFS would cause a drastic shift in model output probability.

its influence on the output. However, such methods may
lead to feature redundancy and fail to account for the synergistic interplay among words. Each word plays a different
role within a given sentence, and word combinations matter. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, in the sentence
“despite facing numerous challenges, we remain steadfast”,
‘challenges’ poses a negative attitude while ‘remain steadfast’ represents the opposite.
Some other studies employ hierarchical clustering algorithms to detect feature interactions (Singh, Murdoch, and
Yu 2019; Chen, Zheng, and Ji 2020), coming up with low
computational efficiency. (Sekhon et al. 2023) focus on using graph neural networks (GNNs) to model interactions.
However, they neglect redundant words, which may hinder
the model’s interpretability. To eliminate redundant features,
(Harzli, Grau, and Horrocks 2023) provide a formal definition of the minimum feature removal problem proven to
be an NP-complete problem and devise a greedy algorithm
to solve this problem based on a monotonic assumption.
However, the monotonic assumption requires non-negative
model parameters, and the problem solely examines isolated feature effects, presenting obstacles to generalization.
In this paper, we propose a Cooperative Integrated Dynamic
Refining method, namely CIDR. Particularly, considering

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable accomplishments in the natural language processing domain
(Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al.
2020; OpenAI 2023). Meanwhile, the black-box nature of
deep learning techniques has made it challenging to applications. In addition to model accuracy, there is a demand
for considering interpretability (Olex, Maffey, and McInnes
2019; Mosca et al. 2022). Recently feature importancebased explanation methods have gained popularity due to fidelity and usability (Sikdar, Bhattacharya, and Heese 2021;
Sekhon et al. 2023). For the text classification task, feature importance-based explanation methods predominantly
investigate the impact of words on model prediction behavior (Li et al. 2016; Godin et al. 2018; Chen and Ji 2020). Earlier researches mainly utilize the LIME algorithm (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016), attention mechanism (Wiegreffe
and Pinter 2019) or gradient saliency (Kindermans et al.
2018) to ascribe a score to an individual word, measuring
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17763

