The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fast Inter-frame Motion Prediction for
Compressed Dynamic Point Cloud Attribute Enhancement
Wang Liu1 , Wei Gao1,2 * , Xingming Mu1
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
liuwang@stu.pku.edu.cn, {gaowei262, 1700012434}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the success of deep learning
methods in quality enhancement of compressed point cloud.
However, existing methods focus on geometry and attribute
enhancement of single-frame point cloud. This paper proposes a novel compressed quality enhancement method for
dynamic point cloud (DAE-MP). Specifically, we propose a
fast inter-frame motion prediction module (IFMP) to explicitly estimate motion displacement and achieve inter-frame
feature alignment. To maintain motion continuity between
consecutive frames, we propose a motion consistency loss
for supervised learning. Furthermore, a frequency component separation and fusion module is designed to extract
rich frequency features adaptively. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed method is the first deep learning-based
work to enhance the quality for compressed dynamic point
cloud. Experimental results show that the proposed method
can greatly improve the quality of compressed dynamic point
cloud and provide a fast and efficient motion prediction plugin for large-scale point cloud. For dynamic point cloud attribute with severely compressed artifact, our proposed DAEMP method achieves up to 0.52dB (PSNR) performance gain.
Moreover, the proposed IFMP module has a certain real-time
processing ability for calculating the motion offset between
dynamic point cloud frame.

Figure 1: Illustration of point cloud compression artifacts.
First column: raw geometry, geometry compressed by octree
scheme under Qstep = 2, 4, respectively. Second column:
raw attribute, attribute compressed under Qstep = 51 by
RAHT scheme and predlift scheme, respectively. Last column: raw point cloud geometry and attribute, point cloud
compressed by trisoup and RAHT scheme under Qstep =
41, compressed point cloud by trisoup and predlift scheme
under Qstep = 41.

cloud data, it will irreversibly produce information distortion.
The geometry compression algorithms under the GPCC
framework are divided into two categories: Octree-based
(Schnabel and Klein 2006) and Trisoup-based (Anis, Chou,
and Ortega 2016). Depending on the geometry compression
process, attribute compression algorithms mainly include
predlift-based method (Mammou et al. 2018) and RAHTbased method (De Queiroz and Chou 2016). There are significant gaps in point cloud distortion under different compression modes and compression algorithms. Figure 1 shows
the subjective experience among them. The geometry distortion is mainly the reduction of the number of points and the
position shift, while the attribute distortion shows the blur
effect and block effect. Therefore, the goal of quality enhancement of compressed point cloud in a post-processing
manner is not only to enhance the subjective experience or
objective metric, but also to improve the performance in
downstream tasks.
Compressed point cloud quality enhancement methods

Introduction
In recent years, dynamic point cloud have been widely used
in many scenarios, such as autonomous driving, urban modeling, and virtual/augmented reality. However, the existing
methods of point cloud data acquisition and generation will
cause storage and transmission burdens more than those
of image or video. With the rise of point cloud applications, corresponding point cloud compression algorithms
and standards have entered the field of vision of researchers.
Therefore, the well-known Motion Picture Experts Group
(Schwarz et al. 2018) (MPEG) proposed the geometry-based
point cloud compression standard (GPCC) and the videobased point cloud compression standard (VPCC). Although
the reduction of point cloud code stream in lossy mode
is beneficial to the storage and transmission of large point
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3720

