The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VIGC: Visual Instruction Generation and Correction
Bin Wang* 1 , Fan Wu* 1 , Xiao Han* 1 , Jiahui Peng* 1 , Huaping Zhong* 2 ,
Pan Zhang1 , Xiaoyi Dong1,3 , Weijia Li4 , Wei Li1 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Conghui He†1 ,
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
2
SenseTime Research,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
4
Sun Yat-sen University
{wangbin,wufan,hanxiao,pengjiahui,zhangpan,dongxiaoyi,liwei,wangjiaqi,heconghui}@pjlab.org.cn
zhonghuaping@sensetime.com, liweij29@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

BBox & Category

The integration of visual encoders and large language models (LLMs) has driven recent progress in multimodal large
language models (MLLMs). However, the scarcity of highquality instruction-tuning data for vision-language tasks remains a challenge. The current leading paradigm, such as
LLaVA, relies on language-only GPT-4 to generate data,
which requires pre-annotated image captions and detection
bounding boxes, suffering from understanding image details.
A practical solution to this problem would be to utilize the
available multimodal large language models to generate instruction data for vision-language tasks. However, it’s worth
noting that the currently accessible MLLMs are not as powerful as their LLM counterparts, as they tend to produce inadequate responses and generate false information. As a solution for addressing the current issue, this paper proposes the
Visual Instruction Generation and Correction (VIGC) framework that enables multimodal large language models to generate instruction-tuning data and progressively enhance its
quality on-the-fly. Specifically, Visual Instruction Generation
(VIG) guides the vision-language model to generate diverse
instruction-tuning data. To ensure generation quality, Visual
Instruction Correction (VIC) adopts an iterative update mechanism to correct any inaccuracies in data produced by VIG,
effectively reducing the risk of hallucination. Leveraging the
diverse, high-quality data generated by VIGC, we finetune
mainstream models and validate data quality based on various
evaluations. Experimental results demonstrate that VIGC not
only compensates for the shortcomings of language-only data
generation methods, but also effectively enhances the benchmark performance. The models, datasets, and code are available at https://opendatalab.github.io/VIGC.

Caption

GPT-4 Prompt

Question
SFT Data

Initial Dataset

(a) Text-only GPT-4

Image

Instruction VIGC

Question: Can you
elaborate on the elements of
the picture provided?
Answer: The image features
a sleek silver motorcycle
parked in a parking lot …

SFT Data

(b) The Proposed VIGC

Figure 1: Comparison between the language-only GPT-4 approach and the proposed method, highlighting two key limitations of the former: (1) The necessity for extensive human
annotation, and (2) The inability to process visual data, resulting in a loss of detailed information.

LLMs (Touvron et al. 2023; Chiang et al. 2023) has led
to substantial strides in the field of multimodal LLMs, resulting in the creation of frameworks such as BLIP-2 (Li
et al. 2023b), MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al. 2023b), LLaVA (Liu
et al. 2023b), InstructBLIP (Dai et al. 2023) and InternLMXComposer (Zhang et al. 2023). These frameworks have
propelled the rapid evolution of multimodal tasks, exhibiting impressive capabilities in image-text dialogue.
Traditional multimodal models follow a two-stage training process. The initial stage involves training the model
with image-text pairs to enhance feature alignment between
the two modalities. The subsequent stage utilizes highquality multimodal instruction tuning data to augment the
model’s ability to follow instructions, thereby improving its
response to user inquiries. However, compared to a large
amount of available multimodal pre-training data (Schuhmann et al. 2022; Sharma et al. 2018; Changpinyo et al.
2021; He et al. 2023), acquiring high-quality instruction
tuning data is relatively more challenging. Current highquality multimodal fine-tuning data (Liu et al. 2023b; Li
et al. 2023a) is primarily generated based on language-only

Introduction
Over the past year, significant advancements have emerged
in language models, particularly with instruction tuning
in Large Language Models (LLMs). This technology enables models to perform complex tasks in a zero-shot manner (OpenAI 2023a,b). The fusion of visual encoders with
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5309

