The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Hierarchical Network for Multimodal Document-Level Relation Extraction
Lingxing Kong1 , Jiuliang Wang1 , Zheng Ma1,2 * , Qifeng Zhou1,3 , Jianbing Zhang1,3† , Liang He1 ,
Jiajun Chen1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{konglingxing, wangjlcs20, maz, zhouqf, heliang}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{zjb, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

These works typically use a graph neural network to learn
and reason for relation prediction. Recent works (Wang et al.
2019; Xu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2022) leverage Pre-trained Language Models (PrLMs) such as BERT
to capture long-dependency features between entities. The
transformer structure of these models has been shown to excel in dealing with long sequential data. However, existing
works only explore a single textual modality for DocRE.
Rather than only relying on the textual modality, Figure 1 illustrates how incorporating additional information from corresponding videos can be beneficial in addressing the longdependency challenge in real-world scenarios. Specifically,
multiple frames capture the interactions between Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton, providing evidence of their
tense relationship. So, to accurately predict the target relation Competitor, it is necessary to effectively organize evidence from both modalities.
Another challenge in DocRE is the mention-selection
problem. Due to the abundance of information in a document, an entity may appear multiple times, resulting in multiple mentions. Previous approaches (Wang et al. 2019; Xu
et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2022) have not distinguished between entity mentions, instead, they have simply averaged all mentions to represent the entity. However,
in reality, not all mentions may be relevant to the target relation. As shown in Figure 1, only the first two mentions
of Hillary Clinton are associated with the relational triple
(Donald Trump, Competitor, Hillary Clinton), whereas
the third mention in the last sentence “On Friday, Hillary returned to Detroit on her private plane.” should be disregarded
when extracting this target triple. The difficulty in distinguishing mentions is exacerbated by the complexity of the
written language, which may include rhetorical devices such
as irony, puns, and hyperboles. In such instances, accurately
assessing the importance of a mention based solely on the
textual modality becomes challenging. To overcome these
hurdles, incorporating corresponding video information can
prove invaluable. Visual descriptions captured in different
frames offer diverse perspectives of an entity, thereby aiding
in more accurately measuring its significance.
To overcome these challenges, we present an innovative
extension of the DocRE task that incorporates an additional
video modality, giving rise to a new task called Multimodal
Document-level Relation Extraction (MDocRE). To support

Document-level relation extraction aims to extract entity relations that span across multiple sentences. This task faces two
critical issues: long dependency and mention selection. Prior
works address the above problems from the textual perspective, however, it is hard to handle these problems solely based
on text information. In this paper, we leverage video information to provide additional evidence for understanding long dependencies and offer a wider perspective for identifying relevant mentions, thus giving rise to a new task named Multimodal Document-level Relation Extraction (MDocRE). To
tackle this new task, we construct a human-annotated dataset
including documents and relevant videos, which, to the best
of our knowledge, is the first document-level relation extraction dataset equipped with video clips. We also propose a hierarchical framework to learn interactions between different
dependency levels and a textual-guided transformer architecture that incorporates both textual and video modalities. In
addition, we utilize a mention gate module to address the
mention-selection problem in both modalities. Experiments
on our proposed dataset show that 1) incorporating video information greatly improves model performance; 2) our hierarchical framework has state-of-the-art results compared with
both unimodal and multimodal baselines; 3) through collaborating with video information, our model better solves the
long-dependency and mention-selection problems.

Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) is a crucial task in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Traditionally, RE works have focused on extracting relations between entities in a single sentence. However, natural language often expresses complex
relations over multiple sentences, necessitating the extension of RE from sentence-level to document-level for realworld applications.
One challenge in Document-level Relation Extraction
(DocRE) is to capture the long dependencies between entities that are described separately and distantly in text. Most
existing DocRE works utilize a document graph to organize
long dependencies between entities (Quirk and Poon 2017;
Peng et al. 2017; Verga, Strubell, and McCallum 2018).
* Internship at AIR, Tsinghua University
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18408

