The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CoSTA: End-to-End Comprehensive Space-Time Entanglement for
Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding
Yaoyuan Liang* 1 , Xiao Liang* 1 , Yansong Tang†1 , Zhao Yang2 ,
Ziran Li3 , Jingang Wang3 , Wenbo Ding1 , Shao-Lun Huang1
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
University of Oxford,
3
Meituan Inc.

An adult man in yellow is
riding a bicycle outdoors.

Abstract
This paper studies the spatio-temporal video grounding
task, which aims to localize a spatio-temporal tube in an
untrimmed video based on the given text description of an
event. Existing one-stage approaches suffer from insufficient space-time interaction in two aspects: i) less precise
prediction of event temporal boundaries, and ii) inconsistency in object prediction for the same event across adjacent frames. To address these issues, we propose a framework
of Comprehensive Space-Time entAnglement (CoSTA) to
densely entangle space-time multi-modal features for spatiotemporal localization. Specifically, we propose a space-time
collaborative encoder to extract comprehensive video features and leverage Transformer to perform spatio-temporal
multi-modal understanding. Our entangled decoder couples
temporal boundary prediction and spatial localization via
an entangled query, boasting an enhanced ability to capture
object-event relationships. We conduct extensive experiments
on the challenging benchmarks of HC-STVG and VidSTG,
where CoSTA outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods,
demonstrating its effectiveness for this task.

Spatial
Encoder

·

Spatial Decoder
Prediction
Temporal Decoder

An adult man in yellow is
riding a bicycle outdoors.
Space-Time
Encoder

tstart

·

Space-Time
Entangled Decoder

Prediction

tend

Figure 1: The task of spatio-temporal video grounding takes
an untrimmed video and a text description as inputs, and
predicts a spatio-temporal tube that corresponds to the event
and the object described. (a) The previous state-of-the-art
method (Jin et al. 2022) employs a spatial encoder (e.g.,
2D CNN) to extract frame-wise video features and decodes
the results in a parallel way. (b) Our CoSTA encodes both
spatial and temporal video features and utilizes an entangled decoder to produce the final predictions. (c) The spatiotemporal tubes predicted by our method (in red) and by that
of (Jin et al. 2022) (in yellow), highlighting our method’s
temporal consistency in object grounding by comparison.

Introduction
Spatio-temporal video grounding (STVG) (Huang et al.
2018; Su, Yu, and Xu 2021; Yang et al. 2022a; Jin et al.
2022) is the task of localizing natural language in untrimmed
videos, where a linguistic expression describes an event happening to an object, and the objective is to predict a spatiotemporal tube (i.e., a sequence of bounding boxes) that localizes that object. Different from conventional spatial (Liu
et al. 2019a,b; Yang et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2021; Li and
Sigal 2021) and temporal grounding tasks (Anne Hendricks
et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019b; Chen et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020a, 2021), which focus specifically on either spatial or temporal dimensions, STVG requires joint space-time
localization based on the given linguistic query. As a result,
it poses a more difficult challenge in respect to multi-modal
learning—the modeling and exploitation of spatio-temporal
dependencies in visual features.

An increasing amount of attention has been drawn to the
STVG task over the past few years. In recent literature,
two-stage and one-stage models are the two mainstream approaches to capturing multi-modal correspondences in the
video and text inputs. The two-stage paradigm (Yamaguchi
et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020c) is to first
extract object proposals (Zhang et al. 2020c) or tube proposals (Tang et al. 2021) by leveraging a pre-trained object or
tube detector. The proposals are then ranked based on crossmodal similarity measures, from which one proposal is selected as the prediction. Such approaches heavily rely on the
pre-trained tube extractor and cannot recover from proposal
failures. Meanwhile, the success of end-to-end Transformer-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3324

