The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Generalized Shuffle Framework for Privacy Amplification: Strengthening
Privacy Guarantees and Enhancing Utility
E Chen1 , Yang Cao2, * , Yifei Ge 3
1

Zhejiang Lab
Hokkaido University
3
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
chene@zhejianglab.com, yang@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, Yifei.Ge23@student.xjtlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

not exist. Given this, Local Differential Privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan et al. 2011) has been proposed to achieve differential privacy by allowing the users to add noises individually; however, LDP suffers from low utility due to the
accumulated noise. To address this, the shuffle model of differential privacy (shuffle DP) (Bittau et al. 2017; Balle et al.
2019; Erlingsson et al. 2019) adds a shuffler between the
users and the server to randomly shuffle the noisy data before sending the server. The shuffle DP has an intriguing theoretical privacy amplification effect, which means a small
amount of local noise could result in a strong privacy guarantee against the untrusted server. Extensive studies (Balle
et al. 2019; Erlingsson et al. 2019; Girgis et al. 2021b; Feldman, McMillan, and Talwar 2022; Liu et al. 2021; Girgis
et al. 2021a) have been devoted to proving a better (tighter)
privacy amplification in the shuffle DP.
However, most existing studies have focused on the shuffle model based on (ϵ0 , δ0 )-LDP randomizer with uniform
and limited settings of local privacy parameters ϵ0 and δ0 .
For example, Erlingsson et al. 2019 assumes 0 < ϵ0 < 1/2
and δ0 = 0. Although a recent work Liu et al. 2023 provides
a privacy bound for local personalized privacy parameter ϵi
for each user i (and a fixed δ0 ), the bound is relatively rough
and has a large room to be improved. To address this problem, we make the following contributions.
Firstly, we propose a Generalized Shuffle framework for
Privacy Amplification (GSPA) to allow arbitrary local privacy parameters and provide new privacy amplification analysis. Our analysis technique benefits from the adoption of
Functional Differential Privacy (Dong, Roth, and Su 2022)
and carefully analyzing the distance between two multinomial distributions (see Theorem 1 and 2). For both uniform and personalized privacy parameter settings, we provide lower privacy bounds that exceed that of existing results
(see Figure 2).
Secondly, we apply GSPA with different personalized privacy parameter settings to diverse privacy-preserving analysis tasks, including private mean, private frequency estimation, and DP-SGD, to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach. For mean and frequency estimation with GSPA
(see Figure 3), the more conservative users there are, the
less utility is observed, showing a negative linear relationship. Simultaneously, as the privacy parameters of conservative users increase, utility demonstrates a positive linear

The shuffle model of local differential privacy is an advanced
method of privacy amplification designed to enhance privacy protection with high utility. It achieves this by randomly shuffling sensitive data, making linking individual data
points to specific individuals more challenging. However,
most existing studies have focused on the shuffle model based
on (ϵ0 , 0)-Locally Differentially Private (LDP) randomizers,
with limited consideration for complex scenarios such as
(ϵ0 , δ0 )-LDP or personalized LDP (PLDP). This hinders a
comprehensive understanding of the shuffle model’s potential and limits its application in various settings. To bridge
this research gap, we propose a generalized shuffle framework that can be applied to any (ϵi , δi )-PLDP setting with
personalized privacy parameters. This generalization allows
for a broader exploration of the privacy-utility trade-off and
facilitates the design of privacy-preserving analyses in diverse
contexts. We prove that shuffled (ϵi , δi )-PLDP process approximately
preserves µ-Gaussian Differential Privacy with
r
µ =

2

1−δi
1−δi
i=1 1+eϵi −maxi 1+eϵi

Pn

. This approach allows us

to avoid the limitations and potential inaccuracies associated
with inequality estimations. To strengthen the privacy guarantee, we improve the lower bound by utilizing hypothesis
testing instead of relying on rough estimations like the Chernoff bound or Hoeffding’s inequality. Furthermore, extensive
comparative evaluations clearly show that our approach outperforms existing methods in achieving strong central privacy
guarantees while preserving the utility of the global model.
We have also carefully designed corresponding algorithms for
average function, frequency estimation, and stochastic gradient descent.

Introduction
The shuffle model (Bittau et al. 2017) is a state-of-the-art
technique to balance privacy and utility for differentially
private data analysis. In traditional differential privacy, a
trusted server (or aggregator) is often assumed to collect all
users’ data before privacy-preserving data analysis (Dwork
and Roth 2014). However, such approaches may not be feasible or practical in scenarios where a trusted curator does
* Corresponding author: Yang Cao, yang@ist.hokudai.ac.jp
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11267

