The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Universal Weak Coreset
Ragesh Jaiswal∗ , Amit Kumar∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
{rjaiswal, amitk}@cse.iitd.ac.in

space, the assignment cost of X to C is within (1±ε) of that
of S. More formally, let w(x) denote the weight of a point
x ∈ S, and for a point x ∈ X, let D(x, C) be the distance
between x and the closest point in C. Then the following
condition is satisfied for every subset C of k points (where
z = 1 or z = 2 depending on the clustering problem being
considered):
X
X
(1 − ε)
w(x)D(x, C)z ≤
D(x, C)z

Abstract
Coresets for k-means and k-median problems yield a small
summary of the data, which preserves the clustering cost
with respect to any set of k centers. Recently coresets have
also been constructed for constrained k-means and k-median
problems. However, the notion of coresets has the drawback
that (i) they can only be applied in settings where the input
points are allowed to have weights, and (ii) in general metric
spaces, the size of the coresets can depend logarithmically on
the number of points. The notion of weak coresets, which has
less stringent requirements than coresets, has been studied in
the context of classical k-means and k-median problems. A
weak coreset is a pair (J, S) of subsets of points, where S
acts as a summary of the point set and J as a set of potential
centers. This pair satisfies the properties that (i) S is a good
summary of the data as long as the k centers are chosen from
J only, and (ii) there is a good choice of k centers in J with
a cost close to the optimal cost. We develop this framework,
which we call universal weak coresets, for constrained clustering settings. In conjunction with recent coreset constructions for constrained settings, our designs give greater data
compression, are conceptually simpler, and apply to a wide
range of constrained k-median and k-means problems.

x∈S

x∈X

≤ (1 + ε)

X

w(x)D(x, C)z

(1)

x∈S

Coresets are useful for several reasons: (i) There are
efficient algorithms for constructing small-sized coresets.
Hence, some of the fastest known algorithms for k- MEANS
and k- MEDIAN problems proceed in a two step fashion: first,
find a succinct coreset, and then run a less efficient algorithm on the coreset; (ii) in streaming settings, where one
cannot afford to store the entire dataset, a coreset provides
a summary of the data without compromising on the quality of clustering. Further, it is well known that coresets from
two distinct data sets can be composed to yield a new coreset for the union of these two datasets. Hence, coresets are
amenable to settings where data arrives over time; (iii) in
scenarios where the set of k centers may change over time,
a coreset represents an efficient way of computing the clustering cost.
For most applications, the requirements of a coreset may
seem too strong. Indeed, a less stringent notion of weak
coreset was defined by (Feldman, Monemizadeh, and Sohler
2007). A weak coreset, with a parameter ε, for a point set
X as above is a pair (J, S) of subsets of points in the metric
space, with S being a weighted subset of points, such that (i)
the condition (1) is satisfied for all subsets C, where |C| = k
and C ⊆ J; and (ii) there is a subset C of k centers in J such
that the assignment cost of X to C is within (1 + ε) of the
optimal clustering cost of X. The motivation for defining a
weak coreset is that one could obtain weak coresets with better guarantees than a coreset. Indeed, this shall be the case
for the problems considered in this work.
To understand why weak coresets may have better guarantees than coresets, we briefly discuss coreset construction techniques. Typical constructions use random samplingbased ideas. One starts with an initial set of O(k) centers ob-

Introduction
Center-based clustering problems such as k- MEDIAN and
the k- MEANS are important data processing tasks. Given a
set of center locations F ⊂ X , a set X ⊂ X of n points in
a metric (X , D), and a parameter k, the goal here is to partition the set of points into k clusters, say X1 , . . . , Xk , and
assign the points in each cluster to a corresponding cluster
center, say c1 , . . . , ck ∈ F respectively, such that the objecPk P
tive i=1 x∈Xi D(x, ci )z is minimized. Here, z is a parameter which is 1 for k- MEDIAN and 2 for k- MEANS.1 In
the past decade, there has been significant effort in designing
coresets for such settings. Given a k- MEDIAN or k- MEANS
clustering instance as above, a coreset with parameter ε is
a weighted subset S of points in the metric space with the
following property: for every set C of k points in the metric
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Note that even though our results are stated for z = 1 and
z = 2, they also hold for a general value of z.

12782

