The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Optimize Permutation Flow Shop Scheduling via Graph-Based
Imitation Learning
Longkang Li1,2 , Siyuan Liang3 , Zihao Zhu1 , Chris Ding1 , Hongyuan Zha1 , Baoyuan Wu1 *
1

The School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore

Input

Abstract
The permutation flow shop scheduling (PFSS), aiming at
finding the optimal permutation of jobs, is widely used
in manufacturing systems. When solving large-scale PFSS
problems, traditional optimization algorithms such as heuristics could hardly meet the demands of both solution accuracy and computational efficiency, thus learning-based methods have recently garnered more attention. Some work attempts to solve the problems by reinforcement learning methods, which suffer from slow convergence issues during training and are still not accurate enough regarding the solutions.
To that end, we propose to train the model via expert-driven
imitation learning, which accelerates convergence more stably and accurately. Moreover, in order to extract better fea(a)
ture representations of input jobs, we incorporate the graph
structure as the encoder. The extensive experiments reveal
that our proposed model obtains significant promotion and
presents excellent generalizability in large-scale problems
with up to 1000 jobs. Compared to the state-of-the-art reinforcement learning method, our model’s network parameters are reduced to only 37% of theirs, and the solution gap
of our model towards the expert solutions decreases from
(b)
6.8% to 1.3% on average. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/longkangli/PFSS-IL.

1

J1

J2

J3

J4

Scheduling Method

Output
J4

J1

J2

J3

(a) The overview of the PFSS.

Machine

One feasible
feasible permutation:
permutation: J3
I.I. One
J3 -- J1
J1 -- J2
J2 -- J4
J4

Processing Time

makespan: 18

makespan:18
18
Makespan:

Machine

II. The optimal permutation: J4 - J1 - J2 - J3
II. The optimal permutation: J4 - J1 - J2 - J3

Processing Time

makespan: 13

makespan:13
13
Makespan:

(b) Gantt charts of different permutations.

Figure 1: An overview of a 4-job (J1∼J4) 3-machine
(M1∼M3) PFSS problem. One color corresponds to one job.
All jobs follow the same operational order M1-M2-M3.

Introduction

Scheduling is a synthesized process of arranging, controlling, and optimizing jobs and workload in a manufacturing
system. Here we utilize machine learning to solve a frequently encountered optimization problem: the permutation
flow shop scheduling (PFSS) (Sharma and Sharma 2021),
which is about sequentially processing several jobs on a series of machines. The PFSS is one of the most comprehensively studied scheduling problems, with broad applications
in production and planning (Ribas, Leisten, and Framiñan
2010), intuitive designs (Alfaro-Fernández et al. 2020), and
transportation (Soukhal, Oulamara, and Martineau 2005).
Figure 1 gives an example and overview of a 4-job 3machine PFSS problem. One machine corresponds to one
operation, and the PFSS strictly requires all the jobs to
be processed in the same order of operations. Typically,
the goal of the PFSS is to find the optimal permutation

of the jobs, which minimizes the makespan. Makespan describes the total processing time from the start to the end
for scheduling a sequence of jobs. When there is only 1 machine, this PFSS problem can be trivially solved. As for a
n-job m-machine PFSS problem (m ≥ 2), the number of
feasible solutions should be n!. The PFSS thus can be considered as a combinatorial optimization (CO) problem with
the NP-hard property (Lenstra and Kan 1981).
Recently, machine learning has been widely used in combinatorial optimization problems (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2020; Li et al. 2022). One popular model is pointer network (PN) (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015), which uses
the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) as an encoder and
the attention mechanism as a decoder (or pointer) to select a
member of the input as the output. The PN can generalize a
small pre-trained model to arbitrarily large instances. The
current state-of-the-art learning-based method for solving
the PFSS utilizes the PN and training the network via actor-

* Corresponding to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20185

