The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PPEA-Depth: Progressive Parameter-Efficient Adaptation for
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Yue-Jiang Dong1 , Yuan-Chen Guo1 , Ying-Tian Liu1 , Fang-Lue Zhang2 , Song-Hai Zhang1 * †
1

BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
{dongyj21@mails., guoyc19@mails., liuyingt23@mails., shz@}tsinghua.edu.cn, fanglue.zhang@vuw.ac.nz

Previous Training Paradigm:

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation is of significant importance with applications spanning across autonomous driving and robotics. However, the reliance on
self-supervision introduces a strong static-scene assumption,
thereby posing challenges in achieving optimal performance
in dynamic scenes, which are prevalent in most real-world
situations. To address these issues, we propose PPEA-Depth,
a Progressive Parameter-Efficient Adaptation approach to
transfer a pre-trained image model for self-supervised depth
estimation. The training comprises two sequential stages:
an initial phase trained on a dataset primarily composed of
static scenes, succeeded by an expansion to more intricate
datasets involving dynamic scenes. To facilitate this process,
we design compact encoder and decoder adapters to enable
parameter-efficient tuning, allowing the network to adapt effectively. They not only uphold generalized patterns from pretrained image models but also retain knowledge gained from
the preceding phase into the subsequent one. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PPEA-Depth achieves state-of-theart performance on KITTI, CityScapes and DDAD datasets.

Tuning

Static Dataset A

Encoder

Decoder

Dynamic Dataset B

Encoder

Decoder

Dynamic Dataset C

Encoder

Decoder

Frozen
Model A
Model B
Model C
Pre-Trained
Model

Our Training Paradigm:
• Stage 1: Domain Adaptation
Static Dataset
A
• Stage 2: Scene Adaptation
Dynamic Dataset

Encoder
Adapter

Decoder

Load Weights from Stage 1
B

C

Encoder

Decoder

Adapter

Adapter

Encoder

Decoder

Adapter

Adapter

Figure 1: Previous Paradigm v.s. Our Paradigm. The conventional training approach employs a consistent process for
both static and dynamic datasets: it includes using a pretrained image model as an encoder and fine-tuning all U-Net
parameters for each dataset. In contrast, our novel two-stage
training paradigm integrates adapters to progressively tailor
the pre-trained image models for depth perception initially
on simple datasets (static scenes primarily) and then extends
to intricate datasets (with dynamic scenes).

Introduction
In the realm of computer vision, accurate depth perception
of a scene is a fundamental aspect that underpins a wide array of applications, from autonomous vehicles navigating
complex environments to immersive virtual reality experiences. Depth estimation has witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years due to the proliferation of deep learning techniques. Especially, self-supervised methods (Zhou
et al. 2017; Godard et al. 2019; Watson et al. 2021; Guizilini
et al. 2022; Bangunharcana et al. 2023) that leverage the inherently contained rich and diverse sources of depth-related
information in monocular videos open the door to scalability
and real-world adaptability for depth estimation methods.
Existing self-supervised monocular depth estimation
methods are commonly based on fine-tuning pre-trained image models learned from large image datasets, such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), on depth datasets, such as KITTI
(Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012), improving depth estimation accuracy compared to training from scratch (Godard
* Project homepage: https://yuejiangdong.github.io/PPEADepth/.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1609

et al. 2019). Some recent approaches introduce cost volume construction within the network to incorporate multiframe inputs during inference (Watson et al. 2021; Guizilini
et al. 2022; Bangunharcana et al. 2023). However, the above
methods are all rooted in the assumption of a static scene,
where solely the camera moves. This strong assumption subsequently creates challenges for these methods to reach optimality in dynamic scenes, limiting the efficient utilization
of actual, unlabeled data for self-supervised training. Some
other methods propose sophisticated algorithms that incorporate supplementary components like semantic segmentation or motion prediction networks to model object motion
(Klingner et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021a; Feng et al. 2022; Hui

