The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedTGP: Trainable Global Prototypes with Adaptive-Margin-Enhanced
Contrastive Learning for Data and Model Heterogeneity in Federated Learning
Jianqing Zhang1 , Yang Liu2 * , Yang Hua3 , Jian Cao1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
3
Queen’s University Belfast
tsingz@sjtu.edu.cn, liuy03@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, y.hua@qub.ac.uk, cao-jian@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

bring formidable communication cost (Zhuang, Chen, and
Lyu 2023) but also expose clients’ models, which further
raise privacy and intellectual property (IP) concerns (Li et al.
2021a; Zhang et al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2023).
To alleviate these problems, Heterogeneous FL
(HtFL) (Tan et al. 2022b) has emerged as a novel FL
paradigm that enables clients to possess diverse model
architectures and heterogeneous data without sharing
private model parameters. Instead, various types of global
knowledge are shared among clients to reduce communication and improve model performance. For example,
some FL methods adopt knowledge distillation (KD) techniques (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) and communicate
predicted logits on a public dataset (Li and Wang 2019; Lin
et al. 2020; Liao et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021) as global
knowledge for aggregation at the server. However, these
methods highly depend on the availability and quality of
the global dataset (Zhang et al. 2023a). Data-free KD-based
approaches utilize additional auxiliary models as global
knowledge (Wu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022), but the
communication overhead for sharing the auxiliary models
is still considerable. Alternatively, prototype-based HtFL
methods (Tan et al. 2022b,c) propose to share lightweight
class representatives, a.k.a, prototypes, as global knowledge,
significantly reducing communication overhead.
However, existing prototype-based HtFL methods naively
aggregate heterogeneous client prototypes on the server using weighted-averaging, which has several limitations. First,
the weighted-averaging protocol requires clients to upload
class distribution information of private data to the server
as weights, which leaks sensitive distribution information
about clients’ data (Yi et al. 2023). Secondly, the prototypes
generated from heterogeneous clients have diverse scales
and separation margins. Averaging client prototypes generates uninformative global prototypes with smaller margins
than the margins between well-separated prototypes. We
demonstrate this “prototype margin shrink” phenomenon in
Fig. 1(a). However, smaller margins between prototypes diminish their separability, ultimately generating poor prototypes (Zhang and Sato 2023).
To address these limitations, we design a novel HtFL
method using Trainable Global Prototypes (TGP), termed
FedTGP, in which we train the desired global prototypes with our proposed Adaptive-margin-enhanced Con-

Recently, Heterogeneous Federated Learning (HtFL) has attracted attention due to its ability to support heterogeneous
models and data. To reduce the high communication cost of
transmitting model parameters, a major challenge in HtFL,
prototype-based HtFL methods are proposed to solely share
class representatives, a.k.a, prototypes, among heterogeneous
clients while maintaining the privacy of clients’ models.
However, these prototypes are naively aggregated into global
prototypes on the server using weighted averaging, resulting
in suboptimal global knowledge which negatively impacts the
performance of clients. To overcome this challenge, we introduce a novel HtFL approach called FedTGP, which leverages our Adaptive-margin-enhanced Contrastive Learning (ACL) to learn Trainable Global Prototypes (TGP) on
the server. By incorporating ACL, our approach enhances
prototype separability while preserving semantic meaning.
Extensive experiments with twelve heterogeneous models
demonstrate that our FedTGP surpasses state-of-the-art methods by up to 9.08% in accuracy while maintaining the communication and privacy advantages of prototype-based HtFL.
Our code is available at https://github.com/TsingZ0/FedTGP.

Introduction
With the rapid increase in the amount of data required to
train large models today, concerns over data privacy also
rise sharply (Shin et al. 2023; Li et al. 2021a). To facilitate training machine learning models while protecting data
privacy, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a new distributed machine learning paradigm (Kairouz et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2020). However, in practical scenarios, traditional
FL methods such as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) experience performance degradation when faced with statistical
heterogeneity (T Dinh, Tran, and Nguyen 2020; Li et al.
2022). Subsequently, personalized FL methods emerged to
address the challenge of statistical heterogeneity by learning personalized model parameters. Nevertheless, most of
them still assume the model architectures on all the clients
are the same and communicate client model updates to the
server to train a shared global model (Zhang et al. 2023d,c,b;
Collins et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021b). These methods not only
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16768

