The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ProxyDet: Synthesizing Proxy Novel Classes via Classwise Mixup
for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Joonhyun Jeong1,2 , Geondo Park2 , Jayeon Yoo3 , Hyungsik Jung1 , Heesu Kim1 *
1

NAVER Cloud, ImageVision
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
3
Seoul National University
{joonhyun.jeong, hyungsik.jung, heesu.kim89}@navercorp.com, geondopark@kaist.ac.kr, jayeon.yoo@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

the performance on the fixed class set, open-vocabulary object detection (OVOD) frameworks (Gu et al. 2021; Zareian
et al. 2021) have emerged to tackle the limited range of discernible objects. The objective is to detect a set of novel
classes which are not seen during training, without newly
labeling the bounding boxes and class labels of these novel
classes which is labor-intensive and non-scalable.
In order to achieve open-vocabulary property, OVOD
frameworks should expand their classifier for novel classes.
Therefore, previous OVOD frameworks (Gu et al. 2021;
Zhou et al. 2022; Kuo et al. 2022) adopt pretrained visionlanguage model (VLM), CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), to obtain the weights of their classifier by prompting the names
of base and novel classes. These VLM models provide an
interface (i.e., encoder) that maps textual information (e.g.,
class name) to an embedding space where embeddings of semantically matched images are closely located. In line with
previous work, our study also adopts this approach to enable
open-vocabulary detection.
In order to further explicitly expand the range of detection vocabulary on the novel classes, recent OVOD frameworks (Zhou et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022;
Gao et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022) rely on pseudo-labeling a
subset of novel classes given in the inexpensive supplementary datasets (Ridnik et al. 2021) consisting of pairs of image and its class label (or caption) without box annotations.
The missing box annotations are predicted using pretrained
region proposal network (RPN) and their class labels are assigned using image-level labels (Zhou et al. 2022; Rasheed
et al. 2022) and the words within the captions (Lin et al.
2022), which contain a substantial number of novel classes.
These pseudo-labeling approaches are essentially identical
to the conventional closed-set object detection, the only difference being that the human-labeled box annotations are
not used. Consequently, it has limitations in fundamentally
solving generalization to the truly unseen novel classes that
were not pseudo-labeled, only to improve performance for
the pseudo-labeled novel classes as shown in Table 1.
To overcome this limitation, we present ProxyDet, a new
OVOD framework that helps better generalization on the
overall distribution of novel classes including these truly
unseen novel ones that have never been presented during
training. Empirically, we observe that a wide range of novel
classes resides within the convex hull constructed by the

Open-vocabulary object detection (OVOD) aims to recognize novel objects whose categories are not included in the
training set. In order to classify these unseen classes during training, many OVOD frameworks leverage the zero-shot
capability of largely pretrained vision and language models,
such as CLIP. To further improve generalization on the unseen novel classes, several approaches proposed to additionally train with pseudo region labeling on the external data
sources that contain a substantial number of novel category
labels beyond the existing training data. Albeit its simplicity,
these pseudo-labeling methods still exhibit limited improvement with regard to the truly unseen novel classes that were
not pseudo-labeled. In this paper, we present a novel, yet simple technique that helps generalization on the overall distribution of novel classes. Inspired by our observation that numerous novel classes reside within the convex hull constructed by
the base (seen) classes in the CLIP embedding space, we propose to synthesize proxy-novel classes approximating novel
classes via linear mixup between a pair of base classes. By
training our detector with these synthetic proxy-novel classes,
we effectively explore the embedding space of novel classes.
The experimental results on various OVOD benchmarks such
as LVIS and COCO demonstrate superior performance on
novel classes compared to the other state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/clovaai/ProxyDet.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a task in which the model simultaneously
predicts where all objects are located within an image and
to which class each object belongs. Conventional closedset object detection frameworks (Lin et al. 2017b; He et al.
2017; Lin et al. 2017a) have limited the range of discernible
objects to a fixed set of base classes, which are usually the
classes annotated in training sets. Recently, the performance
of those frameworks on the fixed set of classes has largely
evolved, building upon the success of vision transformer architectures (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Carion
et al. 2020; Zong, Song, and Liu 2022; Chen et al. 2022)
and large-scale pretraining techniques (Su et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022). However, beyond improving
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2462

