The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continual Relation Extraction via Sequential Multi-Task Learning
Thanh-Thien Le1 * , Manh Nguyen2 * , Tung Thanh Nguyen3 * ,
Linh Ngo Van2† , Thien Huu Nguyen4
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Vietnam
3
University of Michigan, USA
4
University of Oregon, USA
v.thienlt3@vinai.io, manhnv195088@sis.hust.edu.vn, shawdsai@umich.edu,
linhnv@soict.hust.edu.vn, thienn@uoregon.edu
2

Abstract

declines after learning previously unseen relation types as
new data emerges. To mitigate this issue, previous CRE approaches (Cui et al. 2021; Han et al. 2020; Zhao, Cui, and
Hu 2023; Nguyen et al. 2023) have achieved impressive results using memory-based techniques (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Shin et al. 2017a; Chaudhry et al. 2019). These
methods retain a fraction of learned data in a small memory
buffer, allowing the model to reinforce its past knowledge
while learning new relations. For instance, Hu et al. (2022)
mitigated catastrophic forgetting by integrating a classification network and a prototypical contrastive network, contrasting every newly encountered instance with the prototype
of each relation stored in the replay buffer. Another state-ofthe-art approach is Zhao et al. (2022), which leveraged the
memory buffer to enable knowledge distillation from older
tasks combined with learning the newest task using supervised contrastive learning. Despite their success, state-ofthe-art CRE methods persists two lingering issues:

To build continual relation extraction (CRE) models, those
can adapt to an ever-growing ontology of relations, is a cornerstone information extraction task that serves in various
dynamic real-world domains. To mitigate catastrophic forgetting in CRE, existing state-of-the-art approaches have effectively utilized rehearsal techniques from continual learning and achieved remarkable success. However, managing
multiple objectives associated with memory-based rehearsal
remains underexplored, often relying on simple summation
and overlooking complex trade-offs. In this paper, we propose Continual Relation Extraction via Sequential Multi-task
Learning (CREST), a novel CRE approach built upon a tailored Multi-task Learning framework for continual learning.
CREST takes into consideration the disparity in the magnitudes of gradient signals of different objectives, thereby effectively handling the inherent difference between multi-task
learning and continual learning. Through extensive experiments on multiple datasets, CREST demonstrates significant
improvements in CRE performance as well as superiority
over other state-of-the-art Multi-task Learning frameworks,
offering a promising solution to the challenges of continual
learning in this domain.

The first issues is their reliance on a memory buffer.
In light of the diverse potential applications of CRE, many
of which might involve highly confidential data, there are
significant concerns regarding storing data in the long term
while maintaining stringent privacy standards. In an attempt
to solve this problem, recently, prompt-based, rehearsal-free
methods for Continual Learning (Wang et al. 2022c,b; Smith
et al. 2023) have emerged and achieved remarkable success
in computer vision. However our empirical studies (Table
3) show extremely subpar results from these methods when
applying to CRE.

Introduction
In Natural Language Processing, Relation Extraction (RE)
(Baldini Soares et al. 2019; Man et al. 2022; Lai et al.
2022) is the task of classifying the semantic relationships
between entities/events in text into predefined relation types.
Nonetheless, conventional relation extraction (Nguyen and
Grishman 2015; Baldini Soares et al. 2019; Veyseh et al.
2020a,b) encounters challenges in dynamic environments
characterized by a continuously expanding set of relations.
This realization has prompted the development of Continual Relation Extraction (CRE) models, which recognize the
ever-changing nature of information in practical settings.
The fundamental problem of Continual Relation Extraction (CRE) is catastrophic forgetting. This refers to the phenomenon where the model’s performance on previous tasks

Another problem that arises from such methods is the
task of handling multiple objectives during replay. Among
numerous advanced CRE baselines, primarily utilizing
memory-based methods, there often exists at least two loss
functions, corresponding to acquiring new information and
strengthening previously acquired knowledge, respectively.
In the above examples, Hu et al.’s method involves InfoNCE
(Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018) contrastive loss and contrastive
margin loss, while Zhao et al.’s approach involves supervised contrastive loss and distillation loss. These methods
oversimplistically aggregate these losses by weighted summation, hence overlook the inherent, complicated trade-offs
between the objectives.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18444

