The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reliable Data Generation and Selection for Low-Resource Relation Extraction
Junjie Yu1 , Xing Wang2 , Wenliang Chen1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
jjyu@stu.suda.edu.cn, brightxwang@tencent.com, wlchen@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
Automated construction of annotated data holds significant
importance in Relation Extraction (RE) tasks due to the hardness and cost of human annotation. In this work, we propose Self-RDGS, a method for Self-supervised Reliable Data
Generation and Selection in low-resource RE tasks. At first,
we fully utilize the knowledge of triplets as prompts to generate sentences by employing the Large Language Models
(LLMs). Since the auto-generated data contains noise, we
then propose a ranking-based data selection method to select reliable sentences. Finally, we integrate the data selection and RE model training within a self-supervised iterative framework. Through experimentation on three datasets
with low-resource settings, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach in constructing annotated data
and achieving noteworthy improvements in comparison to
multiple baselines. Code, data and models are available at
https://github.com/jjyunlp/GenerationRE.

Figure 1: An example of sentence generation for a given
triplet. While certain sentences express the correct semantic relation, there are noisy sentences.

obtain lots of triplets (e.g. the ones from Freebase1 ) and free
text, and consequently obtain a large amount of annotated
sentences. However, the automatically annotated data from
Exact Match-based Distant Supervision (EM-DS) contains
significant noisy sentences, since the information of relations is completely ignored during matching (Lin et al. 2016;
Ma et al. 2021).
Another solution to constructing annotated data for RE
is through automatic text generation (ATG). Papanikolaou
and Pierleoni (2020) proposes a method to train a generator for each relation by fine-tuning GPT-2 (Radford et al.
2019). Chia et al. (2022), on the other hand, suggests explicitly incorporating relations as a prefix constraint to prompt
the generator in generating annotated sentences. These prior
studies achieve a certain success in generating synthetic data
for RE tasks through automatic text generation. However,
their methods do not consider the knowledge of entities during the generation process that may result in noisy sentences.
Thus, we argue that fully utilizing the information of triplets,
including both entities and relations, can provide valuable
guidance to the generator that might generate higher quality
training data.
In order to address the aforementioned challenges, we
propose a method called Self-supervised Reliable Data Generation and Selection (Self-RDGS). In our approach, we first

Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) aims to identify the pre-defined relations between two entities within a given sentence, thereby
plays an important role in many Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (Zhou et al. 2005). Nowadays, training a
neural network model using a large amount of annotated
data stands as the prevailing and efficacious strategy for constructing an RE system (Zeng et al. 2015; Soares et al. 2019).
However, obtaining a large amount of annotated data for RE
tasks poses a challenge due to the diverse definitions of relations (Hendrickx et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2017), and human
annotation remains a laborious and costly process. Consequently, numerous studies have concentrated on the automatic construction of annotated data.
One possible solution is the utilization of Distant Supervision (DS), a widely employed method for automatically
constructing annotated data, under the assumption that if
two entities participate in a relation, any sentence that contains the two entities might express the relation (Mintz et al.
2009). During constructing the data, we often apply the exact match strategy to search for the entities. We can easily
* The corresponding author is Wenliang Chen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

19440

https://developers.google.com/freebase

