The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CutFreq: Cut-and-Swap Frequency Components for
Low-Level Vision Augmentation
Hongyang Chen1 , Kaisheng Ma2*
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
chenhy@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Generated Images

Abstract

Smart ISP

Denoise

Enhance

Derain

Low-level vision plays a crucial role in a wide range of imaging quality and image recognition applications. However, the
limited size, quality, and diversity of datasets often pose significant challenges for low-level tasks. Data augmentation is
the most effective and practical way of sample expansion,
but the commonly used augmentation methods in high-level
tasks have limited improvement in the low-level due to the
boundary effects or the non-realistic context information. In
this paper, we propose the Cut-and-Swap Frequency Components (CutFreq) method for low-level vision, which aims
to preserve high-level representations with directionality and
improve image synthesis quality. Observing the significant
frequency domain differences between reconstructed images
and real ones, in CutFreq, we propose to transform the input and real images separately in the frequency domain, then
define two stages for the model training process, and finally
swap the specified frequency bands respectively and inversely
transform to generate augmented samples. The experimental results show the superior performance of CutFreq on five
low-level vision tasks. Moreover, we demonstrate the effectiveness of CutFreq in the low-data regime. Code is available
at https://github.com/DreamerCCC/CutFreq.

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Frequency domain gaps between the generated
and the real images by the state-of-the-art models in lowlevel vision tasks. Row 1: Restormer (Zamir et al. 2021)
on Rain100H (Yang et al. 2017). Row 2: Restormer on
LoL (Wei et al. 2018). Row 3: Restormer on SIDD (Abdelhamed, Lin, and Brown 2018). Row 4: LW-ISP (Chen and
Ma 2022) on Zurich (Ignatov, Van Gool, and Timofte 2020).

Introduction
Labeling data is a time-consuming and labor-intensive task,
especially in low-level vision tasks, which have the characteristics of high overhead, low savings, and poor adaptability (Devillers, Vidrascu, and Lamel 2005). Whereas data
augmentation (Yun et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2017; Li et al.
2021; Yoo, Ahn, and Sohn 2020; Han et al. 2022) are techniques used to increase the amount of data by adding slightly
modified copies of existing data or synthetic data newly
created from existing data. In mainstream tasks (Trabucco
et al. 2023; Liang, Liang, and Jia 2023; Zou et al. 2023),
the augmented samples are always strongly correlated with
the original samples. At the same time, data augmentation can bring regularization effects and reduce the structural risk of the model (Yun et al. 2019). In a certain way,
the model is more immersed in observing the general patterns in the dataset, and some data irrelevant to the patterns are suppressed. Recent approaches (DeVries and Tay-

lor 2017; Yoo, Ahn, and Sohn 2020) have focused on altering certain regions in an image to ensure that deep neural networks (DNNs) can emphasize more discriminative regions used to generate predictions. However, these methods
are not always applicable to low-level vision, such as image super-resolution (Chen et al. 2022) and image restoration (e.g., image deblurring (Tao et al. 2018), image dehazing (Engin, Genç, and Kemal Ekenel 2018)). Extensive experiments have shown that training with augmentation with
warped spatial properties results in poor algorithm performance compared to simple data augmentation methods such
as flipping and rotating (Yoo, Ahn, and Sohn 2020; Han
et al. 2022). As of now, few data augmentation methods
can be used universally for low-level vision. From the perspective of low-level vision, for data augmentation methods
to increase samples and improve the model’s generalization

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1072

