The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Propagation for Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation
Meihan Liu1 , Zeyu Fang1 , Zhen Zhang3 , Ming Gu1 , Sheng Zhou1,2 * , Xin Wang4 , Jiajun Bu1
1

Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{lmh zju, fangzeyu, guming444, zhousheng zju, bjj}@zju.edu.cn,
zhen@nus.edu.sg, xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
75

Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation (UGDA) aims to
transfer knowledge from a labelled source graph to an unlabelled target graph in order to address the distribution shifts
between graph domains. Previous works have primarily focused on aligning data from the source and target graph in
the representation space learned by graph neural networks
(GNNs). However, the inherent generalization capability of
GNNs has been largely overlooked. Motivated by our empirical analysis, we reevaluate the role of GNNs in graph domain
adaptation and uncover the pivotal role of the propagation
process in GNNs for adapting to different graph domains. We
provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis of UGDA and
derive a generalization bound for multi-layer GNNs. By formulating GNN Lipschitz for k-layer GNNs, we show that the
target risk bound can be tighter by removing propagation layers in source graph and stacking multiple propagation layers
in target graph. Based on the empirical and theoretical analysis mentioned above, we propose a simple yet effective approach called A2GNN for graph domain adaptation. Through
extensive experiments on real-world datasets, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed A2GNN framework.

70

Macro-F1

Abstract

[PT]

P[T]

[T]P

[P]T

T[P]

65
60
55

1 2 3 4 5
(a) Number of Layers

1
2
3
4
5
(b) Number of T Layers

1 2 3 4 5
(c) Number of P Layers

Figure 1: The influence of different operations in GNNs on
task D → A. [·] indicates the module stacking operation.

concentrated on aligning source and target graph distributions in the representation space generated by GNNs (Zhu
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023). This includes learning domaininvariant representations with measurements like maximum
mean discrepancy (Shen et al. 2021), graph subtree discrepancy (Wu, He, and Ainsworth 2023), or performing domain
discrimination (Shen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Dai et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2020; You et al. 2023). However, the underlying generalization capability of GNNs has been largely
overlooked. Given that the representations learned by GNNs
play a pivotal role in UGDA, we propose to revisit the step
prior to alignment and pose a fundamental research question: Does GNNs have an inherent capability to adapt to
new domains?
To answer this question, we first decouple GNN’s mechanism into two independent operations: Propagation (P) and
Transformation (T), where the P operation performs message passing between neighboring nodes and the T operation
conducts linear transformations to the node representations.
Following the disentanglement, the GNN’s architecture can
be constructed with the combinations of P and T. Figure 1
presents the results under different architectures, from which
we have the following key observations: (i) Simultaneously
adding P and T does not substantially enhance its generalization capability. As we can see from Figure 1(a), an incremental trend can be observed when the number of layers is
fewer than 4, and more layers will result in decreased performance. (ii) Solely adding T may impair its adaptation capability. The UGDA performance in Figure 1(b) shows a significant decrease with the addition of more transformation
layers while keeping the number of propagation layers fixed;

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed remarkable achievements of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Zhang et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022) across a wide range of
applications, from social network analysis (Xia et al. 2021)
and protein prediction (Li et al. 2021), to traffic flow forecasting (Lu et al. 2022), etc. As the distribution shifts commonly exist among real-world graphs, it makes the majority
of existing GNNs fail to generalize to new domains. Recently, Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation (UGDA)
has emerged as a key focus in both industrial and academic
communities. The goal of UGDA is to facilitate the knowledge transfer from a labelled source graph to an unlabelled
target graph, which addresses the issue of distribution shifts,
thus unlocking the full potential of graph neural networks
for diverse applications.
Inspired by the success of domain adaptation in computer
vision and natural language processing (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015), most existing UGDA methods have primarily
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13963

