The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FairPlay: A Multi-Sided Fair Dynamic Pricing Policy for Hotels
Errikos Streviniotis* 1,3 , Athina Georgara* 2 , Filippo Bistaffa2 , Georgios Chalkiadakis1
1
Technical University of Crete, Chania, Greece
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (IIIA), CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
3
Athena Research Center, Athens, Greece
{estreviniotis, gchalkiadakis}@tuc.gr, {ageorg, filippo.bistaffa}@iiia.csic.es
2

Abstract

the hotel industry, dynamic pricing policies (DPP) are prevalent among online platforms to optimise hotel revenue while
offering competitive prices. However, there is still room for
improvement in the current DPPs, as few studies address the
relationship between fairness and pricing policy.
Now, overtourism in popular destinations (Butler 2022;
McGarvey and Leonardo 2023) and overpricing of hotels
coupled with the proliferation of short-term rentals (e.g.,
Airbnb), have significant social implications for local communities. Currently, it is very common for hotel owners to
abruptly even quadruple their room rates in high-demand periods (Stoller 2017), making accommodation unaffordable
for many visitors. As such, many tourists seek accommodation via short-term rentals, resulting in the rise of Airbnb
properties while drawing potential long-term rentals off the
market. Consequently, the increase in rental costs creates
challenges for residents who may find it extremely hard to
secure affordable housing options (Rafenberg 2022). It is evident that these problems are affecting communities socially,
showing that local authorities need to take action to deal with
these tourism-related challenges by adopting several regulatory measures (von Briel and Dolnicar 2021).
At the same time, most approaches used in two-sided platforms may hurt providers’ well-being (Graham et al. (2017);
Burke (2017)). In general, the providers’ prosperity depends
on the exposure they get in the platform, i.e., the opportunities offered by the platform to their goods to be viewed
and potentially selected by the customers (Patro et al. 2020).
If the platform favours a small group of providers by constantly exposing them, the remaining providers will not be
able to prosper and, therefore, will quit or move to other platforms (Patro et al. 2020). Thus, it is crucial to develop more
sophisticated systems that consider the providers’ exposure
opportunities, i.e., the opportunity to display a provider’s
product(s) to potential customers in a fair manner.
Against this background, we propose a highly effective
approach that ensures two-sided fairness in the context of an
online platform for the hotel industry by considering a fair
dynamic pricing strategy and providing fair opportunities of
exposure to the providers. Specifically, our approach, given
a collection of rooms organised in hotels—where the hotels
correspond to providers—adjusts each room’s price based
on the platform’s supply and demand. Notably, cooperative
game theory (Peleg and Sudhölter (2007); Chalkiadakis et

In recent years, popular touristic destinations face overtourism. Local communities suffer from its consequences
in several ways. Among others, overpricing and profiteering
harms local societies and economies deeply. In this paper we
focus on the problem of determining fair hotel room prices.
Specifically, we put forward a dynamic pricing policy where
the price of a room depends not only on the demand of the hotel it belongs to but also on the demand of: (i) similar rooms
in the area and (ii) their hotels. To this purpose, we model our
setting as a cooperative game and exploit an appropriate game
theoretic solution concept that promotes fairness both on the
customers’ and the providers’ side. Our simulation results involving price adjustments across real-world hotels datasets,
confirm that ours is a fair dynamic pricing policy, avoiding
both over- and under-pricing hotel rooms.

Introduction
In today’s digital era, online platforms have emerged as pivotal players in facilitating global commerce and play a key
role in the transformation of the hotel industry. Such platforms offer customers a seamless and efficient way to access
a vast range of hotel products and services. By providing features such as price comparisons, customer reviews, and instant bookings, these platforms have revolutionised the way
in which travellers plan their trips and make their reservations. In turn, this has opened up new opportunities for hotels
to expand their reach, increase their revenue streams, and
improve their customer experiences through digital marketing and advertising. In general, online platforms, also known
as two-sided platforms, host two roles: (i) the providers of
services and (ii) the customers (Patro et al. 2020).
A crucial factor in the success of online platforms is pricing policies, as they directly impact customer satisfaction
and loyalty. A pricing policy that is perceived as unfair by
customers can lead to negative reviews and a loss of revenue in the long run. Online platforms have adopted various
policies depending on their business model, such as dynamic
pricing (Bayoumi et al. 2013; Aziz et al. 2011), fixed pricing
plans, and negotiation-based pricing (Zhang et al. 2018). In
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22368

