The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Non-monotone Sequential Submodular Maximization
Shaojie Tang1 , Jing Yuan 2
1

2

Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas
shaojie.tang@utdallas.edu, jing.yuan@unt.edu

denotes the first j items of π.
This problem, which captures the position-bias in item selection, has a wide range of applications, including sequential active learning and recommendation systems (Zhang,
Tatti, and Gionis 2022). For instance, it can be applied to
tackle challenges in ranking products on online retail platforms (Asadpour et al. 2022). Platforms like Amazon and
Airbnb face the task of not only selecting a subset of products or rooms to showcase but also arranging them in a
vertical list format to provide customers with an organized
and customer-friendly browsing experience. Shoppers scroll
through this list, depending on their level of patience, and
may potentially make a purchase from the products displayed. The platform’s objective is to optimize the selection and ranking of products to maximize the likelihood of a
purchase. Interestingly, these applications can be framed as
a problem of sequential submodular maximization. In this
context, the parameters in F (π) can be interpreted as follows: We denote the set of products as V , the window size
of displayed products as k, λj represents the proportion of
customers with a specific patience level j (e.g., a customer
with patience level j is willing to view the first j products π[j] ). The function fj (π[j] ) denotes the likelihood of purchase for customers with a patience level of j after seeing the
first j products π[j] . Typically, fj is described as a submodular function. In this case, F (π) captures the expected probability of purchase when a customer is shown a sequence of
products π.
While previous research on sequential submodular maximization has primarily focused on the monotone setting, where submodular functions are assumed to be nondecreasing, the non-monotonicity of submodular functions becomes more apparent in many real-world scenarios,
including feature selection (Das and Kempe 2008), maximum cut (Gotovos, Karbasi, and Krause 2015), profit maximization (Tang and Yuan 2021a), and data summarization (Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi 2016). One
such example involves designing a diversity-aware recommendation system for a vast assortment of products spanning
different categories (Lin and Bilmes 2010; Mirzasoleiman,
Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi 2016; Amanatidis et al. 2020;
Carbonell and Goldstein 1998). The system’s primary goal
is to generate a sequence of products that not only have high
ratings but also effectively represent the entire collection. To

Abstract
In this paper, we study a fundamental problem in submodular optimization known as sequential submodular maximization. The primary objective of this problem is to select and
rank a sequence of items to optimize a group of submodular functions. The existing research on this problem has predominantly concentrated on the monotone setting, assuming
that the submodular functions are non-decreasing. However, in various real-world scenarios, like diversity-aware recommendation systems, adding items to an existing set might
negatively impact the overall utility. In response, we propose
to study this problem with non-monotone submodular functions and develop approximation algorithms for both flexible
and fixed length constraints, as well as a special case with
identical utility functions. The empirical evaluations further
validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms in the
domain of video recommendations.

Introduction
Submodular optimization is a central problem in machine
learning with various applications in a wide range of fields, including data summarization (Lin and Bilmes 2011), sparse reconstruction (Das and Kempe 2011), active learning (Golovin and Krause 2011; Tang and Yuan 2022), and
viral marketing (Tang and Yuan 2020). These formulations
aim to select a subset of items that maximizes a submodular
function. However, in many real-world applications, the objective is not only to select items but also to rank them in a
specific order (Azar and Gamzu 2011; Tschiatschek, Singla,
and Krause 2017; Tang and Yuan 2021b). This motivates
the study of sequential submodular maximization (Asadpour
et al. 2022; Zhang, Tatti, and Gionis 2022), a fundamental
problem in submodular optimization. This problem involves
selecting and ranking a group of k items from a ground set
V . The goal is to maximize the weighted summation of k
submodular functions, denoted as f1 , · · · , fk : 2V → R+ ,
where each function fj takes the first j items from the ranking sequence as input. Formally, the objective is to find a
feasible sequence π = {π1 , · · · , πk } over items in V that
def P
maximizes the value of F (π) = j∈[k] λj · fj (π[j] ) where
def

λj denotes the weight of function j and π[j] = {π1 , · · · , πj }
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15284

