The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SeqRank: Sequential Ranking of Salient Objects
Huankang Guan and Rynson W.H. Lau*
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Huankang.Guan@my.cityu.edu.hk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Salient Object Ranking (SOR) is the process of predicting
the order of an observer’s attention to objects when viewing a complex scene. Existing SOR methods primarily focus
on ranking various scene objects simultaneously by exploring their spatial and semantic properties. However, their solutions of simultaneously ranking all salient objects do not
align with human viewing behavior, and may result in incorrect attention shift predictions. We observe that humans view
a scene through a sequential and continuous process involving a cycle of foveating to objects of interest with our foveal
vision while using peripheral vision to prepare for the next
fixation location. For instance, when we see a flying kite, our
foveal vision captures the kite itself, while our peripheral vision can help us locate the person controlling it such that we
can smoothly divert our attention to it next. By repeatedly
carrying out this cycle, we can gain a thorough understanding
of the entire scene. Based on this observation, we propose
to model the dynamic interplay between foveal and peripheral vision to predict human attention shifts sequentially. To
this end, we propose a novel SOR model, SeqRank, which reproduces foveal vision to extract high-acuity visual features
for accurate salient instance segmentation while also modeling peripheral vision to select the object that is likely to grab
the viewer’s attention next. By incorporating both types of
vision, our model can mimic human viewing behavior better
and provide a more faithful ranking among various scene objects. Most notably, our model improves the SA-SOR/MAE
scores by +6.1%/-13.0% on IRSR, compared with the stateof-the-art. Extensive experiments show the superior performance of our model on the SOR benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/guanhuankang/SeqRank.

Input

Liu et al.

Our sequential ranking strategy.

Tian et al.

Ours

GT

Figure 1: We present a novel salient object ranking approach, in which the objects are detected in a sequential
order, allowing the most salient object to be detected first,
followed by the less salient one and so on. Our sequential
ranking strategy is consistent with human viewing behavior
and gives a more accurate prediction than the state-of-theart methods (Liu et al. 2021a; Tian et al. 2022a), which rank
objects simultaneously.

based on their degrees of salience, allowing the most salient
object to be attended to first, followed by the less salient objects, resulting in a sequential visiting of different parts of a
complex scene. SOR can help understand how humans interpret images and benefit many downstream tasks, such as
image editing (Aberman et al. 2022; Miangoleh et al. 2023),
scene understanding (Du et al. 2019; Li et al. 2023), and
human-robot interaction (Schillaci, Bodiroža, and Hafner
2013).
Salient object ranking is a rather new research field that
has witnessed some recent progress. For instance, (Siris
et al. 2020) study the object-scene context to predict attention shifts. (Fang et al. 2021a) suggest adding position information explicitly to enhance ranking performance. (Tian
et al. 2022a) propose combining both spatial and objectbased attention in the ranking model for more realistic attention shift predictions. These methods have demonstrated
some advantages in salient object ranking. However, they are
limited to exploring semantics and spatial attributes to learn
how objects compete for saliency, raising concerns about
spatial and semantic biases. Besides, they operate under an
unrealistic assumption that the saliency ranking of all potential salient objects in the scene could be inferred simultane-

Introduction
Salient object detection (He et al. 2017b; Qin et al. 2019;
Zhao et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021b; Wu et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2023) aims to identify objects that naturally attract human attention in a cluttered visual world. Although SOD can
tell which objects are more likely to grab human attention, it
fails to reveal how human attention shifts among them. This
issue has recently led to the development of Salient Object
Ranking (SOR) (Siris et al. 2020), which is to predict the visiting order of an observer’s attention to various scene objects
* Rynson W.H. Lau is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1941

