The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Navigating Open Set Scenarios for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Kunyu Peng1 , Cheng Yin1 , Junwei Zheng1 , Ruiping Liu1 , David Schneider1 , Jiaming Zhang1 ,
Kailun Yang2, * , M. Saquib Sarfraz1,3 , Rainer Stiefelhagen1 , Alina Roitberg4
1

Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
2
School of Robotics, Hunan University, China
3
Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation, Germany
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University of Stuttgart, Germany
kunyu.peng@kit.edu, ujfib@student.kit.edu, junwei.zheng@kit.edu, ruiping.liu@kit.edu,
david.schneider@kit.edu, jiaming.zhang@kit.edu, kailun.yang@hnu.edu.cn,
saquib.safraz@kit.edu, rainer.stiefelhagen@kit.edu, alina.roitberg@ki.uni-stuttgart.de
Abstract

Known Unknown

In real-world scenarios, human actions often fall outside the
distribution of training data, making it crucial for models to
recognize known actions and reject unknown ones. However,
using pure skeleton data in such open-set conditions poses
challenges due to the lack of visual background cues and
the distinct sparse structure of body pose sequences. In this
paper, we tackle the unexplored Open-Set Skeleton-based
Action Recognition (OS-SAR) task and formalize the benchmark on three skeleton-based datasets. We assess the performance of seven established open-set approaches on our
task and identify their limits and critical generalization issues when dealing with skeleton information. To address
these challenges, we propose a distance-based cross-modality
ensemble method that leverages the cross-modal alignment
of skeleton joints, bones, and velocities to achieve superior
open-set recognition performance. We refer to the key idea as
CrossMax - an approach that utilizes a novel cross-modality
mean max discrepancy suppression mechanism to align latent
spaces during training and a cross-modality distance-based
logits refinement method during testing. CrossMax outperforms existing approaches and consistently yields state-ofthe-art results across all datasets and backbones. We will release the benchmark, code, and models to the community.

Closed- OpenSet
Set

(a) Open-set setting

MCD
Humanity
ARPL
Ours

SoftMax
PMAL

RPL
DEAR

(b) Result comparison

Figure 1: (a) The open-set skeleton-based action recognition setting. (b) Compared to previous methods, our method
consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance. The tasks
T1-T4 are based on the CTR-GCN backbone and use CrossSubject and Cross-View splits of NTU60 to evaluate with
O-AUROC and O-AUPR metrics, T5-T8 are with HD-GCN,
and T9-T12 are with Hyperformer, respectively.

Introduction

2018; Fontanel et al. 2020) there is a pressing need for further exploration in open-set, skeleton-based human action
recognition, which is the main motivation of our work.
Several methods target open-set action recognition in
videos (Bao, Yu, and Kong 2021), but the problem of detecting novel behaviors from skeleton streams has been
overlooked so far. These tasks pursue similar goals, yet
differ substantially: the absence of visual background as
an additional cue context and the sparse characteristic
structure of body pose sequences introduce unique challenges in managing out-of-distribution actions. To address the lack of a suitable evaluation testbed, we first
build an expansive benchmark for Open-Set Skeletonbased Action Recognition (OS-SAR), comprising three
prominent skeleton-based action recognition backbones:
CTRGCN (Chen et al. 2021), HDGCN (Lee et al. 2022),
and Hyperformer (Ding et al. 2023). This benchmark is derived from three public datasets for action recognition from

Leveraging body pose sequences for human action recognition offers several benefits, such as enhanced privacy, reduced data volume, and better generalization to novel human appearances. Modern skeleton-based approaches (Zhou
et al. 2022), once trained, remain static in their set of possible predictions. A more realistic scenario is the model’s
exposure to open sets, where both, known and novel action
categories may occur at any time (Meyer and Drummond
2019). Out-of-distribution actions – those that fall outside
the model’s known repertoire – typically result in misclassifications as one of the known categories, eventually leading
to significant disruptions, particularly when these recognition outputs directly steer decision-making, e.g., in assistive
robots. As pointed out by researchers in the past (Miller et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4487

