The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relaxed Stationary Distribution Correction Estimation
for Improved Offline Policy Optimization
Woosung Kim, Donghyeon Ki, Byung-Jun Lee
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{wsk208, peop1e1n, byungjunlee}@korea.ac.kr

trained. In this case, it is common to impose a f -divergence
regularization between the stationary distributions of the
data collection policy and the trained policy (Wu, Tucker,
and Nachum 2019; Lee et al. 2021) to mitigate the aforementioned distributional shift problem. Here, f -divergence
plays a significant role, enabling safe estimation of the RL
objective without sampling from the target policy and establishing approximate lower bounds on performance.
Despite their favorable theoretical properties, however,
these implicit policy optimization algorithms, e.g. AlgaeDICE (Nachum et al. 2019b) and OptiDICE (Lee et al.
2021), have shown limited performance in practice, compared to other offline RL algorithms based on the conventional actor-critic framework. In particular, implicit policy
optimization algorithms tend to show weak performance in
large environments, and in datasets with low optimality (i.e.,
data collection policy being closer to random policy).
In this paper, we identify the main cause that weakens f divergence regularized implicit policy optimization methods
and propose Offline Policy Optimization via Relaxed Stationary DIstribution Correction Estimation (PORelDICE),
a refined algorithm that addresses the raised issues by relaxing the constraint. We first reformulate the objective in a unified convex conjugate form for better analysis and show how
the bias of the estimator and the shape of the unified convex
conjugate function contribute to the performance degradation. While the use of a biased estimator is common in recent deep RL algorithms (Dai et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2021),
we show that the bias in implicit policy optimization method
may result in significantly different policy, similar to the
phenomenon known as optimistic transition (Levine et al.
2020). On the other hand, if we adopt an additional function
approximator to alleviate the bias, the resultant algorithm
tends to diverge due to the non-decreasing property of the
conjugate function.
Our proposed algorithm, PORelDICE, relaxes the positivity constraint of the visitation distribution, which result
in different shape of the conjugate function and adoption of
samples with low advantage during optimization. We show
that the relaxation corresponds to the minimization of the
upper bound of the original objective, and leads to improved
stability. We also show that the proposed relaxation can be
applied to other offline RL frameworks, and the practical
implementation of Sparse Q-learning (Xu et al. 2023) can

Abstract
One of the major challenges of offline reinforcement learning
(RL) is dealing with distribution shifts that stem from the mismatch between the trained policy and the data collection policy. Stationary distribution correction estimation algorithms
(DICE) have addressed this issue by regularizing the policy
optimization with f -divergence between the state-action visitation distributions of the data collection policy and the optimized policy. While such regularization naturally integrates
to derive an objective to get optimal state-action visitation,
such an implicit policy optimization framework has shown
limited performance in practice. We observe that the reduced
performance is attributed to the biased estimate and the properties of conjugate functions of f -divergence regularization.
In this paper, we improve the regularized implicit policy optimization framework by relieving the bias and reshaping the
conjugate function by relaxing the constraints. We show that
the relaxation adjusts the degree of involvement of the suboptimal samples in optimization, and we derive a new offline
RL algorithm that benefits from the relaxed framework, improving from a previous implicit policy optimization algorithm by a large margin.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on training agents to
make desirable decisions in complex environments through
trial and error. While RL has shown remarkable successes
in a number of domains with favorable properties, its online
learning nature makes it expensive and inefficient in practice, especially in real-world settings with high interaction
costs. To this end, offline RL framework was proposed to
obtain policies without any online interaction, using only a
fixed dataset. However, offline RL turns out to face its own
challenge called distribution shift, where the error accumulates as the policy is attempted to improve, as it deviates
from the data collection policy. Numerous offline RL algorithms have been proposed to limit the distribution shift and
result in the policy that actually improves from the data collection policy.
Our main focus is on implicit policy optimization methods for offline RL, where we optimize stationary distribution
correction estimation (DICE) that corrects the data distribution to the stationary distribution induced by the policy being
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13185

