The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Semantic-Based Spatial Graph Convolution Network for Skeleton-Based
Human Action Recognition
Jianyang Xie1,2 , Yanda Meng2,6∗ , Yitian Zhao4 , Anh Nguyen3 , Xiaoyun Yang5 , Yalin Zheng2,6 *
1

CDT in Distributed Algorithms, School of EEECS, University of Liverpool, UK
Department of Eye and Vision Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
3
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
4
Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, CAS, Cixi, China
5
Remark AI UK Limited, London, UK
6
Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Liverpool, UK
yzheng@liverpool.ac.uk, myd@liverpool.ac.uk
2

Abstract

N

𝝋: 1×1

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have attracted great
attention and achieved remarkable performance in skeletonbased action recognition. However, most of the previous
works are designed to refine skeleton topology without considering the types of different joints and edges, making them
infeasible to represent the semantic information. In this paper, we proposed a dynamic semantic-based graph convolution network (DS-GCN) for skeleton-based human action
recognition, where the joints and edge types were encoded in
the skeleton topology in an implicit way. Specifically, two semantic modules, the joints type-aware adaptive topology and
the edge type-aware adaptive topology, were proposed. Combining proposed semantics modules with temporal convolution, a powerful framework named DS-GCN was developed
for skeleton-based action recognition. Extensive experiments
in two datasets, NTU-RGB+D and Kinetics-400 show that
the proposed semantic modules were generalized enough to
be utilized in various backbones for boosting recognition accuracy. Meanwhile, the proposed DS-GCN notably outperformed state-of-the-art methods. The code is released here
https://github.com/davelailai/DS-GCN.

𝜉: 1×1

Edge type

×N
%

(a)

𝐴! ∈ ℝ#×#

𝝉𝟏 : 1×1

N

𝝉𝟐 : 1×1

𝛷 : 1×1
N

×N

N

𝐴&! ∈ ℝ#×#

𝐴"! ∈ ℝ#×#

(b)
N: joint number × Matrix multiplication

(c)
𝜑, 𝜉, 𝝉𝟏 , 𝝉𝟐 , 𝛷 Convolution Kernel

Figure 1: Illustration of node and edge type-aware adaptive
graph generation. (a) represents the general adaptive graph
generation, where the joint is considered as the same type,
ϕ, and ξ is 1 × 1 convolution kernel. general adaptive graph
AgD ∈ RN ×N was generated based on the matrix multiplication. (b) represent node type-aware adaptive generation,
human body is split into five parts with different colours,
and node-type specific transform function τ1 and τ2 was designed, where the color is corresponding to the node type.
For each part, the joints were projected into corresponding feature space, then the node type-aware adaptive graph
AnD ∈ RN ×N can be obtained based on the matrix multiplication. (c) represent the edge type-aware adaptive graph
generation, the edge type is represented as the type pair of
its end nodes. There are fifteen types of edges, and an edgetype specific transform function ϕ was designed and was utilized to transfer edge representations to their corresponding
distribution space, thus the edge type-aware adaptive graph
AeD ∈ RN ×N can be obtained.

Introduction
Human action recognition (HAR) is an essential topic in
computer vision and has a wide range of applications in
video understanding (Gaur et al. 2011; Gui et al. 2018).
Especially, skeleton-based action recognition has attracted
much attention in the research community. Compared with
RGB image squeeze (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Bilen
et al. 2017; Tran et al. 2015) or optical flows (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Wang and Schmid 2013), skeleton
data (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Vemulapalli, Arrate, and
Chellappa 2014) provided body pose and movement information directly, making it more robust to variations of camera viewpoint and video appearance. Meanwhile, low-cost
depth sensors (Liu et al. 2019) (e.g., Kinect) and availability of pose estimation algorithms (Sun et al. 2019) make the
skeleton-based HAR can be extensively studied.

Early methods focus on extracting handcrafted features
from skeleton sequences (Vemulapalli, Arrate, and Chellappa 2014; Wang et al. 2014). Recently, deep learning has
become the mainstream research due to its strong feature
learning ability, and various network structures have been investigated. For instance, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
(Du, Wang, and Wang 2015; Zhang, Liu, and Xiao 2017;
Liu et al. 2017) have been applied to model the temporal information within the skeleton sequences, convolution neu-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6225

