The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GIN-SD: Source Detection in Graphs with Incomplete Nodes via Positional
Encoding and Attentive Fusion
Le Cheng1,2 , Peican Zhu2 * , Keke Tang3 , Chao Gao2 , Zhen Wang1,2†
1

2

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University (NWPU)
School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University (NWPU)
3
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University
ericcan@nwpu.edu.cn, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

Source detection in graphs has demonstrated robust efficacy
in the domain of rumor source identification. Although recent solutions have enhanced performance by leveraging deep
neural networks, they often require complete user data. In
this paper, we address a more challenging task, rumor source
detection with incomplete user data, and propose a novel
framework, i.e., Source Detection in Graphs with Incomplete
Nodes via Positional Encoding and Attentive Fusion (GINSD), to tackle this challenge. Specifically, our approach utilizes a positional embedding module to distinguish nodes that
are incomplete and employs a self-attention mechanism to focus on nodes with greater information transmission capacity.
To mitigate the prediction bias caused by the significant disparity between the numbers of source and non-source nodes,
we also introduce a class-balancing mechanism. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of GIN-SD and its superiority to state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Impact of incomplete nodes on source detection:
(a-c) graphs with incomplete node ratios of 0%, 10%, and
20%; (d) influence of varying incomplete node ratios on
the source detection accuracy for different methods. As the
proportion of incomplete nodes increases, the performance
of other methods declines more significantly, while our approach remains less affected.

Introduction
Source detection in graphs represents a fundamental challenge in mathematics and plays a vital role in rumor source
detection (Shah and Zaman 2011; Ling et al. 2022; Zhu
et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2022). Early solutions, such
as LPSI (Wang et al. 2017), EPA (Ali et al. 2019), and
MLE (Pinto, Thiran, and Vetterli 2012), primarily rely on
source centrality theory (Prakash, Vreeken, and Faloutsos
2012; Shah and Zaman 2011) and maximum likelihood estimation in detecting sources. In recent years, with the advancement of deep learning techniques (Gao et al. 2022), researchers have utilized deep neural networks to encode user
attributes and propagation information (Bian et al. 2020;
Wang, Jiang, and Zhao 2022; Ling et al. 2022), significantly
refreshing the state-of-the-art records.
However, current solutions for source detection are
premised on the strict assumption of having access to complete user data, encompassing details such as the forwarding
frequency of all users and the time of information reception.
Indeed, acquiring such exhaustive user data is exceedingly

challenging and sometimes impossible due to time constraints, resource limitations, and privacy protection measures (Du et al. 2017; Zhou, Jagmohan, and Varshney 2019).
No existing work, to our knowledge, considers the problem
of source detection in graph with incomplete nodes. In practice, when user data is incomplete, the majority of cuttingedge solutions falter, as evidenced by the notable performance decline shown in Fig. 1.
Source detection in graphs with incomplete nodes poses
three main challenges. First, in the process of node information aggregation and transmission, the absent information
from incomplete nodes may be erroneously treated as valid
data from normal nodes, thus leading to significant feature
errors. Second, since the efficiency of information transmission varies among nodes, e.g., nodes with higher degrees
tend to relay information more rapidly, treating all nodes
uniformly hinders the training efficiency. Third, a marked

* Corresponding author.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

55

