The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TopoGCL: Topological Graph Contrastive Learning
Yuzhou Chen1 , Jose Frias2 , Yulia R. Gel3,4
1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University
2
Department of Mathematics, UNAM
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas
4
National Science Foundation
yuzhou.chen@temple.edu, frias@ciencias.unam.mx, ygl@utdallas.edu

Abstract

The emerging GCL paradigm rests on the two major components: 1) augmentation which constructs multiple views
of the graph by exploiting invariance under various transformations such as subgraph sampling, perturbations of nodes
and edges, and attribute masking (You et al. 2020; Zeng
and Xie 2021); and 2) contrastive learning (CL) itself which
maximizes mutual information (MI) among the views generated from the resulting graph augmentations, such that
positive pairs are contrasted with their negative counterparts (Sun et al. 2019; Velickovic et al. 2019; Hassani and
Khasahmadi 2020). The CL step is performed by contrasting
node-level representations and graph-level representations,
and the three traditional contrasting modes are local-local
CL, global-local CL, and global-global CL. However, since
the agreement analysis among representations is typically
assessed using cosine similarity of the related embeddings,
these contrasting approaches cannot systematically account
for similarity of higher-order graph properties, for instance,
simultaneous matching among subgraphs of varying sizes
and orders. In turn, such polyadic node interactions, including various network motifs and other multi-node graph substructures, often play the key role in graph learning tasks, especially, in conjunction with prediction of protein functions
in protein-protein interactions and fraud detection in financial networks (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016; Chen,
Gel, and Poor 2022). Interestingly, as shown by (You et al.
2020), subgraphs also tend to play the uniformly consistent
role in the data augmentation step of GCL across all types
of the considered graphs, from bioinformatics to social networks.

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has recently emerged as a
new concept which allows for capitalizing on the strengths
of graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn rich representations in a wide variety of applications which involve abundant
unlabeled information. However, existing GCL approaches
largely tend to overlook the important latent information on
higher-order graph substructures. We address this limitation
by introducing the concepts of topological invariance and extended persistence on graphs to GCL. In particular, we propose a new contrastive mode which targets topological representations of the two augmented views from the same graph,
yielded by extracting latent shape properties of the graph
at multiple resolutions. Along with the extended topological layer, we introduce a new extended persistence summary,
namely, extended persistence landscapes (EPL) and derive its
theoretical stability guarantees. Our extensive numerical results on biological, chemical, and social interaction graphs
show that the new Topological Graph Contrastive Learning
(TopoGCL) model delivers significant performance gains in
unsupervised graph classification for 8 out of 12 considered
datasets and also exhibits robustness under noisy scenarios.

Introduction
In the last couple of years self-supervised contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a new promising trend in graph
learning which has brought the power of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to a broad range of applications without annotated supervisory data, from prediction of molecular properties in biochemistry to discovery of new crystalline materials (Koker et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2022;
Stärk et al. 2022). Indeed, until very recently GNNs have
been limited in their representation learning capabilities due
to the over-reliance on the existence of task-dependent labels. However, such supervisory information is often handcrafted and may be both scarce and notoriously hard to obtain in many real-life applications of graph learning. For instance, labeling e-crime activity on blockchain transaction
graphs typically involves a highly resource-intensive process of manual annotation by the law enforcement agencies,
while in bioinformatics and material research graph labeling
requires costly and time-consuming wet-lab experiments.

Motivated by the recent success of the computational algebraic topology in graph representation learning, we introduce the concepts of topological representation invariance
and extended persistent homology (PH) to GCL. In particular, PH is a tool in computational topology which retrieves evolution of the shape patterns in the observed data
along various user-defined geometric dimensions (Hofer,
Kwitt, and Niethammer 2019; Edelsbrunner, Letscher, and
Zomorodian 2000; Zomorodian and Carlsson 2005). By
“shape” here, we broadly refer to the data properties which
are invariant under continuous transformations such as bending, stretching, and twisting. PH tools, often in a form of a
fully trainable topological layer (Carrière et al. 2020; Chen,
Coskunuzer, and Gel 2021; Yan et al. 2021; Horn et al.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11453

