The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VMT-Adapter: Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning for Multi-Task Dense
Scene Understanding
Yi Xin1,2 , Junlong Du2 , Qiang Wang2 , Zhiwen Lin2 , Ke Yan2 *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
xinyi@smail.nju.edu.cn, {jeffdu, albertqwang, xavierzwlin, kerwinyan}@tencent.com

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained models have achieved remarkable
success in various computer vision tasks. A standard approach to leverage these models is to fine-tune all model parameters for downstream tasks, which poses challenges in
terms of computational and storage costs. Recently, inspired
by Natural Language Processing (NLP), parameter-efficient
transfer learning has been successfully applied to vision tasks.
However, most existing techniques primarily focus on singletask adaptation, and despite limited research on multi-task
adaptation, these methods often exhibit suboptimal training and inference efficiency. In this paper, we first propose
an once-for-all Vision Multi-Task Adapter (VMT-Adapter),
which strikes approximately O(1) training and inference efficiency w.r.t task number. Concretely, VMT-Adapter shares
the knowledge from multiple tasks to enhance cross-task interaction while preserves task-specific knowledge via independent knowledge extraction modules. Notably, since taskspecific modules require few parameters, VMT-Adapter can
handle an arbitrary number of tasks with a negligible increase
of trainable parameters. We also propose VMT-Adapter-Lite,
which further reduces the trainable parameters by learning
shared parameters between down- and up-projections. Extensive experiments on four dense scene understanding tasks
demonstrate the superiority of VMT-Adapter(-Lite), achieving
a 3.96% (1.34%) relative improvement compared to singletask full fine-tuning, while utilizing merely ∼ 1% (0.36%)
trainable parameters of the pre-trained model.

1

Relative improvement to
Single-Task Full Fine-Tuning (%)

6
4
2

(4X)

VMT-Adapter(Ours)

Polyhistor
Polyhistor

(4X)

VMT-Adapter-Lite(Ours)

Hyperformer

Polyhistor-Lite

0

(4X)

Single-Task Full Fine-Tuning
(!")."+ )

-2

Adapter
BitFit
LoRA

-4
-6

Low-Rank Adapter

!"$

!"#

!"%

!"&

!"'

Numbers of trainable parameters

Figure 1: The trade-off between performance and trainable
parameters of various parameter-efficient tuning methods.
The result is the average performance on four dense tasks.
4X means that training and inference costs is four times.

To address these challenges, researchers have extensively investigated parameter-efficient transfer learning approaches (Houlsby et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2022; Zaken,
Goldberg, and Ravfogel 2022), which strive to achieve an
optimal balance between trainable parameters and performance on downstream tasks. Among these methods, the
Adapter (Houlsby et al. 2019) and its variants (Karimi Mahabadi et al. 2021; mahabadi, Henderson, and Ruder 2021)
have gained widespread adoption in the NLP domain and
have been integrated into various architectures. The Adapter
is a compact module incorporated into the intermediate layers of the model (as depicted in Figure 2), enabling comparable performance to full fine-tuning while only training
a limited set of parameters. This innovative approach significantly reduces the computational and storage overhead,
making it a more practical solution for large-scale models
and diverse applications. Recently, Adaptformer (Chen et al.
2022) introduced adapter into computer vision, focusing on
visual recognition tasks. Owing to its success, parameter-

Introduction

The pretrain-finetune paradigm has made significant strides
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Devlin et al. 2018;
Brown et al. 2020), Computer Vision (CV) (He et al. 2022b;
Xin et al. 2023), and various other domains. Typically, given
a pre-trained model, the conventional fine-tuning approach
involves adjusting the entire model, that is, performing full
fine-tuning for downstream tasks. However, as state-of-theart pre-trained models expand to encompass billions or even
trillions of parameters, the traditional method of full finetuning becomes increasingly untenable due to the immense
computational and storage resource demands.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16085

