The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Continual Knowledge Graph Embedding via Incremental Distillation
Jiajun Liu1 * , Wenjun Ke1, 2 * † , Peng Wang1, 2† , Ziyu Shang1 ,
Jinhua Gao3 , Guozheng Li1 , Ke Ji1 , Yanhe Liu1
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiajliu, kewenjun, pwang, ziyus1999, liguozheng, keji, liuyanhe}@seu.edu.cn, gaojinhua@ict.ac.cn

Time i

Abstract
Traditional knowledge graph embedding (KGE) methods typically require preserving the entire knowledge graph (KG)
with significant training costs when new knowledge emerges.
To address this issue, the continual knowledge graph embedding (CKGE) task has been proposed to train the KGE model
by learning emerging knowledge efficiently while simultaneously preserving decent old knowledge. However, the explicit
graph structure in KGs, which is critical for the above goal,
has been heavily ignored by existing CKGE methods. On
the one hand, existing methods usually learn new triples in
a random order, destroying the inner structure of new KGs.
On the other hand, old triples are preserved with equal priority, failing to alleviate catastrophic forgetting effectively.
In this paper, we propose a competitive method for CKGE
based on incremental distillation (IncDE), which considers
the full use of the explicit graph structure in KGs. First, to
optimize the learning order, we introduce a hierarchical strategy, ranking new triples for layer-by-layer learning. By employing the inter- and intra-hierarchical orders together, new
triples are grouped into layers based on the graph structure
features. Secondly, to preserve the old knowledge effectively,
we devise a novel incremental distillation mechanism, which
facilitates the seamless transfer of entity representations from
the previous layer to the next one, promoting old knowledge
preservation. Finally, we adopt a two-stage training paradigm
to avoid the over-corruption of old knowledge influenced by
under-trained new knowledge. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of IncDE over state-of-the-art baselines.
Notably, the incremental distillation mechanism contributes
to improvements of 0.2%-6.5% in the mean reciprocal rank
(MRR) score. More exploratory experiments validate the effectiveness of IncDE in proficiently learning new knowledge
while preserving old knowledge across all time steps.

Time i + 1

KG

KG
d

old entity

old relation

d
c
new entity

a

b

new relation

Figure 1: Illustration of a growing KG. Two specific learning orders should be considered: entities closer to the old
KG should be prioritized (a is prioritised over b); entities influenced heavier to new triples (e.g., connecting with more
relations) should be prioritized (a is prioritised over c).
question answering (Bordes, Weston, and Usunier 2014), semantic search (Noy et al. 2019), and relation extraction (Li
et al. 2022). Traditional KGE models (Bordes et al. 2013;
Trouillon et al. 2016; Sun et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020) only
focus on obtaining embeddings of entities and relations in
static KGs. However, real-world KGs constantly evolve, especially emerging new knowledge, such as new triples, entities, and relations. For example, during the evolution of DBpedia (Bizer et al. 2009) from 2016 to 2018, about 1 million
new entities, 2,000 new relations, and 20 million new triples
emerged (DBpedia 2021). Traditionally, when a KG evolves,
KGE models need to retrain the models with the entire KG,
which is a non-trivial process with huge training costs. In
domains such as bio-medical and financial fields, it is significant to update the KGE models to support medical assistance and informed market decision-making with rapidly
evolving KGs, especially with substantial new knowledge.
To this end, the continual KGE (CKGE) task has been
proposed to alleviate this problem by using only the emerging knowledge for learning (Song and Park 2018; Daruna
et al. 2021). In comparison with the traditional KGE, the
key of CKGE lies in learning emerging knowledge well
while preserving old knowledge effectively. As shown in
Figure 1, new entities and relations (i.e., the new entity a,
b, and c) should be learned to adapt to the new KG. Meanwhile, knowledge in the old KG (such as old entity d) should
be preserved. Generally, existing CKGE methods can be
categorized into three families: dynamic architecture-based,

Introduction
Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) (Bordes et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2017; Rossi et al. 2021) aims to embed entities and relations from knowledge graphs (KGs) (Dong et al.
2014) into continuous vectors in a low-dimensional space,
which is crucial for various knowledge-driven tasks, such as
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8759

