The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Bayesian Network Classifiers to Minimize Class Variable Parameters
Shouta Sugahara, Koya Kato, Maomi Ueno
The University of Electro-Communications
sugahara@ai.lab.uec.ac.jp, kato@ai.lab.uec.ac.jp, ueno@ai.lab.uec.ac.jp

Abstract

likelihood (CLL) of the class variable given the feature variables, which is related directly to the classification, and into
a joint LL of the feature variables, which is not related directly to the classification. Furthermore, they proposed conditional MDL (CMDL), a modified MDL replacing the LL
with the CLL.
Consequently, they claimed that the Bayesian network
(BN) minimizing CMDL, as a discriminative model, shows
better accuracy than that maximizing ML. Unfortunately,
CLL has no closed-form equation for estimating the optimal parameters. This finding implies that optimizing CLL
requires a gradient descent algorithm (e.g., extended logistic
regression algorithm (Greiner and Zhou 2002)). Nevertheless, the optimization algorithm involves the reiteration of
each structure candidate, which greatly increases the computational costs.
To resolve this difficulty, Friedman, Geiger, and Goldszmidt (1997) proposed an augmented naive Bayes classifier
(ANB) in which the class variable links directly to all feature variables. Links among feature variables are allowed.
Actually, ANB ensures that all feature variables can contribute to classification. Later, restricted ANBs of various
types were proposed, such as tree-augmented naive Bayes
(TAN) (Friedman, Geiger, and Goldszmidt 1997) and forestaugmented naive Bayes (FAN) (Lucas 2004).
Maximization of CLL entails heavy computation. Therefore, various approximation methods have been proposed
to maximize it. Carvalho, Adão, and Mateus (2013) proposed approximate CLL (aCLL), which is decomposable
and which is computationally efficient. Moreover, Grossman
and Domingos (2004) proposed a learning structure method
using a greedy hill-climbing algorithm (Heckerman, Geiger,
and Chickering 1995) to maximize CLL. Furthermore, Mihaljević, Bielza, and Larrañaga (2018) proposed a method
to reduce the space for the greedy search of BN Classifiers
(BNCs) with the CLL score. These reports described that the
BNC maximizing the approximated CLL performed better
than that maximizing the approximated ML.
Nevertheless, they did not explain why CLL outperformed ML. For large datasets, because ML has an asymptotic consistency, the classification accuracies presented by
maximizing ML are expected to be comparable to those presented by maximizing CLL. Differences between the performances of the two scores in these studies might depend on

This study proposes and evaluates a new Bayesian network
classifier (BNC) having an I-map structure with the fewest
class variable parameters among all structures for which the
class variable has no parent. Moreover, a new learning algorithm to learn our proposed model is presented. The proposed method is guaranteed to obtain the true classification
probability asymptotically. Moreover, the method has lower
computational costs than those of exact learning BNC using
marginal likelihood. Comparison experiments have demonstrated the superior performance of the proposed method.

Introduction
Classifiers are divided roughly into deep learning approaches and probabilistic approaches. The former can learn
huge variables and can provide more accurate classification
than the latter does. However, the decisions made by the
deep learning classifier is unexplainable because mathematical properties of the deep learning are unclear and because
the decisions of deep learning classifiers are deterministic.
By contrast, the latter can estimate a probability distribution of the class variable. In particular, probabilistic graphical models have the explainable, “white-box” characteristic.
A popular probabilistic classifier is the naive Bayes classifier, in which the feature variables are conditionally independent given a class variable (Minsky 1961). Initially, because actual datasets were generated from more complex
systems, naive Bayes was not expected to provide highly
accurate classification. Therefore, the general Bayesian network (GBN) with learning by marginal likelihood (ML) as
a generative model has been expected to outperform naive
Bayes because GBN is more expressive than naive Bayes.
However, Friedman, Geiger, and Goldszmidt (1997) demonstrated that naive Bayes sometimes outperforms the GBN
using a greedy search to find the smallest minimum description length (MDL) score, which had been originally intended to approximate ML. They explained the inferior performance of the MDL by decomposing it into a log likelihood (LL) term that reflects the model fitting to training data,
and a penalty term that reflects the model complexity. Moreover, they decomposed the LL term into a conditional log
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20540

