The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

IINet: Implicit Intra-inter Information Fusion for Real-Time Stereo Matching
Ximeng Li1 , Chen Zhang1, 2 , Wanjuan Su1 , Wenbing Tao1, *
1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Tuke Research
{ximengli, zhangchen , suwanjuan, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

25
20
15
10
5
0.5

Fast-ACV+
DPF

1.0
1.5
Res.(Kpx²)

2.0

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6

BGNet
DecNet

ACVNet
PLKNet

IINet(Ours)
1.6

Abs(px)

Mem.(GB)

Recently, there has been a growing interest in 3D CNN-based
stereo matching methods due to their remarkable accuracy.
However, the high complexity of 3D convolution makes it
challenging to strike a balance between accuracy and speed.
Notably, explicit 3D volumes contain considerable redundancy. In this study, we delve into more compact 2D implicit
network to eliminate redundancy and boost real-time performance. However, simply replacing explicit 3D networks with
2D implicit networks causes issues that can lead to performance degradation, including the loss of structural information, the quality decline of inter-image information, as well
as the inaccurate regression caused by low-level features. To
address these issues, we first integrate intra-image information to fuse with inter-image information, facilitating propagation guided by structural cues. Subsequently, we introduce
the Fast Multi-scale Score Volume (FMSV) and Confidence
Based Filtering (CBF) to efficiently acquire accurate multiscale, noise-free inter-image information. Furthermore, combined with the Residual Context-aware Upsampler (RCU),
our Intra-Inter Fusing network is meticulously designed to
enhance information transmission on both feature-level and
disparity-level, thereby enabling accurate and robust regression. Experimental results affirm the superiority of our network in terms of both speed and accuracy compared to all
other fast methods.

CoEx
AANet+

EPE(px)

HitNet
Fast-ACV

Abstract

30

40 50 60
Time(ms)

1.2
0.8

9

12 15
1PX(%)

Figure 1: Left: Comparison of GPU memory cost as input resolution increases. While some fast methods fail with
OOM, our method can process image at extremely high resolution. Mid: Comparison of EPE metric between fast methods on the SceneFlow. Our method achieve both best results and best efficiency. Right: D1 and Abs metric results
on the Spring benchmark. Our method surpasses all other
fast methods.

at lower resolutions and super-resolves the outcomes. Another class (Gu et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2021) constructs cascading volumes and centers on reducing disparity samples
at higher resolutions. Despite the promising temporal efficiency demonstrated by these techniques, striking a balance
between accuracy and speed remains a challenge.
The challenge primarily arises from the retention of explicit 3D volumes and 3D convolution. While denser sampling and 3D aggregation at higher resolutions enhance accuracy, they introduce substantial time and memory burdens
due to the O(n3 ) complexity of 3D convolution. Notably,
explicit 3D volume contains huge amount of redundancy due
to the sparsity of ground truth occupancy grids. To tackle
redundancy and alleviate computational overhead, an intuitive approach is replacing 3D convolution with implicit 2D
encoder-decoder network.
Nevertheless, the replacement of explicit 3D network with
implicit 2D network causes potential issues. First, the 3D
network serves the purpose of acquiring measurements (Guo
et al. 2019) for local 3D structural patterns. Removal of the
3D network obstructs the acquisition of crucial structural information, leading to performance decline especially at occlusion or low-texture areas. Second, the 3D aggregation
network plays a pivotal role in noise reduction and accuracy
enhancement. Cost volumes without 3D aggregation tend
to exhibit pronounced noise, making it a challenge to ef-

Introduction
Stereo matching stands as a crucial technique for 3D perception. It leverages rectified binocular images to compute
disparity through correspondence matching (Hirschmuller
and Scharstein 2007). Deep stereo networks have exhibited significant potential with the aid of large training
datasets (Mayer et al. 2016). While 3D CNN-based approaches (Chang and Chen 2018; Shen, Dai, and Rao 2021)
and RNN-based methods (Lipson, Teed, and Deng 2021; Li
et al. 2022) have demonstrate great accuracy, they come at
the expense of substantial computational complexity. Consequently, various methods have been proposed to enhance
real-time performance by expediting 3D cost aggregation.
One class of methods (Xu et al. 2021) conducts aggregation
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3225

