The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Leveraging Local Variance for Pseudo-Label Selection in Semi-supervised
Learning
Zeping Min1 * , Jinfeng Bai2 , Chengfei Li2
1

Peking University, Beijing, China
TAL Education Group, Beijing, China
zpm@pku.edu.cn, baijinfeng1@tal.com, lichengfei@tal.com
2

Abstract

to circumvent the need for extensive manual annotation, by
exploiting both labeled and unlabeled data to build robust
machine learning models. In this context, pseudo-labeling
semi-supervised learning algorithms have gained considerable traction.
The essence of pseudo-labeling semi-supervised learning
algorithms lies in harnessing the information inherent in the
unlabeled data by bestowing pseudo-labels upon them and
considering these as additional training instances (Lee et al.
2013; Sohn et al. 2020; Berthelot et al. 2019, 2020). This
strategy aids the model in enhancing its generalization capabilities and performance on the task at hand. The efficacy
of such approaches hinges on the quality of these pseudolabels, rendering their selection a paramount aspect of SSL
algorithms. Proper pseudo-label selection strategy can bolster the model’s ability to generalize to unseen data, while
a poor one could precipitate detrimental impacts on model
performance.
Prominent semi-supervised learning algorithms that utilize pseudo-labeling, such as MixMatch (Berthelot et al.
2019), FixMatch (Sohn et al. 2020), RemixMatch (Berthelot et al. 2020), and FreeMatch (Wang et al. 2023), have
traditionally depended exclusively on the absolute values of
posterior probabilities to choose pseudo-labels. These methods interpret these probabilities as a measure of the model’s
confidence in its predictions, setting a selection threshold accordingly. While this is intuitive and straightforward, it has
its limitations.
Specifically, when dealing with sparsely labeled data, the
model might predict with high confidence incorrectly, which
can adversely affect the performance of these methods. As
illustrated in Figure 1, even for a simple binary classification
task, relying solely on the model’s posterior probabilities for
pseudo-label selection can be challenging. This is because
many incorrect pseudo-labels might still have high posterior
probabilities.
We introduce the Local Variance Match (LVM). This
novel method offers a fresh dimension for filtering pseudolabels. By incorporating the dimension of local variance into
our pseudo-label selection, the task becomes considerably
more manageable. Removing labels with high local variance helps to reduce errors in pseudo-labels, thereby positively impacting the model’s performance (Zhu, Luo, and
Liu 2022). Experimental findings showcase that our LVM

Semi-supervised learning algorithms that use pseudolabeling have become increasingly popular for improving
model performance by utilizing both labeled and unlabeled
data. In this paper, we offer a fresh perspective on the selection of pseudo-labels, inspired by theoretical insights. We
suggest that pseudo-labels with a high degree of local variance are more prone to inaccuracies. Based on this premise,
we introduce the Local Variance Match (LVM) method,
which aims to optimize the selection of pseudo-labels in
semi-supervised learning (SSL) tasks. Our methodology is
validated through a series of experiments on widely-used image classification datasets, such as CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and SVHN, spanning various labeled data quantity scenarios. The empirical findings show that the LVM method substantially outpaces current SSL techniques, achieving stateof-the-art results in many of these scenarios. For instance, we
observed an error rate of 5.41% on CIFAR-10 with a single
label for each class, 35.87% on CIFAR-100 when using four
labels per class, and 1.94% on SVHN with four labels for
each class. Notably, the standout error rate of 5.41% is less
than 1% shy of the performance in a fully-supervised learning environment. In experiments on ImageNet with 100k labeled data, the LVM also reached state-of-the-art outcomes.
Additionally, the efficacy of the LVM method is further validated by its stellar performance in speech recognition experiments.

Introduction
The surge in the success of deep learning across diverse domains, such as computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2017; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Szegedy et al.
2015; He et al. 2017), natural language processing (Mikolov
et al. 2013; Raffel et al. 2020; Brown et al. 2020; OpenAI
2023), and speech recognition (Wang et al. 2017; van den
Oord et al. 2016; Chan et al. 2015), owes its prosperity
to the availability of substantial labeled datasets and powerful computational capabilities. Despite this, the process
of acquiring high-quality labeled data frequently proves to
be laborious, costly, and time-consuming. Semi-supervised
learning (SSL) (Sohn et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Berthelot et al. 2019, 2020) has surfaced as a potent approach
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14370

