The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RadarMOSEVE: A Spatial-Temporal Transformer Network for Radar-Only
Moving Object Segmentation and Ego-Velocity Estimation
Changsong Pang1,2 * , Xieyuanli Chen4 * , Yimin Liu3 , Huimin Lu4 , Yuwei Cheng2,3†
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
ORCA-UBOAT
3
Tsinghua University
4
National University of Defense Technology, College of Intelligence Science and Technology
dreamdusty1113@gmail.com, chengyw18@tsinghua.org.cn
yiminliu@tsinghua.edu.cn, {xieyuanli.chen,lhmnew}@nudt.edu.cn
Static object

Moving object

Abstract
Moving object segmentation (MOS) and Ego velocity estimation (EVE) are vital capabilities for mobile systems to
achieve full autonomy. Several approaches have attempted to
achieve MOSEVE using a LiDAR sensor. However, LiDAR
sensors are typically expensive and susceptible to adverse
weather conditions. Instead, millimeter-wave radar (MWR)
has gained popularity in robotics and autonomous driving
for real applications due to its cost-effectiveness and resilience to bad weather. Nonetheless, publicly available MOSEVE datasets and approaches using radar data are limited.
Some existing methods adopt point convolutional networks
from LiDAR-based approaches, ignoring the specific artifacts
and the valuable radial velocity information of radar measurements, leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper,
we propose a novel transformer network that effectively addresses the sparsity and noise issues and leverages the radial velocity measurements of radar points using our devised
radar self- and cross-attention mechanisms. Based on that,
our method achieves accurate EVE of the robot and performs
MOS using only radar data simultaneously. To thoroughly
evaluate the MOSEVE performance of our method, we annotated the radar points in the public View-of-Delft (VoD)
dataset and additionally constructed a new radar dataset in
various environments. The experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of our approach over existing state-of-the-art
methods. The code is available at https://github.com/ORCAUboat/RadarMOSEVE.

Radar-MOSEVE

Two frame of point clouds

Velocity

MOS result

Figure 1: Our MOSEVE network takes two frames of radar
point clouds as input and outputs the current ego velocity
of the robot. The MOS module takes the velocity-calibrated
point clouds to provide the moving segmentation.

image (Cheng et al. 2017; Voigtlaender et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2019; Patil et al. 2021) data, which have demonstrated
promising performance. However, both LiDAR and camera
sensors are susceptible to bad weather conditions, which can
cause a substantial reduction in MOS performance when utilized in outdoor real-world applications.
With the advancement of integrated circuits, 77 Ghz
millimeter-wave radar (MWR) (Sun, Petropulu, and Poor
2020; Li et al. 2022) has been applied in mobile robots
and autonomous driving (Cheng et al. 2022). MWR exhibits strong robustness to different environments and harsh
weather conditions (Lu et al. 2020a,b). Additionally, it provides radial velocity information of the measurement point,
making it a valuable alternative sensor for MOS tasks. However, few studies have been conducted on MOS using radar
data, and directly applying LiDAR MOS methods yields
suboptimal results due to the sparsity and noise in the radar
points. Furthermore, existing MOS approaches assume accurate ego-motion estimation from odometry or SLAM systems, which is not always reliable when both the robot and
surrounding objects are in motion, making radar MOS tasks
highly challenging.
We propose a novel radar point cloud transformer network to simultaneously achieve robust radar MOS and EVE,
named RadarMOSEVE. We first modify the self- and cross-

Introduction
Simultaneously moving object segmentation (MOS) and ego
velocity estimation (EVE) is a challenging task in computer
vision, robotics, and autonomous driving. The goal of MOS
is to accurately distinguish between moving and static objects in a scene, which is an important component in many
downstream tasks, including collision detection, path planning, and navigation. Recently, many studies have been conducted on MOS using LiDAR (Chen et al. 2021; Kim, Woo,
and Im 2022; Sun et al. 2022; Mersch et al. 2022) and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4424

