The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Analytically Tractable Models for Decision Making under Present Bias
Yasunori Akagi1 , Naoki Marumo2 , Takeshi Kurashima1
1

NTT Human Informatics Labratories, NTT Corporation,
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{yasunori.akagi, naoki.marumo, takeshi.kurashima}@ntt.com

2

Abstract

model which combines previous models. The Kleinberg–
Oren (KO) model is based on graph theory and simulates the
time-inconsistent behavior of a person affected by present
bias with an agent moving on a graph. The model represents a task with a directed acyclic graph whose vertices
correspond to the agent’s states. Each edge has a cost for
moving between vertices, and the goal vertex has a reward.
On each vertex, the agent evaluates the value of each path
to the goal and approaches the goal by following the path
that seems most valuable to it. The value of each path is
evaluated with a particular discounting scheme called quasihyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997), which introduces
present bias into the agent. The KO model effectively reproduces typical time-inconsistencies in behavioral economics,
such as procrastination, task abandonment, and choice reduction. The model is also highly expressive and can represent various real-world tasks. We could use this model to
predict undesirable future outcomes or determine interventions for agents to achieve better outcomes.
However, the high flexibility of the model also makes it
challenging to analyze its properties. The agent’s future behavior in the KO model cannot be derived in a closed form;
simulation is necessary to determine the agent’s behavior.
Additionally, it is difficult to identify optimal interventions
for guiding the agent to the goal. Tang et al. (2017) and Albers and Kraft (2019) considered intervention by adding intermediate rewards, while Albers and Kraft (2021) increased
the cost of edges. It is shown in both settings that finding
the optimal intervention is NP-hard, which demonstrates the
computational difficulty of the KO model.
We introduce a model that is easy to analyze and compute while still being able to handle typical tasks in real life
based on the KO model. We limit tasks to increasing a real
number, which we refer to as progress, over a period. This
type of task is commonly encountered in daily life; for example, completing a graduation thesis within six months (see
the beginning of Section 3 for more examples). Our model
shares the same assumptions on agent behavior as that of the
KO model but differs in three ways.

Time-inconsistency is a characteristic of human behavior in
which people plan for long-term benefits but take actions that
differ from the plan due to conflicts with short-term benefits.
Such time-inconsistent behavior is believed to be caused by
present bias, a tendency to overestimate immediate rewards
and underestimate future rewards. It is essential in the research community of behavior economics to investigate the
relationship between present bias and time-inconsistency. In
this paper, we propose a model for analyzing agent behavior with present bias in tasks to make progress toward a goal
over a period. Unlike previous models, the state sequence of
the agent can be described analytically in our model. Based
on this property, we analyze three crucial problems related
to agents under present bias: task abandonment, optimal goal
setting, and optimal reward scheduling. Extensive analysis reveals how present bias affects the condition under which task
abandonment occurs and optimal intervention strategies. Our
findings are meaningful for preventing task abandonment and
intervening through incentives in the real world.

1

Introduction

People often do not achieve their goals because they change
their plans in the middle of a task, even when nothing unexpected happens. For instance, some people may plan to stick
to a diet for a month but end up indulging on the weekend.
Similarly, a student may plan to do their assignments every
day during vacation but procrastinate until the last day. Such
behavior is known as time-inconsistency, which is a topic of
active research in behavioral economics.
Time-inconsistent behavior is often caused by present
bias (Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’donoghue 2002), a tendency to overestimate the value of immediate rewards and
underestimate the value of future rewards. As an example,
when planning a diet, the individual may not give much
thought to treats on weekends, believing they can resist the
temptation. However, when the weekend arrives, the desire
for those treats becomes stronger, and the person may find it
difficult to stick to their diet plan.
Researchers have been utilizing mathematical models
to study the effects of present bias on human behavior,
and recently Kleinberg and Oren (2014) proposed a new

• The agent’s state is represented as a pair of time index
and progress rather than as a vertex of a graph.
• The agent can take (uncountably) infinite states as we regard progress as a real number rather than as an integer.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9441

