The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Domain-Controlled Prompt Learning
Qinglong Cao1,2 , Zhengqin Xu1 , Yuntian Chen2 * , Chao Ma1 , Xiaokang Yang1
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo
{caoql2022, fate311}@sjtu.edu.cn, ychen@eitech.edu.cn, {chaoma, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large pre-trained vision-language models, such as CLIP,
have shown remarkable generalization capabilities across various tasks when appropriate text prompts are provided. However, adapting these models to specific domains, like remote sensing images (RSIs), medical images, etc, remains
unexplored and challenging. Existing prompt learning methods often lack domain-awareness or domain-transfer mechanisms, leading to suboptimal performance due to the misinterpretation of specific images in natural image patterns.
To tackle this dilemma, we proposed a Domain-Controlled
Prompt Learning for the specific domains. Specifically, the
large-scale specific domain foundation model (LSDM) is
first introduced to provide essential specific domain knowledge. Using lightweight neural networks, we transfer this
knowledge into domain biases, which control both the visual
and language branches to obtain domain-adaptive prompts
in a directly incorporating manner. Simultaneously, to overcome the existing overfitting challenge, we propose a novel
noisy-adding strategy, without extra trainable parameters, to
help the model escape the suboptimal solution in a global
domain oscillation manner. Experimental results show our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance in specific domain image recognition datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/caoql98/DCPL.

Figure 1: Using RSIs as examples. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on 8 different RSIs datasets.
has demonstrated exceptional zero-shot generalization capabilities.
In CLIP, visual categories are directly incorporated into
carefully designed templates as prompts. Nonetheless, the
creation of appropriate templates can be a time-consuming
endeavor. To address this concern and drawing inspiration
from prompt learning techniques, CoOp (Zhou et al. 2022b)
proposes context optimization, employing learnable context vectors to enhance the zero-shot generalization performance. Following the prompt learning paradigm, numerous
prompt learning algorithms have been developed for visionlanguage models, yielding notable advancements in zeroshot image recognition. For instance, CoCoOp (Zhou et al.
2022a) tackles the class shift problem by introducing inputconditional tokens, while MaPle adopts prompt learning for
both vision and language branches to enhance the alignment
between visual and linguistic representations.
Despite the progress made in prompt learning algorithms (Zhou et al. 2022b,a; Khattak et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2022b; Ge et al. 2022), they only consider the same-domain
downstream task, while the adaptation problem from the
natural image domain to specific domains like RSIs has
rarely been considered. The domain-awareness or domaintransfer mechanisms are correspondingly been ignored. Naturally, existing prompt learning algorithms would approach

Introduction
With the emergence of deep learning technology, various visual understanding tasks, including classification (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), semantic segmentation (Cao et al. 2023b,a), and object detection (Redmon et al.
2016; Girshick 2015), have witnessed remarkable progress.
However, the success of these tasks heavily relies on access
to large-scale, high-quality annotated datasets (Deng et al.
2009; Lin et al. 2014), which entail significant labor and
expense for each specific visual task. To tackle this practical challenge, the Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
(CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has been introduced, aiming
to provide transferable visual features that can be leveraged
across a diverse range of downstream tasks. By employing
contrastive learning with extensive image-text pairs, CLIP
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

936

