The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Make Lossy Compression Meaningful for Low-Light Images
Shilv Cai1,2, * , Liqun Chen1,2, * , Sheng Zhong1,2 , Luxin Yan1,2 , Jiahuan Zhou3 , Xu Zou1,2,†
2

1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{caishilv, chenliqun, zhongsheng, yanluxin, zoux}@hust.edu.cn, jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

enhancement is usually employed. In recent years, the success of learning-based low-light image enhancement (Lore,
Akintayo, and Sarkar 2017; Xu et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2022b)
has been compelling thus attracting growing attention.
In practical applications, lossy image compression is also
crucial for media storage and transmission. Many traditional
standards (e.g., JPEG (Wallace 1992), JPEG2000 (Rabbani 2002), BPG (Bellard 2015), and Versatile Video Coding (VVC) (Joint Video Experts Team 2021)) have been proposed and widely used. In recent years, learning-based lossy
image compression methods (Cheng et al. 2020; He et al.
2022; Xie, Cheng, and Chen 2021; Wang et al. 2022a; Liu,
Sun, and Katto 2023) have developed rapidly and outperformed traditional standards in terms of performance metrics, such as the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and the
multi-scale structural similarity index (MS-SSIM).
Whereas, lossy low-light image compression is required
in many actual systems as well (e.g., nighttime autonomous
driving and visual surveillance), while little research has
been conducted in the academic community on this practical
topic. Current engineering solutions can be categorized into
two manners: “Compress before Enhance (CbE)” and “Enhance before Compress (EbC)”. However, existing sequential solutions have at least two major drawbacks: (1) Error
accumulation and loss of information in the individual models plague sequential solutions (see Figure 1). In particular,
the loss of useful detail information in low-light images after
compression severely degrades enhancement performance.
Off-the-shelf lossy image compression methods often lack
adaptability to low-light images. (2) Sequential solutions introduce additional computational costs due to intermediate
results, resulting in low efficiency. Therefore, in this work,
we try to answer an important question: Can we construct
a joint solution of low-light image compression and enhancement, which would achieve high visual quality of
reconstructed image under both low computational cost
and bits per pixel (BPP)? Or simply say, can we make
lossy low-light image compression more meaningful?
Based on these considerations, in this work, we propose a novel joint solution for low-light image compression and enhancement. We design an end-to-end trainable
two-branch architecture with the main enhancement branch
for obtaining compressed domain features and the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) aware branch for obtaining local/non-

Low-light images frequently occur due to unavoidable environmental influences or technical limitations, such as insufficient lighting or limited exposure time. To achieve better
visibility for visual perception, low-light image enhancement
is usually adopted. Besides, lossy image compression is vital
for meeting the requirements of storage and transmission in
computer vision applications. To touch the above two practical demands, current solutions can be categorized into two
sequential manners: “Compress before Enhance (CbE)” or
“Enhance before Compress (EbC)”. However, both of them
are not suitable since: (1) Error accumulation in the individual models plagues sequential solutions. Especially, once
low-light images are compressed by existing general lossy
image compression approaches, useful information (e.g., texture details) would be lost resulting in a dramatic performance decrease in low-light image enhancement. (2) Due to
the intermediate process, the sequential solution introduces
an additional burden resulting in low efficiency. We propose
a novel joint solution to simultaneously achieve a high compression rate and good enhancement performance for lowlight images with much lower computational cost and fewer
model parameters. We design an end-to-end trainable architecture, which includes the main enhancement branch and the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) aware branch. Experimental results show that our proposed joint solution achieves a significant improvement over different combinations of existing state-of-the-art sequential “Compress before Enhance”
or “Enhance before Compress” solutions for low-light images, which would make lossy low-light image compression more meaningful. The project is publicly available at:
https://github.com/CaiShilv/Joint-IC-LL.

Introduction
Low-light images are prevalent in the real world since they
are inevitably captured under sub-optimal conditions (e.g.,
back, uneven, or dim lighting) or technical limitations (e.g.,
limited exposure time). Low-light images present challenges
for human perception and subsequent downstream vision
tasks due to unsatisfied visibility. Therefore, low-light image
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8236

