The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Latent Diffusion Transformer for Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting
Shibo Feng1,2,3 , Chunyan Miao1,2,3 , Zhong Zhang4 , Peilin Zhao4 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY), NTU, Singapore
3
Webank-NTU Joint Research Institute on Fintech, NTU, Singapore
4
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{shibo001, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, {todzhang, masonzhao}@tencent.com

Abstract

particularly in processing high-dimensional types of data
such as high-resolution images (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Takagi and Nishimoto 2023), natural languages (Li et al.
2022a; Yuan et al. 2022), and audios (Huang et al. 2022;
Ruan et al. 2023).
Multivariate time series forecasting seeks to predict future
trends accurately but faces challenges due to its complexity
and computational demands. The common approach of using deep, auto-regressive (Woo et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2020) models to predict future timestamps is hindered by the high dimensionality of the data and the model’s
structure. This leads to two main issues: significant computational resource requirements, limiting scalability, and
the accumulation of errors in forecasts, particularly in highdimensional series. Therefore, there’s a pressing need for an
innovative forecasting framework that can efficiently and effectively predict future trends with reduced computational
load and increased speed.
Latent-space generation, an efficient alternative in time
series forecasting, employs a pre-trained autoencoder to mitigate data redundancy, transferring generation from the time
to a latent domain. The primary challenge is the distribution
shift problem, as statistical properties like mean and variance vary over time (Fan et al. 2023; Kim et al. 2021). Traditional models struggle with numerical inaccuracies when
using historical timestamps as the inputs of the autoencoder.
Our novel approach dynamically updates statistical parameters in pre-training, ensuring high-quality, accurate latent
representations for each timestamp.
Existing multivariate time-series diffusion models face
two major issues. First, the autoregressive structure (Rasul
et al. 2021) leads to poor long-range prediction, error accumulation, and slow inference. Second, most models excel
in low-dimensional series (Tashiro et al. 2021; Alcaraz and
Strodthoff 2022; Shen and Kwok 2023) but falter in high dimensions. To overcome these challenges, our approach emphasizes a non-autoregressive, resource-efficient denoising
network for forecasting. We introduce a self-conditioningbased transformer denoising structure that effectively denoises time variables in a continuous latent space, incorporating covariant features akin to strategies in image generation (Chen, Zhang, and Hinton 2022; Yang et al. 2022; Ho
and Salimans 2022). This Transformer diffusion module significantly reduces computational complexity, resource use,

The probability prediction of multivariate time series is a notoriously challenging but practical task. This research proposes to condense high-dimensional multivariate time series forecasting into a problem of latent space time series
generation, to improve the expressiveness of each timestamp and make forecasting more manageable. To solve the
problem that the existing work is hard to extend to highdimensional multivariate time series, we present a latent
multivariate time series diffusion framework called Latent
Diffusion Transformer (LDT), which consists of a symmetric statistics-aware autoencoder and a diffusion-based conditional generator, to implement this idea. Through careful
design, the time series autoencoder can compress multivariate timestamp patterns into a concise latent representation
by considering dynamic statistics. Then, the diffusion-based
conditional generator is able to efficiently generate realistic
multivariate timestamp values on a continuous latent space
under a novel self-conditioning guidance which is modeled
in a non-autoregressive way. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance
on many popular high-dimensional multivariate time series
datasets.

Introduction
Forecasting time series data is crucial across various sectors,
including finance (Sezer, Gudelek, and Ozbayoglu 2020),
energy (Cao et al. 2020), traffic (Liu et al. 2016; Feng et al.
2023) and human identification (Rao and Miao 2022; Rao
et al. 2021). Multivariate forecasting, prevalent in practical applications, is more important and popular in industrial fields. For example, power companies analyze billions
of data points from numerous clients to monitor electricity
consumption, reflecting the complexity and significance of
this task.
Latent diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022), a simple
and efficient way to significantly improve both the training
and sampling efficiency of denoising diffusion models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020) without degrading their quality. This
particular class of latent generative models has gained significant recognition and accomplishments in recent times,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11979

