The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Modeling Uncertainties of Self-Explaining Neural Networks via
Conformal Prediction
Wei Qian* 1 , Chenxu Zhao* 1 , Yangyi Li* 1 , Fenglong Ma2 , Chao Zhang3 , Mengdi Huai1
1

Iowa State University
Pennsylvania State University
3
Georgia Institute of Technology
{wqi, cxzhao, liyangyi, mdhuai}@iastate.edu, fenglong@psu.edu, chaozhang@gatech.edu
2

Abstract

To offer valuable insights into how a model makes predictions, many approaches have surfaced to explain the behavior of black-box neural networks. These methods primarily
focus on providing post-hoc explanations, attempting to provide insights into the decision-making process of the underlying model (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016; Slack et al. 2020, 2021; Yao et al. 2022; Han,
Srinivas, and Lakkaraju 2022; Huai et al. 2020). Note that
these post-hoc methods need designing another explanatory
model to provide explanations for a trained deep learning
model. Despite their widespread use, post-hoc interpretation
methods can be inaccurate or incomplete in revealing the actual reasoning process of the original model (Rudin 2018).
To address these challenges, researchers have been actively promoting the adoption of inherently self-explaining
neural networks (Koh et al. 2020; Havasi, Parbhoo, and
Doshi-Velez 2022; Chauhan et al. 2023; Yuksekgonul,
Wang, and Zou 2022; Alvarez Melis and Jaakkola 2018;
Sinha et al. 2023), which integrate interpretability directly
into the model architecture and training process, producing
explanations that are utilized during classification. Based on
the presence of ground-truth basis concepts during training,
existing works on self-explaining networks can be broadly
classified into two groups: those with access to groundtruth and those without. For example, (Koh et al. 2020)
trains the concept bottleneck layer to align concept predictions with established true concepts, while (Alvarez Melis
and Jaakkola 2018) utilizes autoencoder techniques to learn
prototype-based concepts from the training data.
Although existing self-explaining networks can offer inherent interpretability to make their decision-making process transparent and accessible, they are limited in the
distribution-free uncertainty quantification for both the generated explanation outcomes and the corresponding label
predictions. Such limitations have the potential to significantly impede the widespread acceptance and utilization
of self-explaining neural networks. In practice, such confidence values serve as indicators of the likelihood of correctness for each prediction, and understanding the likelihood of each prediction allows us to assess the degree to
which we can rely on it. Note that self-explaining neural
networks simultaneously generate two outputs (i.e., the final prediction decision and an explanation of that final decision). The most straightforward way is to separately and

Despite the recent progress in deep neural networks (DNNs),
it remains challenging to explain the predictions made by
DNNs. Existing explanation methods for DNNs mainly focus
on post-hoc explanations where another explanatory model
is employed to provide explanations. The fact that post-hoc
methods can fail to reveal the actual original reasoning process of DNNs raises the need to build DNNs with built-in
interpretability. Motivated by this, many self-explaining neural networks have been proposed to generate not only accurate predictions but also clear and intuitive insights into
why a particular decision was made. However, existing selfexplaining networks are limited in providing distribution-free
uncertainty quantification for the two simultaneously generated prediction outcomes (i.e., a sample’s final prediction
and its corresponding explanations for interpreting that prediction). Importantly, they also fail to establish a connection between the confidence values assigned to the generated
explanations in the interpretation layer and those allocated
to the final predictions in the ultimate prediction layer. To
tackle the aforementioned challenges, in this paper, we design
a novel uncertainty modeling framework for self-explaining
networks, which not only demonstrates strong distributionfree uncertainty modeling performance for the generated explanations in the interpretation layer but also excels in producing efficient and effective prediction sets for the final predictions based on the informative high-level basis explanations. We perform the theoretical analysis for the proposed
framework. Extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates
the effectiveness of the proposed uncertainty framework.

Introduction
Recent advancements in DNNs have undeniably led to remarkable improvements in accuracy. However, this progress
has come at the expense of losing visibility into their internal workings (Nam et al. 2020). This lack of transparency
often renders these deep learning models as “black boxes”
(Li et al. 2020; Bang et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2023). Without
understanding the rationales behind the predictions, these
black-box models cannot be fully trusted and widely applied in critical areas. In addition, explanations can facilitate model debugging and error analysis. These indicate the
necessity of investigating the explainability of DNNs.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14651

