The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Iterative Token Evaluation and Refinement for Real-World Super-resolution
Chaofeng Chen1 , Shangchen Zhou1 , Liang Liao1 , Haoning Wu1 ,
Wenxiu Sun2 , Qiong Yan2 , Weisi Lin1
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
SenseTime Research
{chaofeng.chen, liang.liao, wslin}@ntu.edu.sg, shangchenzhou@gmail.com,
haoning001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {sunwx, yanqiong}@tetras.ai
Abstract
Real-world image super-resolution (RWSR) is a longstanding problem as low-quality (LQ) images often have
complex and unidentified degradations. Existing methods
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) or continuous diffusion models present their own issues including
GANs being difficult to train while continuous diffusion models requiring numerous inference steps. In this paper, we propose an Iterative Token Evaluation and Refinement (ITER)
framework for RWSR, which utilizes a discrete diffusion
model operating in the discrete token representation space,
i.e., indexes of features extracted from a VQGAN codebook
pre-trained with high-quality (HQ) images. We show that
ITER is easier to train than GANs and more efficient than
continuous diffusion models. Specifically, we divide RWSR
into two sub-tasks, i.e., distortion removal and texture generation. Distortion removal involves simple HQ token prediction
with LQ images, while texture generation uses a discrete diffusion model to iteratively refine the distortion removal output with a token refinement network. In particular, we propose to include a token evaluation network in the discrete diffusion process. It learns to evaluate which tokens are good
restorations and helps to improve the iterative refinement results. Moreover, the evaluation network can first check status
of the distortion removal output and then adaptively select total refinement steps needed, thereby maintaining a good balance between distortion removal and texture generation. Extensive experimental results show that ITER is easy to train
and performs well within just 8 iterative steps.

Figure 1: Example result with the proposed ITER. Left top:
input LQ image; Right top: SR result with ITER; Bottom:
results from t = T to t = 0, and t is the iterative step index
of the reverse discrete diffusion process. We can observe that
the textures are gradually enriched with iterative refinement.
To obtain satisfactory results, our ITER requires only a total
iteration step of T ≤ 8. (Zoom in for best view)

Real-world super-resolution (RWSR) is particularly illposed because details are usually corrupted or completely
lost due to complex degradations. In general, the RWSR
can be divided into two subtasks: distortion removal and
conditioned texture generation. Many existing approaches,
such as (Wang et al. 2018b; Zhang et al. 2019a), follow the
seminal SRGAN (Ledig et al. 2017) and rely on Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs). Typically, these methods require the joint optimization of various constraints for the
two subtasks: 1) reconstruction loss for distortion removal,
which is usually composed of pixel-wise L1/L2 loss and
feature space perceptual loss; 2) adversarial loss for texture
generation. Effective training of these models often involves
tedious fine-tuning of hyper-parameters between restoration
and generation abilities. Moreover, most models have a fixed
preference for restoration and generation and cannot be flexibly adapted to LQ inputs with different degradation levels.
Recently, approaches such as SR3 (Saharia et al. 2022) and
LDM (Rombach et al. 2022) have turned to the popular diffusion model (DM) for realistic generative ability. Although
DMs are easier to train and more powerful than GANs, they
require hundreds or even thousands of iterative steps to generate outputs. Additionally, current DM-based methods have
only been shown to be effective on images with moderate

Introduction
Single-image super-resolution (SISR) aims to restore highquality (HQ) outputs from low-quality (LQ) inputs that
have been degraded through processes such as downsampling, blurring, noise, and compression. Previous studies
(Liang et al. 2021; Zamir et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023)
have achieved remarkable progress in enhancing LQ images degraded by a single predefined type of degradation,
thanks to the emergence of increasingly powerful deep networks. However, in real-world LQ images, multiple unknown degradations are typically present, making previous
methods unsuitable for such complex scenarios.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1010

