The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SECap: Speech Emotion Captioning with Large Language Model
Yaoxun Xu1 , Hangting Chen2 , Jianwei Yu2,* , Qiaochu Huang1 ,
Zhiyong Wu1,3,* , Shi-Xiong Zhang2 , Guangzhi Li2 , Yi Luo2 , Rongzhi Gu2
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
xuyx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {erichtchen,tomasyu}@tencent.com, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Previous research has typically approached speech emotion acquisition as a categorization task, known as speech
emotion recognition (SER) (El Ayadi, Kamel et al. 2011;
Nwe, Foo, and De Silva 2003; Jiang et al. 2019), where emotions like fear and happiness are assigned to discrete categories. In recent years, the performance of such SER tasks
has made great progress thanks to the emergence of innovative model architectures.
However, traditional SER exhibits limitations, because
single-word labels often lack nuances, failing to convey detailed emotional information like intensity and fluctuations.
Speech emotions are typically multifaceted, encompassing
diverse affective states (e.g., simultaneous happiness and
nervousness) within one utterance. Classifying speech into a
single emotion category may inadequately capture authentic
emotion. Additionally, the inherently subjective perception
of emotions leads to potential variability in emotion classification among individuals interpreting complicated speech.
Considering the limitations of speech emotion classification, employing natural language sentences rather than labels could be a promising strategy to describe speech emotions more precisely. Motivated by the recent progress of the
Automated Audio Captioning (AAC) task (Han et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2021) which employs natural language to describe acoustic events in audio, we present the
Speech Emotion Captioning (SEC) task and propose an innovative SECap framework, comprising an audio encoder,
a Bridge-Net, and a text decoder, to characterize human
speech emotions using natural language. To our knowledge,
this is among the pioneering works in this direction.
In the SEC task, there are two primary challenges to address: firstly, how to extract the emotion-related speech features from the original speech inputs; and secondly, how to
generate high-quality, human-like speech emotion descriptions. For the first challenge, limited speech data with emotion captions makes training the audio encoder from scratch
challenging. Inspired by the success of pre-trained model in
SER (Mohamed and Aly 2021) tasks, we utilize HuBERT
(Hsu et al. 2021) as SECap’s audio encoder for robust speech
feature extraction. However, directly using the frame-level
HuBERT features can be computationally heavy. To address
this, inspired by BLIP-2 (Li et al. 2023), we employ QFormer as Bridge-Net to compress HuBERT features. While
both acoustic and content information within HuBERT fea-

Speech emotions are crucial in human communication and
are extensively used in fields like speech synthesis and natural
language understanding. Most prior studies, such as speech
emotion recognition, have categorized speech emotions into a
fixed set of classes. Yet, emotions expressed in human speech
are often complex, and categorizing them into predefined
groups can be insufficient to adequately represent speech
emotions. On the contrary, describing speech emotions directly by means of natural language may be a more effective
approach. Regrettably, there are not many studies available
that have focused on this direction. Therefore, this paper proposes a speech emotion captioning framework named SECap,
aiming at effectively describing speech emotions using natural language. Owing to the impressive capabilities of large
language models in language comprehension and text generation, SECap employs LLaMA as the text decoder to allow
the production of coherent speech emotion captions. In addition, SECap leverages HuBERT as the audio encoder to extract general speech features and Q-Former as the Bridge-Net
to provide LLaMA with emotion-related speech features. To
accomplish this, Q-Former utilizes mutual information learning to disentangle emotion-related speech features and speech
contents, while implementing contrastive learning to extract
more emotion-related speech features. The results of objective and subjective evaluations demonstrate that: 1) the SECap framework outperforms the HTSAT-BART baseline in
all objective evaluations; 2) SECap can generate high-quality
speech emotion captions that attain performance on par with
human annotators in subjective mean opinion score tests.

Introduction
Speech communication plays a pivotal role in people’s daily
life in terms of transmitting information and establishing
connections. As one of the core carriers of interpersonal
communication, speech not only undertakes the function of
verbal communication but also deeply involves the transmission of emotions and intentions. Recognizing and interpreting speech emotions precisely is crucial for enhancing communication effects. Therefore, how to extract the speaker’s
emotional information accurately from speech has gradually
become an important topic in the field of speech processing.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19323

