The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Modality Affinity Inference for Weakly Supervised 3D Semantic
Segmentation
Xiawei Li1 * , Qingyuan Xu1 * , Jing Zhang1† , Tianyi Zhang2 , Qian Yu1 , Lu Sheng1 , Dong Xu3
1

School of Software, Beihang University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
{ZY2121108,ZY2121121,zhang jing,qianyu,lsheng}@buaa.edu.cn, tianyizhang0213@zju.edu.cn, dongxu@hku.hk
2

Abstract

To reduce the annotation costs, some recent works have
delved into the realm of weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) methods (Bearman et al. 2016; Xu and
Lee 2020; Zhang et al. 2021b; Liu, Qi, and Fu 2021; Hou
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021a; Yang et al. 2022; Wei et al.
2020; Ren et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022). These methods
can be categorized based on different levels of supervision,
including partially labeled points, sub-cloud level annotations, and scene-level annotations. Among these, segmentation with scene-level labels is the most challenging scenario
as point-wise annotations are completely unavailable, which
is the focus of our paper.
Most of the current methods with scene-level annotations (Wei et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022) are
proposed based on pseudo labels which can be obtained by
Class Activation Map (CAM) (Zhou et al. 2016) or Multiple
Instance Learning (MIL) (Maron and Lozano-Pérez 1997).
The key to successful weakly supervised semantic segmentation is how to expand the semantic regions to achieve completeness and preciseness of the localized objects. The 3D
point clouds of the RGB-D scans provide accurate object
shape and scale information without occlusion and distortions, while the corresponding RGB data provide additional
color and texture information. However, the current weakly
supervised point cloud segmentation based on RGB-D scans
fails to fully take advantage of all the data modalities. Moreover, current methods fail to fully exploit the point affinity
that can be readily inferred from the feature extraction network. We argue that point affinity that characterizes the similarity between points is essential for learning from scenelevel weak labels.
In addition, the long-tailed distribution of point cloud data
due to the extremely imbalanced point data have detrimental effects on both point-wise classification performance and
point-wise feature learning, which has largely overlooked
by previous research on weakly-supervised point cloud semantic segmentation. For example, when the point cloud
data have long-tailed distribution, the point-wise classifier
for semantic segmentation will be biased towards the head
classes with more number of samples (Wang et al. 2022;
Kang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2019; Jamal
et al. 2020). Moreover, the point features of the tail classes
with less number of samples will also be learned similar to
the point features of the head classes since the feature ex-

3D point cloud semantic segmentation has a wide range of applications. Recently, weakly supervised point cloud segmentation methods have been proposed, aiming to alleviate the
expensive and laborious manual annotation process by leveraging scene-level labels. However, these methods have not
effectively exploited the rich geometric information (such as
shape and scale) and appearance information (such as color
and texture) present in RGB-D scans. Furthermore, current
approaches fail to fully leverage the point affinity that can be
inferred from the feature extraction network, which is crucial for learning from weak scene-level labels. Additionally,
previous work overlooks the detrimental effects of the longtailed distribution of point cloud data in weakly supervised
3D semantic segmentation. To this end, this paper proposes
a simple yet effective scene-level weakly supervised point
cloud segmentation method with a newly introduced multimodality point affinity inference module. The point affinity proposed in this paper is characterized by features from
multiple modalities (e.g., point cloud and RGB), and is further refined by normalizing the classifier weights to alleviate
the detrimental effects of long-tailed distribution without the
need of the prior of category distribution. Extensive experiments on the ScanNet and S3DIS benchmarks verify the effectiveness of our proposed method, which outperforms the
state-of-the-art by ∼ 4% to ∼ 6% mIoU. Codes are released
at https://github.com/Sunny599/AAAI24-3DWSSG-MMA.

Introduction
Point cloud data capture rich object and scene geometric and
appearance information, which serves as an essential data
representation for various applications, such as autonomous
driving, augmented reality, and robotic. Point cloud semantic segmentation plays a key role in 3D scene understanding,
and has been extensively explored (Qi et al. 2017a,b; Wang
et al. 2019b,a; Thomas et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019;
Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019; Hu et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2021; Lai et al. 2022). However, the success of most of
the methods is based on learning in a fully supervised manner, requiring extensive point-level annotations.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3216

