The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Chronic Poisoning: Backdoor Attack against Split Learning
Fangchao Yu, Bo Zeng, Kai Zhao, Zhi Pang, Lina Wang∗
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Wuhan University
{fangchao, bobozen, kizhao, zhipang, lnwang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Split learning is a computing resource-friendly distributed
learning framework that protects client training data by splitting the model between the client and server. Previous work
has proved that split learning faces a severe risk of privacy
leakage, as a malicious server can recover the client’s private data by hijacking the training process. In this paper,
we first explore the vulnerability of split learning to serverside backdoor attacks, where our goal is to compromise the
model’s integrity. Since the server-side attacker cannot access the training data and client model in split learning, the
traditional poisoning-based backdoor attack methods are no
longer applicable. Therefore, constructing backdoor attacks
in split learning poses significant challenges. Our strategy involves the attacker establishing a shadow model on the server
side that can encode backdoor samples and guiding the client
model to learn from this model during the training process,
thereby enabling the client to acquire the same capability.
Based on these insights, we propose a three-stage backdoor
attack framework named SFI. Our attack framework minimizes assumptions about the attacker’s background knowledge and ensures that the attack process remains imperceptible to the client. We implement SFI on various benchmark
datasets, and extensive experimental results demonstrate its
effectiveness and generality. For example, success rates of our
attack on MNIST, Fashion, and CIFAR10 datasets all exceed
90%, with limited impact on the main task.

Figure 1: Overview of the backdoor attack framework
against split learning.

access the client model and training data, split learning is regarded as a secure and privacy-preserving training strategy
(Vepakomma et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019).
However, as research progresses, the security risks associated with split learning have gradually come to light (Zhang
et al. 2023). Some recent work have presented a series of
attacks targeting private client data, including data reconstruction attacks (Pasquini, Ateniese, and Bernaschi 2021)
and label inference attacks (Fu et al. 2022). In this paper, we
first demonstrate the vulnerability of split learning to backdoor attacks (Li et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2020a). We believe
that the malicious server has both the motivation and capability to implant backdoors in the model, thereby achieving
specific objectives.
In split learning, constructing backdoor attacks from the
server side poses a significant challenge. Traditional approaches of constructing backdoor attacks rely on controlling the training data, wherein the attacker injects backdoor
samples into the training data to confer the model with the
ability to encode the backdoor samples (Bagdasaryan and
Shmatikov 2020; Nguyen and Tran 2021; Wenger et al.
2021; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022). However, in the context of split learning, the server cannot access or interact with the training data, and the model responsible for encoding the input data is under the client’s
control. Consequently, the conventional strategies for backdoor attacks become inapplicable. We contend that the pivotal breakthrough for constructing server-side backdoor at-

Introduction
Split learning is a computing resource-friendly distributed
learning framework, considered as a supplement to federated learning (Gao et al. 2020b; Kairouz et al. 2021; Li et al.
2020). In split learning, a complete neural network model is
divided into two parts: the client model and the server model,
which are held by the client and server, respectively. Typically, the client only needs to perform lightweight calculations, and offloads the rest laden computations to the server.
During the forward propagation phase, the client model encodes the local data into feature vectors, serving as inputs
to the server model. In the backpropagation process, the
server sends gradient information to the client to facilitate
updates of the client model. Since the server cannot directly
∗

Correspoonding Author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16531

