The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Link Prediction in Multilayer Networks via Cross-Network Embedding
Guojing Ren1 , Xiao Ding2 , Xiao-Ke Xu3 , Hai-Feng Zhang2 *
1
Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education,
School of Mathematical Science, Anhui University
3
Computational Communication Research Center and School of Journalism and Communication, Beijing Normal University
{rengj, xiaoding2021}@stu.ahu.edu.cn, xuxiaoke@foxmail.com, haifengzhang1978@gmail.com
2

Abstract

?

Link prediction is a fundamental task in network analysis,
with the objective of predicting missing or potential links.
While existing studies have mainly concentrated on single
networks, it is worth noting that numerous real-world networks exhibit interconnectedness. For example, individuals
often register on various social media platforms to access
diverse services, such as chatting, tweeting, blogging, and
rating movies. These platforms share a subset of users and
are termed multilayer networks. The interlayer links in such
networks hold valuable information that provides more comprehensive insights into the network structure. To effectively
exploit this complementary information and enhance link
prediction in the target network, we propose a novel crossnetwork embedding method. This method aims to represent
different networks in a shared latent space, preserving proximity within single networks as well as consistency across
multilayer networks. Specifically, nodes can aggregate messages from aligned nodes in other layers. Extensive experiments conducted on real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed method for link prediction in multilayer networks.

𝐺𝑠

𝐺𝑡

𝑆
?

Figure 1: A example of multilayer networks. black lines represent intralayer links, blue lines represent interlayer links,
and black dashes represent non-observed intralayer links
that need to be predicted.

maximum likelihood models (Clauset, Moore, and Newman 2008; Guimerà and Sales-Pardo 2009), matrix factorization methods (Ding, Li, and Jordan 2010; Ma, Sun, and
Qin 2017), Skip-gram embedding (Grover and Leskovec
2016; Tang et al. 2015), deep learning models (Wang, Cui,
and Zhu 2016), and graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018). These methods have mainly focused
on single networks. However, there might be missing links
or noise in the single network, due to limitations in observation or sampling. This data insufficiency problem hinders the
performance of link prediction methods, which are sensitive
to network topology. Moreover, mining information from a
single network provides one-sided insights, as users exhibit
distinct characteristics and behavior patterns across different networks. For example, the Facebook network captures
social friendships, the LinkedIn network focuses on employment relationships, the Douban network contains a common
interest in movies, and the DBLP network reveals coauthorship among scholars. We cannot tell if someone is genuinely interested in the movie “Fast X” or just influenced by
their friends, using only the limited information revealed in
the movie rating network without knowledge of their social
friendships. To address these challenges, some researchers
have turned their attention to multilayer networks (Dickison,
Magnani, and Rossi 2016).
Interconnectedness is pervasive among real-world net-

Introduction
Link prediction (Kumar et al. 2020; Daud et al. 2020) is a
fundamental task in network analysis that aims to predict
missing or potential links in a network. It plays a crucial
role in various fields, including (i) social network analysis (Kossinets and Watts 2006): suggesting new friendships;
(ii) recommender systems (Vahidi Farashah et al. 2021):
recommending relevant items or products to users; (iii) biological networks (Coşkun and Koyutürk 2021): predicting protein-protein interactions; and (iv) pandemic forecasting (Ma et al. 2022): predicting the spread of infectious diseases. The objective of link prediction is to infer the likelihood of a link between two nodes in a network based on the
observed network structural features and, if available, node
attribute features.
Numerous existing approaches have been developed for
link prediction, employing various techniques such as similarity indices (Newman 2001; Zhou, Lü, and Zhang 2009),
* Hai-Feng Zhang is the corresponding author of this paper.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8939

