The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From Toxic to Trustworthy: Using Self-Distillation and Semi-supervised Methods
to Refine Neural Networks
Xianda Zhang1,2 , Baolin Zheng3 * ,
Jianbao Hu4 , Chengyang Li1 , Xiaoying Bai2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Advanced Institute of Big Data
3
Alibaba Group
4
University of Glasgow
zhangxianda@stu.pku.edu.cn, baolin.zbl@alibaba-inc.com
2906770H@student.gla.ac.uk, chengyang li@stu.pku.edu.cn, baixy@aibd.ac.cn
Abstract
Despite the tremendous success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) across various fields, their susceptibility to potential backdoor attacks seriously threatens their application
security, particularly in safety-critical or security-sensitive
ones. Given this growing threat, there is a pressing need
for research into purging backdoors from DNNs. However,
prior efforts on erasing backdoor triggers not only failed
to withstand increasingly powerful attacks but also resulted
in reduced model performance. In this paper, we propose
From Toxic to Trustworthy (FTT), an innovative approach
to eliminate backdoor triggers while simultaneously enhancing model accuracy. Following the stringent and practical
assumption of limited availability of clean data, we introduce a self-attention distillation (SAD) method to remove the
backdoor by aligning the shallow and deep parts of the network. Furthermore, we first devise a semi-supervised learning
(SSL) method that leverages ubiquitous and available poisoned data to further purify backdoors and improve accuracy. Extensive experiments on various attacks and models
have shown that our FTT can reduce the attack success rate
from 97% to 1% and improve the accuracy of 4% on average,
demonstrating its effectiveness in mitigating backdoor attacks
and improving model performance. Compared to state-of-theart (SOTA) methods, our FTT can reduce the attack success
rate by 2× and improve the accuracy by 5%, shedding light
on backdoor cleansing.

Figure 1: Performance of FTT on CIFAR-10 using
PreActResNet-18, compared to other backdoor defense
methods. FT and FP are abbreviations for Fine-Tuning and
Fine-Pruning respectively.

in safety-critical and security-sensitive applications exposes
these systems to potential adversarial threats.
One of the most serious adversarial threats is the backdoor attack (Li et al. 2022, 2023), where an adversary injects
malicious behavior into a neural network during its training phase by tampering with a small subset of the training
data, implanting a backdoor or trigger (Wang et al. 2022b,c).
This stealthy manipulation causes the network to produce
incorrect or manipulated outputs when specific inputs are
presented during testing, which can have dire consequences
in real-world applications (Li et al. 2021b; Luo et al. 2023;
He et al. 2023; Tao et al. 2023; Mei et al. 2023). For instance, a traffic sign recognition system utilizing a backdoored backbone might consistently misclassify the ”STOP”
sign as ”GO STRAIGHT” when a specific pattern is present,
leading to serious security issues. In this context, it is essential to explore the challenges posed by backdoor attacks and

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning techniques have undergone
rapid development and widespread adoption, revolutionizing numerous fields such as image recognition (Kirillov
et al. 2023), natural language processing (Devlin et al.
2019), and autonomous systems (Sun et al. 2020). Due to the
significant computational resources required to train a model
from scratch, it has become increasingly popular to obtain
pre-trained backbones from third-party platforms and employ them in various downstream tasks. Nevertheless, this
increased convenience comes with its own set of challenges,
as the growing reliance on deep neural networks (DNNs)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16873

