The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QLABGrad: a Hyperparameter-Free and
Convergence-Guaranteed Scheme for Deep Learning
Minghan Fu1 , Fang-Xiang Wu1,2
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Saskatchewan
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan
{fig072, faw341}@mail.usask.ca

Abstract

1. The first strategy is the learning rate decay with the iteration number t, where the learning rate is expressed as
the product of the hyperparameter α and a monotonically
decreasing function of t, while the descent direction is the
gradient. There are several commonly used monotonically
decreasing functions for adapting the learning rate for deep
learning tasks, including exponential decay (E-decay) , reciprocal decay (R-decay), step-size decay (SS-decay), and
cosine annealing decay (CA-decay) schemes.
Another strategy makes use of the loss function value
and/or the loss function gradient for adapting the learning
rate while the decent direction is also the gradient. AdaGrad (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011a) is the first method
in this category, which aggregates squared gradient norms
over the learning course, denoted as At . The square-root of
At is used to adjust the learning rate. Instead of simply aggregating the squared gradient norms, RMSprop (Tieleman
and Hinton 2012) calculates At with the exponential moving
average of squared gradient norms. Furthermore, AdaDelta
(Zeiler 2012) replaces the learning rate in RMSProp with the
square root of the exponential moving average of squared incremental update norms. As a result, there is no learning rate
in AdaDelta. More recently the hypergradient decent (HGD)
is rediscovered to learn the learning rate (Baydin et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2022), which originally considers the adaptation
of the learning rate using the derivative of the objective function with respect to the learning rate (Almeida et al. 1998).
Computing this hypergradient requires one extra copy of the
original gradient to be stored in memory. It has been illustrated that the hypergradient decent can be more robust by
using the gradient-related information of up to two previous
steps in adapting the learning rate (Plagianakos, Magoulas,
and Vrahatis 2001). L4 (Rolinek and Martius 2018) adapts
the learning rate with the current and minimum loss function values, as well as the current gradient and another descent direction. L4GD utilizes the gradient as the descent
direction, while L4Mom and L4Adam (Rolinek and Martius 2018) apply Momentum and Adam’s update directions,
respectively. LQA (Zhu et al. 2021) employs the three loss
function values to calculate the adaptive learning rate at each
iteration.
The third strategy can be viewed as the schemes with a
constant learning rate while adapting the descent direction.
Momentum (Jacobs 1988) keeps a discounted history of past

The learning rate is a critical hyperparameter for deep learning tasks since it determines the extent to which the model parameters are updated during the learning course. However, the
choice of learning rates typically depends on empirical judgment, which may not result in satisfactory outcomes without
intensive try-and-error experiments. In this study, we propose
a novel learning rate adaptation scheme called QLABGrad.
Without any user-specified hyperparameter, QLABGrad automatically determines the learning rate by optimizing the
Quadratic Loss Approximation-Based (QLAB) function for
a given gradient descent direction, where only one extra forward propagation is required. We theoretically prove the convergence of QLABGrad with a smooth Lipschitz condition
on the loss function. Experiment results on multiple architectures, including MLP, CNN, and ResNet, on MNIST, CIFAR10, and ImageNet datasets, demonstrate that QLABGrad
outperforms various competing schemes for deep learning.

Introduction
The most common scheme for learning parameters of deep
network models is the gradient (steepest) descent method, in
which the gradient of the loss function with a learning rate
is used to update the parameters in an iterative course. The
basic descent methods include stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), mini-batch gradient descent and batch gradient descent (Aggarwal 2018; Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville
2016; Ruder 2016) and their variants (Huo and Huang 2017;
Khirirat, Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2017), where a
constant finite learning rate is user-specified or is tuned with
less or no adaptation. In principle, the gradient descent direction is the optimal direction with infinitesimal learning
rates. However, if a finite learning rate is chosen to be too
small, the learning course could be very time-consuming.
On the other hand, if a finite learning rate is chosen to be
too large, the learning course can behave unexpectedly (e.g.,
overshooting or diverging). Therefore, in either case, maintaining a constant learning rate is not an ideal learning strategy.
Several strategies have been proposed to address the issues with a constant learning rate as summarized in Table
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12072

