The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Intelligent Calibration for Bias Reduction in Sentiment Corpora Annotation
Process
Idan Toker1 , David Sarne1 , Jonathan Schler2
1

Bar-Ilan University
Holon Institute of Technology
idanokim@gmail.com, david.sarne@gmail.com, schler@gmail.com
2

Abstract

(termed ”review” onwards) and returns a numeric sentiment
score, repeatedly. This may result in a score bias, particularly when the annotator runs into a reviews sequence of
rather extreme reviews, creating a biased reference point
(anchor) which influences following scores.
Methods for dealing with anchoring bias are human-labor
intensive. These include, among others, taking the majority sentiment label assigned by multiple crowdworkers for a
given text (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis 2008), incorporating gold standard questions or attention check questions in
the task to identify and exclude unreliable or biased workers
(Snow et al. 2008), and labeling a small subset of the data
by experts in sentiment analysis to serve as a benchmark for
the crowdworkers to compare their own labels against (Pang,
Lee et al. 2008). As an alternative to the above, we propose
an approach aiming at directly mitigating the anchoring effect. The method is based on providing a small set of reviews
to be labeled by the annotators before they begin annotating
the (substantially) larger batch of reviews assigned to them.
The purpose of these calibration reviews is to reduce the average annotation error of the other reviews, meaning that the
effort exerted in labeling of these reviews is overhead. Alas,
the saving on manpower engaged in redundant labeling is
often well worth this additional overhead.
Simply adding random reviews at the beginning of the
process is not enough. We suggest that the selection of the
calibration reviews be carried out intelligently, based on
learning. In such case the selection of the calibration reviews
should be made from an already labeled reliable set of reviews. We emphasize that even if such repository of labeled
reviews should be constructed from scratch, the additional
overhead is significantly smaller compared to the substantial overhead associated with the above reviewed methods.
In this study, we introduce an innovative review annotation model that employs a calibration set to meticulously
quantify anchoring bias, utilizing the metric of mean absolute error (MAE). Through a comprehensive series of 17
experiments encompassing 1640 annotators on established
platforms such as Prolific or Amazon Mechanical Turk,
we delineate the trajectory of sentiment bias as annotators
progress in their tasks. A significant contribution of our research is the elucidation of the profound impact of initial
review exposure on annotator bias and the consequent emphasis on the judicious selection of calibration sets. Building

This paper focuses in the inherent anchoring bias present in
sequential reviews-sentiment corpora annotation processes. It
proposes employing a limited subset of meticulously chosen
reviews at the outset of the process, as a means of calibration,
effectively mitigating the phenomenon. Through extensive
experimentation we validate the phenomenon of sentiment
bias in the annotation process and show that its magnitude can
be influenced by pre-calibration. Furthermore, we show that
the choice of the calibration set matters, hence the need for
effective guidelines for choosing the reviews to be included
in it. A comparison of annotators performance with the proposed calibration to annotation processes that do not use calibration or use a randomly-picked calibration set, reveals that
indeed the calibration set picked is highly effective—it manages to substantially reduce the average absolute error compared to the other cases. Furthermore, the proposed selection
guidelines are found to be highly robust in picking an effective calibration set also for domains different than the one
based on which these rules were extracted.

Introduction
Customer feedbacks are becoming increasingly crucial for
the success of firms as they increase their understanding of
strengths and weaknesses, as well as the general attractiveness of the products and services they offer (Dey, Haque,
and Raj 2010; Milner and Furnham 2017). Feedbacks are
also useful for prospective customers, serving as a signal
for quality, usefulness and cost-effectiveness. As such, many
companies are now offering a public feedback mechanism
on their websites (Chen et al. 2017; Dellarocas 2003; Assimakopoulos et al. 2014). One important analysis tool for
customer feedback is the automatic understanding of their
sentiment (Moghaddam 2015; Gamon 2004). Still, despite
rapid progress in the automation of data analysis, and recent advances in the field of sentiment analysis, automatic
sentiment extraction still requires much user involvement,
primarily in terms of labeling of training data (Mitra 2020).
The labeling (or ”annotation”) process, either carried out
in house or with the use of crowdworkers (e.g., with Amazon Mechanical Turk, Prolific or Toloka), is inherently sequential. The annotator is presented with a textual feedback
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10172

