The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Non-parametric Representation Learning with Kernels
Pascal Esser∗ , Maximilian Fleissner∗ , Debarghya Ghoshdastidar
Technical University of Munich, Germany
esser@cit.tum.de, fleissner@cit.tum.de, ghoshdas@cit.tum.de

Abstract
Unsupervised and self-supervised representation learning
has become popular in recent years for learning useful features from unlabelled data. Representation learning has been
mostly developed in the neural network literature, and other
models for representation learning are surprisingly unexplored. In this work, we introduce and analyze several kernelbased representation learning approaches: Firstly, we define
two kernel Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) models using contrastive loss functions and secondly, a Kernel Autoencoder
(AE) model based on the idea of embedding and reconstructing data. We argue that the classical representer theorems
for supervised kernel machines are not always applicable for
(self-supervised) representation learning, and present new
representer theorems, which show that the representations
learned by our kernel models can be expressed in terms of kernel matrices. We further derive generalisation error bounds
for representation learning with kernel SSL and AE, and empirically evaluate the performance of these methods in both
small data regimes as well as in comparison with neural network based models.

Introduction
Representation learning builds on the idea that for most data,
there exists a lower dimensional embedding that still retains
most of the information useful for a downstream task (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). While early works relied
on pre-defined representations, including image descriptors
such as SURF (Bay, Tuytelaars, and Van Gool 2006) or SIFT
(Lowe 1999) as well as bag-of-words approaches, over the
past decade the focus has moved to representations learned
from data itself. Across a wide range of tasks, including image classification and natural language processing (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013), this approach has proven to
be more powerful than the use of hand-crafted descriptors.
In addition, representation learning has gained increasing
popularity in recent years as it provides a way of taking advantage of unlabelled data in a partially labelled data setting.
Since the early works, methods for representation learning
have predominantly relied on neural networks and there
has been little focus on other classes of models. This may be
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

part of the reason why it is still mostly driven from an experimental perspective. In this work, we focus on the following
two learning paradigms that both fall under the umbrella of
representation learning:
Self-Supervised representation learning using contrastive loss functions has been established in recent years
as an important method between supervised and unsupervised learning as it does not require explicit labels but relies on implicit knowledge of what makes samples semantically close to others. Therefore SSL builds on inputs and
inter-sample relations (𝑿, 𝑿), where 𝑿 is often constructed
through data-augmentations of 𝑿 known to preserve input
semantics such as additive noise or horizontal flip for an
image (Kanazawa, Jacobs, and Chandraker 2016). While the
idea of SSL is not new (Bromley et al. 1993) the main focus
has been on deep SSL models, which have been highly successful in domains such as computer vision (Chen et al. 2020;
Jing and Tian 2019) and natural language processing (Misra
and Maaten 2020; Devlin et al. 2019).
Unsupervised representation learning through reconstruction relies only on a set of features 𝑿 without
having access to the labels. The high level idea is to map the
data to a lower dimensional latent space, and then back to
the features. The model is optimised by minimising the difference between the input data and the reconstruction. This
has been formalized through principal component analysis
(PCA) (Pearson 1901) and its nonlinear extension Kernel PCA
(Schölkopf, Smola, and Müller 1998). While few approaches
exist in traditional machine learning, the paradigm of representation through reconstruction has built the foundation of
a large number of deep learning methods. Autoencoders (AE)
(Kramer 1991) use a neural network for both the embedding
into the latent space as well as for the reconstruction. The
empirical success of autoencoders has given rise to a large
body of work, developed for task specific regularisation (e.g.
(Yang et al. 2017)), as well as for a wide range of applications
such as image denoising (Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005a),
clustering (Yang et al. 2017) or natural language processing
(Zhang et al. 2022). However, their theoretical understanding
is still limited to analyzing critical points and dynamics in
shallow linear networks (Kunin et al. 2019; Pretorius, Kroon,
and Kamper 2018; Refinetti and Goldt 2022).
An extended version including proofs can be found at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02028

11910

