The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AE-NeRF: Audio Enhanced Neural Radiance Field for Few Shot
Talking Head Synthesis
Dongze Li1,2 , Kang Zhao3 , Wei Wang2 * , Bo Peng2 ,
Yingya Zhang3 , Jing Dong2 , Tieniu Tan2,4
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CRIPAC & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
4
Nanjing University
References

Target

Abstract
Audio-driven talking head synthesis is a promising topic with
wide applications in digital human, film making and virtual
reality. Recent NeRF-based approaches have shown superiority in quality and fidelity compared to previous studies.
However, when it comes to few-shot talking head generation, a practical scenario where only few seconds of talking
video is available for one identity, two limitations emerge:
1) they either have no base model, which serves as a facial
prior for fast convergence, or ignore the importance of audio when building the prior; 2) most of them overlook the
degree of correlation between different face regions and audio, e.g., mouth is audio related, while ear is audio independent. In this paper, we present Audio Enhanced Neural Radiance Field (AE-NeRF) to tackle the above issues, which
can generate realistic portraits of a new speaker with fewshot dataset. Specifically, we introduce an Audio Aware Aggregation module into the feature fusion stage of the reference scheme, where the weight is determined by the similarity of audio between reference and target image. Then,
an Audio-Aligned Face Generation strategy is proposed to
model the audio related and audio independent regions respectively, with a dual-NeRF framework. Extensive experiments have shown AE-NeRF surpasses the state-of-the-art on
image fidelity, audio-lip synchronization, and generalization
ability, even in limited training set or training iterations.

Over
/𝑜ʊ/

Our
/a/

Video …

Flow

…

Seventeen Activate
/ æ/
/𝑡𝑖:/

Authorize
/ɔ:/
(a)

…

(b)

…

Figure 1: Our observation. (a) It shows the target/reference
images and their phonetic symbols. The target is more similar to the first and last reference image because their pronunciation is closer. (b) We calculate the flow of adjacent
frames, it can be seen the lower half face varies obviously
than other regions.
for each new identity. What’s worse, to make model generalize to various mouth shapes, the training set for each identity
should be large, which is difficult to be satisfied in practice
since the data for one identity are often limited. One-shot
talking head generation (Chen et al. 2019; Prajwal et al.
2020; Zhou et al. 2020) may be a solution, which drives
the novel identity from one reference image without training. But it sacrifices the fidelity of talking head, especially
the teeth consistency and details. To balance data availability, training efficiency and generation quality, we focus on
a practical scenario: few-shot talking head synthesis, that is,
we need to train a NeRF model rapidly on a short talking
video of one identity, which is capable of generating highfidelity talking head with a given audio. Existing NeRFbased methods suffer from the following limitations when
applied to this setting:
Lack of a robust prior. In order to quickly generalize to the
few-shot identity, it is necessary to pre-train a base model
across multi-identity to provide a basic audio-to-lip translation and implicit facial priors, such as color, shape and
texture, which are helpful to restore faithful facial details.

Introduction
Audio-driven talking head generation is an essential technique with broad application scenarios such as digital human, film making, video conference and virtual reality.
Many literature (Prajwal et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2023; Ye
et al. 2023) have been put forward to learn the audio-to-lip
mapping by using deep generative models, such as GAN,
diffusion model, VAE, etc. Among them, Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) based methods (Guo
et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2022) have shown
promising results, which map audio features to dynamic
neural radiance fields to model a talking head.
However, NeRF-based methods usually adopt identityspecific training, i.e., one needs to train a model from scratch
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3037

