The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scalable Motion Style Transfer with Constrained Diffusion Generation
Wenjie Yin1 , Yi Yu2* , Hang Yin3 , Danica Kragic1 , Mårten Björkman1*
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
2
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
3
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
{yinw, dani, celle}@kth.se, yiyu@nii.ac.jp, hayi@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Current training of motion style transfer systems relies on
consistency losses across style domains to preserve contents,
hindering its scalable application to a large number of domains and private data. Recent image transfer works show the
potential of independent training on each domain by leveraging implicit bridging between diffusion models, with the content preservation, however, limited to simple data patterns.
We address this by imposing biased sampling in backward
diffusion while maintaining the domain independence in the
training stage. We construct the bias from the source domain keyframes and apply them as the gradient of content
constraints, yielding a framework with keyframe manifold
constraint gradients (KMCGs). Our validation demonstrates
the success of training separate models to transfer between
as many as ten dance motion styles. Comprehensive experiments find a significant improvement in preserving motion
contents in comparison to baseline and ablative diffusionbased style transfer models. In addition, we perform a human study for a subjective assessment of the quality of generated dance motions. The results validate the competitiveness
of KMCGs.

Figure 1: The proposed scalable motion style transfer system, with independently trained diffusion models. Given a
source motion sequence, our system converts it to latent encoding, then constructs motion in the target style.

primarily relied on supervised learning, requiring paired and
annotated data. However, obtaining matched human motion sequences is challenging and often involves a laborious
preprocessing phase. Consequently, the predominant style
transfer methods today are unpaired translations that do not
demand direct mappings between motion samples. Common
methods among these are the motion transfer systems based
on CycleGAN (Dong et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2023b) for paired
style domains and StarGAN (Chan, Irimia, and Ho 2020;
Yin et al. 2023c) for a set of domains.
While these systems are capable of generating highquality human motion, they exhibit considerable limitations
when it comes to scalability towards new domains. Specifically, CycleGAN-based methods are trained on distinct pairs
of motion styles, where each model is tailored for transfer between a specific pair of styles (Dong et al. 2020; Yin
et al. 2023b), or establish a shared domain bridging multiple styles via StarGAN-based architecture (Chan, Irimia,
and Ho 2020; Yin et al. 2023c).
The former implies training a quadratically increasing
number of models, making it an impractical solution when
transfer between a large number of style domains is considered. The latter faces finding such a shared domain, which
is an enormously challenging task. Both methods also show
limited incremental scalability and adaptability; a new style
requires retraining of the models on the entire dataset. The
requirement of simultanous access to the entire dataset highlights an additional drawback of these methods when parts
of the data are sensitive due to privacy concerns, such as

Introduction
Human motion style is a complex and important aspect of
human behavior, which can be perceived as motion characteristics that convey personality and temper or articulate
socio-cultural factors. The ability to accurately capture and
replicate motion style is crucial in numerous applications,
such as video games, and choreography. Style transfer systems can streamline creation of various media, including images (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016), music (Brunner et al.
2018), and indeed human movements (Dong et al. 2020).
For instance, in the realm of video games, unique modes of
action correspond to various player operations and character states. Similarly, in the field of dance choreography, each
dance genre has its own movement patterns, and the application of style transfer can assist choreographers in creating
variations of particular movements.
Early methods for motion style transfer (Hsu, Pulli, and
Popović 2005; Taylor and Hinton 2009; Smith et al. 2019)
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10234

