The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimised Storage for Datalog Reasoning
Xinyue Zhang1 , Pan Hu2 , Yavor Nenov3 , Ian Horrocks1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
School of Electrical Information and Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Oxford Semantic Techonologies, Oxford, UK
{xinyue.zhang, ian.horrocks}@cs.ox.ac.uk, pan.hu@sjtu.edu.cn, yavor.nenov@oxfordsemantic.tech

2

Abstract

rules and original facts. This process of computing all consequences is known as materialisation, the same for the resulting set of facts. Materialisation ensures efficient query
evaluation, as queries can be directly evaluated over the materialised facts without considering the rules further. Therefore, materialisation is commonly used in Datalog systems.
For example, systems like RDFox, Vadalog, LogicBlox, and
VLog all adopt this approach. However, materialisation has
downsides for large datasets. Computing the materialisation can be computationally expensive, especially with rules
like transitive closure that derive many inferred facts. Storing all the materialised facts also increases storage requirements. Additionally, if the original facts change, materialisation needs to be incrementally updated, rather than fully
recomputed from scratch each time. This incremental maintenance is crucial for efficiency when facts are updated frequently. In essence, materialisation trades increased preprocessing time and storage for improved query performance
by avoiding extensive rule evaluation during query processing. The costs in time and space to materialise can become
prohibitive for very large datasets and rule sets.
The computation and maintenance of materialisation
have been well investigated. The standard seminaı̈ve algorithm (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995) efficiently computes the materialisation by avoiding repetitions during
rule applications. This algorithm can also incrementally
maintain the materialisation for fact additions. More general (incremental) maintenance algorithms like the counting algorithm (Gupta, Mumick, and Subrahmanian 1993),
Delete/Rederive algorithm (Staudt and Jarke 1995), and
Backward/Forward (B/F) algorithm (Motik et al. 2019) can
maintain materialisation for both additions and deletions and
are applicable beyond initial computation. Additionally, specialised algorithms optimised for particular rule patterns,
like transitive closure (Subercaze et al. 2016), have been developed, and a modular framework proposed by Hu, Motik,
and Horrocks (2022) combines standard approaches for normal rules with tailored approaches for certain types of rules
to further improve materialisation efficiency.
While extensive research has been conducted on the efficient computation and maintenance of Datalog materialisation, optimised storage of relations that takes into account
properties implied by the program has so far been limited to
the handling of equality relations (Motik et al. 2015) and the

Materialisation facilitates Datalog reasoning by precomputing all consequences of the facts and the rules so that queries
can be directly answered over the materialised facts. However, storing all materialised facts may be infeasible in practice, especially when the rules are complex and the given set
of facts is large. We observe that for certain combinations of
rules, there exist data structures that compactly represent the
reasoning result and can be efficiently queried when necessary. In this paper, we present a general framework that allows for the integration of such optimised storage schemes
with standard materialisation algorithms. Moreover, we devise optimised storage schemes targeting at transitive rules
and union rules, two types of (combination of) rules that commonly occur in practice. Our experimental evaluation shows
that our approach significantly improves memory consumption, sometimes by orders of magnitude, while remaining
competitive in terms of query answering time.

Introduction
Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995) can describe a
domain of interest as a set of “if-then” rules and new facts
in this domain can be derived by applying the rules to a
set of explicitly given facts until a fixpoint is reached. With
the ability to express recursive dependencies, such as transitive closure and graph reachability, Datalog is widely used
in different communities. In the Semantic Web community,
Datalog is used to capture OWL 2 RL ontologies (Motik
et al. 2009) possibly extended with SWRL rules (Horrocks
et al. 2004) and can thus be used to answer queries over
ontology-enriched data. There are an increasing number of
academic and commercial systems that have implemented
Datalog, such as LogicBlox (Aref et al. 2015), VLog (Carral et al. 2019), RDFox (Nenov et al. 2015), Vadalog (Bellomarini, Gottlob, and Sallinger 2018), GraphDB1 , and Oracle’s database (Wu et al. 2008).
Given a set of explicitly given facts and a set of Datalog rules, a prominent computational task for a Datalog system is to answer queries over both facts and rules. One typical approach is to pre-compute all derivable facts from the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://graphdb.ontotext.com/

10748

