The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Interpretable Long-Form Legal Question Answering with
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models
Antoine Louis, Gijs van Dijck, Gerasimos Spanakis
Law & Tech Lab, Maastricht University
{a.louis, gijs.vandijck, jerry.spanakis}@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Abstract

to justice for all. The global implications of this issue are
significant: an estimated 1.5 billion individuals wrestle with
unresolved legal challenges, and 4.5 billion may be excluded
from the protective measures that the law provides (Garavano et al. 2019). In light of these circumstances, there is
growing consensus that improved access to legal information could dramatically enhance the outcomes of legal disputes for many people (Currie 2009).
The rapid progress in natural language processing and
the growing availability of digitized legal data present unprecedented opportunities to bridge the gap between people
and the law. For instance, legal text summarization (Bhattacharya et al. 2019; Shukla et al. 2022) holds the potential to
simplify complex legal documents for the layperson, while
legal judgment prediction (Chalkidis et al. 2019; Trautmann
et al. 2022) could unveil insightful correlations between an
individual’s situation and the probable legal outcome. Similarly, legal question answering (LQA) could offer affordable, expert-like assistance to the masses, thereby empowering marginalized parties when utilized for public welfare.
However, existing research on LQA tends to exhibit a constrained scope, often concentrating on specialized legal domains, such as tax law (Holzenberger et al. 2020) or privacy
policies (Ravichander et al. 2019), or limiting the responses
to uninformative brief answers like yes/no replies (Rabelo
et al. 2022) or few-word spans (Duan et al. 2019).
In this paper, we present an end-to-end approach aimed at
generating long-form responses to any statutory law questions. Our methodology harnesses the popular “retrievethen-read” pipeline, which first leverages a retriever over
a large evidence corpus to fetch a set of relevant legislative articles, and then employs a reader to peruse these articles and formulate a comprehensive, interpretable answer.
Our retriever relies on a lightweight bi-encoder model, wich
enables fast and effective retrieval. For our reader, we use
an instruction-tuned large language model (LLM) that we
adapt to our task via two distinct learning strategies: incontext learning, wherein the model learns from instructions
and a set of contextually provided examples; and parameterefficient finetuning, where a small number of extra parameters are optimized on a downstream dataset while the base
model’s weights are quantized and remain unchanged.
To support training and evaluating such systems, we collect and release the Long-form Legal Question Answering

Many individuals are likely to face a legal dispute at some
point in their lives, but their lack of understanding of how to
navigate these complex issues often renders them vulnerable.
The advancement of natural language processing opens new
avenues for bridging this legal literacy gap through the development of automated legal aid systems. However, existing legal question answering (LQA) approaches often suffer from a
narrow scope, being either confined to specific legal domains
or limited to brief, uninformative responses. In this work,
we propose an end-to-end methodology designed to generate
long-form answers to any statutory law questions, utilizing
a “retrieve-then-read” pipeline. To support this approach, we
introduce and release the Long-form Legal Question Answering (LLeQA) dataset, comprising 1,868 expert-annotated legal questions in the French language, complete with detailed
answers rooted in pertinent legal provisions. Our experimental results demonstrate promising performance on automatic
evaluation metrics, but a qualitative analysis uncovers areas
for refinement. As one of the only comprehensive, expertannotated long-form LQA dataset, LLeQA has the potential
to not only accelerate research towards resolving a significant real-world issue, but also act as a rigorous benchmark
for evaluating NLP models in specialized domains. We publicly release our code, data, and models.

Introduction
Legal disputes are an inevitable part of everyday life, with
many individuals finding themselves entangled in issues related to marriage, debts, or employment (Farrow et al. 2016;
Ponce et al. 2019). However, most people have little to no
knowledge about their rights and fundamental legal processes (Balmer et al. 2010). As a result, they either take no
action or turn to the internet for advice (Denvir 2016). Unfortunately, the latter often directs users towards commercial websites that prioritize their own marketing efforts over
providing thorough, useful legal guidance (Hagan and Li
2020). While invaluable, expert legal assistance is often prohibitively expensive, which results in a considerable number
of vulnerable individuals being left unprotected or exploited
due to their inability to afford it. This barrier to accessing
legal information fosters a significant imbalance within the
legal system, impeding the universal right to equal access
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22266

