The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ResMatch: Residual Attention Learning for Feature Matching
Yuxin Deng1 , Kaining Zhang1 , Shihua Zhang1 , Yansheng Li2 , Jiayi Ma1∗
1

2

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China
{dyx acuo, zkn19961212, yansheng.li}@whu.edu.com, {suhzhang001, jyma2010}@gmail.com

SuperGlue

Abstract

Feat.

Attention-based graph neural networks have made great
progress in feature matching. However, the literature lacks
a comprehensive understanding of how the attention mechanism operates for feature matching. In this paper, we rethink cross- and self-attention from the viewpoint of traditional feature matching and filtering. To facilitate the learning of matching and filtering, we incorporate the similarity
of descriptors into cross-attention and relative positions into
self-attention. In this way, the attention can concentrate on
learning residual matching and filtering functions with reference to the basic functions of measuring visual and spatial correlation. Moreover, we leverage descriptor similarity
and relative positions to extract inter- and intra-neighbors.
Then sparse attention for each point can be performed only
within its neighborhoods to acquire higher computation efficiency. Extensive experiments, including feature matching,
pose estimation and visual localization, confirm the superiority of the proposed method. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/ACuOoOoO/ResMatch.

ResMatch

Cross-Atten.

Self-Atten.

Matching

Filtering

+

+

Similarity of Descriptor

Relative Position

Figure 1: Interpretation of ResMatch. For the classical
matching-and-filtering, the similarity of descriptors and relative positions are injected into cross- and self-attention.

optimizes across multiple information sources is challenging. Benefiting from the great potential of deep learning,
SuperGlue (Sarlin et al. 2020) elegantly combines spatial information and visual appearance in an attention-based graph
neural network (GNN) (Vaswani et al. 2017). Briefly, SuperGlue fuses descriptor and keypoint position in hyperspace,
then uses sequential self- (intra-image) and cross- (interimage) attention to aggregate valid information. Finally, the
features augmented by the aggregated information can be
precisely matched. Although SuperGlue has achieved favorable performance and led the current trend in feature matching (Lindenberger, Sarlin, and Pollefeys 2023; Sun et al.
2021), it remains unclear how features that entangle spatial
and visual information interact with each other during iterative self- and cross-attention.
We think cross-attention behaves like NN matching since
it measures inter-image similarity and gathers messages
from similar features. In terms of self-attention, it shares
a similar formulation with the kernel-based match filter,
VFC (Ma et al. 2014). Given noisy putative matches, VFC
leverages kernel method to estimate the vector field, i.e., optical flow between two images, which can be fitted by inliers
only and used to filter outliers. The kernel measures correlation among intra-image points and the motion of a query
point is calculated by the correlation-weighted sum of key
motions. Similarly, self-attention measures intra-image correlation between features, which contain information of ‘soft
putative matches’, and gathers information in a formulation
of kernel method. So, self-attention might tend to predict
vector field like VFC. Such evidence encourages us to promote agnostic attention-based networks from a traditional
viewpoint of matching and filtering.

Introduction
Establishing point correspondences among images is a
fundamental step in various computer vision tasks, such
as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) (Fu
et al. 2022), Structure-from-Motion (SfM) (Schonberger and
Frahm 2016), and Multiview Stereo (MVS) (Seitz et al.
2006). To this end, features, which consist of descriptors, positions, etc. (Lowe 2004; Yan et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2022b),
should be extracted and matched. The most common way
to match features is searching nearest neighbor (NN) via
the similarity of descriptors. However, due to the inherent
ambiguity of descriptors, NN shows limited practicality in
challenging scenes marked by significant changes in viewpoint or illumination, repetitive structures, and other complexities (Fan et al. 2022a, 2019).
Compared to NN, graph-based methods (Caetano et al.
2009; Sarlin et al. 2020) offer enhanced feature matching
by considering additional properties like keypoint position,
thereby enabling the discovery of more correspondences.
However, crafting a graph-matching model that seamlessly
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1501

