The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UMA: Facilitating Backdoor Scanning via Unlearning-Based Model Ablation
Yue Zhao1 , Congyi Li 1,2 , Kai Chen1,2 *
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Science, China
{zhaoyue, licongyi, chenkai}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Advanced Backdoor attacks. Recently, advanced backdoor
attacks have made them harder to detect by improving the
trigger designs or leveraging stealthier backdoor implanting methods. Some of these methods involve the use of
feature-space triggers or more complex triggers, such as
frequency-domain backdoor (Feng et al. 2022), latent-space
backdoor (Yao et al. 2019), blend backdoor (Li et al. 2021),
reflection backdoor (Liu et al. 2020), and the composite
backdoor (Lin et al. 2020), etc. Different from small patches,
these triggers are difficult to be reversed as small-area patterns and, thus, pose challenges in distinguishing them from
universal AEs. Other approaches leverage advancements in
backdoor implanting techniques to enhance their stealthiness and evade detections. They achieve this by entangling
backdoor features with benign features, such as minimizing
the distance between the backdoor task and the clean (primary) task (Tang et al. 2022) or the distance between the trojaned model parameters and clean model parameters (TDC
2022b). In (Tang et al. 2022), it has been shown that the
task similarity between the backdoor task and the clean task
can affect the detectability. For the former approaches, some
state-of-the-art methods like ABS+Ex-ray (Liu et al. 2022)
and MNTD (Xu et al. 2021) have achieved an improved detection on some backdoor attacks. However, for the latter
approaches, their detection accuracies degrade quickly.
Considering the gap between the advancements in backdoor attack techniques and the existing backdoor detection
methods, it is imperative to investigate more efficient backdoor detection techniques against advanced attacks. To do
that, we need to consider the following two questions:
Q1: What hinders the detection of these advanced backdoors? Backdoor attacks inject non-target class features into
the model and associate them with the target class, leading
to model misclassifications. To detect them, we first need to
identify features that cause the model to produce the desired
target misclassification. Then, we must verify that these features do not belong to the inherent features of the target
class, as learned from clean samples. However, advanced
backdoor attacks involve more challenges in the second step.
For example, stealthy implanting techniques entangle the injected features with the inherent features of the target class,
making them indistinguishable. Advanced triggers obstruct
trigger inversion-based detections by making the inversed
triggers indistinguishable from universal AEs. To some ex-

Recent advances in backdoor attacks, like leveraging complex triggers or stealthy implanting techniques, have introduced new challenges in backdoor scanning, limiting the usability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in various scenarios. In this paper, we propose Unlearning-based Model Ablation (UMA), a novel approach to facilitate backdoor scanning
and defend against advanced backdoor attacks. UMA filters
out backdoor-irrelevant features by ablating the inherent features of the target class within the model and subsequently
reveals the backdoor through dynamic trigger optimization.
We evaluate our method on 1700 models (700 benign and
1000 trojaned) with 6 model structures, 7 different backdoor
attacks, and 4 datasets. Our results demonstrate that UMA effectively detects these advanced backdoors. Specifically, our
method can achieve 91% AUC-ROC and 86.6% detection accuracy on average, which outperforms the baselines, including Neural Cleanse, ABS, K-Arm and MNTD.

Introduction
Backdoor, also known as Trojan Horse, injects a hidden and
unexpected output into the model, which behaves normally
until a specific trigger is presented in the input, causing the
model to produce the predefined misclassification desired by
the attacker. The backdoor attack has been a growing concern for trustworthy ML systems, especially for vital applications like the facial-recognition system, malware classification, autonomous driving and medical diagnosis, etc.
To defend them, we have already got plenty of backdoor
detection methods, which could determine whether a given
model is trojaned or not. Among them, trigger inversion
methods like Neural Cleanse (Wang et al. 2019), ABS (Liu
et al. 2019), TABOR (Guo et al. 2019), and K-arm (Shen
et al. 2021) are verified effective backdoor detection methods. These methods reverse the trigger based on its misclassification property and distinguish it from universal adversarial examples (AEs) by assuming the trigger is much
smaller than any universal AEs. However, recent backdoor
attacks have rendered the above existing defenses less effective and make backdoor detection more challenging.
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21823

