The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data Shunt: Collaboration of Small and Large Models
for Lower Costs and Better Performance
Dong Chen1 ,Yueting Zhuang1∗ , Shuo Zhang2 , Jinfeng Liu3 , Su Dong3 , Siliang Tang1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Ant Group
{chendongcs, yzhuang, shuo.zhang, siliang}@zju.edu.cn, jinfeng.ljf@antgroup.com, listenersu@gmail.com
Pay 1$

Pay 5$

Abstract

of

Pretrained large models, particularly large language models, have garnered increasing attention, as they have demonstrated remarkable abilities through contextual learning. Pretrained large models are increasingly recognized as fundamental tools for solving various tasks. However, the substantial computational demands of large models have dissuaded
most product teams and individuals from running them. In
such scenarios, to leverage the exceptional performance of
large models, one must solely depend on costly APIs, further burdening product teams and individuals. On the other
hand, despite the overall inferior performance of small models compared to large models, there are certain distributions
where small models can achieve comparable or even superior
results. For instance, during training, small models may become trapped in a local optimum that is unique to certain distributions, leading to superior performance. Hence, we propose Data Shunt (DS), a general paradigm for collaboration
of small and large models. DS not only substantially reduces
the cost associated with deploying large models but also effectively enhances overall performance. Specifically, DS determines the shunting direction by evaluating the confidence
level of small models. When the confidence level falls below a specific threshold, the input data is forwarded to large
models. To further leverage the advantages of the small and
large models, we introduce Prompt Pruning (PP) and 2-Stage
Confidence Distillation (2CD), which facilitate mutual collaboration, leading to better results and less cost. The remarkable performance across diverse modalities and tasks demonstrates the superiority of the proposed DS over large models.
For instance, ChatGPT achieves an accuracy of 94.43% on
Amazon Product sentiment analysis, and DS achieves an accuracy of 95.64%, while the cost has been reduced to only
31.18%. The code for the proposed method are provided for
research purposes https://github.com/Anfeather/Data-Shunt.

User

Answer

APP 1

Product team 1

Answer

Large model

Better Service,
Lower Prices!
Pay 4.5$

Pay 0.3$

+

of
User

Answer

APP 2

Product team 2

Answer

Large model

Small model

Figure 1: Commercial Applications of Large Models. upper: Product team 1 only use large models to support their
applications. lower: Product team 2 decreases costs with
collaboration of large and small models, enabling them to
offer more attractive prices to users.

Ouyang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023) have demonstrated outstanding performance in text-related tasks (Wei et al. 2022;
Brown et al. 2020). Additionally, multimodal large models (Zhu et al. 2023) like Flamingo (Alayrac et al. 2022)
and BLIP-2 (Li et al. 2023b) have been developed to extend the capabilities of LLM to encompass vision modality.
Pretrained large models, particularly ChatGPT, have found
widespread applications in various domains, including coding (Surameery and Shakor 2023), education (Biswas 2023),
health (Biswas 2023), and beyond, revolutionizing people’s
lives.
Despite the impressive performance of pretrained large
models such as ChatGPT across various applications, their
computational demands make them impractical for deployment on numerous devices. As a result, product teams or individuals might opt to acquire the interface of the pretrained
large model to access the associated services. Nonetheless, frequent invocations of the interface prove to be prohibitively costly for both teams and individuals. Besides, we
find that although the small model’s overall performance
is significantly lower than that of the large model, it can
still outperform or achieve highly competitive results across
certain data distributions. We first divide samples into easy
samples and hard samples. Easy samples represent data that
small models can fit well. These samples generally represent the majority of the training data and are relatively easier for small models to learn and predict accurately. In con-

Introduction
Recent years have seen a surge of interest in pretrained large
models (Yu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a), which are trained on
a vast quantity of data at scale and can be adapted to a wide
range of downstream tasks (Bommasani et al. 2021). Large
language models (LLM), such as GPT (Brown et al. 2020;
∗

Yueting Zhuang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11249

