The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving the Adversarial Transferability of Vision Transformers with Virtual
Dense Connection
Jianping Zhang1 , Yizhan Huang1 , Zhuoer Xu2 , Weibin Wu3 * , Michael R. Lyu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Tiansuan Lab, Antgroup
3
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{jpzhang, yzhuang22, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xuzhuoer.xze@antgroup.com, wuwb36@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

better adapt the transformer structure to the computer vision
field. Nowadays, ViTs have become the new paradigm for
solving various vision tasks such as object detection (Zhang
et al. 2021) and semantic segmentation (Zheng et al. 2021),
with competitive performance compared with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs).
Recent research reveals that both convolution-based and
transformer-based models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Wu et al. 2020c; Zhang et al. 2023b). Adversarial attacks inject human-imperceptible noise into the original image to mislead the deep neural network (DNN) models with
high confidence. This phenomenon raises security concerns
with the wide application of deep neural networks (Zhang
et al. 2023c,d; Wu et al. 2019). Furthermore, the adversarial examples crafted by the attacking algorithms manifest
adversarial transferability. That is, the adversarial examples
generated from a local surrogate model have the ability to
mislead the target victim model (Wu et al. 2020b; Zhang
et al. 2022). Therefore, adversarial transferability provides
an efficient way to craft adversarial examples for testing the
victim models without any access to the victim model under the black-box setting. Since victim models are usually
deployed in the black-box setting, it is imperative to devise
transferable attacking algorithms to assess their robustness
before their deployment in real-world applications.
The transfer-based attacks have achieved high attack
success rates against convolution-based models. Nevertheless, recent studies have discovered the robustness of
the transformer-based models and the low cross-structure
transferability, when we transfer the adversarial examples
generated by attacking transformer-based models to mislead convolution-based models or vice versa (Zhang et al.
2023b). Some research believes that the low cross-structure
transferability is due to the model structure difference
between transformer-based models and convolution-based
ones (Naseer et al. 2021). Convolution-based models utilize
the convolutional layers to capture the local information of
the input features in a small receptive field (Luo et al. 2016).
Transformer-based models divide the input image into small
patches and feed a sequence of small patches into the network. With the help of the self-attention mechanism, ViT
models can learn the global features at each stage of the
network, which shows distinct properties to CNN models.
Therefore, enhancing the adversarial transferability from

With the great achievement of vision transformers (ViTs),
transformer-based approaches have become the new
paradigm for solving various computer vision tasks. However, recent research shows that similar to convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), ViTs are still vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To explore the shared deficiency of models
with different structures, researchers begin to analyze the
cross-structure adversarial transferability, which is still
under-explored. Therefore, in this work, we focus on the
ViT attacks to improve the cross-structure transferability
between the transformer-based and convolution-based
models. Previous studies fail to thoroughly investigate the
influence of the components inside the ViT models on
adversarial transferability, leading to inferior performance.
To overcome the drawback, we launch a motivating study
by linearly down-scaling the gradients of components inside
the ViT models to analyze their influence on adversarial
transferability. Based on the motivating study, we find
that the gradient of the skip connection most influences
transferability and believe that back-propagating gradients
from deeper blocks can enhance transferability. Therefore, we propose the Virtual Dense Connection method
(VDC). Specifically, without changing the forward pass, we
first recompose the original network to add virtual dense
connections. Then we back-propagate gradients of deeper
Attention maps and Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) blocks
via virtual dense connections when generating adversarial
samples. Extensive experiments confirm the superiority of
our proposed method over the state-of-the-art baselines, with
an 8.2% improvement in transferability between ViT models
and a 7.2% improvement in cross-structure transferability
from ViTs to CNNs.

Introduction
Transformers have become the dominant solutions in the
natural language processing field with the state-of-the-art
performance on various downstream tasks. Vision transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) first adapt the selfattention mechanism of the transformers (Vaswani et al.
2017) to the computer vision field for image recognition.
Subsequently, diverse transformer-based approaches (Touvron et al. 2021a; Heo et al. 2021) have been proposed to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7133

