The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine-Grained Multi-View Hand Reconstruction Using Inverse Rendering
Qijun Gan, Wentong Li, Jinwei Ren, Jianke Zhu*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{ganqijun,liwentong,zijinxuxu,jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing high-fidelity hand models with intricate textures plays a crucial role in enhancing human-object interaction and advancing real-world applications. Despite the stateof-the-art methods excelling in texture generation and image
rendering, they often face challenges in accurately capturing
geometric details. Learning-based approaches usually offer
better robustness and faster inference, which tend to produce
smoother results and require substantial amounts of training
data. To address these issues, we present a novel fine-grained
multi-view hand mesh reconstruction method that leverages
inverse rendering to restore hand poses and intricate details.
Firstly, our approach predicts a parametric hand mesh model
through Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) based method
from multi-view images. We further introduce a novel Hand
Albedo and Mesh (HAM) optimization module to refine both
the hand mesh and textures, which is capable of preserving the mesh topology. In addition, we suggest an effective mesh-based neural rendering scheme to simultaneously
generate photo-realistic image and optimize mesh geometry
by fusing the pre-trained rendering network with vertex features. We conduct the comprehensive experiments on InterHand2.6M, DeepHandMesh and dataset collected by ourself,
whose promising results show that our proposed approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on both reconstruction accuracy and rendering quality. Code and dataset are
publicly available at https://github.com/agnJason/FMHR.

a) Input Images

b) Hyper-realistic Hand Mesh

Figure 1: Our proposed approach focuses on reconstructing
hands from multi-view images, allowing for the generation
of precise poses, geometry, and photo-realistic rendering.

Conventional
model-based
methods,
such
as
MANO (Romero, Tzionas, and Black 2017) and Nimble (Li et al. 2022b), often rely on smoothing meshes
and texture maps for hand representation. Nevertheless, it
typically requires costly scanning data and artistic expertise
in order to achieve intricate and personalized hand meshes
with texture maps. Moreover, the complex nature of hand
movements and challenges posed by occlusions hinder the
faithful restoration of hand mesh. Model-free approaches
like LISA (Corona et al. 2022) aim to address these
challenges by reconstructing coherent hands from image
sequences, while HandAvatar (Chen, Wang, and Shum
2023) focuses on reconstructing and rendering hands in
arbitrary poses by disentangling reflectance and lighting.
Nonetheless, the resulting mesh often exhibits smoothness
due to large pose variations across different frames.
Neural rendering-based methods, such as NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021) and NeuS (Wang et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2022),
have been widely used in synthesizing static objects from
multi-view images. As for the dynamic objects like hands,
these methods have the difficulties in obtaining a fixed topological structure through implicit surface representation. Despite their impressive rendering results, NeuS (Wang et al.
2021) requires a large amount of training time due to sampling along the ray. Meanwhile, NeuralBody (Peng et al.

Introduction
3D human reconstruction has attracted considerable research attentions (Saito et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2021a; Weng
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2021; Noguchi et al. 2021; Bhatnagar et al. 2020) in recent years. While there have been
promising advancements in reconstructing the human body
and face (Lei et al. 2023; Grassal et al. 2022; Peng et al.
2021b; Xiu et al. 2022), it still remains a formidable challenge to achieve highly accurate hand reconstruction due to
the inherent complexity of joint variations. By taking consideration of the distinctive nature for hands, it is essential
to investigate the hand geometry and rendering for obtaining
the realistic and fine-grained representations.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1779

