The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RPSC: Robust Pseudo-Labeling for Semantic Clustering
Sihang Liu1 , Wenming Cao2 , Ruigang Fu3 , Kaixiang Yang1 * , Zhiwen Yu1,4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Chongqing Jiaotong University, Chongqing, China
3
College of Electronic Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
202221044888@mail.scut.edu.cn, wenmincao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, furuigang08@nudt.edu.cn,
yangkx@scut.edu.cn, zhwyu@scut.edu.cn
Abstract
Clustering methods achieve performance improvement by
jointly learning representation and cluster assignment. However, they do not consider the confidence of pseudo-labels
which are not optimal as supervised information, resulting
into error accumulation. To address this issue, we propose a
Robust Pseudo-labeling for Semantic Clustering (RPSC) approach, which includes two stages. In the first stage (RPSCSelf), we design a semantic pseudo-labeling scheme by using
the consistency of samples, i.e., samples with same semantics
should be close to each other in the embedding space. To exploit robust semantic pseudo-labels for self-supervised learning, we propose a soft contrastive loss (SCL) which encourage the model to believe high-confidence sematic pseudolabels and be less driven by low-confidence pseudo-labels.
In the second stage (RPSC-Semi), we first determine the semantic pseudo-label of a sample based on the distance between itself and cluster centers, followed by screening out
reliable semantic pseudo-label by exploiting the consistency.
These reliable pseudo-labels are used as supervised information in the pseudo-semi-supervised learning algorithm to
further improve the performance. Experimental results show
that RPSC outperforms 18 competitive clustering algorithms
significantly on six challenging image benchmarks. In particular, RPSC achieves an accuracy of 0.688 on ImageNetDogs, which is an up to 24% improvement, compared with
the second-best method. We conduct ablation studies to investigate effects of different augmented strategies on RPSC
as well as contributions of terms in SCL to clustering performance. Experimental results indicate that SCL can be easily
integrated into existing clustering methods and bring performance improvement.

Figure 1: The ratio of neighboring samples that are semantically identical for CIFAR-10, STL-10 and CIFAR-100.
and complex data, traditional clustering algorithms may lead
to poor results due to the difficulty in extracting high-quality
features. With the improvement of representation learning
capability of neural networks, deep learning has come to the
fore in clustering tasks, referred to as deep clustering.
Existing deep clustering methods are divided into singlestage methods (Yang et al. 2017; Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi
2016; Yang, Parikh, and Batra 2016; Guo et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2021) and two-stage methods (Van Gansbeke et al.
2020; Dang et al. 2021; Niu, Shan, and Wang 2022). The former ones learn representations and cluster assignment simultaneously. For example, DEC (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi
2016) learns the mapping from data space to embedding
space through a pre-trained network, and uses K-means
and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence loss in the embedding space to optimize the clustering objective. JULE (Yang,
Parikh, and Batra 2016) obtains the label sequence by merging clusters in the forward propagation, and uses the label sequence as supervisory information to learn representations.
CC (Li et al. 2021) proposes a comparative learning framework combining instance level and cluster level.
Unlike one-stage methods, two-stage methods (Van Gansbeke et al. 2020; Niu, Shan, and Wang 2022) first use pretext tasks for representation learning and then perform cluster assignment. For example, SCAN (Van Gansbeke et al.
2020) exploits contrastive learning to mine nearest neighbors in the first stage and force the model to output the same
label for similar samples in the second stage. SPICE (Niu,
Shan, and Wang 2022) proposed a deep clustering frame-

Introduction
Clustering algorithms divide unlabeled data into groups via
using the similarity, so that data in the same group are more
similar to those from different groups. Traditional clustering
algorithms like hierarchical clustering (Johnson 1967), Kmeans (Hartigan and Wong 1979), DBSCAN (Schubert et al.
2017) require high-quality features to obtain desirable performance. However, when dealing with high-dimensional
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14008

