The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Dual Stealthy Backdoor: From Both Spatial and Frequency Perspectives
Yudong Gao1 , Honglong Chen1 * , Peng Sun2 , Junjian Li1 ,
Anqing Zhang1 , Zhibo Wang3 , Weifeng Liu1
1

College of Control Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China), P.R. China
2
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, P.R. China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P.R. China
YudongGao0504@163.com, chenhl@upc.edu.cn, psun@hnu.edu.cn, ljj1016cc@163.com, zhanganqing@126.com,
zhibowang@zju.edu.cn, liuwf@upc.edu.cn
Clean

Abstract
Backdoor attacks pose serious security threats to deep neural networks (DNNs). Backdoored models make arbitrarily
(targeted) incorrect predictions on inputs containing welldesigned triggers, while behaving normally on clean inputs.
Prior researches have explored the invisibility of backdoor
triggers to enhance attack stealthiness. However, most of
them only focus on the invisibility in the spatial domain, neglecting the generation of invisible triggers in the frequency
domain. This limitation renders the generated poisoned images easily detectable by recent defense methods. To address this issue, we propose a DUal stealthy BAckdoor attack method named DUBA, which simultaneously considers
the invisibility of triggers in both the spatial and frequency
domains, to achieve desirable attack performance, while ensuring strong stealthiness. Specifically, we first use Wavelet
Transform to embed the high-frequency information of the
trigger image into the clean image to ensure attack effectiveness. Then, to attain strong stealthiness, we incorporate
Fourier Transform and Cosine Transform to mix the poisoned
image and clean image in the frequency domain. Moreover,
DUBA adopts a novel attack strategy by training the model
with weak triggers and attacking with strong triggers to further enhance attack performance and stealthiness. DUBA is
evaluated extensively on four datasets against popular image
classifiers, showing significant superiority over state-of-theart backdoor attacks in attack success rate and stealthiness.

BadNets

Blend

WaNet

FIBA

DUBA

Spatial
Residual
Frequency
Residual

Figure 1: Visualization of images poisoned by different attacks. The first row contains: the clean image, images poisoned by BadNets (Gu et al. 2017), Blend (Chen et al. 2017),
WaNet (Nguyen and Tran 2021), FIBA (Feng et al. 2022),
and the proposed DUBA. The second row is the corresponding residual images in the spatial domain and the bottom is
the residual images in the frequency domain.

in security-sensitive applications (e.g., autonomous driving).
Most existing backdoor attacks craft backdoor triggers in the
spatial domain (Gu et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017; Li et al.
2021a). However, as shown in Figure 1, with the visible
triggers, early backdoor attacks can be easily detected and
removed. To enhance attack stealthiness, recent works consider generating invisible triggers through image steganography (Li et al. 2021a), disorting fields (Nguyen and Tran
2021) and so on. Regrettably, these methods only address
the invisibility of triggers in the spatial domain but neglect
that in the frequency domain. As a result, the generated
backdoored images can be easily identified by typical image
classification models that employ the frequency transform
as a part of the task pipeline (Zhang et al. 2021; Yan et al.
2019). More importantly, researchers have proposed effective backdoor defenses from frequency perspective. For example, FTD (Zeng et al. 2021) demonstrated that most backdoor triggers are high-frequency semantics, and it trained
a DNN model that classifies images in the frequency domain to effectively defend against most attacks. That is, most
backdoors are perceptible in the frequency domain. Therefore, it becomes imperative to guarantee the trigger’s imperceptibility in both the spatial and frequency domains to
launch a powerful yet stealthy backdoor attack.
To the best of our current understanding, the scholarly dis-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made great achievements in many fields, such as image classification (He et al.
2016), image segmentation (Feng et al. 2022), and target
recognition (Peng et al. 2021). Despite this remarkble success, DNNs are exposed to various security threats due to
their reliance on datasets labeled by third parties or during
outsourced training (Wang et al. 2023). Recent studies have
shown the vulnerability of DNNs to backdoor attacks (Gu
et al. 2017), where adversaries intentionally manipulate either the training data or model parameters to ensure accurate predictions on clean data while inducing targeted incorrect predictions on poisoned data. Backdoor attacks pose
serious security threats to deep learning systems, especially
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1851

