The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Moral Uncertainty and the Problem of Fanaticism
Jazon Szabo1 , Natalia Criado2 , Jose Such1,2 , Sanjay Modgil1
1

King’s College London, UK
VRAIN, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
{jazon.szabo,jose.such,sanjay.modgil}@kcl.ac.uk, {jsuch,ncriado}@upv.es
2

Abstract

cal theories. The most influential proposal – Maximising Expected Choiceworthiness (MEC) (MacAskill 2014) – treats
moral uncertainty analogously to empirical uncertainty. Credence corresponds to probability and choiceworthiness corresponds to utility, while MEC itself corresponds to maximising the expected utility.
However, MEC is arguably unsuitable for agent decision
making, given its vulnerability to the problem of fanaticism
(Ross 2006; MacAskill, Bykvist, and Ord 2020). That is to
say, under MEC, decision making can be dominated by theories that assign very high stakes to most moral situations
(i.e. are evaluated as either extremely desirable or undesirable), even if the agent has low credence in these theories.
Hence, the agent’s behaviour may be completely determined
by only a subset of low-credence theories while completely
ignoring other theories.
We concur with (MacAskill, Bykvist, and Ord 2020) that
fanaticism is unacceptable, since it allows for theories to
act as dictators or oligarchs (in the social choice sense of
these terms). Thus fanaticism completely undermines democratic motivation for accommodating multiple ethical perspectives. Relatedly, fanaticism subverts any societal endorsement and trust; a society is unlikely to accept agents
which may entirely ignore ethical perspectives that the society has high credence in.
The study of machine ethics (Moor 2006) has sought to
understand the moral implications of agent behaviour on
human stakeholders, so as to design machines that can act
ethically, even without human supervision (Anderson, Anderson, and Armen 2005). However, given prevalent significant moral disagreement, both within and between societies
(Haidt 2012)1 , it is unclear as to exactly which ethical theory
should guide agents’ actions (Ecoffet and Lehman 2021).
This is especially troubling for machine ethics, where a common methodology has been to implement a single ethical
theory. As emphasised in (Gabriel 2020), given the diversity
of ethical perspectives, an agent that acts according to a single ethical theory may not receive societal endorsement, thus
jeopardising the project of machine ethics. Indeed, recent
work in machine ethics draws on insights from moral uncer-

While there is universal agreement that agents ought to act
ethically, there is no agreement as to what constitutes ethical
behaviour. To address this problem, recent philosophical approaches to ‘moral uncertainty’ propose aggregation of multiple ethical theories to guide agent behaviour. However, one
of the foundational proposals for aggregation – Maximising
Expected Choiceworthiness (MEC) – has been criticised as
being vulnerable to fanaticism; the problem of an ethical theory dominating agent behaviour despite low credence (confidence) in said theory. Fanaticism thus undermines the ‘democratic’ motivation for accommodating multiple ethical perspectives. The problem of fanaticism has not yet been mathematically defined. Representing moral uncertainty as an instance of social welfare aggregation, this paper contributes to
the field of moral uncertainty by 1) formalising the problem
of fanaticism as a property of social welfare functionals and
2) providing non-fanatical alternatives to MEC, i.e. Highest
k-trimmed Mean and Highest Median.

1

Introduction

The recently proposed study of moral uncertainty represents a paradigm shift in how philosophers think about ethics
(MacAskill, Bykvist, and Ord 2020). Instead of aiming at a
‘one size fits all’ approach, moral uncertainty acknowledges
that different ethical perspectives have differing strengths
and weaknesses, and that it is rarely the case that there is
universal agreement on any given moral issue. Therefore,
under moral uncertainty, an agent aggregates different ethical perspectives so as to yield an overall evaluation. In particular such an agent has some credence (i.e. degree of acceptance) in not just one but rather multiple ethical theories. Each theory evaluates the agent’s available actions by
assigning each action a degree of choiceworthiness. A positive choiceworthiness denotes a good outcome while a negative choiceworthiness denotes a bad outcome; the larger the
magnitude, the better or worse the outcome of the action,
respectively. The agent chooses an action based on both the
theories’ credences and the choiceworthiness of the actions.
A fundamental question in moral uncertainty is how to
trade off the theories’ credences and the actions’ choiceworthiness when aggregating the evaluations of different ethi-

1
Indeed, the assumption that individuals apply a single ethical
perspective is questionable (MacAskill, Bykvist, and Ord 2020).
Hence proposals for value alignment (e.g., (Hadfield-Menell et al.
2016)) necessitate the learning of individual’s ethical preferences.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19948

