The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LaViP: Language-Grounded Visual Prompting
Nilakshan Kunananthaseelan1 , Jing Zhang2 , Mehrtash Harandi1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University
2
College of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian National University
{nilakshan.kunananthaseelan,mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu, zjnwpu@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a language-grounded visual prompting method
to adapt the visual encoder of vision-language models for
downstream tasks. By capitalizing on language integration,
we devise a parameter-efficient strategy to adjust the input of
the visual encoder, eliminating the need to modify or add to
the model’s parameters. Due to this design choice, our algorithm can operate even in black-box scenarios, showcasing
adaptability in situations where access to the model’s parameters is constrained. We will empirically demonstrate that,
compared to prior art, grounding visual prompts with language enhances both the accuracy and speed of adaptation.
Moreover, our algorithm excels in base-to-novel class generalization, overcoming limitations of visual prompting and
exhibiting the capacity to generalize beyond seen classes. We
thoroughly assess and evaluate our method across a variety of
image recognition datasets, such as EuroSAT, UCF101, DTD,
and CLEVR, spanning different learning situations, including
few-shot adaptation, base-to-novel class generalization, and
transfer learning.

1

Figure 1: Our key idea is to reprogram the visual encoder
of CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) through the generation of
language-grounded visual prompts.
this objective. The pioneering work of (Tsai, Chen, and Ho
2020) has demonstrated that through MR, even a CNN initially trained on ImageNet can be swiftly adapted to excel in classifying medical images, interestingly, even outperforming the traditional finetuning approach. Subsequent
research efforts have extended the idea of MR into various domains, achieving successful adaption without finetuing (Vinod, Chen, and Das 2020; Yen et al. 2021; Yang, Tsai,
and Chen 2021; Neekhara et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023).
The input transformation acquired through MR is commonly conceptualized as a perturbation pattern, which is
either added to or concatenated with the input images. By
learning the perturbation pattern, also called Visual Prompts
(VPs) in vision tasks, the PTM effectively embeds the downstream task samples into a distinct subset of its latent space.
As such, MR allows to adeptly repurpose the PTM’s capabilities, all while preserving the integrity of the latent space.
Despite the promise and rapid progress, several questions
remain unanswered in MR;

Introduction

Large-scale pretrained models (PTMs) (Brown et al. 2020a;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2021; Touvron et al.
2023; Kirillov et al. 2023) are trained with massive amounts
of data and intricate optimization algorithms. This makes
designing and developing high-performing PTMs a laborious and costly process. While these models showcase generalization prowess, achieving optimal performance on new
tasks necessitates careful finetuning. Nonetheless, the finetuning of PTMs carries inherent challenges, notably the risk
of catastrophic knowledge forgetting and vulnerability to
overfitting on the downstream tasks (Kumar et al. 2021;
Wortsman et al. 2022).
In response to the challenges mentioned earlier, a fresh
paradigm called Model Reprogramming (MR) has been proposed as a method in the context of transfer learning. The
core idea behind MR is to repurpose and harness a highquality pretrained model, facilitating seamless cross-domain
learning without the need for finetuning the model. MR introduces a learnable transformation function at the input of
the model, along with an output mapping function to achieve

• Unimodality in learning VPs. To the best of our knowledge, in the previous studies focusing on VPs, class semantic information and visual encoding are typically
treated separately in many cases, despite human perception being multimodal (e.g., (Gibson 1969; Meltzoff
and Borton 1979; Quiroga et al. 2005). This multimodal

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2840

