The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Factorized Diffusion Autoencoder for
Unsupervised Disentangled Representation Learning
Ancong Wu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhwshi@mail.sysu.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Unsupervised disentangled representation learning aims to
recover semantically meaningful factors from real-world data
without supervision, which is significant for model generalization and interpretability. Current methods mainly rely
on assumptions of independence or informativeness of factors, regardless of interpretability. Intuitively, visually interpretable concepts better align with human-defined factors.
However, exploiting visual interpretability as inductive bias
is still under-explored. Inspired by the observation that most
explanatory image factors can be represented by “content
+ mask”, we propose a content-mask factorization network
(CMFNet) to decompose an image into different groups of
content codes and masks, which are further combined as content masks to represent different visual concepts. To ensure
informativeness of the representations, the CMFNet is jointly
learned with a generator conditioned on the content masks
for reconstructing the input image. The conditional generator
employs a diffusion model to leverage its robust distribution
modeling capability. Our model is called the Factorized Diffusion Autoencoder (FDAE). To enhance disentanglement of
visual concepts, we propose a content decorrelation loss and a
mask entropy loss to decorrelate content masks in latent space
and spatial space, respectively. Experiments on Shapes3d,
MPI3D and Cars3d show that our method achieves advanced
performance and can generate visually interpretable conceptspecific masks. Source code and supplementary materials are
available at https://github.com/wuancong/FDAE.

Contents =

lower
upper
+ context + limbs +
torso
torso

Contents =

ring

+

disk

+ object + context

Masks learned by our FDAE method

Figure 1: Examples of visual concept factorization on
Market-1501 (Zheng et al. 2015) and MPI3D (Gondal et al.
2019). Inspired by visual interpretability, we learn disentangled representations by decomposing an image into multiple
groups of “content + mask” to uncover visual concepts.

(Chen et al. 2016). However, they rarely take into account
the visually interpretable concepts, which intuitively better
align with human-defined factors. To uncover interpretable
visual concepts, we leverage visually interpretability to introduce inductive bias for representation disentanglement,
since Locatello et al. (Locatello et al. 2019) have proven that
unsupervised disentanglement is fundamentally impossible
without inductive biases on both model and data. Generally,
an image is composed of different visual concepts, and most
explanatory factors are related to the content and position
of these concepts. Figure 1 shows some examples of visual
concept factorization, where the concepts are represented by
multiple groups of “content + mask”.
Inspired by this observation, we propose a Content-Mask
Factorization Network (CMFNet) that consists of an image
encoder and a mask decoder to factorize an image. Given
an input image, the image encoder extracts a latent code
and splits it into multiple groups of content codes and mask
codes to represent different underlying visual concepts. In
each group, we aim to learn semantic information in the content code and position information in the mask code. The
mask decoder then takes the mask codes as input to generate masks. The content code and mask of each group are
aggregated to form a content mask representing a specific

Introduction
Learning interpretable disentangled representation (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2012; Locatello et al. 2019)
is fundamental for improving model generalization and interpretability in downstream tasks that require recognition
of manually defined factors. Since annotations of the factors are generally unavailable for real-world data, unsupervised disentangled representation learning (Zhu, Xu, and
Tao 2021; Voynov and Babenko 2020; Ren et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2022) is a significant field of computer vision.
Most existing methods operate under the assumption that
different factors are independent (Higgins et al. 2016) or
under the assumption that representations are informative
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5930

