The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When Are Two Lists Better Than One?:
Benefits and Harms in Joint Decision-Making
Kate Donahue1 * , Sreenivas Gollapudi2 , Kostas Kollias2
1

Cornell University
2
Google
kdonahue@cs.cornell.edu, sgollapu@google.com, kostaskollias@google.com

Abstract

different information sources in making their predictions: vast troves of data for the algorithm, and personal conversations with the patient for the human, for
example. Because of this, their rankings over the true
labels will often differ slightly. The algorithm communicates its knowledge by presenting its top k labels to Alice, who picks her top label among those
that are presented. For what settings and what values
of k will Alice and the algorithm working together
have a higher chance of picking the right label?

Historically, much of machine learning research has focused
on the performance of the algorithm alone, but recently
more attention has been focused on optimizing joint humanalgorithm performance. Here, we analyze a specific type of
human-algorithm collaboration where the algorithm has access to a set of n items, and presents a subset of size k to the
human, who selects a final item from among those k. This
scenario could model content recommendation, route planning, or any type of labeling task. Because both the human
and algorithm have imperfect, noisy information about the
true ordering of items, the key question is: which value of k
maximizes the probability that the best item will be ultimately
selected? For k=1, performance is optimized by the algorithm
acting alone, and for k=n it is optimized by the human acting
alone. Surprisingly, we show that for multiple of noise models, it is optimal to set k in [2, n-1] - that is, there are strict
benefits to collaborating, even when the human and algorithm
have equal accuracy separately. We demonstrate this theoretically for the Mallows model and experimentally for the
Random Utilities models of noisy permutations. However, we
show this pattern is *reversed* when the human is anchored
on the algorithm’s presented ordering - the joint system always has strictly worse performance. We extend these results
to the case where the human and algorithm differ in their accuracy levels, showing that there always exist regimes where
a more accurate agent would strictly benefit from collaborating with a less accurate one, but these regimes are asymmetric
between the human and the algorithm’s accuracy.

1

If the algorithm were able to tell Alice exactly which label
she should pick (k = 1), then this problem would simply reduce to that of building a highly accurate machine learning
system. However, in the medical prediction setting, it is unrealistic to assume that the algorithm can force Alice to pick
a particular label. If the algorithm presented all of the items
to Alice (k = n), then this would be equivalent to Alice
solving the task herself. In the case where n is large, considering each possible label may be infeasible. However, even
if Alice could consider all n items herself, we will show that
there are often settings where allowing the algorithm to narrow the set of items to k strictly increases the probability of
picking the correct item.
In human-algorithm collaboration more generally, often
the algorithm can provide assistance, but the human makes
the final decision. This is the case in other settings as well: a
diner trying to find the best restaurant, a driver trying to find
the best route, or a teacher trying to find the best pedagogical
method. This framework requires a shift in thinking: rather
than focus on optimizing the performance of the algorithm
alone, the goal is to build an algorithm that maximizes the
performance of the human-algorithm system.
In this paper, we will focus on the role of the noise distributions that govern the human and algorithm. In particular,
we will be interested in how independent these are. In particular, we will be interested in how strongly the human’s
permutation is affected by the algorithm’s prediction, or the
strength of anchoring. In this paper, we will explore different models of noisy predictions, and give theoretical and
empirical results describing when the joint human-algorithm
system has a higher chance of picking the best item.
In Section 2, we describe the theoretical model that we
will explore and in Section 3 we connect our model to related works. Section 4 considers the case where both the

Introduction

Consider the following motivating example:
Alice is a doctor trying to classify a scan with one of
n different labels. Based on her professional expertise and relevant medical information she has access
to, she is able to make some ranking over which of
these labels is most likely to be accurate. However,
she is not perfect, and sometimes picks the wrong label. She decides to use a machine learning algorithm
as a tool. The algorithm similarly has a goal of maximizing the probability of picking the correct label.
However, the algorithm and Alice rely on somewhat
* Work done while at Google.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10030

