The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CLIP-Gaze: Towards General Gaze Estimation via Visual-Linguistic Model
Pengwei Yin1,2 * , Guanzhong Zeng1,2 * , Jingjing Wang1,2† , Di Xie1,2
1

Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Social Security Big Data, China
{yinpengwei,zengguanzhong,wangjingjing9,xiedi}@hikvision.com
2

Abstract
Gaze estimation methods often experience significant performance degradation when evaluated across different domains,
due to the domain gap between the testing and training data.
Existing methods try to address this issue using various domain generalization approaches, but with little success because of the limited diversity of gaze datasets, such as appearance, wearable, and image quality. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel framework called CLIP-Gaze that
utilizes a pre-trained vision-language model to leverage its
transferable knowledge. Our framework is the first to leverage
the vision-and-language cross-modality approach for gaze estimation task. Specifically, we extract gaze-relevant feature
by pushing it away from gaze-irrelevant features which can
be flexibly constructed via language descriptions. To learn
more suitable prompts, we propose a personalized context
optimization method for text prompt tuning. Furthermore,
we utilize the relationship among gaze samples to refine the
distribution of gaze-relevant features, thereby improving the
generalization capability of the gaze estimation model. Extensive experiments demonstrate the excellent performance
of CLIP-Gaze over existing methods on four cross-domain
evaluations.

Figure 1: (1) Top subgraph: The conventional gaze generalization approach enhances the model’s robustness by adversarial training, but can only mitigate a few gaze-irrelevant
factors. (2) Bottom subgraph: Our method, CLIP-Gaze, constructs a text prompt from diverse language descriptions to
obtain gaze-irrelevant features, and then push away the gazerelevant feature from gaze-irrelevant features in the feature
space to handle various gaze disturbing factors and achieve
a robust model.

Introduction
Gaze estimation has been widely applied for human behavior and mental analysis. High-accuracy gaze estimation
can provide strong support for many applications, such as
human-computer interaction(Andrist et al. 2014; Moon et al.
2014), saliency prediction(Xu, Sugano, and Bulling 2016),
augmented reality(Padmanaban et al. 2017) and driver monitoring systems(Mavely et al. 2017). Recently, appearancebased gaze estimation methods(Zhang et al. 2015; Krafka
et al. 2016; Cheng, Lu, and Zhang 2018; Cheng et al. 2020)
achieved significant results with the development of deep
learning. These methods achieve promising performance
in the within-domain evaluation, but suffer from dramatic
degradation in the cross-domain evaluations due to the domain gap.
Gaze images contain rich information, but gaze labels are
mainly determined by the eye direction. The eye area only

occupies a small proportion of pixels in the face image(Xu,
Wang, and Lu 2023), so the model prediction results are
easily affected by various disturbation factors, such as hair,
beard, expressions, makeup, hat, environment illumination,
sensor noise and motion blur. Thus, these gaze-irrelevant
factors lead to the domain gap, and pose a great challenge
for the generalization of gaze model. To enhance the generalization of the model, some works purify the gaze feature with self-adversarial framework(Cheng and Bao 2022)
or learn stable representation with the contrastive regression
loss(Wang et al. 2022). However, their performance is limited due to the simplicity of the source domain, which fails
to cover the diverse data types of the unseen target domain.
To address such a problem, common domain generalization
approaches(Xu, Wang, and Lu 2023; Yin et al. 2024) attempt to improve the diversity of the source dataset by data
augmentation or data manipulation. However, these meth-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6729

