The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning from History: Task-agnostic Model Contrastive Learning
for Image Restoration
Gang Wu, Junjun Jiang* , Kui Jiang, Xianming Liu
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
{gwu, jiangjunjun, jiangkui, csxm}@hit.edu.cn

Ground Truth

Abstract
Contrastive learning has emerged as a prevailing paradigm
for high-level vision tasks, which, by introducing properly
negative samples, has also been exploited for low-level vision tasks to achieve a compact optimization space to account for their ill-posed nature. However, existing methods rely on manually predefined and task-oriented negatives, which often exhibit pronounced task-specific biases.
To address this challenge, our paper introduces an innovative method termed ’learning from history’, which dynamically generates negative samples from the target model itself. Our approach, named Model Contrastive Learning for
Image Restoration (MCLIR), rejuvenates latency models as
negative models, making it compatible with diverse image
restoration tasks. We propose the Self-Prior guided Negative loss (SPN) to enable it. This approach significantly enhances existing models when retrained with the proposed
model contrastive paradigm. The results show significant improvements in image restoration across various tasks and architectures. For example, models retrained with SPN outperform the original FFANet and DehazeFormer by 3.41 and
0.57 dB on the RESIDE indoor dataset for image dehazing. Similarly, they achieve notable improvements of 0.47 dB
on SPA-Data over IDT for image deraining and 0.12 dB on
Manga109 for a 4× scale super-resolution over lightweight
SwinIR, respectively. Code and retrained models are available at https://github.com/Aitical/MCLIR.

Anchor Image

…

𝑓! !

Deraining

…

𝑓!

Dehazing

…

𝑓! ∗

SR

…

Model Contrastive Paradigm

Self-Prior Guided Negatives

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed model contrastive
paradigm. We provide a common optimization space for
it. To the target model fθ , the proposed model contrastive
paradigm exploits negative samples from the latency model
fθ′ smoothly. Compared to task-oriented negatives in previous work, our model contrastive paradigm is task-agonist
and general to various image restoration tasks. This provides a compact optimization space adaptively (pushing target model fθ closer to assumed optimal fθ∗ ).

tasks, incorporating the concept of sample contrastive learning and bridging the gap between high-level and low-level
tasks (Wu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b; Ye et al. 2022; Wu,
Jiang, and Liu 2023; Zheng et al. 2023). Image restoration
tasks usually contain high-quality ground truth as the learning target (positive sample), and more attention is paid to obtaining appropriate negative examples. For example, Wu et
al. (Wu et al. 2021) directly utilized low-quality input as the
negative sample and introduced the contrastive paradigm for
the image dehazing task. Wu et al. proposed a hard negative
construction for image super-resolution tasks. Compared to
the super-resolved results, hard negatives with similar image
quality to the anchor sample can push it ahead effectively
(Wu, Jiang, and Liu 2023). Most recently, Zheng et al. utilized multiple pre-trained models to provide consensual negatives and proposed a progressively improved negative lower
bound for image dehazing (Zheng et al. 2023).
While existing contrastive learning methods for low-level
tasks, leveraging potent approaches such as hard negative
mining (Wu, Jiang, and Liu 2023) and curriculum learning
strategies (Zheng et al. 2023), have shown impressive performance, certain intrinsic limitations persist. Chiefly, there exists an over-reliance on task-oriented prior, leading to lim-

Introduction
Image restoration, aiming at recovering a high-quality image from the degraded one, is a fundamental problem in the
fields of image processing and computer vision (Yang et al.
2021; Wang, Chen, and Hoi 2021a; Jiang et al. 2023). Deep
learning approaches have made considerable advancements
in image restoration, while there are still challenges due to
its ill-posed nature (Wang, Chen, and Hoi 2021b; Lu et al.
2023). The success of the self-supervised learning paradigm
for high-level tasks, especially those using contrastive learning methods, has drawn great attention (Gui et al. 2023a).
This inspires many researchers to make strides in improving the end-to-end learning paradigm for image restoration
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5976

