The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Urban Region Embedding via Multi-View Contrastive Prediction
Zechen Li1 , Weiming Huang2 , Kai Zhao3 , Min Yang1∗ , Yongshun Gong1 , Meng Chen1,4 *
1

School of Software, Shandong University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Robinson College of Business, Georgia State University
4
Key Laboratory of Urban Land Resources Monitoring and Simulation, Ministry of Natural Resources
lizechenn@gmail.com, weiming.huang@ntu.edu.sg, kzhao4@gsu.edu, myang3@sdu.edu.cn, yongshun2512@hotmail.com,
mchen@sdu.edu.cn
2

region
representation

Abstract

region
representation
max 𝐼(𝐙𝑎 , 𝐙𝑚 )
min 𝐻(𝐙𝑎 |𝐙𝑚 )
min 𝐻(𝐙𝑚 |𝐙𝑎 )

Recently, learning urban region representations utilizing
multi-modal data (information views) has become increasingly popular, for a deep understanding of the distributions of
various socioeconomic features in cities. However, previous
methods usually blend multi-view information in a posterior
stage, falling short in learning coherent and consistent representations across different views. In this paper, we form a
new pipeline to learn consistent representations across varying views and propose the multi-view Contrastive Prediction
model for urban Region embedding (ReCP), which leverages
the multiple information views from point-of-interest (POI)
and human mobility data. Specifically, ReCP comprises two
major modules, namely an intra-view learning module utilizing contrastive learning and feature reconstruction to capture
the unique information from each single view, and an interview learning module that perceives the consistency between
the two views using a contrastive prediction learning scheme.
We conduct thorough experiments on two downstream tasks
to assess the proposed model, i.e., land use clustering and region popularity prediction. The experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art baseline
methods significantly in urban region representation learning.

Multi-view Fusion

Consistency Learning consistent

Embedding Fusion

information

𝐙𝑎

Attention Layer
Single-view Representations

𝐙𝑚

𝐻(𝐙𝑎 |𝐙𝑚 ) 𝐼(𝐙𝑎 , 𝐙𝑚 ) 𝐻(𝐙𝑚 |𝐙𝑎 )

View-specific Representations
𝐙𝑎

graph
embedding
Region
Attributes

graph
embedding
Human
Mobility

𝐙𝑚

intra-view
learning
Region
Attributes

intra-view
learning
Human
Mobility

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) multi-view fusion paradigm and
our proposed (b) consistency learning paradigm for region
embedding. In the right figure, the solid and dotted rectangles denote the region representations Za and Zm from the
attribute and mobility views, respectively. The mutual information I(Za , Zm ) (chartreuse area) quantifies the amount of
information shared by Za and Zm ; the conditional entropy
H(Za |Zm ) (grey area) quantifies the amount of information
of Za conditioned on Zm . To learn consistent region representations across different views, it is encouraged to maximize I(Za , Zm ) and minimize H(Za |Zm ) and H(Zm |Za ).

Introduction
A deep understanding of the spatial distribution of various
socioeconomic factors in cities such as land use or population distribution, is important for urban planning and management. In recent years, an increasingly popular trend in the
community of urban computing has been to partition a city
into numerous regions and utilize various urban sensory data
to learn the latent representations of the regions, which can
subsequently be used in varying urban sensing tasks, e.g.,
land usage clustering. house price prediction, and population density inference (Liu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023b; Li et al.
2023). This trend can also be attributed to the prosperity of
mobile sensing technologies, which has led to the rapid accumulation of urban sensing data, such as human trajectories
or points-of-interest (POIs) (Zheng et al. 2020, 2021; Chen,
Yu, and Liu 2018; Zhang, Zhao, and Chen 2022; Xu et al.

2023a; Zhang et al. 2023). Such various urban data provide
more opportunities for tackling the problem of region representation learning.
Many previous studies have attempted to learn region
representations by utilizing human mobility data. For instance, Wang et al. (Wang and Li 2017) construct flow
graphs and spatial graphs using taxi flow data and propose
a graph embedding method to learn region representations.
Yao et al. (Yao et al. 2018) extract human mobility patterns from taxi trajectories, and model the co-occurrence
of origin-destination regions to learn region representations.
The above methods merely rely on single-view data, which
offers a limited perspective of regions and fails to provide a comprehensive representation. Further, recent studies (Zhang et al. 2021; Luo, Chung, and Chen 2022; Zhang,
Long, and Cong 2022; Zhou et al. 2023) propose learning region representations through integrating data in mul-

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8724

