The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressive Painterly Image Harmonization from Low-Level Styles to High-Level
Styles
Li Niu* , Yan Hong, Junyan Cao, Liqing Zhang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ustcnewly, hy2628982280, joy c1, lqzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Painterly image harmonization aims to harmonize a photographic foreground object on the painterly background.
Different from previous auto-encoder based harmonization
networks, we develop a progressive multi-stage harmonization network, which harmonizes the composite foreground
from low-level styles (e.g., color, simple texture) to highlevel styles (e.g., complex texture). Our network has better
interpretability and harmonization performance. Moreover,
we design an early-exit strategy to automatically decide the
proper stage to exit, which can skip the unnecessary and even
harmful late stages. Extensive experiments on the benchmark
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our progressive harmonization network.

1

Figure 1: The leftmost column shows the composite images
with the foregrounds outlined in red. The rest columns show
the harmonized images obtained by minimizing the style
loss Lsty in different VGG-19 encoder stages, e.g., Lsty
is
1
the style loss in the first VGG-19 encoder stage.

Introduction

As a common photo editing technique, image composition
refers to splicing a foreground object from one image and
overlaying it on another background image. However, the
foreground and background in the obtained composite image may have incompatible styles, which severely harms the
quality of composite image. Given a composite image, if
the foreground is from a photographic image and the background is an artistic painting (see Figure 1), the background
style could be defined similarly as in artistic style transfer
(Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Huang and Belongie 2017;
Park and Lee 2019), which includes color, texture, and so
on. The task to mitigate the style mismatch between foreground and background in such composite images is called
painterly image harmonization (Luan et al. 2018), which adjusts the style of foreground to make it compatible with the
background and naturally embedded into the background.
As far as we are concerned, there exist only few works on
painterly image harmonization, which can be divided into
optimization-based methods (Luan et al. 2018; Zhang, Wen,
and Shi 2020) and feed-forward methods (Cao, Hong, and
Niu 2023; Yan et al. 2022). Optimization-based methods
(Luan et al. 2018; Zhang, Wen, and Shi 2020) update the
composite foreground iteratively to minimize the designed
loss functions, which is too slow for real-time application.
In contrast, feed-forward methods only pass the composite

image through the network once to produce a harmonized
image, which is much more efficient than optimizationbased methods. Among the feed-forward methods, Peng,
Wang, and Wang (2019) introduced AdaIN (Huang and Belongie 2017) into painterly image harmonization. Yan et al.
(2022) proposed to combine the advantages of transformer
and CNN. Cao, Hong, and Niu (2023) explored harmonizing
the composite image in both spatial domain and frequency
domain. Some diffusion model based methods (Meng et al.
2021; Hachnochi et al. 2023; Lu, Liu, and Kong 2023) for
cross-domain image composition can also be applied to this
task. However, the above methods are still struggling to preserve the content details and transfer the styles sufficiently.
Moreover, the above methods directly output the final harmonized image, which function like a black box.
In this work, we propose an interpretable network structure which harmonizes the composite image progressively.
In previous works (Peng, Wang, and Wang 2019; Cao, Hong,
and Niu 2023), style is usually represented by the feature
statistics (e.g., mean, variance) of pretrained VGG-19 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) encoder. We observe that the
feature statistics in shallow and deep encoder stages represent low-level and high-level styles respectively, which has
also been discussed in previous literature (Yao et al. 2019;
Cho et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021). As shown in Figure 1, we
optimize the composite foreground by minimizing the style

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4352

