The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Autoregressive Omni-Aware Outpainting for Open-Vocabulary
360-Degree Image Generation
Zhuqiang Lu1 , Kun Hu1, * , Chaoyue Wang2 , Lei Bai3 , Zhiyong Wang1
1

The University of Sydney
2
JD.com
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
zhuqiang.lu@sydney.edu.au, kun.hu@sydney.edu.au, chaoyue.wang@outlook.com, baisanshi@gmail.com,
zhiyong.wang@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
A 360-degree (omni-directional) image provides an allencompassing spherical view of a scene. Recently, there has
been an increasing interest in synthesising 360-degree images from conventional narrow field of view (NFoV) images captured by digital cameras and smartphones, for providing immersive experiences in various scenarios such as
virtual reality. Yet, existing methods typically fall short in
synthesizing intricate visual details or ensure the generated
images align consistently with user-provided prompts. In this
study, autoregressive omni-aware generative network (AOGNet) is proposed for 360-degree image generation by outpainting an incomplete 360-degree image progressively with
NFoV and text guidances joinly or individually. This autoregressive scheme not only allows for deriving finer-grained
and text-consistent patterns by dynamically generating and
adjusting the process but also offers users greater flexibility to edit their conditions throughout the generation process.
A global-local conditioning mechanism is devised to comprehensively formulate the outpainting guidance in each autoregressive step. Text guidances, omni-visual cues, NFoV
inputs and omni-geometry are encoded and further formulated with cross-attention based transformers into a global
stream and a local stream into a conditioned generative backbone model. As AOG-Net is compatible to leverage largescale models for the conditional encoder and the generative prior, it enables the generation to use extensive openvocabulary text guidances. Comprehensive experiments on
two commonly used 360-degree image datasets for both indoor and outdoor settings demonstrate the state-of-the-art
performance of our proposed method. Our code is available
at https://github.com/zhuqiangLu/AOG-NET-360.

Figure 1: Examples of 360-degree image generation, showcasing the limitation of existing methods compared to ours.
The top part above the dashed line depicts an NFoV-guided
example and the bottom part below the dashed line is for
a text-guided example. (a) Input condition. (b) Ours (AOGNet). (c) Top - OmniDreamer (Akimoto, Matsuo, and Aoki
2022) and Bottom - Text2Light(Chen, Wang, and Liu 2022).

content for broader audiences. In contrast, given the vast
quantity of Narrow Field of View (NFoV) images captured
daily via mobile phones and digital cameras, there has been
a growing interest in transforming these conventional images into 360-degree panoramic visuals. By converting these
NFoV images, extensive visual databases can be leveraged
and enable more immersive experiences for the applications
in Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality across various domains such as tourism, entertainment and education.
In recent years, deep learning methods have been explored
to generate photo-realistic 360-degree images. For instance,
OmniDreamer (Akimoto, Matsuo, and Aoki 2022) formulates a 360-degree image generation pipeline with a VQGAN (Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2021) by treating NFoV
images as incomplete 360-degree images. Conditioned on
text guidances, Text2Light (Chen, Wang, and Liu 2022) introduces two VQGANs for a global-to-local modelling strategy in pursuit of generating high-resolution 360-degree images. ImmerseGAN (Dastjerdi et al. 2022) applies domain

Introduction
A 360-degree (omni-directional) image offers a comprehensive spherical view of a scene and provides users the freedom to explore any direction from a singular view point.
They have revolutionized the way that users consume, interact with, and produce visual content. Yet, the exclusive reliance on specialized cameras to capture these images poses
significant challenges for their widespread adoption, limiting the scalability and accessibility of creating immersive
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14211

