The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Contrastive Graph Learning with Clustering-Oriented Guidance
Mulin Chen1,2 , Bocheng Wang1,2 , Xuelong Li1,2 *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shanxi, China
2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Interaction and Applications, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shanxi, China
chenmulin@nwpu.edu.cn, wangbocheng@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

relationships of samples. Hence, an initial graph needs to
be constructed as the input of GCN. Although this approach has demonstrated promising results, it gives rise to
some issues. Firstly, as observed in the Graph Auto-Encoder
(GAE) framework (Li, Zhang, and Zhang 2021; Zhao et al.
2022) and a series of graph-structured data clustering models (Wang et al. 2019; Tu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022c), the
training procedure relies on the input graph heavily, and pays
insufficient attention to the original features. Therefore, if
there are many connected samples from different classes in
the initial graph, the embedding obtained by multilayer aggregation would be ambiguous, leading to a loss of discriminative capacity. This phenomenon is called as representation collapse. Secondly, GCN-based models emphasize the
representational ability of the learned graph embedding, but
lack clustering-oriented guidance, such as the distribution
of centroids. As a result, the output of GCN may contain
clustering-irrelevant information, while the cluster structure
is not fully captured, which is essential for data clustering.
To address these issues, we propose the Deep Contrastive
Graph Learning (DCGL) model for the general clustering
task without a prior graph. As shown in Fig. 1, DCGL consists of a pseudo-siamese network, wherein one branch handles both the data matrix and the input graph with GCN,
while the other branch encodes the data matrix with an encoder. During this stage, feature-level contrastive learning
models the distances between the estimated centroids and
samples, such that the discriminative characteristics are explored. Then, the outputs are employed to construct the Local Propinquity Graph (LPG) and Global Diffusion Graph
(GDG) with different neighborhood sizes respectively. After that, the graphs are mapped into the cluster space, where
cluster-level contrastive learning is used to push away the
different centroids. In this way, the cluster structure is better
maintained. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• A deep unsupervised graph learning model is established
to cluster general data, which takes a pseudo-siamese
network to analyze structural dependencies and node attributes concurrently. By considering the original features explicitly and updating the learned graph adaptively, the reliance on the initial graph is alleviated.
• Two clustering-oriented contrastive learning strategies
are devised to provide training guidance. Feature-level

Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) has exhibited remarkable potential in improving graph-based clustering. To handle
the general clustering scenario without a prior graph, these
models estimate an initial graph beforehand to apply GCN.
Throughout the literature, we have witnessed that 1) most
models focus on the initial graph while neglecting the original
features. Therefore, the discriminability of the learned representation may be corrupted by a low-quality initial graph;
2) the training procedure lacks effective clustering guidance,
which may lead to the incorporation of clustering-irrelevant
information into the learned graph. To tackle these problems, the Deep Contrastive Graph Learning (DCGL) model
is proposed for general data clustering. Specifically, we establish a pseudo-siamese network, which incorporates autoencoder with GCN to emphasize both the graph structure and
the original features. On this basis, feature-level contrastive
learning is introduced to enhance the discriminative capacity, and the relationship between samples and centroids is
employed as the clustering-oriented guidance. Afterward, a
two-branch graph learning mechanism is designed to extract
the local and global structural relationships, which are further
embedded into a unified graph under the cluster-level contrastive guidance. Experimental results on several benchmark
datasets demonstrate the superiority of DCGL against stateof-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Graph-based clustering achieves dominant performance due
to its capability on capturing data manifold. It uses an undirected graph to learn the pair-wise relations between samples, and infers the cluster labels from the adjacency structure. Recently, neural networks are widely used in data clustering (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016; Shaham et al. 2018;
Bo et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2022). Among a variety of network
structures, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and
Welling 2016a) has shown a prominent ability on exploring
the relationship among graph-type data, and realized good
results on graph-based clustering (Zhang et al. 2022).
GCN-based clustering methods learn the data representation with the input graph and data matrix. For general
clustering tasks, there is no prior graph that records the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11364

