The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hyp-OW: Exploiting Hierarchical Structure Learning with Hyperbolic Distance
Enhances Open World Object Detection
Thang Doan* , Xin Li, Sima Behpour, Wenbin He, Liang Gou, Liu Ren
Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{thang.doan,xin.li9,sima.behpour,wenbin.he2,liang.gou,liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract

further, introducing the detection and integration of newly
discovered classes.
While the seminal work by (Bendale and Boult 2015) introduced OW framework, further advancements by (Joseph
et al. 2021) extended it in two key aspects: the detection
task and continual learning. However, a significant challenge
within this framework lies in the absence of annotations for
unknown objects, leading to biases toward known labels and
potential confusion between unknown items and the background. This bias significantly impedes the accurate identification of unknown objects and presents a major hurdle in the
detection process.
Previous approaches, often relying on shared features or
objectness scores (Joseph et al. 2021; Gupta et al. 2022;
Zohar, Wang, and Yeung 2023), as well as clustering methods (Wu et al. 2022b; Yu et al. 2022), have failed to address
a critical challenge: defining what constitutes an ”unknown”
object. Currently, there is no clear definition or prior knowledge available to effectively distinguish unknowns from the
background. Its interpretation greatly varies depending on
the context. For example, in a driving scene, a ”debris on the
road” could be considered an unknown object (Balasubramaniam and Pasricha 2022), while in a camera surveillance
context, it might be perceived as part of the background (Ingle and Kim 2022). Without considering the context, these
works can only learn to differentiate knowns and unknowns at
low level features such as texture or shape. As a consequence,
they fail to model any hierarchical structures and similarities
between known and unknown items, whether at the image
level or dataset level.
Acknowledging this context information, we argue that a
hierarchical structure must exist between the objects to be
discovered and the known items (Hosoya, Suganuma, and
Okatani 2022). This hierarchy is characterized by classes
that share the same semantic context, belonging to the same
category such as vehicles, animals, or electronics. Such hierarchical relationships enable the retrieval of common features
and facilitate the discovery of unknown objects. For instance,
a model trained on objects related to driving scenes can adequately detect stop signs or traffic lights but is not expected
to recognize unrelated objects like a couch or any furniture.
Given this discrepancy, we propose modeling hierarchical relationships among items to enhance the discovery of
unknowns. Ideally, items belonging to the same family (or

Open World Object Detection (OWOD) is a challenging and
realistic task that extends beyond the scope of standard Object
Detection task. It involves detecting both known and unknown
objects while integrating learned knowledge for future tasks.
However, the level of ”unknownness” varies significantly depending on the context. For example, a tree is typically considered part of the background in a self-driving scene, but it
may be significant in a household context. We argue that this
contextual information should already be embedded within the
known classes. In other words, there should be a semantic or
latent structure relationship between the known and unknown
items to be discovered. Motivated by this observation, we propose Hyp-OW, a method that learns and models hierarchical
representation of known items through a SuperClass Regularizer. Leveraging this representation allows us to effectively
detect unknown objects using a similarity distance-based relabeling module. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of Hyp-OW, achieving improvement in both known and unknown detection (up to 6 percent).
These findings are particularly pronounced in our newly designed benchmark, where a strong hierarchical structure exists
between known and unknown objects.

Introduction
Advances in Object Detection (OD) have unlocked a plethora
of practical applications such as robotics (Zhou et al. 2022),
self-driving cars (Balasubramaniam and Pasricha 2022),
manufacturing (Malburg et al. 2021), and medical analysis (Yang and Yu 2021). Recent breakthroughs in attentionbased neural network architecture, such as Deformable Transformers (Zhu et al. 2021), have yielded impressive performance in these settings. However, most of these approaches
assume a fixed number of classes (closed-world assumption), which is rare in reality. Continual Object Detection
(Menezes et al. 2023) takes a step further by incrementally
adding new classes, resulting in a distribution shift in the
input and the well-known phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Doan et al. 2021) where the
network forgets previously learned knowledge. Open World
(OW) (Bendale and Boult 2015) takes these assumptions even
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1555

