The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multiagent Gumbel MuZero: Efficient Planning in Combinatorial Action Spaces
Xiaotian Hao1 , Jianye Hao1,2 * , Chenjun Xiao2 , Kai Li2 , Dong Li2 , Yan Zheng1
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
{xiaotianhao, jianye.hao, yanzheng}@tju.edu.cn, {xiaochenjun, likai210, lidong106}@huawei.com

Abstract

low. Thus, we cannot reduce the computational cost by simply decreasing the simulation budget.
In the real world, many important applications have combinatorial action spaces(Kemmerling, Lütticke, and Schmitt
2023; Ausiello et al. 2012). These problems include multiagent control, power grid management, combinatorial auctions, resource allocation problems like job scheduling, routing problems like capacitated vehicle routing, chip design,
portfolio optimization, and optimizing large language models like ChatGPT (Ouyang et al. 2022), etc.
Applying AlphaZero to such problems is challenging as
larger action spaces require much more simulations to keep
a good performance. To improve the sample efficiency, various methods have been proposed. Instead of recomputing
the Q-values at the root node from scratch through simulations, Hamrick et al. (2020) integrate a model-free Qlearning agent which learns a global Q-function to give a
better initialization of the Q-values in the tree, thus reducing the simulation numbers. Grill et al. (2020) show that AlphaZero’s search heuristics is an approximated solution to
a regularized policy optimization problem and propose to
directly compute the exact solution instead of using more
simulations to approximate. Danihelka et al. (2022) exploit
the idea of Grill et al. (2020) further and propose Gumbel
MuZero, employing the Gumbel top-k trick to sample k actions at the root node to further reduce the simulation cost.
While these methods could mitigate the performance drop
due to the low simulation budgets, they still cannot be directly applied to problems with combinatorial action spaces
where fully enumerating all possible actions is infeasible.
Hubert et al. (2021) propose Sampled MuZero, which extends MuZero to more complex action spaces such as highdimensional continuous ones. Rather than enumerating all
possible actions, its idea is to sample a small subset of actions with replacement and do policy evaluation and improvement with respect to the sampled actions. However, using sampling with replacement can be inefficient because it
may resample high-probability actions over and over again,
which are less informative. Besides, like MuZero, it has
to use more simulations to approximate the exact solution
shown in (Grill et al. 2020). When using a smaller number
of simulations, it even cannot guarantee a policy improvement (Danihelka et al. 2022).
In this paper, combining the strengths of both Sam-

AlphaZero and MuZero have achieved state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance in a wide range of domains, including
board games and robotics, with discrete and continuous action spaces. However, to obtain an improved policy, they often require an excessively large number of simulations, especially for domains with large action spaces. As the simulation
budget decreases, their performance drops significantly. In
addition, many important real-world applications have combinatorial (or exponential) action spaces, making it infeasible to search directly over all possible actions. In this paper,
we extend AlphaZero and MuZero to learn and plan in more
complex multiagent (MA) Markov decision processes, where
the action spaces increase exponentially with the number of
agents. Our new algorithms, MA Gumbel AlphaZero and MA
Gumbel MuZero, respectively without and with model learning, achieve superior performance on cooperative multiagent
control problems, while reducing the number of environmental interactions by up to an order of magnitude compared
to model-free approaches. In particular, we significantly improve prior performance when planning with much fewer
simulation budgets. The code and appendix are available at
https://github.com/tjuHaoXiaotian/MA-MuZero.

Introduction
AlphaZero family algorithms have achieved great success
in many applications, such as playing board games like
Go and chess (Silver et al. 2016, 2017, 2018; Schrittwieser
et al. 2020), making planning decisions in robotics and autonomous vehicles (Lenz, Kessler, and Knoll 2016), predicting the structure of large protein complexes (Bryant et al.
2022), and discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms (AlphaTensor) (Fawzi et al. 2022) and sorting algorithms (AlphaDev) (Mankowitz et al. 2023), etc.
However, these algorithms usually require a large number
of simulations before making a decision, which is computationally expensive. For example, in the board games Go,
chess, and Shogi, the search is run for 800 simulations per
move to pick an action (Schrittwieser et al. 2020). AlphaTensor also uses 800 simulations for each MCTS (Fawzi et al.
2022). Hamrick et al. (2020); Grill et al. (2020) find that AlphaZero performs poorly when the simulation budgets are
* Corresponding author: Jianye Hao (jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12304

