The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Double-Bounded Optimal Transport for Advanced Clustering and Classification
Liangliang Shi, Zhaoqi Shen, Junchi Yan∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{shiliangliang, shenzhaoqi2271621336, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) is attracting increasing attention in
machine learning. It aims to transport a source distribution to
a target one at minimal cost. In its vanilla form, the source and
target distributions are predetermined, which contracts to the
real-world case involving undetermined targets. In this paper,
we propose Doubly Bounded Optimal Transport (DB-OT),
which assumes that the target distribution is restricted within
two boundaries instead of a fixed one, thus giving more freedom for the transport to find solutions. Based on the entropic
regularization of DB-OT, three scaling-based algorithms are
devised for calculating the optimal solution. We also show
that our DB-OT is helpful for barycenter-based clustering,
which can avoid the excessive concentration of samples in
a single cluster. Then we further develop DB-OT techniques
for long-tailed classification which is an emerging and open
problem. We first propose a connection between OT and classification, that is, in the classification task, training involves
optimizing the Inverse OT to learn the representations, while
testing involves optimizing the OT for predictions. With this
OT perspective, we first apply DB-OT to improve the loss,
and the Balanced Softmax is shown as a special case. Then
we apply DB-OT for inference in the testing process. Even
with vanilla Softmax trained features, our extensive experimental results show that our method can achieve good results
with our improved inference scheme in the testing stage.

Figure 1: Illustration for the difference between vanilla OT
and our DB-OT using the example of mines and factories
as source and target, respectively. Vanilla OT assumes the
equivalence between the supply and demand. In our DB-OT,
we assume that the demand of the factory is not a fixed value,
but rather a certain range by upper and lower bounds.

Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) (Cuturi 2013) has been widely applied in machine learning (Cui et al. 2019a; Wang et al.
2013). For instance, Wasserstein distance (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017) is applied with
the dual form of OT to minimize the gap between the generated and real distributions via min-max adversarial optimization (Li et al. 2022). SwAV (Caron et al. 2020) employs the Sinkhorn algorithm for online clustering in selfsupervised contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020; Khosla
et al. 2020; Wang and Liu 2021). OT-LDA (Huynh, Zhao,
and Phung 2020) devises a Wasserstein barycenter-based
topic model, while in (Xu et al. 2019), Gromov-Wasserstein
distance is used for graph matching (Wang, Yan, and Yang

2019, 2021; Hu et al. 2020). These works all assume the
source and target distributions are fixed.
However, in many real-world cases, the source or target
distribution often varies over time and becomes uncertain.
As shown in Fig. 1, in vanilla OT, it assumes that the supply from mines and the demand from factories are fixed and
and their total masses are equal to each other. While in our
realistic setting we assume the demand from factories vary
within a double-bounded range. When the demand exceeds
the upper boundary, the factory reaches its production capacity limit. Conversely, when the demand falls below the lower
boundary, the factory operates below its optimal capacity.1

∗ Correspondence author.

1 When both sides are not fixed, it degenerates to the lower
bound. We discuss it in details in Sec. .

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14982

