The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Meta-Learning-Based Adaptive Stability Certificates for Dynamical Systems
Amit Jena, Dileep Kalathil, Le Xie
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA
amit jena@tamu.edu, dileep.kalathil@tamu.edu, le.xie@tamu.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of Neural Network (NN)
based adaptive stability certification in a dynamical system.
The state-of-the-art methods, such as Neural Lyapunov Functions (NLFs), use NN-based formulations to assess the stability
of a non-linear dynamical system and compute a Region of Attraction (ROA) in the state space. However, under parametric
uncertainty, if the values of system parameters vary over time,
the NLF methods fail to adapt to such changes and may lead
to conservative stability assessment performance. We circumvent this issue by integrating Model Agnostic Meta-learning
(MAML) with NLFs and propose meta-NLFs. In this process,
we train a meta-function that adapts to any parametric shifts
and updates into an NLF for the system with new test-time
parameter values. We demonstrate the stability assessment
performance of meta-NLFs on some standard benchmark autonomous dynamical systems.

Introduction
Stability assessment of non-linear systems and ensuring their
safe and reliable operation are of paramount importance in
any real-world engineering system. While learning-based
control schemes have received a lot of attention recently,
the lack of stability guarantees is a fundamental issue that
prevents their wide-scale deployment in the real world. One
standard approach to estimate the stability region of a general
nonlinear system is to first find a Lyapunov function for the
system and characterize its region of attraction (ROA) as the
stability region (Khalil 2015). A closed-loop system is stable
in the sense of Lyapunov if the system trajectory converges
to the origin as long as the initial condition is inside the
ROA. The sum-of-squares approach is one popular method
for finding a Lyapunov function for a dynamical system (Parrilo 2000; Henrion and Garulli 2005; Jarvis-Wloszek et al.
2003; Topcu et al. 2009; Topcu, Packard, and Seiler 2008).
However, sum-of-squares approaches typically do not scale
well to large systems since a large number of semidefinite
programs need to be solved for the sum-of-squares decomposition of polynomial systems even with a few states (Parrilo
2000). Another approach is to employ local linearizations
and use quadratic approximations to find Lyapunov functions.
However, this approach is typically conservative in the sense
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12801

that stability can only be certified in a small vicinity of an
equilibrium point of a nonlinear system, which may be insufficient to cover the normal range of operation in several
practical applications (Cheng, Guo, and Huang 2003; Huang,
Gao, and Xie 2021).
Recently, a line of works has used learning-based approaches that make use of the function approximation capability of a neural network for finding the Lyapunov function (Kolter and Manek 2019; Chang, Roohi, and Gao 2019).
The key idea is to use supervised learning to find a neural
Lyapunov function (NLF) by minimizing a loss function that
captures the Lyapunov constraints. The NLF approaches have
shown impressive empirical performance in estimating the
stability region for nontrivial nonlinear systems. However,
training an NLF requires a large number of data samples and
gradient update steps, which makes the real-time training
infeasible. So, a typical fix is to use the system model or precollected data from the real-world system and perform offline
training. The trained NLF can then be used for the stability
estimation of the real-world system. However, this approach
will fail if the real-world system dynamics is different from
the model used for training the NLF. At the same time, the
real-world system model can be different from the model estimated from the collected data due to various reasons, such as
estimation error and changes in the system parameters over
time. Repeating the training procedure every time whenever
there is such a parametric mismatch turns impractical due
to the unavailability of necessary data samples and the need
to get a quick stability assessment. Thus, learning a neural
Lyapunov function for a real-world system using only a small
number of data samples and through a few gradient updates,
remains an open problem.
In this paper, we address the problem of stability assessment of a closed-loop system, focusing on the setting where
the real-world system parameters are different from the offline model parameters. Our goal is to learn a NLF that :
(i) quickly adapts to a new system instance under parametric shifts, (ii) and does so with low adaptation-time data
requirements. We follow a meta-learning procedure, and in
particular, the framework of Model Agnostic Meta-learning
(MAML) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), to learn such a
meta-neural Lyapunov function (meta-NLF). We compare the
performance of the meta-NLF approach with other baseline
methods on various benchmark control systems to demon-

