The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stable Model Semantics for Description Logic Terminologies
Federica Di Stefano1 , Mantas Šimkus1,2
2

1
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
Department of Computing Science, Umeå University, Sweden
federica.stefano@tuwien.ac.at, simkus@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

order to enable commonsense reasoning in DLs; see, e.g.,
some works based on circumscription in (Bonatti, Lutz, and
Wolter 2009; Bonatti, Faella, and Sauro 2011; Di Stefano,
Ortiz, and Šimkus 2023). This is also witnessed, e.g., by
works that combine DL knowledge bases (KBs) and rules
with default negation (see, e.g., (Motik and Rosati 2010;
Bajraktari, Ortiz, and Šimkus 2018; Lukumbuzya, Ortiz,
and Šimkus 2020) and the references therein). The reconciliation of OWA and CWA specifically in DL terminologies is a problem whose relevance is boosted by the new
W3C SHACL standard for expressing constraints over RDF
graphs (Knublauch and Kontokostas 2017). SHACL is syntactically very close to DL terminologies, but its semantics
has not been fully established yet (but it clearly leans towards CWA).
A DL terminology T consists of statements of the form
A := C, where a concept name A is defined using a complex
concept expression C. A terminology may contain terminological cycles, where a definition of some concept name may
be recursive, as in the following terminology:

This paper studies a stable model semantics for Description
Logic (DL) knowledge bases (KBs) and for (possibly cyclic)
terminologies, ultimately showing that terminologies under
the proposed semantics can be equipped with effective reasoning algorithms. The semantics is derived using Quantified
Equilibrium Logic, and—in contrast to the usual semantics of
DLs based on classical logic—supports default negation and
allows to combine the open-world and the closed-world assumptions in a natural way. Towards understanding the computational properties of this and related formalisms, we show
a strong undecidability result that applies not only to KBs under the stable model semantics, but also to the more basic setting of minimal model reasoning. Specifically, we show that
concept satisfiability in minimal models of an ALCIO KB
is undecidable. We then turn our attention to (possibly cyclic)
DL terminologies, where ontological axioms are limited to
definitions of concept names in terms of complex concepts.
This restriction still yields a very rich setting. We show that
standard reasoning problems, like concept satisfiability and
subsumption, are E XP T IME-complete for terminologies expressed in ALCI under the stable model semantics.

BasicUser := User ⊓ ¬PrivilegedUser
PrivilegedUser := Admin ⊔ ∃promotedBy.PrivilegedUser

Introduction

Here BasicUser and PrivilegedUser are (intensional or defined) concept names defined using (extensional) base predicates User , Admin, and promotedBy. A concrete semantics
for terminologies tells us how to interpret the defined concept names given an extension for the base predicates. Suppose the base predicates correspond to the following facts:

Description Logics (DLs) is a prominent family of languages
in the area of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, allowing to model a domain of interest by formalizing relationships between concepts, which are written in a convenient yet rich logic-based syntax, and semantically denote
classes of objects (Baader et al. 2017). Specifically, DLs underlie the W3C standard OWL for writing ontologies in the
Semantic Web (Grau et al. 2008), and they are used, e.g., in
formalizing and reasoning about complex terminologies in
healthcare (Elkin 2023); see (Schneider and Šimkus 2020)
for a survey on ontologies and data management.
DLs are often seen as fragments of the classical first-order
logic, equipped with a syntax that is more convenient for
knowledge representation. In particular, this means that most
DLs nowadays make the open-world assumption (OWA), in
which, intuitively, everything that is not forbidden is considered possible. However, it is acknowledged that supporting the closed-world assumption (CWA) is also important in

User (a) User (b) promotedBy(a, b) promotedBy(b, a)
The standard (descriptive) semantics sees “:=” as a logical
equivalence; in our example, it produces two possible extensions for the defined concept names:
(i) BasicUser(a), BasicUser(b)
(ii) PrivilegedUser(a), PrivilegedUser(b)
While the extension (i) is natural and expected, the extension (ii) is questionable: the membership of a and b in
PrivilegedUser is not well-founded (there is only a selfsupported justification). Thus it makes sense to seek a semantics that would reject (ii), but keep (i) as an intended
structure. A relevant alternative semantics here is the least
fixpoint semantics of Baader (1990), which however is too

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10484

