The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Talk Funny! A Large-Scale Humor Response Dataset with Chain-of-Humor
Interpretation
Yuyan Chen1 , Yichen Yuan2 , Panjun Liu3 , Dayiheng Liu4 , Qinghao Guan5 , Mengfei Guo6 ,
Haiming Peng1 , Bang Liu7 * , Zhixu Li1 * , Yanghua Xiao1,8 * †
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
4
Alibaba DAMO Academy
5
University of Zurich
6
Beijing Jiaotong University,
7
RALI & Mila, Université de Montréal
8
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center, Shanghai, China
{chenyuyan21@m., hmpeng21@m., zhixuli@, shawyh@}fudan.edu.cn, yuanyichen2024@ia.ac.cn, panjunliu@outlook.com
liudayiheng.ldyh@alibaba-inc.com, qinghao.guan@uzh.ch, guomengfei@bjtu.edu.cn, bang.liu@umontreal.ca

Abstract

NLP research on humor mainly focuses on humor recognition (Chauhan et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022) and humor rewriting (Petrović and Matthews 2013; Valitutti et al. 2016). Humor recognition aims to determine whether a sentence is
humorous from a human perspective, and humor rewriting
aims to rewrite an ordinary sentence into a humorous one. In
comparison, humor response generation is a more challenging task that aims to generate humor text in dialogues (Bertero and Fung 2016b,a). Although existing Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) can achieve superior performance in
human-machine conversations, their ability to humorous response generation is still poor and there is little research on
this. For example in Fig. 1, the human-generated humorous
response to the context “Why do I get acne?” is “Because
you’re so cute that you’re bubbling.” which gives an unexpected answer that a person is so cute with metaphor. In contrast, the response given by a PLM is “Because you stay up
late.” which directly present the common reason.
The first reason for the unsatisfactory performance of
PLMs is existing humor corpus and datasets are limited
(Engelthaler and Hills 2018; Hossain, Krumm, and Gamon
2019) and of low quality, and the second is that humor generation requires abundant knowledge and commonsense.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose TalkFunny, a
large-scale Chinese explainable humorous response dataset.
TalkFunny consists of 4,116 high-quality contextresponse pairs crawled from various platforms such as
RED and Zhihu. Specially, each context-response pair in
TalkFunny features a manually created chain-of-humor
field that interprets how the humorous text is generated, as
well as a corresponding humor mind map field that unfolds
the underlying knowledge and logic backbone for generating
the humor response. As shown in Fig. 1, the chain-of-humor
field explains the inference process from the input context
to the humorous response. The corresponding humor mind
map reveals the implicit knowledge and logic that can be

Humor is a crucial part of human communication. Understanding humor and generating humorous responses in dialogue can provide natural and empathic human-computer interactions. However, most existing pre-trained language models (PLMs) perform unsatisfactorily in humor generation. On
one hand, the serious shortage of humor corpus and datasets
pose challenges for constructing models that can understand
and generate humorous expressions. On the other hand, humor generation relies on rich knowledge and commonsense,
which is often tacit and unspoken. In this paper, we construct
the largest Chinese Explainable Humor Response Dataset to
date with chain-of-humor and humor mind map annotations,
which can be used to comprehensively evaluate as well as
improve the humorous response ability of PLMs. We further design humor-related auxiliary tasks to further enhance
PLMs’ humorous response performance. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our proposed dataset and auxiliary
tasks effectively help PLMs to generate humorous responses,
laying the groundwork for future humor research.

Introduction
Humor is an important skill in human interaction. Possessing a sense of humor requires a comprehensive and deep understanding of external knowledge, including semantics and
cultural background, etc. Therefore, it is a big challenge for
machines to understand what the “funny” is and enable them
with a sense of humor (Yang et al. 2022; Bechade, Duplessis, and Devillers 2016; Binsted 1996). However, existing
* Corresponding author.
†

Yanghua Xiao is also a member of Research Group of Computational and AI Communication at Institute for Global Communications and Integrated Media, Fudan University.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17826

