The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Does Few-Shot Learning Suffer from Backdoor Attacks?
Xinwei Liu1,2 , Xiaojun Jia3 * , Jindong Gu4 , Yuan Xun1,2
Siyuan Liang5 , Xiaochun Cao6*
1
SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
University of Oxford, UK
5
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
6
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
{liuxinwei,xunyuan}@iie.ac.cn, jiaxiaojunqaq@gmail.com, jindong.gu@outlook.com,
pandaliang521@gmail.com, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The field of few-shot learning (FSL) has shown promising results in scenarios where training data is limited, but its vulnerability to backdoor attacks remains largely unexplored.
We first explore this topic by first evaluating the performance
of the existing backdoor attack methods on few-shot learning scenarios. Unlike in standard supervised learning, existing backdoor attack methods failed to perform an effective
attack in FSL due to two main issues. Firstly, the model tends
to overfit to either benign features or trigger features, causing a tough trade-off between attack success rate and benign accuracy. Secondly, due to the small number of training
samples, the dirty label or visible trigger in the support set
can be easily detected by victims, which reduces the stealthiness of attacks. It seemed that FSL could survive from backdoor attacks. However, in this paper, we propose the Few-shot
Learning Backdoor Attack (FLBA) to show that FSL can still
be vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Specifically, we first generate a trigger to maximize the gap between poisoned and benign features. It enables the model to learn both benign and
trigger features, which solves the problem of overfitting. To
make it more stealthy, we hide the trigger by optimizing two
types of imperceptible perturbation, namely attractive and repulsive perturbation, instead of attaching the trigger directly.
Once we obtain the perturbations, we can poison all samples
in the benign support set into a hidden poisoned support set
and fine-tune the model on it. Our method demonstrates a
high Attack Success Rate (ASR) in FSL tasks with different
few-shot learning paradigms while preserving clean accuracy
and maintaining stealthiness. This study reveals that few-shot
learning still suffers from backdoor attacks, and its security
should be given attention.

Figure 1: Results of six backdoor attack methods with different poison rates on the 5-way 5-shot learning task. The
poisoning rate of 0.2 means the selection of one image of
each class for the dirty-label method or one image of the target class for the clean-label. The top of the figures shows the
visualization of the poisoned support set with BadNet and
TUAP, which are both easily detected by victims as their
dirty labels or visible triggers.

ios, only a few labeled samples are available for new unseen
classes, such as rare species or medical diseases. Learning
a classifier when only a few training samples are available
for each class is well known as few-shot learning (FSL) in
the literature (Vinyals et al. 2016; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017). The FSL approach involves using a large auxiliary set
of labeled data from disjoint classes to acquire transferable
knowledge or representations that can help in the few-shot
tasks. Recently, the security implications of FSL have been
brought to the forefront of the community (Li et al. 2022a;
Guan et al. 2022), such as the challenge of training a robust
few-shot model against adversarial attacks (Li et al. 2019b;
Jia et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021, 2023).
Apart from adversarial attacks (Liang et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2022; Gu et al. 2022, 2023; He et al. 2023), the back-

Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated remarkable success in a
variety of computer vision applications, particularly in the
area of image classification (He et al. 2016; Gu et al. 2018).
However, this success is contingent upon access to a significant amount of training data. In many real-world scenar* Correspondence to: Xiaojun Jia and Xiaochun Cao.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19893

