The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

InterpretARA: Enhancing Hybrid Automatic Readability Assessment with
Linguistic Feature Interpreter and Contrastive Learning
Jinshan Zeng1 , Xianchao Tong1 , Xianglong Yu1 , Wenyan Xiao2 , Qing Huang1 *
1

Jiangxi Normal University
Jiangxi University of Science and Technology
jinshanzeng@jxnu.edu.cn, xianchaotong@jxnu.edu.cn, xianglongyu@jxnu.edu.cn,wy.xiao@jxust.edu.cn,qh@jxnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

(Ma, Fosler-Lussier, and Lofthus 2012; Devlin et al. 2019;
Li, Ziyang, and Wu 2022).
Linguistic features are indicators used to describe the linguistic properties of texts (Dell’Orletta, Montemagni, and
Venturi 2011; Hancke, Vajjala, and Meurers 2012). In ARA,
researchers often utilize various linguistic features to quantify the difficulty level of a text (Flesch 1948; Chall 1948).
These features can capture different aspects of the linguistic
nature of a text, including vocabulary, syntax, semantics, and
discourse structures (Dell’Orletta, Montemagni, and Venturi
2011; Hancke, Vajjala, and Meurers 2012; Sung et al. 2015;
Denning, Pera, and Ng 2016; Arfé, Mason, and Fajardo
2018; Jiang et al. 2019). Due to the richness of linguistic
features, they are incorporated in both traditional machine
learning and modern deep learning approaches. For example, a large number of linguistic features are designed in
machine learning models to assess text readability (Deutsch,
Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Hansen et al. 2021; Lee, Jang, and
Lee 2021). In particular, hybrid ARA models combining
both linguistic and deep features for RA have recently attracted amounts of attention due to their impressive performance (Lee, Jang, and Lee 2021; Li, Ziyang, and Wu 2022).
Despite significant improvements achieved by current hybrid models over both traditional machine learning models
and deep learning models solely using linguistic or deep features (Lee, Jang, and Lee 2021; Li, Ziyang, and Wu 2022),
the potential of linguistic features has not yet been fully explored, as most of ARA models often focus on numerical
values of these linguistic features, overlooking the valuable
structural insights embedded within them. This limits the
contribution of linguistic features in the kind of hybrid models. For instance, when a feature value of some linguistic
feature is fed into the model, the model is hard to grasp the
specific textual information that this numerical value represents. During the training process, the model can only judge
the relationship between feature values and text readability
based on numerical differences. This excessive emphasis on
numerical values neglects the crucial structural information
carried by these features. As a result, the contribution of linguistic features to the hybrid ARA models is limited, sometimes even resulting in counterproductive outcomes. Moreover, the difficulty correlation among different texts has not
yet been fully investigated in existing models (Lee, Jang, and
Lee 2021; Li, Ziyang, and Wu 2022).

The hybrid automatic readability assessment (ARA) models
that combine deep and linguistic features have recently received rising attention due to their impressive performance.
However, the utilization of linguistic features is not fully realized, as ARA models frequently concentrate excessively on
numerical values of these features, neglecting valuable structural information embedded within them. This leads to limited contribution of linguistic features in these hybrid ARA
models, and in some cases, it may even result in counterproductive outcomes. In this paper, we propose a novel hybrid ARA model named InterpretARA through introducing
a linguistic interpreter to better comprehend the structural information contained in linguistic features, and leveraging the
contrastive learning that enables the model to understand relative difficulty relationships among texts and thus enhances
deep representations. Both document-level and segment-level
deep representations are extracted and used for the readability assessment. A series of experiments are conducted over
four English corpora and one Chinese corpus to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed model. Experimental results
show that InterpretARA outperforms state-of-the-art models
in most corpora, and the introduced linguistic interpreter can
provide more useful information than existing ways for ARA.

Introduction
Readability assessment (RA) quantifies the difficulty level
of a text, and particularly measures how easy or difficult it is
to read and comprehend the content (Laughlin 1969; Klare
2000). Research on automatic readability assessment (ARA)
can be traced back to the last century (Lively and Pressey
1923; Klare 1963). ARA systems automatically assign difficulty levels to texts, making them widely applicable in various domains such as the enhancement of reading skills (Pera
and Ng 2014), facilitation of second language learning (Qiu
et al. 2021), and comprehension of clinical informed consent documents (Perni et al. 2019). As one of the earliest
and systematically developed approaches in the field of linguistics, RA has developed various linguistic features and
has been extensively studied using both traditional machine
learning (Deutsch, Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Hansen et al.
2021; Lee, Jang, and Lee 2021) and deep learning methods
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19497

