The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Manifold-Based Verbalizer Space Re-embedding for Tuning-Free Prompt-Based
Classification
Haochun Wang, Sendong Zhao* , Chi Liu, Nuwa Xi, Muzhen Cai, Bing Qin, Ting Liu
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{hcwang, sdzhao}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract

[CLS] The drama discloses nothing.
[MASK] [SEP]
It was

Prompt-based classification adapts tasks to a cloze question
format utilizing the [MASK] token and the filled tokens are
then mapped to labels through pre-defined verbalizers. Recent studies have explored the use of verbalizer embeddings
to reduce labor in this process. However, all existing studies require a tuning process for either the pre-trained models
or additional trainable embeddings. Meanwhile, the distance
between high-dimensional verbalizer embeddings should not
be measured by Euclidean distance due to the potential for
non-linear manifolds in the representation space. In this study,
we propose a tuning-free manifold-based space re-embedding
method called Locally Linear Embedding with Intra-class
Neighborhood Constraint (LLE-INC) for verbalizer embeddings, which preserves local properties within the same class
as guidance for classification. Experimental results indicate
that even without tuning any parameters, our LLE-INC is on
par with automated verbalizers with parameter tuning. And
with the parameter updating, our approach further enhances
prompt-based tuning by up to 3.2%. Furthermore, experiments
with the LLaMA-7B, 13B and 65B indicate that LLE-INC is
an efficient tuning-free classification approach for the hyperscale language models.

Prompt Template
ManualVerb

GenVerb

great
terrible √

epic
awful √

Prompt Verbalizer

Label
positive
negative

EmbedVerb

√

Figure 1: Illustration of three typical verbalizer design methods for prompt-based tuning.

Introduction
Large language models have seen remarkable success in
natural language processing (NLP) with pre-training on
vast amounts of unlabeled data via masked language model
(MLM) (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019) and fine-tuning
for the downstream tasks (Howard and Ruder 2018). Despite these advancements, the above paradigm necessitates a
substantial amount of labeled training data, which poses challenges when attempting to train an additional classification
layer during fine-tuning with limited data (Liu et al. 2021a).
Prompt-based tuning is a method that addresses this issue
by converting the task into a cloze question (Schick and
Schütze 2021a), where the pre-trained models (PTMs) are
prompted to fill in the [MASK] token with a suitable token
from the vocabulary list, similar to the pre-training task.
Only a limited number of tokens from the vocabulary list
are chosen as verbalizers, which map each token to its corresponding class, as illustrated in Figure 1. Furthermore,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19126

variations in the verbalizer designs for a task can significantly
impact the performance of prompt-based tuning (Gao, Fisch,
and Chen 2021). As shown in Figure 1, recent studies on
prompt-based tuning have employed verbalizers in three distinct ways: manually selected token verbalizers (ManualVerb)
by domain experts empirically (Schick and Schütze 2021a),
automatically generated token verbalizers (GenVerb) through
gradient-based searching or language model (Shin et al. 2020;
Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021), and embedded verbalizers (EmbedVerb) through optimizing trainable embeddings (Zhang
et al. 2022b; Hambardzumyan, Khachatrian, and May 2021;
Cui et al. 2022).
There are two remaining challenges for the prompt-based
classification: (1) All the above three kinds of verbalizers
require updating the parameters either in the PTMs or the
training of extra embeddings, which requires great computational resources, especially for the large language models
(LLMs). (2) The potential manifold comprising the verbalizer embeddings distributed in the high-dimensional space
has not been taken into account and the intra-class neighborhood relationship has been ignored. While a wide range of
applications treat the observed space in the PTM as a highdimensional Euclidean space and utilize Euclidean distance
to measure the distance between different vectors (Yu et al.
2021; Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021), this may not be as appropriate for the verbalizer embedding on a manifold which is

