The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Dimensional Rationale in Graph Contrastive Learning
from Causal Perspective
Qirui Ji1 3 * , Jiangmeng Li1 2 * † , Jie Hu4 , Rui Wang1 2 3 , Changwen Zheng1 3 , Fanjiang Xu1 3
1

Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiqirui2022, jiangmeng2019, wangrui, changwen, fanjiang}@iscas.ac.cn, hujie@ios.ac.cn
Abstract

terpretability in graph representations is not explored, such
that the theoretical guarantee for the performance improvement arising from adopting such approaches is insufficient,
and the model trained by following these methods may learn
stochastic noisy and task-agnostic information, thereby confusing the prediction on downstream tasks. Therefore, the
graph rationale exploration is provoked to understand the
knowledge driving the model to make certain predictions
(Wu et al. 2022), where rationale is a specific subset of graph
features, e.g., graph structure, which can guide or explain the
model’s predictions (Ying et al. 2019). Successes achieved
by RGCL (Li et al. 2022c) demonstrate that exploring rationales in graphs can indeed promote the model to learn discriminative representations in GCL. RGCL focuses on exploring the structural rationale (SR) from graphs, i.e., the
structure containing specific edges or nodes that are correlated with the prediction of graphs. However, the features
contained by the nodes or messages passing through the
edges may still include certain discriminative information.
Thus, arbitrarily removing or assigning weights to the graph
structure can undermine the discriminability of the learned
representation. Concretely, we raise a crucial question:
“Does there exist a manner to explore the intrinsic rationale in graphs, thereby improving the GCL predictions?”
With the question in mind, we conduct exploratory experiments with GraphCL (You et al. 2020) on the biochemical molecule dataset PROTEINS, and the social network
dataset REDDIT-BINARY (RDT-B), where we randomly
preserve certain dimensions, i.e., a subset of the representations, while blocking the others. The experimental results
are illustrated in Figure 1. We observe from the results
and find that the graph representations only preserving specific dimensions indeed achieve better performance than the
primitive representations, and such dimensions are treated as
dimensional rationales (DRs) for the graph. The exploratory
experiments jointly prove the existence of DRs and the positive effects of specific DRs in the prediction of GCL. The intuition behind the experimental exploration is that compared
with the SR, the DR is intrinsic to the representations learned
by GCL methods, which can tackle the long-standing issue
of the SR and further achieve the desideratum that jointly
preserves the discriminative information and blocks the taskagnostic information of representations. We provide theoret-

Graph contrastive learning is a general learning paradigm excelling at capturing invariant information from diverse perturbations in graphs. Recent works focus on exploring the structural rationale from graphs, thereby increasing the discriminability of the invariant information. However, such methods may incur in the mis-learning of graph models towards
the interpretability of graphs, and thus the learned noisy and
task-agnostic information interferes with the prediction of
graphs. To this end, with the purpose of exploring the intrinsic rationale of graphs, we accordingly propose to capture the dimensional rationale from graphs, which has not received sufficient attention in the literature. The conducted exploratory experiments attest to the feasibility of the aforementioned roadmap. To elucidate the innate mechanism behind
the performance improvement arising from the dimensional
rationale, we rethink the dimensional rationale in graph contrastive learning from a causal perspective and further formalize the causality among the variables in the pre-training stage
to build the corresponding structural causal model. On the basis of the understanding of the structural causal model, we
propose the dimensional rationale-aware graph contrastive
learning approach, which introduces a learnable dimensional
rationale acquiring network and a redundancy reduction constraint. The learnable dimensional rationale acquiring network is updated by leveraging a bi-level meta-learning technique, and the redundancy reduction constraint disentangles
the redundant features through a decorrelation process during
learning. Empirically, compared with state-of-the-art methods, our method can yield significant performance boosts
on various benchmarks with respect to discriminability and
transferability. The code implementation of our method is
available at https://github.com/ByronJi/DRGCL.

1

Introduction

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) is a general learning
paradigm excelling at seeking to understand invariant information from diverse perturbations in graphs (You et al.
2020; Suresh et al. 2021; You et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2022).
However, most of these methods focus on building sophisticated data augmentations for GCL, while the intrinsic in* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12810

