The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Dense Correspondence for NeRF-Based Face Reenactment
Songlin Yang1,2 , Wei Wang2 * , Yushi Lan3 , Xiangyu Fan4 , Bo Peng2 , Lei Yang4 , Jing Dong2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
CRIPAC & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
SenseTime, China
yangsonglin2021@ia.ac.cn, {wwang, bo.peng, jdong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
yushi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {fanxiangyu, yanglei}@sensetime.com
Abstract

However, establishing dense correspondence between different face NeRFs is non-trivial. Unlike mesh-based representations which have index-aligned vertexes as groundtruth correspondence annotations, the NeRF-based representations lack an explicit surface descriptor that constructs correspondence of spatial points (Lan, Loy, and Dai
2022). Although introducing 3D parametric models (e.g.,
3DMM (Blanz and Vetter 1999), FLAME (Li et al. 2017),
and DECA (Feng et al. 2021)) as motion conditions make it
feasible to achieve explicit motion control for cross-identity
face reenactment (Zeng et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023b; Li et al.
2023b), aligning mesh-based parametric space with latent
space of NeRF-based generative models brings a significant
optimization burden. Additionally, the 3D parametric models themselves have some limitations, such as their focus being predominantly on the facial region, requiring additional
processing for hair and eyes. These limitations inspire us to
ask: Can we learn the dense correspondence between different NeRF-based face representations without a 3D parametric model prior?
To address the challenge of learning dense correspondences between NeRF-based face representations, the first
issue is the selection of NeRF representations. The vanilla
NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021) employs an MLP network to
capture the spatial information of the target object, which
tends to suffer from overfitting and can lead to a loss of 3D
consistency when animating the representation network. In
order to strike a balance between 3D consistency and animation capabilities, we have opted to utilize the tri-plane representation proposed by EG3D (Chan et al. 2022) as our fundamental NeRF representation, which adopts three spatiallyorthogonal plane feature maps to represent an object. This
choice allows us to maintain 3D consistency within the triplane representation itself, while also leveraging the strong
modeling capacity of the StyleGAN-based (Karras et al.
2020) generator to handle feature deformations.
In this work, we propose a novel framework that can
realize one-shot multi-view face reenactment, as shown in
Fig. 1. Our framework utilizes tri-planes as fundamental
NeRF representation and decomposes face tri-planes into
three components: canonical tri-planes, identity deformations, and motion. The plane feature deformations regarding motion conditions differ from those caused by identity
conditions since the rules governing motion are shared be-

Face reenactment is challenging due to the need to establish
dense correspondence between various face representations
for motion transfer. Recent studies have utilized Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) as fundamental representation, which further enhanced the performance of multi-view face reenactment in photo-realism and 3D consistency. However, establishing dense correspondence between different face NeRFs
is non-trivial, because implicit representations lack groundtruth correspondence annotations like mesh-based 3D parametric models (e.g., 3DMM) with index-aligned vertexes. Although aligning 3DMM space with NeRF-based face representations can realize motion control, it is sub-optimal for
their limited face-only modeling and low identity fidelity.
Therefore, we are inspired to ask: Can we learn the dense
correspondence between different NeRF-based face representations without a 3D parametric model prior? To address
this challenge, we propose a novel framework, which adopts
tri-planes as fundamental NeRF representation and decomposes face tri-planes into three components: canonical triplanes, identity deformations, and motion. In terms of motion
control, our key contribution is proposing a Plane Dictionary
(PlaneDict) module, which efficiently maps the motion conditions to a linear weighted addition of learnable orthogonal
plane bases. To the best of our knowledge, our framework is
the first method that achieves one-shot multi-view face reenactment without a 3D parametric model prior. Extensive experiments demonstrate that we produce better results in finegrained motion control and identity preservation than previous methods.

Introduction
One-shot face reenactment (Hong et al. 2022) aims to utilize motion conditions from the driving image, such as
facial expressions and head poses, to animate the face
in the source image. The main challenge is establishing
dense correspondence between different face representations to transfer motion conditions. Recent studies (Li et al.
2023b; Ma et al. 2023b) have utilized Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) as fundamental representation, which further enhanced the performance of multi-view
face reenactment in photo-realism and 3D consistency.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6522

