The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PosDiffNet: Positional Neural Diffusion for Point Cloud Registration in a Large
Field of View with Perturbations
Rui She* , Sijie Wang* , Qiyu Kang* † , Kai Zhao, Yang Song,
Wee Peng Tay, Tianyu Geng, Xingchao Jian
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{rui.she@, wang1679@e., qiyu.kang@, kai.zhao@, wptay@, tianyu.geng@, xingchao001@e.}ntu.edu.sg,
yang.song@connect.polyu.hk
Abstract

optimization problem poses a significant challenge to the attainment of a globally optimal solution (Wang and Solomon
2019). When dealing with sparse and non-uniform data, traditional methods like nearest-neighbor search may not be
effective, resulting in higher registration errors (Wang and
Solomon 2019; Wei et al. 2020).

Point cloud registration is a crucial technique in 3D computer
vision with a wide range of applications. However, this task
can be challenging, particularly in large fields of view with
dynamic objects, environmental noise, or other perturbations.
To address this challenge, we propose a model called PosDiffNet. Our approach performs hierarchical registration based
on window-level, patch-level, and point-level correspondence.
We leverage a graph neural partial differential equation (PDE)
based on Beltrami flow to obtain high-dimensional features
and position embeddings for point clouds. We incorporate
position embeddings into a Transformer module based on
a neural ordinary differential equation (ODE) to efficiently
represent patches within points. We employ the multi-level
correspondence derived from the high feature similarity scores
to facilitate alignment between point clouds. Subsequently,
we use registration methods such as SVD-based algorithms
to predict the transformation using corresponding point pairs.
We evaluate PosDiffNet on several 3D point cloud datasets,
verifying that it achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance
for point cloud registration in large fields of view with perturbations. The implementation code of experiments is available
at https://github.com/AI-IT-AVs/PosDiffNet.

To address the aforementioned challenges in point cloud
registration, deep learning-based methods have been investigated to predict transformation matrices or relative poses
(Choy, Park, and Koltun 2019; Bai et al. 2020; Ao et al.
2021). However, achieving robust point cloud registration in
large-scale scenarios remains a significant challenge due to
LiDAR scan distortion and sparsity. For instance, real outdoor datasets often exhibit numerous perturbations among
different frames, such as dynamic objects and environmental
noise (Yu et al. 2019). Thus, an open question is how to efficiently estimate the transformation for large-scale scenarios
with perturbations, especially in real outdoor datasets.
In this paper, we propose a model for point cloud registration based on neural diffusion. Considering the demonstrated
capability of Beltrami flow in preserving non-smooth graph
signals and its robustness in feature representation (Song et al.
2022), we utilize feature descriptors and position embeddings
based on graph neural diffusion with Beltrami flow (Kimmel, Sochen, and Malladi 1997; Chamberlain et al. 2021a).
We also present a transformation estimation method using
a diffusion-based Transformer. Our approach mitigates the
challenges from dynamic object non-correspondence and random perturbations in large fields of view, leading to robust
and efficient point cloud registration. Our main contributions
are as follows:

Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) computer vision techniques recently
have gained increasing popularity in various fields such as
autonomous driving (Wang et al. 2023b), robotics (Li et al.
2021), and scene modeling (Kang et al. 2022). Point cloud
registration, which estimates the transformation or relative
pose between two given 3D point cloud frames (Wang and
Solomon 2019), is a crucial task in many applications, such
as object detection, odometry estimation, as well as simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) (Shan et al. 2020;
Kang et al. 2022), owing to its robustness against seasonal
changes and illumination variations.
Iterative methods, as demonstrated by the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm (Besl and McKay 1992; Segal,
Haehnel, and Thrun 2009), have become widely employed
in point cloud registration. Despite their utility, these methods face obstacles. Specifically, the non-convexity of the

• We design a 3D point cloud representation module using
graph neural diffusion based on Beltrami flow, from which
point feature embedding and position embedding are both
outputs.
• We propose a point cloud registration method based on
the window-patch-point matching and a Transformer, which
incorporates neural ODE modules and leverages point features and their positional information.

* These authors contributed equally.

• We empirically evaluate our point cloud registration
method to outperform other baselines in several real datasets
in the large field of view with perturbations.

†

Corresponding author: Qiyu Kang.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

231

