The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Region-Aware Exposure Consistency Network for Mixed Exposure Correction
Jin Liu1 , Huiyuan Fu1 * , Chuanming Wang1 , Huadong Ma1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{ljin,fhy,wcm,mhd}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Exposure correction aims to enhance images suffering from
improper exposure to achieve satisfactory visual effects. Despite recent progress, existing methods generally mitigate
either overexposure or underexposure in input images, and
they still struggle to handle images with mixed exposure,
i.e., one image incorporates both overexposed and underexposed regions. The mixed exposure distribution is nonuniform and leads to varying representation, which makes
it challenging to address in a unified process. In this paper, we introduce an effective Region-aware Exposure Correction Network (RECNet) that can handle mixed exposure
by adaptively learning and bridging different regional exposure representations. Specifically, to address the challenge
posed by mixed exposure disparities, we develop a regionaware de-exposure module that effectively translates regional features of mixed exposure scenarios into an exposureinvariant feature space. Simultaneously, as de-exposure operation inevitably reduces discriminative information, we introduce a mixed-scale restoration unit that integrates exposureinvariant features and unprocessed features to recover local
information. To further achieve a uniform exposure distribution in the global image, we propose an exposure contrastive
regularization strategy under the constraints of intra-regional
exposure consistency and inter-regional exposure continuity.
Extensive experiments are conducted on various datasets, and
the experimental results demonstrate the superiority and generalization of our proposed method. The code is released at:
https://github.com/kravrolens/RECNet.

(a) Under-/Over- Exp examples

(b) Brightness Mapping

(c) LCDPNet

(d) RECNet (Ours)

Figure 1: For a single image above in (a), it contains both
overexposure (marked with red box) and underexposure
(marked with blue box) regions. (b) is the input-ground truth
brightness mapping curve statistics of the LCDP (Wang, Xu,
and Lau 2022) dataset. (c) and (d) are the generated resultground truth mapping curves of LCDPNet and our method,
respectively. A smaller area represents better results with
smaller correction errors.

Introduction
In recent years, taking photos has become universal with the
rapid development of camera devices. However, images captured in unbalanced ambient lighting conditions often suffer
from overexposure and underexposure problems, resulting
in significant structure distortion and quality degradation.
Photography experts can alleviate this problem by tuning the
equipment, but it is too professional and difficult to achieve
in many cases. With the development of deep learning, how
to solve this problem intelligently and automatically gradually attracts the attention of researchers.

To solve this challenging but practical problem, exposure
correction techniques (Wei et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022) have been developed to correct varying levels of underexposed and overexposed images
to normal exposure. However, conventional methods only
emphasize either underexposed or overexposed scenes, resulting in poor generalization to the opposite exposures, limiting their deployment in practical applications. Some methods (Afifi et al. 2021; Nsampi, Hu, and Wang 2021; Huang
et al. 2022b) propose a unified network to handle both underexposure and overexposure problems. They are based on the
assumption that the global illumination of the target scene
is uniform, i.e., the image is overexposed or underexposed.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3648

