The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptative Temporal Sentence Localization
with Mutual Information Maximization
Daizong Liu1 * , Xiang Fang2 * , Xiaoye Qu3 , Jianfeng Dong4 , He Yan5 , Yang Yang6 ,
Pan Zhou3† , Yu Cheng7
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Nanyang Technological University
3
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science of Technology
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University
5
Protagolabs Inc.
6
Meta Platforms Inc.
7
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
dzliu@hust.edu.cn, xfang9508@gmail.com, xiaoye@hust.edu.cn, dongjf24@gmail.com, he.yan@protagolabs.com,
yang.angela06@gmail.com, panzhou@hust.edu.cn, chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Source
Domain

Abstract
Temporal sentence localization (TSL) aims to localize a target segment in a video according to a given sentence query.
Though respectable works have made decent achievements
in this task, they severely rely on abundant yet expensive
manual annotations for training. Moreover, these trained datadependent models usually can not generalize well to unseen
scenarios because of the inherent domain shift. To facilitate
this issue, in this paper, we target a practical but challenging
setting: unsupervised domain adaptative temporal sentence
localization (UDA-TSL), which explores whether the localization knowledge can be transferred from a fully-annotated
data domain (source domain) to a new unannotated data domain (target domain). Particularly, we propose an effective
and novel baseline for UDA-TSL to bridge the multi-modal
gap across different domains and learn the potential correspondence between the video-query pairs in target domain.
We first develop separate modality-specific domain adaptation modules to smoothly balance the minimization of the domain shifts in cross-dataset video and query domains. Then,
to fully exploit the semantic correspondence of both modalities in target domain for unsupervised localization, we devise
a mutual information learning module to adaptively align the
video-query pairs which are more likely to be relevant in target domain, leading to more truly aligned target pairs and
ensuring the discriminability of target features. In this way,
our model can learn domain-invariant and semantic-aligned
cross-modal representations. Three sets of migration experiments show that our model achieves competitive performance
compared to existing methods.

Query: The person puts the cleaning supplies down on a nearby shelf.

Ground Truth

19.70s

|25.20s

|

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Target
Domain

Video Set

No correspondence

Query Set
Query: A person wet a car with water, then he puts detergent to the car using a squeegee.
Query: The man rinses the car with water.
Query: The man cleans again with soap and water the car for the second time.
Query: The man dry the car manually with a cloth.

(a) The illustration of our unsupervised domain adaptation setting

40k

40

Domain: Daily Domain: Cooking
indoor
scenario

30

30k
20k

R@1, IoU=0.7

50k

Domain: Open environment

20
10

10k
0

TACoS
Charades
ActivityNet
Annotation Number
Video Number

(b) Domain differences

0

CMIN
Origin

2DTAN
C→A

Ours
T→A

(c) Performance of domain adaptation

Figure 1: (a) We investigate UDA-TSL, which transfers the
localization knowledge from a fully-annotated source domain to a new unannotated target domain. (b) The inherent domain differences (including number of annotated moments, number of videos, and video content types) among
three typical datasets for TSL task. (c) The domain adaptation performances of existing methods are limited.

Introduction
Temporal sentence localization (TSL) (Anne Hendricks
et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017) is an important yet challenging task in video understanding, which has drawn increasing

attention due to its vast potential applications, such as activity detection (Dong et al. 2022a) and human-computer interaction (Dong et al. 2022b). Given an untrimmed video, it
aims to retrieve a temporal video segment that semantically
corresponds to a given sentence query.
Most previous TSL works (Yuan et al. 2019; Zhang et al.

* The two authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3567

