The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

π-Light: Programmatic Interpretable Reinforcement Learning for
Resource-Limited Traffic Signal Control
Yin Gu1,2 , Kai Zhang1,2 * , Qi Liu1,2 , Weibo Gao1,2 , Longfei Li3 , Jun Zhou3
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Data Science &
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
Ant Financial Services Group
{gy128,weibogao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {kkzhang08,qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn,
longyao.llf@antgroup.com, jun.zhoujun@antfin.com
Abstract

based approaches, agents learn through continuous interactions with the environment, achieving superior performance
over traditional ones. DRL methods can either be valuebased (Van der Pol and Oliehoek 2016; Wei et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2020) or policy-based (Mousavi, Schukat, and
Howley 2017; Oroojlooy et al. 2020), and agents at different
intersections can collaborate (Wei et al. 2019) or communicate (Yu et al. 2021) to improve overall performance.
Despite the significant strides made by Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) methods in traffic signal control,
their reliance on neural networks introduces new challenges.
These challenges include a lack of interpretability, difficulty
in validation, and incompatibility with edge devices. As a
result, in the real world, the majority of traffic signal control methods still rely on traditional approaches (Tang et al.
2019). Even in developed countries (e.g., the United States),
the proportion of intelligent traffic signals remains below
5% (Tang et al. 2019). We posit that an effective TSC approach should encompass the following three characteristics
to find widespread application in real-world scenarios:

The recent advancements in Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) have significantly enhanced the performance of adaptive Traffic Signal Control (TSC). However, DRL policies
are typically represented by neural networks, which are overparameterized black-box models. As a result, the learned
policies often lack interpretability, and cannot be deployed
directly in the real-world edge hardware due to resource constraints. In addition, the DRL methods often exhibit limited generalization performance, struggling to generalize the
learned policy to other geographical regions. These factors
limit the practical application of learning-based approaches.
To address these issues, we suggest the use of an inherently interpretable program for representing the control policy. We present a new approach, Programmatic Interpretable
reinforcement learning for traffic signal control (π-Light),
designed to autonomously discover non-differentiable programs. Specifically, we define a Domain Specific Language
(DSL) and transformation rules for constructing programs,
and utilize Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to find the
optimal program in a discrete space. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms baseline approaches. Moreover, π-Light exhibits superior generalization capabilities compared to DRL, enabling training and
evaluation across intersections from different cities. Finally,
we analyze how the learned program policies can directly deploy on edge devices with extremely limited resources.

• Interpretability of policies: The formidable expressive
capacity of DNNs makes the policies inherently difficult
to interpret. Applying these black-box policies in highstakes decision-making scenarios could potentially lead
to unpredictable risks (Rudin 2019).
• Compatibility with edge device: Many edge devices
lack effective support for neural networks. Deploying
neural networks requires additional operations such as
quantization (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016) to meet hardware constraints, which could inadvertently degrade performance (Krishnamoorthi 2018).
• Robust generalization capability: In this paper, we define robust generalization capability as the ability to
apply a policy trained at one intersection to other regions without the need for retraining. Gathering traffic
flow data for every intersection in a city proves cumbersome and sometimes unfeasible, particularly for newly
constructed roads lacking sufficient traffic data. Consequently, methods should not develop specific policies for
each intersection or district. Instead, they should entail
devising a generalized policy that learns from a small
set of intersection data and can be directly applied to all
other intersections.

Introduction
Traffic signal control plays a pivotal role in alleviating traffic congestion. Efficiently managing traffic flow can reduce
commute times, further reducing carbon emissions. Thus,
optimizing control strategies to reduce the average travel
time holds significant importance. Traditional traffic signal
control methods are based on expert-defined rules, such as
fixed-time control (Miller 1963), SOTL (Cools, Gershenson, and D’Hooghe 2013), and SCATS (Lowrie 1990). Although these rules offer a high degree of interpretability,
their reliance on expert knowledge limits their ability to
learn from data. In contrast, recent deep reinforcement learning emerges as a promising solution to TSC. In these DRL* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21107

