The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Out-of-Distribution Detection in Long-Tailed Recognition
with Calibrated Outlier Class Learning
Wenjun Miao1 , Guansong Pang2* , Xiao Bai1,3 , Tianqi Li1 , Jin Zheng1, 4 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
3
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
4
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
{miaowenjun, jinzheng, baixiao, tianqili}@buaa.edu.cn, gspang@smu.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Existing out-of-distribution (OOD) methods have shown
great success on balanced datasets but become ineffective in
long-tailed recognition (LTR) scenarios where 1) OOD samples are often wrongly classified into head classes and/or 2)
tail-class samples are treated as OOD samples. To address
these issues, current studies fit a prior distribution of auxiliary/pseudo OOD data to the long-tailed in-distribution (ID)
data. However, it is difficult to obtain such an accurate prior
distribution given the unknowingness of real OOD samples
and heavy class imbalance in LTR. A straightforward solution to avoid the requirement of this prior is to learn an outlier class to encapsulate the OOD samples. The main challenge is then to tackle the aforementioned confusion between
OOD samples and head/tail-class samples when learning the
outlier class. To this end, we introduce a novel calibrated
outlier class learning (COCL) approach, in which 1) a debiased large margin learning method is introduced in the outlier
class learning to distinguish OOD samples from both head
and tail classes in the representation space and 2) an outlierclass-aware logit calibration method is defined to enhance the
long-tailed classification confidence. Extensive empirical results on three popular benchmarks CIFAR10-LT, CIFAR100LT, and ImageNet-LT demonstrate that COCL substantially
outperforms state-of-the-art OOD detection methods in LTR
while being able to improve the classification accuracy on ID
data. Code is available at https://github.com/mala-lab/COCL.

(a) Feature representations of CIFAR100-LT test data

(b) Prediction confidence

Introduction

(c) OOD score for ID samples

Figure 1: Visualization and qualitative results on test data of
CIFAR100-LT using an LTR model augmented with an outlier learning module (see Eq. 2) for OOD detection. (a) Feature representations of samples randomly selected from head
class, tail class, and OOD samples. The gray areas highlight
obscure regions between head/tail samples and OOD samples. (b) The mean prediction confidence of the model classifying six OOD datasets into one of the ID classes. (c) The
mean OOD score (i.e., the softmax probability of the outlier
class) of samples from each ID class.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various fields (Russakovsky et al. 2015;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017). However, their application in real-world scenarios, such as autonomous driving (Kendall and Gal 2017) and medical diagnosis (Leibig
et al. 2017), remains challenging due to the presence of longtailed distribution and unknown classes (Huang and Li 2021;
Wang et al. 2020b). In particular, DNNs often have high confidence predictions that classify out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples from unknown classes as one of the known classes.
This issue is further amplified when the in-distribution (ID)
data has a class-imbalanced/long-tailed distribution (Zhu

et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022; Li, Cheung, and Lu 2022; Wang
et al. 2022). This is because, as illustrated in Fig. 1a, DNNs
trained on long-tailed data can be heavily biased towards
head classes (the majority classes) due to the overwhelm-

* Corresponding authors: G. Pang and J. Zheng

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4216

