The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unraveling Batch Normalization for Realistic Test-Time Adaptation
Zixian Su1, 2 , Jingwei Guo1, 2 , Kai Yao1, 2 , Xi Yang1 * , Qiufeng Wang1 , Kaizhu Huang3 *
2

1
School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, the United Kingdom
3
Data Science Research Center, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China
xi.yang01@xjtlu.edu.cn, kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn

TENT / Ours (TEMA)

Abstract
While recent test-time adaptations exhibit efficacy by adjusting batch normalization to narrow domain disparities, their
effectiveness diminishes with realistic mini-batches due to inaccurate target estimation. As previous attempts merely introduce source statistics to mitigate this issue, the fundamental
problem of inaccurate target estimation still persists, leaving
the intrinsic test-time domain shifts unresolved. This paper
delves into the problem of mini-batch degradation. By unraveling batch normalization, we discover that the inexact target
statistics largely stem from the substantially reduced class diversity in batch. Drawing upon this insight, we introduce a
straightforward tool, Test-time Exponential Moving Average
(TEMA), to bridge the class diversity gap between training
and testing batches. Importantly, our TEMA adaptively extends the scope of typical methods beyond the current batch
to incorporate a diverse set of class information, which in turn
boosts an accurate target estimation. Built upon this foundation, we further design a novel layer-wise rectification strategy to consistently promote test-time performance. Our proposed method enjoys a unique advantage as it requires neither
training nor tuning parameters, offering a truly hassle-free
solution. It significantly enhances model robustness against
shifted domains and maintains resilience in diverse realworld scenarios with various batch sizes, achieving state-ofthe-art performance on several major benchmarks. Code is
available at https://github.com/kiwi12138/RealisticTTA.

/

BS=2

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

/

BS=16

/

BS=200

Figure 1: (a)(b) Running mean statistics of one specific
channel in the last BN layer during inference. (c) Performance comparison between TENT (Wang et al. 2021) and
Ours under different batch sizes. (d) Quantified class diversity of TENT v.s. Ours under different batch sizes. Same
color denotes same evaluation setting. As can be seen, class
diversity plays a vital role in test-time performance.

uses source statistics for normalization during training; however, applying the same parameters to differing target domains can lead to erratic results. Instead, normalizing with
the estimated statistics from the target domain promotes appropriate standardization and superior generalization across
diverse environments.
Despite their excellent performance under chosen settings, existing TTA methods face essential challenges when
deployed in realistic settings (Wang et al. 2022; Lim et al.
2023). Most of them necessitate extensive target data, commonly large batches. While in practice, mini-batches are often preferred, which may produce erroneous statistics and
cause model degradation (see Figure 1 (c)). Although some
attempts (Schneider et al. 2020; You, Li, and Zhao 2021)
have been made to alleviate this limitation by incorporating
source statistics, they merely cover up the inaccurate target
information, leaving the persistent domain shifts unresolved.
These observations naturally prompt us to ask: What exactly

Introduction
Confronted with unseen environments, the effectiveness of
deep neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2017; He et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017) often suffers a
decline due to domain shift (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015;
Long et al. 2013) — an incongruity between the training
(source) and testing (target) domains. To address this, TestTime Adaptation (TTA) (Wang et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2020)
serves as a practical paradigm that enables pre-trained models to dynamically adapt with test streams. Recent TTA research mainly resolves around exploring batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015). A crucial reason for
this focus lies in the internal relation between normalization statistics and domain characteristics. Specifically, BN
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15136

