The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PRP Rebooted: Advancing the State of the Art in FOND Planning
Christian Muise1,3 , Sheila A. McIlraith2,3 , J. Christopher Beck2
1

Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
3
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada
christian.muise@queensu.ca, sheila@cs.toronto.edu, jcb@mie.utoronto.ca
2

Abstract

planning problem, repeatedly solving this problem, to iteratively solve the original FOND problem. In 2012, the PRP
planner emerged as the state of the art in FOND planning,
often showing orders of magnitude improvements in plan
generation time and/or solution size (Muise, McIlraith, and
Beck 2012). Like NDP and FIP, PRP employed classical
planning over a reformulation of the FOND problem, but
much of its performance gains were the result of identifying
and encoding only those aspects of the state that were relevant to plan validity. This was accomplished by representing families of states as conjunctive formulae and employing regression rewriting, a form of pre-image computation,
to establish relevance (Waldinger 1977; Reiter 2001; Fritz
and McIlraith 2007). Subsequent techniques explored new
concepts for computing solutions to FOND problems: from
the backwards search of GRENDEL (Ramı́rez and Sardiña
2014), to the SAT encoding of FONDSAT (Geffner and
Geffner 2018), to the policy-based search of MyND and Paladinus (Mattmüller et al. 2010; Pereira et al. 2022). These
new planners were often published with additional benchmark problems that showcased the new planner’s potential
and, in a number of cases, their superior performance compared to the incumbent, PRP.
In this work, we introduce PRP Rebooted (PR2), a new
FOND planner that leverages the insights of a generation of
FOND planners to realize a significant advance in the state
of the art. Like NDP, FIP, and PRP before it, PR2 adopts the
approach of repeatedly replanning in a classical planning reformulation. Further, it uses a powerful solution representation inspired by GRENDEL and FONDSAT, while maintaining the solving strength of PRP to produce this solution.
The novel techniques introduced in the PR2 planner include
better handling of deadends, a preprocessing step to simplify
problems, and a new FOND-aware heuristic for the classical
planning sub-process.
PR2 outperforms the four leading FOND planners
(MyND, FONDSAT, PRP, Paladinus), at times by a large
margin, in 17 of 18 domains that represent a comprehensive
benchmark set (five of 800 problems are solved by PRP, but
not PR2). Through an ablation study, we evaluate the impact of individual technical components on overall planner
performance. Ultimately, PR2 constitutes a significant advancement in the field of FOND planning and a new state of
the art for the planning formalism.

Fully Observable Non-Deterministic (FOND) planning is a
variant of classical symbolic planning in which actions are
nondeterministic, with an action’s outcome known only upon
execution. It is a popular planning paradigm with applications ranging from robot planning to dialogue-agent design
and reactive synthesis. Over the last 20 years, a number of
approaches to FOND planning have emerged. In this work,
we establish a new state of the art, following in the footsteps
of some of the most powerful FOND planners to date. Our
planner, PR2, decisively outperforms the four leading FOND
planners, at times by a large margin, in 17 of 18 domains that
represent a comprehensive benchmark suite. Ablation studies
demonstrate the impact of various techniques we introduce,
with the largest improvement coming from our novel FONDaware heuristic.

Introduction
Fully Observable Non-Deterministic (FOND) planning is a
variant of classical symbolic planning in which actions are
non-deterministic, the finite set of possible action outcomes
is known a priori, and the realized outcome in a particular
instant is observed following execution of the action (e.g.,
(Daniele, Traverso, and Vardi 1999; Cimatti et al. 2003)).
As with classical planning, FOND planning assumes full observability, but the uncertainty in the outcome of actions during plan generation necessitates a new form of (contingent)
solution – both in terms of representation and plan synthesis.
Since its introduction 20 years ago, FOND has emerged
as a popular and highly versatile computational paradigm
with applications ranging from generalized planning (Illanes and McIlraith 2019; Bonet et al. 2020) and robot planning (Andrés, de Barros, and Delgado 2020) to dialogueagent design (Muise et al. 2019), and reactive synthesis from
logical specification (Camacho et al. 2017). Given the diversity of applications for FOND planning, advances in FOND
planning have the potential for significant impact.
Following the development of the original MBP FOND
planner, based on model checking (Cimatti et al. 2003), we
have witnessed a stream of innovations. In a departure from
MBP, the NDP (Kuter et al. 2008) and FIP (Fu et al. 2011)
planners reformulated the FOND problem into a classical
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20212

