The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quantifying and Analyzing
Entity-Level Memorization in Large Language Models
Zhenhong Zhou1 , Jiuyang Xiang2 , Chaomeng Chen1 , Sen Su1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
University of Michigan
{zhouzhenhong, gianluigi-chen, susen}@bupt.edu.cn, jiuyangx@umich.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been proven capable of memorizing their training data, which can be extracted through specifically designed prompts. As the scale of
datasets continues to grow, privacy risks arising from memorization have attracted increasing attention. Quantifying language model memorization helps evaluate potential privacy
risks. However, prior works on quantifying memorization require access to the precise original data or incur substantial
computational overhead, making it difficult for applications
in real-world language models. To this end, we propose a finegrained, entity-level definition to quantify memorization with
conditions and metrics closer to real-world scenarios. In addition, we also present an approach for efficiently extracting
sensitive entities from autoregressive language models. We
conduct extensive experiments based on the proposed, probing language models’ ability to reconstruct sensitive entities
under different settings. We find that language models have
strong memorization at the entity level and are able to reproduce the training data even with partial leakages. The results
demonstrate that LLMs not only memorize their training data
but also understand associations between entities. These findings necessitate that trainers of LLMs exercise greater prudence regarding model memorization, adopting memorization mitigation techniques to preclude privacy violations.

Figure 1: Privacy leakage of LLM in real-world scenarios.
Attackers can bypass safety measures and collect sensitive
information from LLMs.

memorization in language models and analyzing their capability of emitting memorized sensitive entities helps researchers understand the potential privacy risks with LLMs.
Recently, several studies have been conducted to quantify
memorization in language models. Prior attempts compared
models trained under different conditions to evaluate language model memorization (Zhang et al. 2021; Mireshghallah et al. 2022), but these approaches incur high computational costs. Carlini et al. (Carlini et al. 2023) used prefix
prompts to prompt models to complete training set suffixes
verbatim and quantified memorization based on completion
accuracy. However, in real-world scenarios, malicious or curious users are unlikely to have direct access to the training set for obtaining the original prefixes. Additionally, the
information leakage from language models is usually finegrained. For instance, in the “Grandma Exploit” of ChatGPT, the language model has generated content that poses
privacy risks. Among these texts, certain key entities (for
instance, the keys shown in the figure) constitute sensitive
information rather than all contents or verbatim suffixes.
Therefore, previous research may not adequately quantify
real-world memorization in LLMs.
Apart from the limitations of quantification methodologies, challenges also arise in approaches for extracting memorized training data from language models. Researchers typically employ original prefixes (Carlini et al. 2023) or carefully crafted prompts (Shao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023) as
input. However, obtaining original prefixes is difficult in

Introduction
Pretrained large language models (LLMs) have made significant breakthroughs in various downstream tasks (Devlin
et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022; OpenAI
2023). However, researches show that LLMs memorize the
training data (Carlini et al. 2019, 2021), typically sourced
from crowd-sourced corpora or the Internet. Through crafted
prompts, language models can reproduce the training data
(Huang, Shao, and Chang 2022; Lukas et al. 2023), leading to serious concerns regarding data privacy. As shown in
Figure 1, attackers have bypassed the security constraints of
language models via the “Grandma Exploit” and successfully extracted sensitive information such as Windows Keys
or Apple IDs from ChatGPT. This suggests that privacy leakages in LLMs may be incurred in real-world settings due
to emitting memorized sensitive entities. Quantifying the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19741

