The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Promoting Counterfactual Robustness through Diversity
Francesco Leofante1 , Nico Potyka2
1

2

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, UK
f.leofante@imperial.ac.uk, PotykaN@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract

1

c1

c

Counterfactual explanations shed light on the decisions of
black-box models by explaining how an input can be altered
to obtain a favourable decision from the model (e.g., when
a loan application has been rejected). However, as noted recently, counterfactual explainers may lack robustness in the
sense that a minor change in the input can cause a major change in the explanation. This can cause confusion on
the user side and open the door for adversarial attacks. In
this paper, we study some sources of non-robustness. While
there are fundamental reasons for why an explainer that returns a single counterfactual cannot be robust in all instances,
we show that some interesting robustness guarantees can be
given by reporting multiple rather than a single counterfactual. Unfortunately, the number of counterfactuals that need
to be reported for the theoretical guarantees to hold can be
prohibitively large. We therefore propose an approximation
algorithm that uses a diversity criterion to select a feasible
number of most relevant explanations and study its robustness
empirically. Our experiments indicate that our method improves the state-of-the-art in generating robust explanations,
while maintaining other desirable properties and providing
competitive computational performance.

x
Y
B

c1

c

x1
x2

x
Y

c2

x1
x2
c2

B

Figure 1: The figure shows the decision boundaries of two
classes B (blue outer region) and Y (yellow inner region) in
two scenarios (left, right). In both cases, the points x, x1 , x2
are relatively close, but their corresponding counterfactuals
c, c1 , c2 on the decision boundary are relatively far away
from each other wrt. Euclidean distance.

There are different reasons for non-robustness. As noted
in (Slack et al. 2021), local search methods as hill-climbing
can be highly sensitive to input perturbations and may therefore not be robust. All heuristic methods can be susceptible
to such problems, in particular if they rely on randomization. However, as noted in (Fokkema, de Heide, and van Erven 2022), there are more fundamental problems that can
cause robustness problems. Intuitively, whenever an input is
between two decision boundaries on opposite sides, a minor
change in the input can result in a major change in the computed counterfactual (see Figure 1 for an illustration). Note
that this problem even applies to exact methods.
The problem in Figure 1 occurs if the input x is close
to the center between decision boundaries. Clearly, a counterfactual explainer that returns a single counterfactual is
bound to lack robustness in such a scenario. One intuitive
idea to overcome this fundamental problem is to report multiple counterfactuals instead of a single one. In Section 4,
we study this idea theoretically and identify some interesting cases under which an exhaustive explainer can guarantee
robustness by returning all approximate counterfactuals with
respect to some tolerance parameter ϵ. Unfortunately, the exhaustive explainer is not practically viable because the number of identified counterfactuals can be prohibitively large or
even infinite. The blowup is partially caused by sets of counterfactuals that are redundant in the sense that they are all
very similar. Reporting all of them is not desirable from an

Introduction

Counterfactual explanations support the outcome of a blackbox machine learning model by explaining how the input
could be changed to produce a different decision (Guidotti
et al. 2019; Karimi et al. 2023; Stepin et al. 2021; Wachter,
Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017). Roughly speaking, a counterfactual explainer is called robust, if a minor change in the
input cannot cause a major change in the explanation. The
actual change can be quantified, for example, by the Euclidean distance, by the number of features that have to be
changed or by a cost associated with changing the features.
One motivation for robustness is user justifiability. Two similar users would expect to get a similar explanation and an
individual user may be surprised if a minor change in its
characteristics would result in a completely different explanation (Hancox-Li 2020). Robustness is also relevant from
a fairness perspective because some non-robust counterfactual explainers can be manipulated such that they offer better
explanations for particular subgroups (Slack et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21322

