The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Compressing Image-to-Image Translation GANs Using Local Density Structures
on Their Learned Manifold
Alireza Ganjdanesh* 1 , Shangqian Gao* 2 , Hirad Alipanah3 , Heng Huang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, College Park, MD 20742, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
aliganj@umd.edu, shg84@pitt.edu, hia21@pitt.edu, heng@umd.edu
2

Abstract

tioned tasks require real-time user interaction, making it infeasible to deploy I2IGANs on mobile and edge devices
in Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) with limited resources. Thus, developing compression schemes for GANs
to preserve their performance and reduce their computational burden is highly desirable. As the training dynamics of
GAN models are notoriously unstable, GAN compression is
much more challenging than pruning other deep models like
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) classifiers.
Despite that notable efforts have been made to compress CNNs (Han et al. 2015; Sandler et al. 2018; Rastegari et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017; Ye et al. 2020; Wan et al.
2020), GAN compression has only been explored in recent years. Early works have proposed a combination of
prominent CNN pruning techniques like Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Gong et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Jin et al.
2021; Gao et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022), Knowledge Distillation (Aguinaldo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Chang and
Lu 2020; Chen et al. 2020a; Fu et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022b,a), and channel pruning (Li et al. 2017,
2022) to prune GANs. However, GAN Slimming (Wang
et al. 2020) demonstrated that heuristically stacking several
CNN pruning methods for GAN compression can degrade
the final performance mainly due to the instabilities of GAN
training. GCC (Li et al. 2021) empirically showed the importance of restricting the discriminator’s capacity during
compression. It demonstrated that the previous methods’ unsatisfactory performance might be because they only pruned
the generator’s architecture while using the full-capacity discriminator. By doing so, the adversarial game cannot maintain the Nash Equilibrium state, and the pruning process fails
to converge appropriately. Although some of these methods
have shown competitive results (Li et al. 2021; Jin et al.
2021), they do not explicitly consider an essential characteristic of GANs as generative models during pruning, which
is their density structure over their learned manifold.
In this paper, we propose a novel GAN Compression
method by enforcing the similarity of the density structure
of the original parameter-heavy model and the pruned model
over the learned manifold of the original model. Our intuition is that the difference in density structures can serve
as the supervision signal for pruning. Specifically, at first,
we partition the learned manifold of the original model into
local neighborhoods. We approximate each neighborhood

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown remarkable success in modeling complex data distributions for
image-to-image translation. Still, their high computational
demands prohibit their deployment in practical scenarios like
edge devices. Existing GAN compression methods mainly
rely on knowledge distillation or convolutional classifiers’
pruning techniques. Thus, they neglect the critical characteristic of GANs: their local density structure over their learned
manifold. Accordingly, we approach GAN compression from
a new perspective by explicitly encouraging the pruned model
to preserve the density structure of the original parameterheavy model on its learned manifold. We facilitate this objective for the pruned model by partitioning the learned manifold of the original generator into local neighborhoods around
its generated samples. Then, we propose a novel pruning objective to regularize the pruned model to preserve the local
density structure over each neighborhood, resembling the kernel density estimation method. Also, we develop a collaborative pruning scheme in which the discriminator and generator are pruned by two pruning agents. We design the agents
to capture interactions between the generator and discriminator by exchanging their peer’s feedback when determining corresponding models’ architectures. Thanks to such a
design, our pruning method can efficiently find performant
sub-networks and can maintain the balance between the generator and discriminator more effectively compared to baselines during pruning, thereby showing more stable pruning
dynamics. Our experiments on image translation GAN models, Pix2Pix and CycleGAN, with various benchmark datasets
and architectures demonstrate our method’s effectiveness.

Introduction
Image-to-Image translation (Isola et al. 2017; Zhu et al.
2017) Generative Adversarial Networks (I2IGANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) have shown excellent performance in
many real-world computer vision applications: style transfer (Huang and Belongie 2017), converting a user’s sketch
to a real image (Park et al. 2019), super resolution (Ledig
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018b), and pose transfer (Wang
et al. 2018a; Chan et al. 2019). Yet, I2IGANs require excessive compute and memory resources. Moreover, the men* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12118

