The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Fairness Fair: Bringing Human Perception into
Collective Decision-Making
Hadi Hosseini
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
hadi@psu.edu

Abstract

framework for studying mathematical foundations of societal good and has enabled advancements in algorithmic
solutions that adhere to fairness concepts such as envyfreeness. A number of fair algorithms, particularly in allocation of indivisible items, have been made available to
the public for real-world decisions through efforts such as
Spliddit (www.spliddit.org), MatchU.ai (www.matchu.ai),
and Course Match (University of Pennsylvania).
Over the past decades, a plethora of approximate fairness axioms have been proposed to escape negative results
driven by i) impossibilities of guaranteeing certain fairness
notions, ii) computational intractability, and iii) incompatibility with other socially desirable notions. Despite the rigorous research in this area, to date, the choice of which fairness
axiom (or approximations) to choose has remained largely
unexplored, leaving social planners uncertain as to which
algorithmic solutions to adopt in practice. Furthermore, the
advent of social platforms, online market places, and participatory resource allocation (Lee et al. 2019b) has shifted its
attention from focusing on agents powered by artificial intelligence (AI) to human-human or human-AI interactions (Endriss 2017; Brandt et al. 2016). Thus, recent efforts in collective decision-making (d’Eon and Larson 2020; de Clippel and Rozen 2022; Nizri, Azaria, and Hazon 2022) have
focused on empirical validation of axioms in computational
social choice. The standard theoretical and algorithmic models of fair division often do not capture the intricacies of realworld settings that are shaped by individuals’ cognitive abilities, the availability of information, and more importantly,
the community and human psyche. Hence, a fundamental
question emerges as to which axioms of fairness (or relaxation thereof) are perceived to be fairer? And why?

Fairness is one of the most desirable societal principles in
collective decision-making. It has been extensively studied in
the past decades for its axiomatic properties and has received
substantial attention from the multiagent systems community
in recent years for its theoretical and computational aspects
in algorithmic decision-making. However, these studies are
often not sufficiently rich to capture the intricacies of human
perception of fairness in the ambivalent nature of the realworld problems. We argue that not only fair solutions should
be deemed desirable by social planners (designers), but they
should be governed by human and societal cognition, consider perceived outcomes based on human judgement, and
be verifiable. We discuss how achieving this goal requires
a broad transdisciplinary approach ranging from computing
and AI to behavioral economics and human-AI interaction. In
doing so, we identify shortcomings and long-term challenges
of the current literature of fair division, describe recent efforts
in addressing them, and more importantly, highlight a series
of open research directions.

1

Introduction

Fairness is a fundamental societal principle for promoting ethical solutions in algorithmic decision-making. It
has become the center of attention in the age of Internet economics (Moulin 2019, 2004) that employs collective decision-making to deal with multiple stakeholders. Arguably, one of the most notable advancements in multiagent
systems is setting policies, norms, and axioms of interactions. Recent progress in this arena has called for ethical
decision making (Murukannaiah et al. 2020) in multiagent
applications including algorithmic hiring (Schumann et al.
2020), blockchain technology (Grossi 2022), and in general
computational social choice (Lang and Rothe 2016; Amanatidis et al. 2022a).
Within computational social choice, fair division has
emerged to provide practical solutions for distributing
goods, services, or tasks in a wide array of problems that
people face in their daily lives. Its primary objective is promoting social values such as fairness and welfare with provable axiomatic guarantees. Fair division has provided a rich

Overview. In this paper, we argue for a broader agenda in
fair division based on perceived fairness, one that grounds
fairness judgements based on human values.1 With the popularity of axiomatic approach in online systems (Tennenholtz,
Zohar, and Moulin 2016), Procaccia (2019) articulates—
through two examples rooted in fair division and voting—
that axioms should explain solutions beyond providing
1
These new directions may be applied to a broader set of problems in computational social choice (e.g. in voting or cake-cutting).
Here, we primarily focus on fair allocation of indivisible resources
for the ease of exposition.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22624

