The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task Planning for Object Rearrangement in Multi-Room Environments
Karan Mirakhor* , Sourav Ghosh* , Dipanjan Das, Brojeshwar Bhowmick
Visual Computing and Embodied Intelligence Lab, TCS Research, Kolkata, India
{karan.mirakhor, g.sourav10, dipanjan.da, b.bhowmick}@tcs.com

Abstract
Object rearrangement in a multi-room setup should produce
a reasonable plan that reduces the agent’s overall travel and
the number of steps. Recent state-of-the-art methods fail to
produce such plans because they rely on explicit exploration
for discovering unseen objects due to partial observability and
a heuristic planner to sequence the actions for rearrangement.
This paper proposes a novel task planner to efficiently plan a
sequence of actions to discover unseen objects and rearrange
misplaced objects within an untidy house to achieve a desired
tidy state. The proposed method introduces several innovative
techniques, including (i) a method for discovering unseen
objects using commonsense knowledge from large language
models, (ii) a collision resolution and buffer prediction method
based on Cross-Entropy Method to handle blocked goal and
swap cases, (iii) a directed spatial graph-based state space
for scalability, and (iv) deep reinforcement learning (RL) for
producing an efficient plan to simultaneously discover unseen
objects and rearrange the visible misplaced ones to minimize
the overall traversal. The paper also presents new metrics and a
benchmark dataset called MoPOR to evaluate the effectiveness
of the rearrangement planning in a multi-room setting. The
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
effectively addresses the multi-room rearrangement problem.

Introduction
Organizing an untidy household according to user preferences is a challenging task that encompasses multiple aspects,
including perception, planning, navigation, and manipulation
(Batra et al. 2020). When an agent engages in multi-room
object rearrangement, it must rely on sensor data and prior
knowledge to devise a comprehensive plan that involves sequencing the object movement to achieve the desired tidy
state. The specifications for this goal state can be defined
using various modalities such as geometry, images, language,
etc. (Batra et al. 2020).
Current research on object rearrangement primarily focuses on single-room setups, emphasizing perception and
commonsense reasoning. However, these studies often assume established navigation and manipulation abilities, neglecting the importance of efficient planning in the rearrangement process. Approaches like (Kant et al. 2022; Sarch et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10350

2022) use image or language-based commonsense reasoning
to detect misplaced objects but struggle with cases involving blocked goal positions or object swapping. Alternatively,
methods like (Weihs et al. 2021; Gadre et al. 2022; Trabucco
et al. 2022) concentrate on egocentric perception, employing
various scene representations to identify misplaced objects
and using greedy planners for rearrangement based on user
specifications. (Sarch et al. 2022) performs user-specific rearrangement using semantic relations for object identification
and exploration, followed by rearrangement using a heuristic
planner. Many existing methods explicitly explore the room
to locate objects outside the egocentric view, compensating
for partial information. However, recent methods (Sarch et al.
2022; Trabucco et al. 2022; Ghosh et al. 2022) face challenges with high traversal costs due to sub-optimal planners,
especially in larger multi-room settings (see Fig 1).
Enhancing planning performance is essential for making
rearrangement feasible, as it allows us to minimize the time
and resources required by the agent to reach the desired goal
state. In the context of rearrangement task planning, (Ghosh
et al. 2022) proposes a method that assumes complete room
visibility from a bird’s eye perspective. Their approach aims
to overcome planning challenges, including the combinatorial
expansion of rearrangement sequencing and swap case resolution, without requiring an explicit buffer. However, their
Euclidean distance-based reward does not minimize overall
agent traversal during planning, as shown in Fig 1. Their state
representation lacks scalability to large numbers of objects.
Additionally, their parameter network suffers from two main
issues: (i) predicting the goal location of non-blocked misplaced objects, which is already known from the goal state in
rearrangement, leading to performance degradation. (ii) predicting the buffer location for swap cases without considering
the object’s geometry and the available free space, resulting
in poor generalization. Furthermore, depending on accurate
ground-truth object positions in both the current and goal
states, is not viable in the real-world. In contrast, our focus
is on a novel, practical and broader aspect of the object rearrangement problem in the multi-room setting, under partial
observability using the egocentric camera view of the agent.
Our main emphasis is on efficient task planning, which is
necessary for effective rearrangement as illustrated in Fig 1.
Task planning for efficient multi-room object rearrangement under partial observability as depicted in Fig 2, presents

