The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Color Event Enhanced Single-Exposure HDR Imaging
Mengyao Cui 1, 2 * , Zhigang Wang 2∗ , Dong Wang 2† , Bin Zhao 2, 3† , Xuelong Li 2, 3
1

The University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University
cuimengyao@connect.hku.hk, {wangzhigang, zhaobin, wangdong}@pjlab.org.cn, li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Single-exposure high dynamic range (HDR) imaging aims
to reconstruct the wide-range intensities of a scene by using
its single low dynamic range (LDR) image, thus providing
significant efficiency. Existing methods pay high attention to
restoring the luminance by inversing the tone-mapping process, while the color in the over-/under-exposed area cannot be well restored due to the information loss of the single LDR image. To address this issue, we introduce color
events into the imaging pipeline, which record asynchronous
pixel-wise color changes in a high dynamic range, enabling
edge-like scene perception under challenging lighting conditions. Specifically, we propose a joint framework that incorporates color events and a single LDR image to restore
both content and color of an HDR image, where an exposureaware transformer (EaT) module is designed to propagate the
informative hints, provided by the normal-exposed LDR regions and the event streams, to the missing areas. In this
module, an exposure-aware mask is estimated to suppress
distractive information and strengthen the restoration of the
over-/under-exposed regions. To our knowledge, we are the
first to use color events to enhance single-exposure HDR
imaging. We also contribute corresponding datasets, consisting of synthesized datasets and a real-world dataset collected
by a DAVIS346-color camera. The datasets can be found at
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mengyaocui/ce-hdr. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Figure 1: Our task (⋇) vs traditional and mono-event-based
single-exposure HDR imaging tasks.

need more computations(Wang and Yoon 2022). In contrast,
single-exposure HDR imaging (Wang et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2020) uses a single LDR image for restoration, avoiding the
above drawbacks. However, as shown in Figure. 1, singleexposure HDR imaging methods lack sufficient information to reconstruct details in over-/under-exposed regions,
making it an ill-posed problem. Mono event camera (Chen
et al. 2021b; Han and et al 2020) has been used to help restore such saturated regions, but it merely provides grayscale
data to complement contour information, the color distortion
problem still remains unresolved, i.e. , the color of the tower.
Fortunately, color event cameras are exploited recently
that can sense the intensity changes of each color in a high
dynamic range and output ”event” data. As can be seen from
Figure. 1, color event cameras provide massive information
in the over-exposed image, appearing in a color-classified
edge-like form. Motivated by these intrinsic advantageous
characteristics, we propose to introduce color events as auxiliary data to restore more realistic HDR images, especially
in over-/under-exposed regions. Considering different intrinsics between the image data and the event stream, we use
different encoders that extract the multi-scale features of the
LDR image and the color events, respectively. The multi-

Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) imaging techniques are widely
studied, aiming at reconstructing wide-range intensities in
real scenes from low dynamic range (LDR) images. LDR
images are produced in large quantities by conventional
cameras, which barely keep details of both bright and dark
parts at the same time. In this way, effectively restoring the
intensity of LDR images is of great significance.
Multi-exposure HDR imaging is the most common approach, where multiple-exposed LDR images are aligned
and merged to obtain an HDR image(Niu et al. 2021; Choi
et al. 2020). Although achieving great successes, such methods cannot handle scenes with large motions and usually
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1399

