The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deletion-Robust Submodular Maximization with Knapsack Constraints
Shuang Cui1 , Kai Han2 * , He Huang2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology / Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and
Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
lakers@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hankai@suda.edu.cn, huangh@suda.edu.cn

Abstract

knapsack constraints (abbreviated as the SK problem) stands
out as one of the most fundamental problems as knapsack
constraints can capture real-world constraints such as budget, time, and size. As a result, the SK problem has attracted
tremendous attention since the 1980s (Wolsey 1982). In recent years, with the increase in the amount of data, there
has been a growing focus on the design of low-memory
streaming algorithms for submodular maximization problems (Kazemi et al. 2019; Mitrovic et al. 2017; Badanidiyuru
et al. 2014; Mirzasoleiman, Jegelka, and Krause 2018; Haba
et al. 2020; El Halabi et al. 2020; Chekuri, Gupta, and Quanrud 2015), which is one of the primary focuses of our paper.

Submodular maximization algorithms have found wide applications in various fields such as data summarization, recommendation systems, and active learning. In recent years,
deletion-robust submodular maximization algorithms have
garnered attention due to their significant implications in scenarios where some data points may be removed due to user
preferences or privacy concerns, such as in recommendation
systems and influence maximization. In this paper, we study
the fundamental problem of submodular maximization with
knapsack constraints and propose a robust streaming algorithm for it. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is
the first to solve this problem for non-monotone submodular functions and can achieve an approximation ratio of
1/(6.82 + 2.63d) − ϵ under a near-optimal summary size
of Õ(k + r), where k denotes the maximum cardinality of
any feasible solution, d denotes the number of the knapsack
constraints and r is the robustness parameter. For monotone
submodular functions, our algorithm can achieve an approximation ratio of 1/(2 + 2d) − ϵ under a near-optimal summary size of Õ(k +r), significantly
improving upon the best
known ratio of Ω (1/d − ϵ)2 . The empirical performance of
our algorithm is extensively evaluated in several applications
including influence maximization and recommendation systems, and the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm.

In this paper, we investigate submodular maximization algorithms that are robust to deletions, which have significant
implications in scenarios where some data points may be removed by users. For instance, Article 17 of the European
“General Data Protection Regulation” (Voigt and Von dem
Bussche 2017) outlines obligations for service providers to
comply with individuals “Right to be forgotten” allowing
them to request the deletion of their personal data or impose restrictions on its use. Another application of these algorithms is in movie recommendation systems, where the
goal is to select a subset of movies for a user that maximizes the submodular utility function. However, in the event
that a user has already viewed some of the recommended
movies, the remaining recommendations may not provide a
satisfactory user experience. In such cases, the user may desire for the recommendation system to remove these movies
and promptly update the list of recommendations. Nevertheless, rerunning the algorithm on the dataset that excludes
movies removed by the user can be both expensive and timeconsuming. As such, a more effective approach to handling
user deletions would be to enhance the robustness of the algorithm itself.

Introduction
Submodular maximization algorithms, which have played a
critical role in advancing the field of artificial intelligence,
encompass a broad range of applications, including data
summarization (Balkanski, Breuer, and Singer 2018; Amanatidis et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2021, 2023b, 2022, 2023a),
object detection (Angelova and Zhu 2013; Zhu, Jiang, and
Shao 2014), text classification (Lei et al. 2019), and active learning (Golovin and Krause 2010; Wei, Iyer, and
Bilmes 2015; Golovin and Krause 2011). As a result of
their widespread applicability, submodular maximization
problems have been extensively studied under various constraints, such as cardinality, knapsack, matroid, and independence system constraints. Among the various NP-hard problems studied in this area, submodular maximization with

Motivated by the aforementioned practical needs, several studies such as (Kazemi, Zadimoghaddam, and Karbasi
2018; Dütting et al. 2022b; Zhang, Tatti, and Gionis 2022)
have modeled the robustness to deletion as a two-stage game
against an adversary and presented robust submodular maximization algorithms. In their model, the robust algorithm
generates a summary of the groundset according to the robustness parameter r in the first stage. Subsequently, in the
second stage, after revealing the elements removed by the

* Corresponding author: Kai Han
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11695

