The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

‘Why Didn’t You Allocate This Task to Them?’
Negotiation-Aware Task Allocation and Contrastive Explanation Generation
Zahra Zahedi1 , Sailik Sengupta2 * , Subbarao Kambhampati1
1

SCAI, Arizona State University
2
AWS AI Labs
zzahedi@asu.edu, sailiks@amazon.com, rao@asu.edu

Abstract

the need for iteratively sharing cost information. Second,
the process can be time-consuming and can increase the human’s cognitive overload, leading to sub-optimal solutions.
In contrast, a centralized allocation can be efficient, but will
certainly be contested by disgruntled agents who, given their
incomplete knowledge, may deem it to be unacceptable.
Thus, a centralized system needs to be ready to provide
the user with an explanation. As discussed in (Kraus et al.
2020), such explanations can aid in increasing people’s
satisfaction (Bradley and Sparks 2009) and maintain the
system’s acceptability (Miller 2018). In a multi-agent environment such as task allocation, providing explanations is
considered to be both important and a challenging problem
(Kraus et al. 2020).

In this work, we design an Artificially Intelligent Task Allocator (AITA) that proposes a task allocation for a team
of humans. A key property of this allocation is that when
an agent with imperfect knowledge (about their teammate’s
costs and/or the team’s performance metric) contests the allocation with a counterfactual, a contrastive explanation can always be provided to showcase why the proposed allocation is
better than the proposed counterfactual. For this, we consider
a negotiation process that produces a negotiation-aware task
allocation and, when contested, leverages a negotiation tree to
provide a contrastive explanation. With human subject studies, we show that the proposed allocation indeed appears fair
to a majority of participants and, when not, the explanations
generated are judged as convincing and easy to comprehend.

To address these challenges, we blend aspects of both
the (centralized and distributed) approaches and propose an
Artificial Intelligence-powered Task Allocator. (AITA) Our
system (1) uses a centralized allocation algorithm patterned
after negotiation to come up with an allocation that explicitly accounts for the costs of the individual agents and overall performance, and (2) can provide contrastive explanation
when a proposed allocation is contested using a counterfactual. We assume AITA is aware of all the individual costs
and the overall performance costs.1 Use of a negotiationbased mechanism for coming up with a negotiation-aware
explicable allocation helps reuse the inference process to
provide contrastive explanations. Our explanations have two
desirable properties. First, the negotiation-tree based explanation by AITA has a graphical form that effectively distills relevant pieces from a large amount of information (see
Figure 1); this is seen as a convenient way to explain information in multi-agent environments (Kraus et al. 2020).
Second, the explanation, given it is closely tied to the inference process, acts as a certificate that guarantees explicability to the human (i.e. no other allocation could have been
more profitable for them while being acceptable to others).
While works like (Kraus et al. 2020) recognize the need for
such negotiation-aware and contestable allocation systems,
their work is mostly aspirational. To the best of our knowl-

Introduction
Whether it be assigning teachers to classes (Kraus et al.
2020), or employees (nurses) to tasks (wards/shifts) (Warner
and Prawda 1972), task allocation is essential for the smooth
function of human-human teams. In the context of indivisible tasks, the goal of task allocation is to assign individual
agents of a team to a subset of tasks such that a pre-defined
set of metrics are optimized. When the cost-information
about all the team members and a performance measure
is known upfront, one can capture the trade-off between
some notion of social welfare (such as fairness, envy-free,
etc.) and team efficiency (or common rewards) (Bertsimas,
Farias, and Trichakis 2012). In a distributed setting, agents
may have to negotiate back-and-forth to arrive at a final
allocation (Saha and Sen 2007). In the negotiation, agents
can either choose to accept an allocation proposed by other
agents or reject it; upon rejection, agents can propose an
alternative allocation that is more profitable for them and,
given their knowledge, still acceptable to others. While distributed negotiation-based allocations will at least keep the
agents happy with their lot (since they got what they negotiated for), it tends to have two major drawbacks for human
negotiators. First, an agent may not be fully aware of their
teammates’ costs and the performance metrics, resulting in

1
The proposed methods work even when this assumption is relaxed and AITA’s proposed allocation and explanation initiate a
conversation to elicit human preferences that were not specified
upfront. We plan to consider this longitudinal aspect in the future.

* The work was done while at Arizona State University

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10243

