The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GxVAEs: Two Joint VAEs Generate Hit Molecules from Gene Expression Profiles
Chen Li and Yoshihiro Yamanishi
Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan
li.chen.z2@a.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp, yamanishi@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp

requires over 1.8 billion US dollars in capital investment.
Despite rigorous pre-market drug testing, the failure rate of
candidate molecules has exceeded 90% (Shaker et al. 2021).
De novo molecular generation using artificial intelligence
(AI) techniques has emerged as a promising approach for
computer-aided drug discovery. The power of deep learning
and computational chemistry enables the generation of new
molecules with desired bioactivity for specific therapeutic
targets. Deep generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Guimaraes et al. 2017; De Cao
and Kipf 2018; Li et al. 2022) and variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Oliveira, Da Silva, and Quiles 2022; Dollar et al. 2021; Kusner, Paige, and Hernández-Lobato 2017;
Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018) accelerate the drug discovery process by employing computational models to generate molecules having a specific bioactivity. Such models
learn the underlying patterns and relationships within molecular structures by training on datasets of known molecules
with the desired properties. By capturing the essential features of molecules, deep generative models can produce
new molecules with similar structures and related properties. Most AI-driven molecular generation models focus on
the generation of new molecules with improved chemical
properties of interest. However, these approaches generate
molecules without considering the biological environment
and cellular context of a particular disease.
Generating hit-like molecules from omics data addresses
these limitations by considering the broader biological context to generate molecules that are more likely to interact effectively with disease-related cellular machinery (Born et al.
2021). Omics data, such as genomics, epigenomics, and
transcriptomics, provide a comprehensive molecular landscape for describing the human cellular response to drug
therapy and the pathological history of patients with disease
(Mun, Choi, and Lim 2020). Omics data that represents drug
activity are therefore an essential resource for modern drug
development. For example, gene expression profiles provide
valuable insights into the activity levels of genes in different
cellular contexts, including in specific diseases (Asyali et al.
2006). Gene expression profiles capture dynamic changes in
gene expression that occur in response to various physiological and pathological conditions. Analysis of gene expression
profiles provides insight into the cellular environment and its
impact on disease progression and therapeutic response.

Abstract
The de novo generation of hit-like molecules that show
bioactivity and drug-likeness is an important task in
computer-aided drug discovery. Although artificial intelligence can generate molecules with desired chemical properties, most previous studies have ignored the influence of
disease-related cellular environments. This study proposes
a novel deep generative model called GxVAEs to generate
hit-like molecules from gene expression profiles by leveraging two joint variational autoencoders (VAEs). The first
VAE, ProfileVAE, extracts latent features from gene expression profiles. The extracted features serve as the conditions
that guide the second VAE, which is called MolVAE, in generating hit-like molecules. GxVAEs bridge the gap between
molecular generation and the cellular environment in a biological system, and produce molecules that are biologically
meaningful in the context of specific diseases. Experiments
and case studies on the generation of therapeutic molecules
show that GxVAEs outperforms current state-of-the-art baselines and yield hit-like molecules with potential bioactivity
and drug-like properties. We were able to successfully generate the potential molecular structures with therapeutic effects
for various diseases from patients’ disease profiles.

Introduction
Hit identification, which involves discovering hit molecules
with the desired bioactivity and therapeutic effects within an
infinite chemical space, is a critical challenge in drug discovery (Dobson et al. 2004). Over 1060 organic molecules
theoretically exist, but only a limited number of these
molecules would have drug-like properties. Traditionally,
hit identification campaigns have been conducted using experimental approaches such as high-throughput screening
(HTS) (Hertzberg and Pope 2000). HTS provides a valuable
methodology for identifying hits with desired bioactivity
(Scannell et al. 2022). However, the hit rate observed in HTS
campaigns tends to be relatively low, which results in many
molecules that are inactive or that hold less promise being screened out (Rahman et al. 2022). Additionally, experimental approaches to drug discovery typically rely on laborintensive and time-consuming processes. Unfortunately, the
entire process of drug development takes up to 12 years and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13455

