The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Toward Open-Set Human Object Interaction Detection
Mingrui Wu1,2 * , Yuqi Liu1∗ , Jiayi Ji1† , Xiaoshuai Sun1,2 , Rongrong Ji1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
mingrui0001@gmail.com, liuyuqi@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jjyxmu@gmail.com , {xssun, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

lar intra-domain relationships, especially within the HICODET dataset. This leaves a gap in models truly adaptable
to real-world, open-set conditions. In response to the current gaps, we present VG-HOI, a comprehensive evaluation
benchmark that features over 17k relationships, covering a
broad spectrum of unfamiliar actions and objects. Our aim
is to mimic real-world scenarios as closely as possible with
a plethora of open-set interactions. The distinction between
zero-shot and open-set HOI detection is shown in Figure 1.
Most of the existing methods cannot be directly evaluated on VG-HOI due to their limited focus either on specific actions or restricted object categories. Current mainstream zero-shot HOI detection paradigms (Liao et al. 2022;
Ning et al. 2023) primarily function within closed-set object scenarios, involving the fine-tuning of object detectors
and interaction classifiers in a tightly integrated, end-toend manner. This often limits their scalability to new object categories. Conversely, emerging bottom-up HOI detection methods (Zhang, Campbell, and Gould 2022; Park,
Park, and Lee 2023) highlight the significance of powerful
bottom-up representations. Regrettably, these methods tend
to concentrate on closed-set scenarios, either with bottomup features focusing on object distinction or with the backbone fitting the long-tail pattern of the specified dataset, inevitably hampering their open-set detection and interactive
classification capabilities.
The recent merger of image-text contrastive learning with
the CLIP model (Radford et al. 2021) has significantly advanced open-set object detection (Liu et al. 2023). These
new methods excel at identifying various new object categories with precise bounding boxes. Alongside this, the
CLIP model, refined through training on extensive webscale data, is skilled at capturing strong visual representations. This juncture offers a promising chance to merge these
powerful models, propelling us toward open-set HOI detection. So, do we really need to repurpose these powerful object detectors or VLM backbone for HOI detection?
In light of this, we introduce the Disentangled HOI Detection (DHD) model, a straightforward bottom-up framework
that includes an open-set object detector, a visual and language model, and an interaction head. We extract bottom-up
features from VLM visual encoder with the bounding boxes
from the openset object detector. Then we attach lightweight
unary and pair-wise adapters to establish connections be-

This work is oriented toward the task of open-set Human Object Interaction (HOI) detection. The challenge lies in identifying completely new, out-of-domain relationships, as opposed to in-domain ones which have seen improvements in
zero-shot HOI detection. To address this challenge, we introduce a simple Disentangled HOI Detection (DHD) model for
detecting novel relationships by integrating an open-set object detector with a Visual Language Model (VLM). We utilize a disentangled image-text contrastive learning metric for
training and connect the bottom-up visual features to text embeddings through lightweight unary and pair-wise adapters.
Our model can benefit from the open-set object detector and
the VLM to detect novel action categories and combine actions with novel object categories. We further present the
VG-HOI dataset, a comprehensive benchmark with over 17k
HOI relationships for open-set scenarios. Experimental results show that our model can detect unknown action classes
and combine unknown object classes. Furthermore, it can
generalize to over 17k HOI classes while being trained on
just 600 HOI classes.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a pivotal task
in computer vision and artificial intelligence that facilitates
the understanding of visual scenes. It involves pinpointing
humans and objects within an image and understanding their
interactions. While significant strides have been made in traditional HOI detection, these advancements are primarily
in closed-set scenarios, with predefined and limited action
and object categories, e.g., the COCO (Lin et al. 2014) 80
object categories and 117 action categories in the HICODET (Chao et al. 2018) dataset. However, open-set HOI
detection, where novel object and action categories are not
explicitly known beforehand, remains an underexplored domain. This necessitates a shift from the traditional closed-set
mindset to a more adaptable and scalable paradigm.
Most current approaches (Hou et al. 2020, 2021b; Bansal
et al. 2020; Liao et al. 2022; Ning et al. 2023)are tailored
for zero-shot HOI detection, working on unseen but simi* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6066

