The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GLH-Water: A Large-Scale Dataset for Global Surface Water Detection in
Large-Size Very-High-Resolution Satellite Imagery
Yansheng Li1 , Bo Dang1 * , Wanchun Li1 , Yongjun Zhang1
1

Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
bodang@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Global surface water detection in very-high-resolution (VHR)
satellite imagery can directly serve major applications such
as refined flood mapping and water resource assessment. Although achievements have been made in detecting surface
water in small-size satellite images corresponding to local
geographic scales, datasets and methods suitable for mapping and analyzing global surface water have yet to be explored. To encourage the development of this task and facilitate the implementation of relevant applications, we propose the GLH-water dataset that consists of 250 satellite images and 40.96 billion pixels labeled surface water annotations that are distributed globally and contain water bodies
exhibiting a wide variety of types (e.g., rivers, lakes, and
ponds in forests, irrigated fields, bare areas, and urban areas). Each image is of the size 12,800 × 12,800 pixels at
0.3 meter spatial resolution. To build a benchmark for GLHwater, we perform extensive experiments employing representative surface water detection models, popular semantic
segmentation models, and ultra-high resolution segmentation
models. Furthermore, we also design a strong baseline with
the novel pyramid consistency loss (PCL) to initially explore this challenge, increasing IoU by 2.4% over the next
best baseline. Finally, we implement cross-dataset generalization and pilot area application experiments, and the superior
performance illustrates the strong generalization and practical application value of GLH-water dataset. Project page:
https://jack-bo1220.github.io/project/GLH-water.html

Figure 1: Visualization of the GLH-water dataset. We show
the geographical coverage of the samples. Several examples
from different continents are selected and their image acquisition times and scene descriptions are provided.
face water bodies have disappeared over the past 32 years,
and there have been significant changes in the geographical
distribution of surface water bodies. It is worth noting that
the use of satellite data with a spatial resolution of 30 meters
can result in the omission of small water bodies. Therefore,
more accurate mapping of surface water bodies at a global
or regional level is necessary to further explore the complex
distribution and changes of surface water bodies on Earth.
Similarly, the mapping of flood disaster also requires the introduction of satellite images with higher spatial resolution
to provide detailed spatial details (Wieland et al. 2023). This
enables accurate identification of flood-affected areas using
advanced water extraction methods and supports effective
guidance for human rescue efforts.
Compared to synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery, very-high-resolution (VHR) optical satellite imagery
(Ground Sampling Distance, GSD<5m) has the advantage
of providing clearer texture and detail information about wa-

Introduction
As one of the fundamental components of the Earth’s natural ecosystem, surface water plays a critical role in maintaining biodiversity, ecological balance, and the development of
human societies (Vörösmarty et al. 2010). Due to its wide
spatial and temporal distribution, using satellite imagery to
detect and map the global surface water is a feasible and convenient method, leading to promising breakthroughs that are
applied in the flood mapping (Wieland et al. 2023), surface
water changes (Donchyts et al. 2016; Pekel et al. 2016), and
other assessments of water resources (Wang et al. 2020b).
Previous researches (Pekel et al. 2016) have shown that
approximately 90,000 square kilometers of permanent sur* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22213

