The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

What Effects the Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning:
Policy Consistency with Truncated Return Prediction
Shuo Wang1, 2, 3 , Zhihao Wu1, 2 , Xiaobo Hu1, 2 , Jinwen Wang1, 2 , Youfang Lin1, 2 , Kai Lv1, 2, 3 *
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
National Key Laboratory of Air-based Information Perception and Fusion, Luoyang, China
{shuo.wang, zhwu, xiaobohu, 20291281, yflin, lvkai}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Training process

Ours

Previous

…

In visual Reinforcement Learning (RL), the challenge of generalization to new environments is paramount. This study pioneers a theoretical analysis of visual RL generalization, establishing an upper bound on the generalization objective,
encompassing policy divergence and Bellman error components. Motivated by this analysis, we propose maintaining the
cross-domain consistency for each policy in the policy space,
which can reduce the divergence of the learned policy during the test. In practice, we introduce the Truncated Return
Prediction (TRP) task, promoting cross-domain policy consistency by predicting truncated returns of historical trajectories. Moreover, we also propose a Transformer-based predictor for this auxiliary task. Extensive experiments on DeepMind Control Suite and Robotic Manipulation tasks demonstrate that TRP achieves state-of-the-art generalization performance. We further demonstrate that TRP outperforms previous methods in terms of sample efficiency during training.

policy 1 policy 2
Domains 1

2

1

Learned policy

policy n

2

1

2

1

2

… 𝒏

Test

Policy shift

Policy space

Policy space

Figure 1: Sketch of our methods. Previous methods improve
generalization by learning one policy that performs well
across multiple domains. In contrast, we maintain crossdomain consistency across various policies. Our approach
demonstrates a lower policy shift, particularly in scenarios
with limited domains.

Introduction
Visual reinforcement learning has garnered significant attention recently and witnessed notable advancements (James
and Davison 2022; Hafner et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023;
Hu et al. 2023). High-dimensional image observation contains lots of task-irrelevant information, which disturbs the
policy. Moreover, the policy is prone to overfit the training
environment, which hinders generalization to unseen environments. In this work, we focus on generalization in visual
RL. Specifically, we address scenarios where observations
from test environments are unobserved during training, yet
the state space and underlying dynamics remain consistent.
Domain randomization and data augmentation show great
potential for learning an invariant representation in computer
vision (Zhao, Queralta, and Westerlund 2020; Shorten and
Khoshgoftaar 2019). Many works have recently utilized various data augmentations for visual RL and achieved significant improvement. Previous research can be divided into
two main categories: 1) methods that utilize advanced visual processing and 2) methods that leverage reinforcement
learning structures. For visual processing, some works try to
extract foreground information for policies. The others learn

an invariant representation for the same state. For leveraging
RL structures, various consistency are proposed based on inherent RL characteristics, e.g., temporal difference equation,
transition function, and intrinsic reward function. However,
the above works only empirically validate effectiveness and
lack theoretical support.
In this study, we theoretically present an upper bound for
the generalization objective. The upper bound is composed
of two main components: 1) policy divergence, representing distribution dissimilarity in state-action distribution for
a policy executed across different domains, and 2) Bellman
error, illustrating the discrepancy between the training policy and the optimal policy. To the best of our knowledge, this
study represents the pioneering attempt to present a theoretical analysis for visual RL generalization.
For the first component of the upper bound, previous
methods (Hansen and Wang 2021; Hansen, Su, and Wang
2021) create various augmented domains with randomized
styles to learn a well-generalized policy as shown in Figure 1. However, providing many domains suitable for the
task is quite challenging. Alternatively, we propose maintaining cross-domain consistency for each policy in the policy space. Notably, acquiring different policies is more fea-

* Corresponding author: Kai Lv (lvkai@bjtu.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5590

