The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Target Propagation by Deriving Analytical Solution
Yanhao Bao1 , Tatsukichi Shibuya1 , Ikuro Sato1,2 , Rei Kawakami1 , Nakamasa Inoue1
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology
2
Denso IT Laboratory
bao.y.ab@m.titech.ac.jp, shibuya.t.ad@m.titech.ac.jp, isato@c.titech.ac.jp, reikawa@sc.e.titech.ac.jp, inoue@c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract

𝑤𝑓0

Exploring biologically plausible algorithms as alternatives to
error backpropagation (BP) is a challenging research topic
in artificial intelligence. It also provides insights into the
brain’s learning methods. Recently, when combined with
well-designed feedback loss functions such as Local Difference Reconstruction Loss (LDRL) and through hierarchical
training of feedback pathway synaptic weights, Target Propagation (TP) has achieved performance comparable to BP
in image classification tasks. However, with an increase in
the number of network layers, the tuning and training cost
of feedback weights escalates. Drawing inspiration from the
work of Ernoult et al., we propose a training method that
seeks the optimal solution for feedback weights. This method
enhances the efficiency of feedback training by analytically
minimizing feedback loss, allowing the feedback layer to skip
certain local training iterations. More specifically, we introduce the Jacobian matching loss (JML) for feedback training.
We also proactively implement layers designed to derive analytical solutions that minimize JML. Through experiments,
we have validated the effectiveness of this approach. Using
the CIFAR-10 dataset, our method showcases accuracy levels comparable to state-of-the-art TP methods. Furthermore,
we have explored its effectiveness in more intricate network
architectures.

Input

𝑤𝑓1

𝐹0

x

ℎ1

𝐹1

ℎ2
𝐽1∗

𝑡1
𝐺1∗

𝑤𝑓𝑁−1

𝐹𝑛
Feed forward path
...

𝑡2

𝜔2

𝐹𝑁−1

ℎ𝑁

JMLs: 𝐽∗

𝐽𝑁∗

𝐽2∗

𝐺2∗
𝜔1

𝑤𝑓𝑛

Analytical solution: 𝐺 ∗

...

Feedback path

𝐺𝑛∗
𝜔𝑛

𝑡𝑁

y

∗
𝐺𝑁−1

𝜔𝑁−1

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed model architecture.
Minimizing JMLs provides G∗ , the analytical feedback
function, thereby avoiding the need for training the feedback
network and enhancing the training efficiency of target propagation. See Section for variable definitions.
propagate errors. These studies highlighted that a fixed random matrix can indeed support learning in neural networks,
indicating that symmetric weight matrices in backpropagation might not be essential. However, follow-up studies (Bartunov et al. 2018; Launay et al. 2020) have suggested that,
while this approach works for simpler tasks, it struggles
when applied to more complex ones.
Target propagation (TP) (LeCun 1986; Le Cun, Galland,
and Hinton 1988; Bengio 2014) is a biologically more plausible feedback algorithm than the error backpropagation
which updates network parameters with layer-wise local
loss. Many studies have shown that TP and its variants are
effective for training deep neural networks (Bengio 2014;
Lee et al. 2015; Ororbia and Mali 2019; Meulemans et al.
2020; Ernoult et al. 2022; Manchev and Spratling 2020).
However, there is still room for improvement in the efficiency of training feedback networks. Similar to a series of
work on Local Representation Alignment (LRA) (Ororbia
et al. 2018; Ororbia and Mali 2019; Ororbia et al. 2020),
the fixed-weight feedback network (Shibuya et al. 2023) that
omits feedback parameter updates is the most efficient TP
algorithm but it does not perform as well as BP.
In deep neural networks, a fundamental difficulty of feedback training is caused by the complexity of feedforward
architectures. For example, even with simple convolutional
networks such as VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015)

Introduction
Backpropagation (BP) (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams
1986) provides an efficient and feasible method for deep
learning to train complex neural network models and has
significantly contributed to the growth of the neural network domain. However, BP has been criticized since its
widespread use as a biologically implausible algorithm because of its difficulty in making connections with the learning process of the human brain (Crick 1989; Roelfsema and
Ooyen 2005). An issue with BP is pointed out that it lacks
the utilization of local information (Lillicrap et al. 2020).
Developing biologically plausible algorithms is important,
not only to improve machine learning techniques but also to
enhance our understanding of how the brain functions.
Former studies (Lillicrap et al. 2016; Nøkland 2016) have
adjusted the backpropagation path, using a random matrix to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11016

