The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Frozen CLIP Transformer Is an Efficient Point Cloud Encoder
Xiaoshui Huang1 * , Zhou Huang2 * , Sheng Li3 * , Wentao Qu4
Tong He1† , Yuenan Hou1 , Yifan Zuo2† , Wanli Ouyang1
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2

Abstract
The pretrain-finetune paradigm has achieved great success
in NLP and 2D image fields because of the high-quality
representation ability and transferability of their pretrained
models. However, pretraining such a strong model is difficult in the 3D point cloud field due to the limited amount
of point cloud sequences. This paper introduces Efficient
Point Cloud Learning (EPCL), an effective and efficient point
cloud learner for directly training high-quality point cloud
models with a frozen CLIP transformer. Our EPCL connects
the 2D and 3D modalities by semantically aligning the image
features and point cloud features without paired 2D-3D data.
Specifically, the input point cloud is divided into a series of
local patches, which are converted to token embeddings by
the designed point cloud tokenizer. These token embeddings
are concatenated with a task token and fed into the frozen
CLIP transformer to learn point cloud representation. The intuition is that the proposed point cloud tokenizer projects the
input point cloud into a unified token space that is similar to
the 2D images. Comprehensive experiments on 3D detection,
semantic segmentation, classification and few-shot learning
demonstrate that the CLIP transformer can serve as an efficient point cloud encoder and our method achieves promising performance on both indoor and outdoor benchmarks. In
particular, performance gains brought by our EPCL are 19.7
AP50 on ScanNet V2 detection, 4.4 mIoU on S3DIS segmentation and 1.2 mIoU on SemanticKITTI segmentation compared to contemporary pretrained models. Code is available
at https://github.com/XiaoshuiHuang/EPCL.

Figure 1: (a) Traditional paradigm fine-tunes the whole
model, while our method only fine-tunes the tokenizer (T)
and head (H). The CLIP transformer, which is initialized
from the original CLIP weight, is kept frozen during training. (b) Our EPCL brings accuracy gains with higher training efficiency compared to SOTA pre-training methods.

The CLIP models (Radford et al. 2021) are strong pretrained models, which are trained in the contrastive manner by leveraging more than 400 million image-text pairs.
The impressive performance of CLIP models on few-shot
and zero-shot tasks is attributed to the powerful representation learned from the large quantity of pretraining data and
the inherent alignment between the image and language domains.
However, directly applying the pretrain-finetune
paradigm to the point cloud field will confront great
difficulties due to the scarcity of training samples as well
as the inherent domain gap between point cloud and image
domains. For instance, the majority of pretraining methods
(Pang et al. 2022; Qian et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Xie et al.
2020; Huang et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2023) are trained
with limited data, ShapeNet (Chang et al. 2015) or ScanNet
datasets (Dai et al. 2017). ShapeNet contains about 50,
000 objects and ScanNet contains 1, 513 room scans (Xie
et al. 2020). Compared to the pretraining data of CLIP,
the number of training samples in the point cloud field is
merely ten thousandth. The prior knowledge learned from
the limited training samples is also limited.
Inspired by the great success of CLIP, we ask a question:
can we apply the CLIP transformer to point cloud tasks as
a pretrained encoder? If the answer is yes, the 2D and 3D
modalities are bridged and we can leverage the pretrained
CLIP transformer for learning effective representations in
the point cloud field. In this condition, the heavy reliance on

Introduction
Recently, the pretrain-finetune paradigm has achieved great
success in natural language processing (NLP) (Chowdhery
et al. 2022; Gu et al. 2021) and 2D image fields (Alayrac
et al. 2022; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Radford et al. 2021).
In the pretrain-finetune paradigm, a backbone is first pretrained on a large-scale dataset to learn general and transferable representations. Then, the pretrained model is finetuned on training samples of the downstream task to learn
task-specific knowledge.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2382

