The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Patch-Wise Graph Contrastive Learning for Image Translation
Chanyong Jung1 , Gihyun Kwon1 , Jong Chul Ye1, 2
1

Department of Brain and Bio Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{ jcy132, cyclomon, jong.ye }@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, patch-wise contrastive learning is drawing attention for the image translation by exploring the semantic correspondence between the input and output images. To further explore the patch-wise topology for high-level semantic understanding, here we exploit the graph neural network
to capture the topology-aware features. Specifically, we construct the graph based on the patch-wise similarity from a pretrained encoder, whose adjacency matrix is shared to enhance
the consistency of patch-wise relation between the input and
the output. Then, we obtain the node feature from the graph
neural network, and enhance the correspondence between the
nodes by increasing mutual information using the contrastive
loss. In order to capture the hierarchical semantic structure,
we further propose the graph pooling. Experimental results
demonstrate the state-of-art results for the image translation
thanks to the semantic encoding by the constructed graphs.

Introduction
Image-to-image translation task is a conditional image generation task in which the model converts the input image
into target domain while preserving the content structure of
the given input image. The seminar works of image translation models used paired training setting (Isola et al. 2017),
or cycle-consistency training (Zhu et al. 2017) for content
preservation. However, the models have disadvantages in
that they require paired dataset or need complex training
procedure with additional networks. To overcome the problems, later works introduced one-sided image translation by
removing the cycle-consistency (Fu et al. 2019; Benaim and
Wolf 2017).
Recently, inspired by the success of contrastive learning
strategies, Contrastive Unpaired Translation (CUT) (Park
et al. 2020) is proposed to enhance the correspondence between the input and the output images by the patch-wise
contrastive learning. The patch-wise contrastive learning is
further improved by exploring patch-wise relation such as
adversarial hard negative samples (Wang et al. 2021), patchwise similarity map (Zheng, Cham, and Cai 2021), or consistency regularization combined with hard negative mining
by patch-wise relation (Jung, Kwon, and Ye 2022). Although

Figure 1: The semantic connectivity of input is extracted by
the encoder, and shared to construct the graph network. We
maximize the mutual information between the nodes.

these methods show meaningful improvement in the performance, they still have a limitation in that the previous works
focused only on the individual point-wise matching for each
pair, which does not consider the topology with the neighbors (Zhou et al. 2021).
To further explore the semantic relationship between the
patches, this paper considers image translation tasks as
topology-aware representation learning as shown in Fig. 1.
Specifically, we propose a novel framework based on the
patch-wise graph constrastive learning using the Graph Neural Network (GNN) which is commonly used to extract the
feature considering the topological structure.
Several existing works have utilized GNN to capture
topology-aware features for various tasks. Hierarchical representation with graph partitioning is proposed for the un-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13013

