The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Neural Network Generalization on Data-limited Regression
with Doubly-Robust Boosting
Hao Wang
Zhejiang University
haohaow@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Enhancing the generalization performance of neural networks
given limited data availability remains a formidable challenge,
due to the model selection trade-off between training error
and generalization gap. To handle this challenge, we present a
posterior optimization issue, specifically designed to reduce
the generalization error of trained neural networks. To operationalize this concept, we propose a Doubly-Robust Boosting
machine (DRBoost) which consists of a statistical learner and a
zero-order optimizer. The statistical learner reduces the model
capacity and thus the generalization gap; the zero-order optimizer minimizes the training error in a gradient-free manner.
The two components cooperate to reduce the generalization
error of a fully trained neural network in a doubly robust
manner. Furthermore, the statistical learner alleviates the multicollinearity in the discriminative layer and enhances the generalization performance. The zero-order optimizer eliminates
the reliance on gradient calculation and offers more flexibility
in learning objective selection. Experiments demonstrate that
DRBoost improves the generalization performance of various
prevalent neural network backbones effectively.

1

Introduction

Since the development of backward propagation and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods (Schneider, Balles, and
Hennig 2019; Kingma and Ba 2015), neural network training
has greatly benefited from the efficiency due to the implicit
dynamic programming mechanism. Despite its widespread
success in various fundamental domains, recent work investigates the limitations and bottlenecks of SGD-based algorithm
for neural network training (Hinton 2022; Ren et al. 2022).
Building upon these recent advances, the limitations of
SGD manifest as three aspects. Firstly, multicollinearity becomes prominent when the parameter count surpasses the
sample size. This issue is pertinent in neural networks trained
with SGD, where the mini-batch size is often smaller than the
parameter count. Such multicollinearity leads to less reliable
parameter estimates and increases the network’s sensitivity to
data noise, ultimately hampering generalization (Alin 2010).
Secondly, there is a notable disparity between ground-truth
metrics and their surrogate counterparts. Metrics of primary
interest in downstream tasks, such as the AUC in ranking

tasks and the DCG in retrieval tasks (Li et al. 2023a; Zhou
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022), are often non-differentiable
and thus incompatible with SGD. This necessitates the use
of surrogate losses like cross-entropy, which, despite advantages like strong convexity (Rosasco et al. 2004), introduces
a surrogate gap and thereby an approximation error to the
learning process (van der Hoeven 2020; Marcotte and Savard
1992). Lastly, the model selection trade-off poses a significant
challenge, as elucidated by Vapnik (1999). This trade-off is
characterized by a seesaw effect: simpler models have smaller
generalization gaps but higher training errors, whereas larger
models could achieve lower training errors at the cost of
larger generalization gaps. This counterbalance complicates
model selection and limits model generalization performance,
especially in scenarios with low data availability (Wang et al.
2023a; Chu, Rathbun, and Li 2020; Chu et al. 2023b).
In response to the challenges presented above, in this work,
we investigate an innovative post-optimization issue: optimizing networks that have been trained with SGD to boost
generalization performance. To operationalize this concept,
we construct Doubly Robust Boosting machine (DRBoost),
harmonizing statistical learning and zero-order optimization
techniques to enhance generalization. The statistical learner
is employed to mitigate multicollinearity and reduce the generalization gap by limiting model capacity. However, it inherently precludes gradient computation. Therefore, the zeroorder optimizer is utilized as an alternative to SGD, to reduce
training error without reliance on gradient calculations. The
integration of the two components could mitigate the complexities associated with multicollinearity and surrogate gaps
and improve the generalization performance of neural networks. To summarize our contributions:
• We introduce the concept of post-optimization for fully
trained networks, a novel paradigm aimed at calibrating
SGD-trained neural networks to enhance their capabilities.
• We develop DRBoost, a pioneering approach unifying zeroorder optimization and statistical learning techniques to improve neural network generalization. The statistical learner
also mitigates multicollinearity issues in neural networks.
The zero-order optimizer bypasses the surrogate gap, offering more flexibility in the choice of metrics to optimize.
• We conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets
to verify the efficacy of DRBoost in diverse settings.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20821

