The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fast and Controllable Post-training Sparsity:
Learning Optimal Sparsity Allocation with Global Constraint in Minutes
Ruihao Gong1,2 , Yang Yong2 , Zining Wang1 , Jinyang Guo3,1 , Xiuying Wei2 , Yuqing Ma3,1 ,
Xianglong Liu1 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University
2
SenseTime Research
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
{gongruihao, 19373122, jinyangguo, mayuqing, xlliu}@buaa.edu.cn, {yongyang, weixiuying}@sensetime.com
Abstract
Neural network sparsity has attracted many research interests
due to its similarity to biological schemes and high energy
efficiency. However, existing methods depend on long-time
training or fine-tuning, which prevents large-scale applications. Recently, some works focusing on post-training sparsity (PTS) have emerged. They get rid of the high training
cost but usually suffer from distinct accuracy degradation due
to neglect of the reasonable sparsity rate at each layer. Previous methods for finding sparsity rates mainly focus on the
training-aware scenario, which usually fails to converge stably under the PTS setting with limited data and much less
training cost. In this paper, we propose a fast and controllable post-training sparsity (FCPTS) framework. By incorporating a differentiable bridge function and a controllable optimization objective, our method allows for rapid and accurate
sparsity allocation learning in minutes, with the added assurance of convergence to a predetermined global sparsity rate.
Equipped with these techniques, we can surpass the state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin, e.g., over 30% improvement for ResNet-50 on ImageNet under the sparsity rate of
80%. Our plug-and-play code and supplementary materials
are open-sourced at https://github.com/ModelTC/FCPTS.

Figure 1: Comparison with existing post-training sparsity
methods on ImageNet ResNet-50. Our FCPTS enjoys significant accuracy improvement, especially for the extremely
high sparsity rates (e.g., 30% boost under 80% sparsity).

be stored in special formats that consume less memory. Due
to the advantage of low inference cost, low memory requirement, and high generalization ability, model sparsity has attracted much research interest in the community.
However, despite the benefit of inference performance for
model sparsification, recovering the accuracy of sparse models is non-trivial. Most methods need to retrain the model for
a long time with a large amount of data. It usually takes several hours and even several days when the training dataset
is huge, bringing obstacles for large-scale applications in
all walks of life. Recently, POT (Lazarevich, Kozlov, and
Malinin 2021) proposes to sparsify a neural network in a
post-training way without training labels, significantly decreasing the cost of producing a sparse model. They reconstruct the sparse weight layer by layer to improve the accuracy. However, to achieve comparable performance with the
dense counterpart, its maximal overall sparsity rate can only
reach 50%. When the sparsity level increases, accuracy will
crash quickly. This reveals that pushing the limit of posttraining sparsity to a higher sparsity level is still challenging. To overcome this challenge, we first identified that the
bottleneck of current PTS methods lies in sparsity rate al-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in a variety of fields, including computer vision, natural language processing, and information retrieval. However, when deploying DNNs on resource-limited edge devices, reducing the memory footprint of neural networks
and improving energy efficiency become crucial problems.
Therefore, various compression techniques are proposed to
make the models efficient (Tan et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021b;
Wei et al. 2022b; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Jacob
et al. 2018; Gong et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021a; Zhu et al.
2020). Among these compression techniques, model sparsity, which prunes the unimportant weights to zero, relates
most with the biological brains. Several studies (Hoefler
et al. 2021; Jacob et al. 2018; Gopalakrishnan et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2020, 2021; Yuan et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2023)
demonstrate that sparsity can contribute to a more robust
and generalized model. Additionally, sparsified weights can
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12190

