The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Diffusion-Based Image Restoration with Error Contraction and Error
Correction
Qiqi Bao1 , Zheng Hui2 , Rui Zhu3 , Peiran Ren2 , Xuansong Xie2 , Wenming Yang1 *
1

Tsinghua University
Institute for Intelligent computing, Alibaba Group
3
City, University of London
bqq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zheng hui@aliyun.com, rui.zhu@city.ac.uk,
peiran r@sohu.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com, yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Generative diffusion prior captured from the off-the-shelf denoising diffusion generative model has recently attained significant interest. However, several attempts have been made
to adopt diffusion models to noisy inverse problems either fail
to achieve satisfactory results or require a few thousand iterations to achieve high-quality reconstructions. In this work, we
propose a diffusion-based image restoration with error contraction and error correction (DiffECC) method. Two strategies are introduced to contract the restoration error in the
posterior sampling process. First, we combine existing CNNbased approaches with diffusion models to ensure data consistency from the beginning. Second, to amplify the error
contraction effects of the noise, a restart sampling algorithm
is designed. In the error correction strategy, the estimationcorrection idea is proposed on both the data term and the prior
term. Solving them iteratively within the diffusion sampling
framework leads to superior image generation results. Experimental results for image restoration tasks such as superresolution (SR), Gaussian deblurring, and motion deblurring
demonstrate that our approach can reconstruct high-quality
images compared with state-of-the-art sampling-based diffusion models.

Figure 1: An example visualization of the intermediate results for the prediction of x̂0|t in DPS (Chung et al. 2023).
adding Gaussian noise to the input data that maps data to
noise. During the reverse sampling process, diffusion models start with a pure Gaussian noise image and progressively
sample a less noisy image until reaching a clean one. Such
diffusion models use the parameterized prior of the highdimensional data distributions. In addition to the unconditional generative power, diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in solving inverse problems (Wang, Yu,
and Zhang 2022; Abu-Hussein, Tirer, and Giryes 2022;
Meng and Kabashima 2022; Kawar et al. 2022b; Song et al.
2023; Fabian, Tinaz, and Soltanolkotabi 2023; Murata et al.
2023; Song et al. 2021; Chung, Lee, and Ye 2023). Chung et
al. (Chung et al. 2023) proposed a Diffusion Posterior Sampling (DPS) method for solving general noisy non-linear
inverse problems. However, adapting denoising diffusion
models from the pure Gaussian noise for image restoration behaves slowly in sampling. DPS requires a few hundreds iterations to achieve high-quality reconstructions. Denoising Diffusion Null-Space Model (DDNM) (Wang, Yu,
and Zhang 2022) decomposes samples into the range-space
and the null-space of the measurement. By refining the
null-space during the reverse diffusion process, DDNM assures data consistency and incorporates priors from diffusion models. Though DDNM ensures data consistency from
the beginning that helps reduce iterations, the ability to generate images with higher quality is constrained.
In this work, we depend on generative priors from pretrained unconditional diffusion models. Data distribution is
modeled regardless of the forward measurement operator

Introduction
Low-level vision tasks in image restoration, such as image
denoising, image super-resolution (SR), and image deblurring can be cast as inverse problems y = A(x) + n, where x
stands for the original image, A(·) is the forward measurement operator and n represents the noise. The inverse problems aim to infer the underlying signal from measurements
and yield a high-quality image.
Recently, diffusion models (Song et al. 2020; Song and
Ermon 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Nichol and Dhariwal 2021; Karras et al. 2022;
Chung, Sim, and Ye 2022a; Mokady et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2023; Permenter and Yuan 2023) have shown state-of-theart performance in image generation compared to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs).
Diffusion models define a forward process by gradually
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

756

