The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Unified Knowledge Transfer Network for Generalized Category Discovery
Wenkai Shi1,3 ,Wenbin An1,3 ,Feng Tian2,3 * ,Yan Chen2 ,Yaqiang Wu4 ,Qianying Wang4 ,Ping Chen5
1

School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analytics
4
Lenovo Research
5
Department of Engineering, University of Massachusetts Boston
shiyibai778@gmail.com, {fengtian,chenyan}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
wenbinan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {wuyqe, wangqya}@lenovo.com, ping.chen@umb.edu
2

Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to recognize
both known and novel categories in an unlabeled dataset
by leveraging another labeled dataset with only known categories. Without considering knowledge transfer from known
to novel categories, current methods usually perform poorly
on novel categories due to the lack of corresponding supervision. To mitigate this issue, we propose a unified Knowledge
Transfer Network (KTN), which solves two obstacles to
knowledge transfer in GCD. First, the mixture of known and
novel categories in unlabeled data makes it difficult to identify transfer candidates (i.e., samples with novel categories).
For this, we propose an entropy-based method that leverages
knowledge in the pre-trained classifier to differentiate known
and novel categories without requiring extra data or parameters. Second, the lack of prior knowledge of novel categories
presents challenges in quantifying semantic relationships between categories to decide the transfer weights. For this, we
model different categories with prototypes and treat their similarities as transfer weights to measure the semantic similarities between categories. On the basis of two treatments,
we transfer knowledge from known to novel categories by
conducting pre-adjustment of logits and post-adjustment of
labels for transfer candidates based on the transfer weights
between different categories. With the weighted adjustment,
KTN can generate more accurate pseudo-labels for unlabeled data, which helps to learn more discriminative features
and boost model performance on novel categories. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms stateof-the-art models on all evaluation metrics across multiple
benchmark datasets. Furthermore, different from previous
clustering-based methods that can only work offline with
abundant data, KTN can be deployed online conveniently
with faster inference speed. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/yibai-shi/KTN.

Figure 1: Prediction entropy (bar) of pre-trained classifier
and corresponding mean value (dotted line) on BANKING
dataset. Green ones are for known categories, and blue ones
are for novel categories.
cannot discover novel categories from unlabeled corpus. To
cope with this limitation, many works in NLP (Lin, Xu, and
Zhang 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; An et al. 2023a) and CV
(Yu et al. 2022) were conducted, and Vaze et al. (2022) formalized the setting of these works as Generalized Category
Discovery (GCD). GCD aims to identify both known and
novel categories in unlabeled data, leveraging labeled data
with only known categories, which can help models tackle
unpredictable novel categories without extra labeling costs.
Existing GCD methods (Zhang et al. 2021; An et al.
2023b; Yu et al. 2022; Vaze et al. 2022) usually adopt
a two-stage training strategy: pre-training on labeled data,
then clustering unlabeled data with acquired knowledge in
a semi-supervised manner. However, without transferring
knowledge from known to novel categories, these methods
usually perform poorly on novel categories due to the lack
of corresponding supervision. Intuitively, although transferring knowledge from known to novel categories helps compensate for the supervision, this transfer will be hindered
by two obstacles in GCD settings. The first is the ambiguity
of transfer candidates (i.e., samples with novel categories).
Considering the dilemma where known and novel categories

Introduction
Although current machine learning methods have achieved
impressive performance on many NLP tasks, they often fail
to meet requirements in the real world. For instance, general
text classification models trained on pre-defined categories
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18961

