The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TNPAR: Topological Neural Poisson Auto-Regressive Model for Learning
Granger Causal Structure from Event Sequences
Yuequn Liu1 , Ruichu Cai1,2 * , Wei Chen1 , Jie Qiao1 , Yuguang Yan1 , Zijian Li1,3 , Keli Zhang4 ,
Zhifeng Hao5
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Paris, France
5
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
{weanyq, cairuichu, chenweidelight, qiaojie.chn}@gmail.com, ygyan@gdut.edu.cn, leizigin@gmail.com,
zhangkeli1@huawei.com, haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn
(𝑏) True causal structure

(𝑎) Topological event sequences

Abstract

𝒗𝟏

P!* (𝑡" )

𝑛!

Learning Granger causality from event sequences is a challenging but essential task across various applications. Most
existing methods rely on the assumption that event sequences
are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However,
this i.i.d. assumption is often violated due to the inherent dependencies among the event sequences. Fortunately, in practice, we find these dependencies can be modeled by a topological network, suggesting a potential solution to the noni.i.d. problem by introducing the prior topological network
into Granger causal discovery. This observation prompts us
to tackle two ensuing challenges: 1) how to model the event
sequences while incorporating both the prior topological network and the latent Granger causal structure, and 2) how to
learn the Granger causal structure. To this end, we devise a
unified topological neural Poisson auto-regressive model with
two processes. In the generation process, we employ a variant
of the neural Poisson process to model the event sequences,
considering influences from both the topological network and
the Granger causal structure. In the inference process, we formulate an amortized inference algorithm to infer the latent
Granger causal structure. We encapsulate these two processes
within a unified likelihood function, providing an end-to-end
framework for this task. Experiments on simulated and realworld data demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

𝒗𝟐

𝒗𝟑

P!+ (𝑡# )

𝑛"

P!, (𝑡$ )

(𝑐) Not True causal structure
𝒗𝟏

P!* (𝑡% )

𝑛&
𝑡'

𝑡!

𝑡"

𝑡&

𝑡(

𝑡)

𝒗𝟑

𝒗𝟐

Figure 1: An example of the topological event sequences
generated by a mobile network in an operation and maintenance scenario. In this context, {n1 , n2 , n3 } represent the
network elements, and {v1 , v2 , v3 } denote the event types of
the alarms. The term Pv1 (t1 ) stands for the distribution of
v1 alarm at t1 timestamp, and so on. Black arrows represent
the correct causal edges, whereas the red arrow represents an
incorrect edge. (a) Generation process of topological event
sequences. The event distribution varies with time and is influenced by both a topological network (connected by the
solid lines) and a Granger causal structure (depicted in part
(b)). (b) Ground truth of the Granger causal structure. (c)
Granger causal structure learned under i.i.d. assumption.

Introduction

causal structure, and 2) point process-based methods, which
employ point processes to model the generation process
of event sequences. While the former, including methods
such as PCMCI (PC with Momentary Conditional Independence test) (Runge 2020) and transfer entropy-based methods (Chen et al. 2020; Mijatovic et al. 2021), is founded on
strict assumptions of the causal mechanism assumptions, the
latter, like Hawkes process-based methods (Xu, Farajtabar,
and Zha 2016; Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013) and neural point
process models (Shchur et al. 2021), is based on the concept of Granger causality (Granger 1969). Given the weaker
assumption of Granger causality, identifying the Granger
causal structure just by assessing if a sequence is predictive
of another, point process-based methods often find preference in real-world applications (Shojaie and Fox 2022) and
are therefore the focal point of this work.

Causal discovery from multi-type event sequences is important in many applications. In the realm of intelligent operation and maintenance, identifying the causal structure
behind alarm sequences can expedite the location of root
causes (Vuković and Thalmann 2022). In social analysis,
recovering the causal structure behind users’ behavior sequences can inform the development of effective advertising
strategies (Chen et al. 2020).
Lots of methods have been proposed for causal discovery from multi-type event sequences. They fall into two
main categories: 1) constraint-based methods, which utilize independence-based tests or measures to estimate the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20491

