The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Robust Mutual-Reinforcing Framework for 3D Multi-Modal Medical Image
Fusion Based on Visual-Semantic Consistency
Hao Zhang1 * , Xuhui Zuo1 * , Huabing Zhou2 , Tao Lu2 , Jiayi Ma1†
1

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205, China
zhpersonalbox@gmail.com, zuoxh2001@163.com, zhouhuabing@gmail.com, lutxyl@gmail.com, jyma2010@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Multi-modal Data

This work proposes a robust 3D medical image fusion framework to establish a mutual-reinforcing mechanism between
visual fusion and lesion segmentation, achieving their double improvement. Specifically, we explore the consistency between vision and semantics by sharing feature fusion modules. Through the coupled optimization of the visual fusion loss and the lesion segmentation loss, visual-related
and semantic-related features will be pulled into the same
domain, effectively promoting accuracy improvement in a
mutual-reinforcing manner. Further, we establish the robustness guarantees by constructing a two-level refinement constraint in the process of feature extraction and reconstruction. Benefiting from full consideration for common degradations in medical images, our framework can not only provide
clear visual fusion results for doctor’s observation, but also
enhance the defense ability of lesion segmentation against
these negatives. Extensive evaluations of visual fusion and
lesion segmentation scenarios demonstrate the advantages
of our method in terms of accuracy and robustness. Moreover, our proposed framework is generic, which can be wellcompatible with existing lesion segmentation algorithms and
improve their performance. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/HaoZhang1018/RMR-Fusion.

Visual-related
Features

Semantic-related
Features

Visual
Fusion

Lesion
Segmentation

(a) Separate manner

Multi-modal Data
Visual-related
Features

Semantic-related
Features

Mutual Reinforcing
Visual
Fusion

Lesion
Segmentation

(b) Proposed method

Figure 1: Existing methods treating visual fusion and lesion
segmentation as (a) separate issues, and our proposed (b)
mutual-reinforcing framework.

It serves intelligent medical diagnostic machines, conducting lesion analysis by combining multi-modal medical images from the semantic perspective. Lesion segmentation is
a typical semantic fusion technology, which is dedicated to
pixel-level localization and classification of lesions (Zhang
et al. 2023). Without loss of generality, we continue the following discussion using lesion segmentation as a representative of semantic fusion.
In recent years, a lot of deep multi-modal medical image fusion methods have been proposed to solve the problems of visual fusion (Ma et al. 2020) and lesion segmentation (Li et al. 2020). However, most of these methods treat
them as two separate issues, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). For these
methods, the consistent way to achieve performance improvements is to design better distance measures (Xue et al.
2021) for optimization guidance and deeper network architectures (Dolz et al. 2019) for nonlinear fitting within their
own domain of knowledge. Nevertheless, without introducing new priors for model solving, performance bottlenecks
in both visual fusion and lesion segmentation will inevitably
arise under such a separate paradigm. In addition, the rigor
of the medical field requires that related methods must be
quite tolerant of image degradations. Otherwise, a slight perturbation to the source images may lead to serious medical
accidents. Unfortunately, few existing multi-modal medical
image fusion methods (Xu et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2022b)

Introduction
Multi-modal medical image fusion aims to combine the
different-attribute information of the body, giving visually
more informative fused results (Xu and Ma 2021; Tang
et al. 2022) or locating the lesions (Zhou et al. 2022; Fang
and Wang 2022) more accurately. According to its intended
use, the broad concept of multi-modal medical image fusion can be categorized into two specific types. i) Visual
fusion (Zhang et al. 2020a; Li et al. 2023). Its target audience is the medical doctor, which integrates multi-modal
medical images into a single image or cube data, aiming
to provide high-quality visual results with sufficient tissue
structure information and significant functional pathological distribution. Then, the doctors can observe the generated
visual fusion results to make a diagnosis with the support
of long-term accumulated experience. ii) Semantic fusion.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7087

