The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Continual Anomaly Detection with Contrastively-Learned Prompt
Jiaqi Liu1 * , Kai Wu2∗ , Qiang Nie2 , Ying Chen2 , Bin-Bin Gao2 ,
Yong Liu2 , Jinbao Wang1 , Chengjie Wang2,3 , Feng Zheng1†
1

Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
liujq32021@mail.sustech.edu.cn, lloydwu@tencent.com, stephennie@tencent.com, mumuychen@tencent.com,
csgaobb@gmail.com, choasliu@tencent.com, linkingring@163.com, jasoncjwang@tencent.com, zfeng02@gmail.com
Testing samples

Training samples

Abstract
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection (UAD) with incremental training is crucial in industrial manufacturing, as unpredictable defects make obtaining sufficient labeled data infeasible. However, continual learning methods primarily rely on
supervised annotations, while the application in UAD is limited due to the absence of supervision. Current UAD methods train separate models for different classes sequentially,
leading to catastrophic forgetting and a heavy computational
burden. To address this issue, we introduce a novel Unsupervised Continual Anomaly Detection framework called
UCAD, which equips the UAD with continual learning capability through contrastively-learned prompts. In the proposed UCAD, we design a Continual Prompting Module
(CPM) by utilizing a concise key-prompt-knowledge memory bank to guide task-invariant ‘anomaly’ model predictions
using task-specific ‘normal’ knowledge. Moreover, Structurebased Contrastive Learning (SCL) is designed with the Segment Anything Model (SAM) to improve prompt learning
and anomaly segmentation results. Specifically, by treating
SAM’s masks as structure, we draw features within the same
mask closer and push others apart for general feature representations. We conduct comprehensive experiments and set
the benchmark on unsupervised continual anomaly detection
and segmentation, demonstrating that our method is significantly better than anomaly detection methods, even with rehearsal training. The code will be available at https://github.
com/shirowalker/UCAD.

…

Model
A

…

…

Model
B

…

a)

…

b)

…

…

Model

Model

Model

…

…

…

Figure 1: Comparison between separate models and UCAD
methods: a) Using separate methods, each task has its own
individual model. On the contrary, Ours b) uses a single
model to handle all tasks without task identities. In the continuous stream, UCAD only requires the dataset of the current task for training and can be applied to previous tasks.

2023b). Moreover, forcing separate models to learn sequentially also results in a heavy computational burden with
class incrementation. Some other methods focus on training a unified model that can handle multiple classes, such
as UniAD (You et al. 2022). In real production, trains occur sequentially, which makes it impractical for UniAD to
require all data to be trained simultaneously. Additionally,
the unified model still lacks the ability to retain previously
learned knowledge when continuously adapting to frequent
product alterations during sequential training. Catastrophic
forgetting and computational burden hinder UAD methods
from applying to real-world scenarios.
Continual Learning (CL) is well-known for addressing the
issue of catastrophic forgetting with a single model, especially when previous data is unavailable due to privacy reasons (Li et al. 2023). Recent research on continual learning
can be categorized based on the requirement of task identities during the test phase. Task-aware approaches explicitly
use the task identities to guide the learning process and prevent interference between tasks (Aljundi et al. 2018; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017). However, it’s not always possible to ac-

Introduction
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection (UAD) focuses on identifying unusual patterns or outliers in data without prior
knowledge or labeled instances, relying solely on the inherent distribution of the ‘normal’ data (Chandola, Banerjee,
and Kumar 2009). This approach is particularly useful in industrial manufacturing since acquiring well-labeled defect
data can be challenging and costly.
Recent researches on UAD involve training distinct models for various classes, which inevitably relies on the knowledge of class identity during the test phase (Liu et al.
* Contributed Equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3639

