The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fair Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines
for Ensuring Equity and Transparency
Parian Haghighat1 , Denisa Gándara2 , Lulu Kang3 , Hadis Anahideh* 1
1

University of Illinois Chicago
University of Texas at Austin
3
University of Massachusetts Amherst
phaghi3@uic.edu, denisa.gandara@austin.utexas.edu, lulukang@umass.edu, hadis@uic.edu
2

Abstract

Education is a complex and dynamic system that requires
accounting for the diversity, variability, and uncertainty of
the data and the context (Nezami et al. 2024). Moreover,
predictive models in education need to be transparent, interpretable, and fair to ensure accountability, trustworthiness,
and ethical design.
Transparency and interpretability are the abilities to
access, understand, and explain the data, methods, and
assumptions behind the predictive models. They are essential for ensuring accountability, trustworthiness, and ethical
design of predictive models. Fairness is the ability to prevent
or mitigate bias and discrimination against certain groups
or individuals based on their sensitive attributes. Fairness is
crucial for ensuring equity, justice, and social good of predictive models.
Several methods have been proposed to enhance the interpretability of machine learning (ML) models, such as
feature selection (Khaire and Dhanalakshmi 2022), feature importance (Linardatos, Papastefanopoulos, and Kotsiantis 2020), decision rules (Wang et al. 2017), and decision trees (Böhm et al. 2010). These methods can be
broadly classified into two categories: intrinsic and posthoc. Intrinsic methods aim to design interpretable models from scratch, by imposing constraints or regularization on the model structure or complexity (Zambaldi et al.
2018). Post-hoc methods aim to explain black-box models after they are trained, extracting or approximating the
model’s behavior using simpler or more transparent models
(Zahavy, Ben-Zrihem, and Mannor 2016).
To ensure fairness in ML, researchers have developed various fairness metrics and methods for measuring and enforcing fairness in the models. For example, statistical parity (Chouldechova 2017; Simoiu, Corbett-Davies, and Goel
2017) requires that the model’s predictions are independent of sensitive attributes (e.g., race), and equal opportunity
(Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) requires that the model’s
true positive rates are equal across different groups. Many
bias mitigation algorithms have been proposed to achieve
these and other fairness criteria, especially for classification
problems, where the goal is to predict a binary outcome
(Berk et al. 2017; Chouldechova 2017; Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016; Kilbertus et al. 2017). However, for regression
problems, where the goal is to model a continuous outcome
variable, such as a real-valued score, there are fewer studies

Predictive analytics is widely used in various domains,
including education, to inform decision-making and improve
outcomes. However, many predictive models are proprietary and inaccessible for evaluation or modification by
researchers and practitioners, limiting their accountability
and ethical design. Moreover, predictive models are often opaque and incomprehensible to the officials who use
them, reducing their trust and utility. Furthermore, predictive models may introduce or exacerbate bias and inequity,
as they have done in many sectors of society. Therefore,
there is a need for transparent, interpretable, and fair predictive models that can be easily adopted and adapted by different stakeholders. In this paper, we propose a fair predictive model based on multivariate adaptive regression splines
(MARS) that incorporates fairness measures in the learning process. MARS is a non-parametric regression model
that performs feature selection, handles non-linear relationships, generates interpretable decision rules, and derives optimal splitting criteria on the variables. Specifically, we integrate fairness into the knot optimization algorithm and provide theoretical and empirical evidence of how it results in a
fair knot placement. We apply our fairMARS model to realworld data and demonstrate its effectiveness in terms of accuracy and equity. Our paper contributes to the advancement of
responsible and ethical predictive analytics for social good.

Introduction
Predictive analytics has made remarkable progress in the
past few decades across diverse sectors, ranging from
education (Yu et al. 2020) to healthcare (Stiglic et al. 2020),
as a potent tool for guiding decision-making processes and
augmenting overall outcomes. Predictive models have the
potential to revolutionize practices by offering foresight into
future developments. However, a recurring challenge lies in
the propriety nature of many of these models, which bars
researchers and practitioners from evaluating, adapting, or
optimizing these models to align with ethical considerations
and accountability standards.
This limitation not only restricts the potential for improvement but also undermines the principles of transparency and
fairness in design for high-stakes domains such as education.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22076

