The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Non-excludable Bilateral Trade between Groups
Yixuan Even Xu1 * , Hanrui Zhang2 , Vincent Conitzer3
1
Tsinghua University
Simons Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute
3
Carnegie Mellon University
xuyx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {hanruiz1,conitzer}@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

problem: We want to design a mechanism that, based on
both parties’ private valuations, decides whether they should
trade, and if so, the amounts of money that the buyer pays
and the seller receives. Such a mechanism can be viewed as a
trusted mediator that facilitates trade. The key difficulty here
is to encourage the buyer and the seller to truthfully reveal
their private valuations, so that the mechanism can make the
most socially efficient decisions, i.e., to trade whenever the
buyer values the item more than the seller.
This basic and seemingly simple problem turns out to be
surprisingly challenging. In fact, the seminal impossibility
result of Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) shows that in the
above setting with private valuations, no mechanism simultaneously satisfies the following four natural properties:

Bilateral trade is one of the most natural and important forms
of economic interaction: A seller has a single, indivisible item
for sale, and a buyer is potentially interested. The two parties
typically have different, privately known valuations for the
item, and ideally, they would like to trade if the buyer values
the item more than the seller. The celebrated impossibility result by Myerson and Satterthwaite shows that any mechanism
for this setting must violate at least one important desideratum. In this paper, we investigate a richer paradigm of bilateral trade, with many self-interested buyers and sellers on
both sides of a single trade who cannot be excluded from the
trade. We show that this allows for more positive results. In
fact, we establish a dichotomy in the possibility of trading efficiently. If in expectation, the buyers value the item more, we
can achieve efficiency in the limit. If this is not the case, then
efficiency cannot be achieved in general. En route, we characterize trading mechanisms that encourage truth-telling, which
may be of independent interest. We also evaluate our trading
mechanisms experimentally, and the experiments align with
our theoretical results.

1

• (Bayesian) incentive compatibility: In expectation, both
parties maximize their respective utilities by truthfully
reporting their valuations to the mechanism.
• (Bayesian) individual rationality: The expected values
of participating are non-negative for both parties.
• Weak budget balance: If a trade happens, the amount
of money that the buyer pays should be at least the
amount that the seller receives, so that the mediator of
the mechanism does not need to subsidize the trade.
• Efficiency: The two parties trade if and only if the buyer
values the item more than the seller.

Introduction

Bilateral trade is one of the most natural and important forms
of economic interaction in human society: A seller has a single, indivisible item for sale, and a buyer is potentially interested. The two parties typically have different valuations for
the item, e.g., the seller has a production cost, and the buyer
can derive a certain utility from consuming the item. If the
buyer values the item more than the seller, then trading in
an appropriate way would benefit both parties: The buyer
could offer to pay the seller a price strictly between both
parties’ valuations, giving both parties positive gain. On the
other hand, if the seller values the item more, then a trade
would hurt the overall utility of them, and thus should not
take place. We can ensure that the trade takes place if and
only if it is efficient by setting an appropriate price, as long
as both parties’ valuations are public information.
The situation is much subtler in the more realistic setting
where the two parties’ valuations are private. There, maximizing the gain from trade becomes a mechanism design

Requiring incentive compatibility is WLOG given the revelation principle, so if we want to implement the socially efficient outcome, then we have to (1) force at least one party
to reveal their true valuation, (2) force at least one party to
participate, or (3) subsidize the trade — none of which is
feasible in practice. This gives us one of the most famous
impossibility results in economics: Efficient bilateral trade
cannot be implemented in a feasible way.
Interestingly, the above impossibility result is only partially echoed by real-life phenomena. Admittedly, negotiation between two individuals is often highly unpredictable
and not fully efficient. However, when we look at trade between two sizable “organizations” (e.g., countries) each consisting of many self-interested “members” (e.g., citizens), it
appears that the aggregate decisions made by these members more often result in an outcome that overall benefits
members of both organizations due to the large number of
participants and is thus more efficient. In such scenarios, the

* This work was done when Xu was a visiting intern at CMU.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9952

