The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hidden Follower Detection: How Is the Gaze-Spacing Pattern Embodied in
Frequency Domain?
Shu Li1 , Ruimin Hu1 * , Suhui Li1 , Liang Liao2
1

2

School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{ shuli, rmhu, suhuili }@xidian.edu.cn, liang.liao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

studies the relative position of two trajectories (Andersson
et al. 2008; Siqueira et al. 2011) and temporal-spatial trajectory (Kjærgaard et al. 2013; Li et al. 2013; Xie, Ren, and Liu
2020; Jiang et al. 2018), nevertheless, the following behavior is ubiquitous, making it difficult to distinguish whether
the pedestrians behind with similar trajectories are due to
coincidence or hidden following intention.
The study of “hidden" behavior has seen new light in recent works (Xu et al. 2022, 2021). They consider behavior
patterns can reflect human intentions: first found there are
significant pattern differences in gaze-spatial behavior between hidden followers and normal pedestrians. In the time
domain, they extract the gaze state series and distance series
from the surveillance video and generate gaze-spacing-flow
features to represent the gaze-spatial low of walking. Then, a
hidden follower detection framework embedded with gazespacing-flow (HFDF-GS) is proposed to improve the accuracy of HFD. However, the time domain representation of
time series often leads to information loss, which is mainly
attributed to 1) Irreversibility: time-domain features are irreversible, for example, we cannot reconstruct from the gaze
frequency to the gazing state series. This one-direction feature extraction will inevitably lose some original information; 2) One-sidedness: the subjective time-domain features
such as gaze frequency only describe the hidden following
behavior in limited aspects.
Nevertheless, early research has proved the vulnerability of time-domain parameters (S.B. and Rao 2016). Signal changes not only with time but also with frequency
and phase, etc. Any movement signal in frequency domain can be decomposed into different sine waves, which
makes it reflect the essence of things or phenomena from
an objective view (Yadav and Rai 2020): 1) Better representation: many studies have demonstrated the frequencydomain features can characterize more accurate and comprehensive original information (Van Segbroeck, Tsiartas, and
Narayanan 2013), such as Mel-frequency cepstrum coefficient (MFCC) (Lai et al. 2022), wavelet feature (Lee et al.
2022), spectral entropy (Yu et al. 2022), and Constant-Q
Cepstral Coefficients (CQCC) (Bhattacharjee et al. 2020),
etc; 2) Reversibility: reversible frequency-domain features
can be lossily reconstructed, which maximizes the preservation of original information.
In this paper, in order to prove the information loss of

Spatiotemporal social behavior analysis is a technique that
studies the social behavior patterns of objects and estimates
their risks based on their trajectories. In social public scenarios such as train stations, hidden following behavior has
become one of the most challenging issues due to its probability of evolving into violent events, which is more than
25%. In recent years, research on hidden following detection (HFD) has focused on differences in time series between
hidden followers and normal pedestrians under two temporal characteristics: gaze and spatial distance. However, the
time-domain representation for time series is irreversible and
usually causes the loss of critical information. In this paper,
we deeply study the expression efficiency of time/frequency
domain features of time series, by exploring the recovery
mechanism of features to source time series, we establish a
fidelity estimation method for feature expression and a selection model for frequency-domain features based on the
signal-to-distortion ratio (SDR). Experimental results demonstrate the feature fidelity of time series and HFD performance are positively correlated, and the fidelity of frequencydomain features and HFD performance are significantly better than the time-domain features. On both real and simulated
datasets, the accuracy of the proposed method is increased
by 3%, and the gaze-only module is improved by 10%. Related research has explored new methods for optimal feature
selection based on fidelity, new patterns for efficient feature
expression of hidden following behavior, and the mechanism
of multimodal collaborative identification.

Introduction
Many achievements have been made in modeling abnormal behaviors with obvious visual features (Liu et al. 2022;
Ionescu et al. 2019). As a prelude to many criminal crimes,
hidden following is a behavior of secretly tracking and monitoring behind the target. Hidden follower detection (HFD)
seeks to identify the hidden follower in all pedestrians from
the surveillance video. However, methods based on computer vision (Li, Zhang, and Diao 2020; Jiang et al. 2020;
Duan et al. 2020), end-to-end learning (Zhou et al. 2019), or
sensors (Wang et al. 2017) are helpless for this task because
there are no obvious posture characteristics; Then mainly
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

538

