The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Effective Causal Discovery under Identifiable Heteroscedastic Noise Model
Naiyu Yin1 , Tian Gao2 , Yue Yu3 , Qiang Ji1
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY.
2
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY.
3
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA.
yinn2@rpi.edu, tgao@us.ibm.com, yuy214@lehigh.edu, jiq@rpi.edu

Abstract

from purely observational data. These algorithms can be
divided into two categories: constraint-based methods and
score-based methods. The constraint-based methods estimate DAGs by performing independence tests between variables. Popular algorithms include PC (Spirtes et al. 2000)
and FCI (Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 1995; Zhang 2008).
The score-based methods search through the DAG space
for a DAG with the optimal score. The differences among
score-based methods usually come from search procedures,
such as hill-climbing and Greedy Equivalent Search (GES)
(Chickering 2002). The structural causal model-based methods encode the statistical and causal dependencies via structural equation models (SEM). Zheng et al. (2018) introduces a continuous DAG constraint and NOTEARS algorithm, which reformulates the original combinatorial DAG
learning problem as a constrained continuous optimization.
Such conversion enables the employment of continuous optimization techniques in follow-up works (Kalainathan et al.
2018; Yu et al. 2019; Ng et al. 2019).
Under either a linear or non-linear structural equation model (SEM) assumption, most of the current methods (Zheng et al. 2018, 2020; Yu and Gao 2020; Peters
et al. 2014) usually adopt an assumption in SEM that the
noises are additive to causal functions and are assumed to
have equal variance for each variable. However, such an assumption may not hold in real-world data. For example, realworld data may be gathered from diverse sources, spanning
different times and locations, employing a variety of collection techniques. As a result, the exogenous factors that
impact each variable may differ, and noise variances become non-constant for observations. Incorrect assumptions
regarding variable noise homoscedasticity, when they are
heteroscedastic, may lead to inaccurate and biased estimates.
Several works (Ng, Ghassami, and Zhang 2020; Lachapelle
et al. 2019; Park 2020) seek to allow the noises of each variable to have different variances but fall short of fully addressing noise heteroscedasticity.
A few recent works explicitly extend the SEM with additive noise assumption to more general cases and estimate the
noise observation heteroscedasticity. Rajendran et al. (2021)
employs SEM with multiplicative noise, while Blöbaum
et al. (2018) assumes the existence of a joint distribution between noise and parent variables. Lachapelle et al. (2019),
Xu et al. (2022); Immer et al. (2022), Khemakhem et al.

Capturing the underlying structural causal relations represented by Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) has been a fundamental task in various AI disciplines. Causal DAG learning via the continuous optimization framework has recently
achieved promising performance in terms of both accuracy
and efficiency. However, most methods make strong assumptions of homoscedastic noise, i.e., exogenous noises have
equal variances across variables, observations, or even both.
The noises in real data usually violate both assumptions due
to the biases introduced by different data collection processes.
To address the issue of heteroscedastic noise, we introduce
relaxed and implementable sufficient conditions, proving the
identifiability of a general class of SEM subject to these conditions. Based on the identifiable general SEM, we propose
a novel formulation for DAG learning that accounts for the
variation in noise variance across variables and observations.
We then propose an effective two-phase iterative DAG learning algorithm to address the increasing optimization difficulties and to learn a causal DAG from data with heteroscedastic
variable noise under varying variance. We show significant
empirical gains of the proposed approaches over state-of-theart methods on both synthetic data and real data.

Introduction
Learning the statistical and causal dependencies of a distribution in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
is of great interest in areas such as causal inference and
Bayesian network structure learning. The underlying statistical or causal relations indicated by the DAG have been applied to various machine learning applications (Ott, Imoto,
and Miyano 2004; Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 1995).
Causal DAG plays an increasingly important role in many
machine learning tasks, including out-of-distribution generalization (Janzing and Schölkopf 2018; Shen et al. 2018;
Ahuja et al. 2021), domain adaptation (Javidian, Pandey,
and Jamshidi 2021; Stojanov et al. 2021), and transfer learning (Schölkopf 2019).
The gold standard approach to performing causal discovery is to conduct controlled experiments, which can be expensive, time-consuming, and sometimes even infeasible.
Therefore, algorithms have been proposed to learn a DAG
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16486

