The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Embracing Language Inclusivity and Diversity in CLIP through
Continual Language Learning
Bang Yang1,2 , Yong Dai2 , Xuxin Cheng1 , Yaowei Li1,2 , Asif Raza1 , Yuexian Zou1 *
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{yangbang, chengxx, ywl, asifraza151, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn, chd-dy@foxmail.com

Abstract
While vision-language pre-trained models (VL-PTMs) have
advanced multimodal research in recent years, their mastery
in a few languages like English restricts their applicability in
broader communities. To this end, there is an increasing interest in developing multilingual VL models via a joint-learning
setup, which, however, could be unrealistic due to expensive costs and data availability. In this work, we propose to
extend VL-PTMs’ language capacity by continual language
learning (CLL), where a model needs to update its linguistic knowledge incrementally without suffering from catastrophic forgetting (CF). We begin our study by introducing
a model dubbed CLL-CLIP, which builds upon CLIP, a prevailing VL-PTM that has acquired image-English text alignment. Specifically, CLL-CLIP contains an expandable token
embedding layer to handle linguistic differences. It solely
trains token embeddings to improve memory stability and is
optimized under cross-modal and cross-lingual objectives to
learn the alignment between images and multilingual texts.
To alleviate CF raised by covariate shift and lexical overlap,
we further propose a novel approach that ensures the identical distribution of all token embeddings during initialization
and regularizes token embedding learning during training. We
construct a CLL benchmark covering 36 languages based on
MSCOCO and XM3600 datasets and then evaluate multilingual image-text retrieval performance. Extensive experiments
verify the effectiveness of CLL-CLIP and show that our approach can boost CLL-CLIP, e.g., by 6.7% in text-to-image
average Recall@1 on XM3600, and improve various state-ofthe-art methods consistently. Our code and data are available
at https://github.com/yangbang18/CLFM.

Identical
Distribution

Token Embedding
Pre-Trained Model
(PTM)
Back Propagate
& Optimize

Prior Works

Token Embedding
Regularization
PTM
Back Propagate
& Optimize

Our Work

Figure 1: For continual language learning, prior works in
NLP (Garcia et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022) train full model
parameters to learn a new language, with new token embeddings initialized randomly without considering the distribution of prior ones. Our work requires the least amount of
components to be trained (i.e., the token embedding layer)
and targets token embedding initialization and regularization
to avert catastrophic forgetting. Note that our frozen vision
PTM is not plotted for clarity.
it is indispensable to strive for greater language inclusivity
and diversity in VL-PTMs.
To endow VL-PTMs with an ability to understand multilingual contexts, there is an increasing interest in developing multilingual VL-PTMs via a joint-learning setup (Zhou
et al. 2021; Zhang, Hu, and Jin 2022; Chen et al. 2023b;
Li et al. 2023b), which has shown remarkable performance
in tasks like multilingual image-text retrieval. However, two
critical issues plague the joint learning. One is the high
computational cost and inflexibility of learning new knowledge, as we need to re-train models on new data alongside
all previous data. Another one is that data is not always
available during the learning cycle due to privacy and other
factors. Alternatively, continual language learning (CLL),
also known as lifelong language learning, is a more practical setup to extend PTMs’ language capacity with low
costs and high flexibility. The goal of CLL is to consolidate multilingual performance into a single, parameter- and
memory-constrained model, ensuring that this model can

Introduction
Large-scale vision-language pre-trained models (VL-PTMs)
such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), Flamingo (Alayrac et al.
2022), and BLIP-2 (Li et al. 2023a) have made great strides
in multimodal research (Gan et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023a).
Nevertheless, the majority of the current literature is biased
toward a few languages, predominantly English, making it a
barrier to the widespread adoption and accessibility of VLPTMs across different linguistic communities. Considering
that we are living in a world with roughly 7,000 languages,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6458

