The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BadRL: Sparse Targeted Backdoor Attack against Reinforcement Learning
Jing Cui1 , Yufei Han2 , Yuzhe Ma3 , Jianbin Jiao1 , Junge Zhang4,1 *
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
INRIA
3
Microsoft Azure AI
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
cuijing21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yufei.han@inria.fr, yuzhema@microsoft.com,
jiaojb@ucas.ac.cn, jgzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

This sequential characteristic of RL poses unique challenges for organizing backdoor poisoning attacks in RL systems. During the training of the backdoored policy, the
adversary must comprehend the state values and corresponding optimal actions to consider the entire future of the agent,
i.e., the actions, state observations, and rewards it may receive in the future, to organize the backdoor policy training process. Specifically, in each round of policy learning,
the adversary must decide which state observations to inject
the trigger signals and modify the corresponding rewards
and/or actions to minimize future rewards instead of only
minimizing the instant rewards. Similarly, during testing
time, when the backdoored policy is deployed, the adversary needs to strategically choose state observations of the
agent to embed the trigger and enhance the degradation impact throughout the agent’s course of action.
Previous studies (Panagiota et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2022)
employed an intense attack strategy during training and testing time to ensure the success of backdoor attacks. However, those attack methods do not consider the impact of
each trigger-injection operation on future rewards. Performing such intense attacks during training time can lead to unnecessarily high attack costs with little additional impact.
For example, in Breakout, targeting the initial game state,
which may not directly impact success or failure, would be
ineffective in causing the agent to fail. Additionally, intense
attacks introduce excessive perturbations to the trained policy, leading to the degradation of the RL task even without
the trigger signal. During testing time, frequent testing-time
poisoning operations incur high costs and increase the noticeability of the attack. Our study aims to address the bottlenecks of intense attack costs in prior works. We focus on
designing an efficient backdoor attack strategy, which only
spends highly sparse backdoor poisoning efforts at training
and testing time yet delivers successful attacks. Specifically,
at the training stage, we are interested in minimizing the
number of time steps for injecting backdoor poisoning efforts into the state, action, and reward values. At the testing stage, we aim to reduce the frequency of introducing the
trigger signals into the state observations.
BadRL results in sparse attacks from two perspectives.
Firstly, we adopt a sample-specific approach to generate
backdoor triggers so that those triggers become easier to
learn and less susceptible to forgetting when the policy

Backdoor attacks in reinforcement learning (RL) have previously employed intense attack strategies to ensure attack
success. However, these methods suffer from high attack
costs and increased detectability. In this work, we propose
a novel approach, BadRL, which focuses on conducting
highly sparse backdoor poisoning efforts during training and
testing while maintaining successful attacks. Our algorithm,
BadRL, strategically chooses state observations with high
attack values to inject triggers during training and testing,
thereby reducing the chances of detection. In contrast to the
previous methods that utilize sample-agnostic trigger patterns, BadRL dynamically generates distinct trigger patterns
based on targeted state observations, thereby enhancing its
effectiveness. Theoretical analysis shows that the targeted
backdoor attack is always viable and remains stealthy under specific assumptions. Empirical results on various classic RL tasks illustrate that BadRL can substantially degrade
the performance of a victim agent with minimal poisoning efforts (0.003% of total training steps) during training
and infrequent attacks during testing. Code is available at:
https://github.com/7777777cc/code.

Introduction
Prior works have demonstrated that reinforcement learning
(RL) is susceptible to backdoor poisoning attacks (Panagiota
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2022;
Du et al. 2022; Schwarzschild et al. 2021). Similar to Supervised Learning, a backdoor attack in RL pursues dual objectives (Panagiota et al. 2020). On the one hand, a backdoored
RL agent trained with poisoned training data should perform
comparably to an adversary-free policy when state observations do not contain the adversary-designed trigger signal.
On the other hand, once the trigger signal is injected into
the state observations, the backdoored policy should significantly degrade the agent’s performance. However, backdoor
attacks in RL can be more hazardous due to the sequential
nature of RL. An incorrect action triggered by an attack may
reduce the immediate reward and guide the agent to a lowvalue state (e.g., a failure state in computer games), resulting
in a small cumulative future reward after a series of actions.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11687

