The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Joint Learning Neuronal Skeleton and Brain Circuit Topology with Permutation
Invariant Encoders for Neuron Classification
Minghui Liao1, 2, 3 , Guojia Wan1, 2, 3 * , Bo Du1, 2, 3 *
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University, China
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
minghui@whu.edu.cn, guojia@whu.edu.cn, dubo@whu.edu.cn
Drosophila Brain

Abstract

Multiple
Neurons

Single Neuron

Soma
3D Neuron Morphology

Connectome
𝒢𝒢 = (𝒱𝒱, ℰ)

Skeleton Point
𝑃𝑃𝑞𝑞 = (𝑥𝑥, 𝑦𝑦, 𝑧𝑧)

Neuron Classfication

Neuron

Determining the types of neurons within a nervous system
plays a significant role in the analysis of brain connectomics
and the investigation of neurological diseases. However, the
efficiency of utilizing anatomical, physiological, or molecular characteristics of neurons is relatively low and costly. With
the advancements in electron microscopy imaging and analysis techniques for brain tissue, we are able to obtain wholebrain connectome consisting neuronal high-resolution morphology and connectivity information. However, few models
are built based on such data for automated neuron classification. In this paper, we propose NeuNet, a framework that
combines morphological information of neurons obtained
from skeleton and topological information between neurons
obtained from neural circuit. Specifically, NeuNet consists
of three components, namely Skeleton Encoder, Connectome Encoder, and Readout Layer. Skeleton Encoder integrates the local information of neurons in a bottom-up manner, with a one-dimensional convolution in neural skeleton’s
point data; Connectome Encoder uses a graph neural network to capture the topological information of neural circuit; finally, Readout Layer fuses the above two information and outputs classification results. We reprocess and release two new datasets for neuron classification task from volume electron microscopy(VEM) images of human brain cortex and Drosophila brain. Experiments on these two datasets
demonstrated the effectiveness of our model with accuracy of
0.9169 and 0.9363, respectively. Code and data are available
at: https://github.com/WHUminghui/NeuNet

Figure 1: Neuron connectivity (orange) and morphology
(blue) in a Drosophila (fruit fly) brain. For each neuron, its
connectivity can be represented by a graph. Its morphology
can be described by a skeleton that is a set of 3D points. Both
of them can reveal neuron‘s functions and roles.

anatomical-based neuron classification methods are exceedingly time-consuming and labor-intensive.
Recently, volume electron microscopy (VEM) imaging
and analysis techniques (Januszewski et al. 2018) contribute
the availability of whole-brain three-dimensional(3D) reconstruction with cellular resolution, providing a new opportunity to understand the neuronal properties and functions. Specifically, the 3D images of brain tissue generated
by VEM contain a wealth of information about neuron size,
location, morphology, and connectivity. We show a neuron
in Figure 1 from Drosophila connectome (Scheffer et al.
2020). We can observe that the morphology of the complex
nerve fibers (including axons and dendrites) that spans multiple brain regions. The red centerline within the fiber voxel
is referred as the skeleton of the neuron, which can be depicted as a set filling with 3D points (in XYZ coordinates),
P = {pq |q = 1, ..., m}. A large number of such neurons
are interconnected, forming the connectome of Drosophila
brain (Scheffer et al. 2020). The connectome can be depicted by a complex network, which is formalized as a graph
G = (V, E). In this network, nodes represent the neurons and
edges represent the synaptic connections between them. Apparently, both of these two data exhibit permutation invariance. That is, permuting or rearranging the order of the ele-

Introduction
Identifying various neuron types in a nervous system is
a fundamental task in numerous neuroscience studies. Assigning neuron type is a necessary step to understand
the anatomical and functional properties of a brain circuit
(Armañanzas and Ascoli 2015). By identifying and classifying various types of neurons, researchers can determine
which neurons are most susceptible to causing some neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s(Buckner et al.
2005) and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). However,
due to the vast number and minuscule size of neurons,
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

197

