The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Formal Logic Enabled Personalized Federated Learning
through Property Inference
Ziyan An, Taylor T. Johnson, Meiyi Ma
Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
{ziyan.an, taylor.johnson, meiyi.ma}@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in federated learning (FL) have greatly
facilitated the development of decentralized collaborative applications, particularly in the domain of Artificial Intelligence
of Things (AIoT). However, a critical aspect missing from the
current research landscape is the ability to enable data-driven
client models with symbolic reasoning capabilities. Specifically, the inherent heterogeneity of participating client devices poses a significant challenge, as each client exhibits
unique logical reasoning properties. Failing to consider these
device-specific specifications can result in missing critical
properties in the client predictions, leading to suboptimal performance. This work proposes a new training paradigm that
leverages temporal logic reasoning to address this issue. Our
approach enhances the training process by incorporating mechanically generated logic expressions for each FL client. Additionally, we develop aggregation clusters and a partitioning
algorithm to effectively group clients based on the alignment
of their temporal reasoning properties. We evaluate the proposed method on two tasks: a real-world traffic volume prediction task consisting of sensory data from fifteen states and
a smart city multi-task prediction utilizing synthetic data. The
evaluation results exhibit clear improvements, with performance accuracy improved by up to 54% across all sequential
prediction models.

Figure 1: FedSTL consists of S cluster devices, and C client
devices. During each communication round, client models
are partitioned into clusters. Then, inferred temporal reasoning properties are enhanced on predictive models.

privacy risks. These frameworks enable collaborations between participating devices by aggregating their models
through a centralized moderator. FL models have proven
particularly useful in privacy-sensitive outdoor sensor networks, where participating clients can receive non-i.i.d or
heterogeneous input data. Client data is securely maintained
on-device, ensuring that sensitive information remains local
and private. To facilitate model updates and collaboration,
only client model parameters are synchronized with the centralized moderator.
However, dealing with client heterogeneities symbolically
remains a challenge for FL models. Previous FL designs
have attempted to address this issue through methods such as
client selection, clustering, and regularization (Collins et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021a,b; Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh 2019; Yu,
Bagdasaryan, and Shmatikov 2020). Unfortunately, these
methods fail to provide any reasoning for the model’s outputs. Furthermore, no logic reasoning properties or domainspecific knowledge can be integrated and enforced through
such approaches.
Consider a sequential real-world prediction task that involves multiple types of sensors (e.g., radar sensors, video
detection systems, air quality monitors) deployed at various

Introduction
In recent years, modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) models
have been adapted to handle massively-distributed tasks deployed on non-independent and identically distributed (i.i.d)
devices, including AI-empowered Internet-of-Things services such as smart cities and smart healthcare (Nguyen et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2019; Ma, Stankovic, and Feng 2021; Preum
et al. 2021). However, a critical challenge that remains unsolved is the ability to enable large-scale distributed datadriven models with symbolic reasoning capabilities; that is,
incorporating logical properties to guide and enhance the
learning process.
More specifically, federated learning (FL) (McMahan
et al. 2017) frameworks have been developed to achieve remarkable performance for distributed training with reduced
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Code implementation is available at https://github.com/AICPSLab/FedSTL.git.

10882

