The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GSO-Net: Grid Surface Optimization via Learning Geometric Constraints
Chaoyun Wang1,2,3 , Jingmin Xin1,2,3 , Nanning Zheng1,2,3 , Caigui Jiang1,2,3 *
1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Information and Applications
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
chaoyunwang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {jxin, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, cgjiang@xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

proven effective in dealing with small-scale or specific types
of problems, they can struggle with large-scale and complex
challenges, often encountering inefficiencies, convergence
difficulties, and numerous hyperparameter issues (Nocedal
and Wright 1999; Ma et al. 2021). In contrast, deep learning
has made significant strides in the field of image processing. This success primarily stems from the regular structure of image data, allowing for specialized computations
using convolutional kernels. These kernels perform sliding
window computations, leading to efficient extraction and
utilization of image features. This facilitates learning complex patterns from large amounts of data, an approach that
might offer insights or alternatives to conventional optimization methods on discrete surfaces, especially grid surfaces in
this paper. As (Yuan, Cao, and Shi 2023) mentioned in their
overview of developable surfaces, there is scant research in
the area of artificial intelligence applications to developable
surfaces, they suggest building large-scale datasets for developable surface optimization.

In the context of surface representations, we find a natural
structural similarity between grid surface and image data.
Motivated by this inspiration, we propose a novel approach:
encoding grid surfaces as geometric images and using image
processing methods to address surface optimization-related
problems. As a result, we have created the first dataset for grid
surface optimization and devised a learning-based grid surface optimization network specifically tailored to geometric
images, addressing the surface optimization problem through
a data-driven learning of geometric constraints paradigm. We
conduct extensive experiments on developable surface optimization, surface flattening, and surface denoising tasks using
the designed network and datasets. The results demonstrate
that our proposed method not only addresses the surface optimization problem better than traditional numerical optimization methods, especially for complex surfaces, but also boosts
the optimization speed by multiple orders of magnitude. This
pioneering study successfully applies deep learning methods
to the field of surface optimization and provides a new solution paradigm for similar tasks, which will provide inspiration
and guidance for future developments in the field of discrete
surface optimization. The code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/chaoyunwang/GSO-Net.

In recent years, the application of deep learning in mesh
processing has primarily centered on tasks like classification, segmentation, retrieval, and denoising, with a particular
focus on surfaces represented by irregular triangular meshes.
To handle such irregular structured data, two main strategies are adopted: designing learning networks suitable for
irregular structured data or transforming the data into regular structured data. The former, represented by MeshCNN
(Hanocka et al. 2019) and SubdivNet mesh processing networks (Hu et al. 2022), can process directly on triangle
patches and are mainly used for semantic segmentation and
recognition problems. However, they are not applicable for
surface optimization problems. In the latter research involving regularized data processing, some studies parameterize
the mesh to create geometric images for processing (Gu,
Gortler, and Hoppe 2002). These studies tend to focus more
on mesh reconstruction and compression (Sinha, Bai, and
Ramani 2016; Wang et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2023). Also, there
is work involving sampling on mesh patches to build regular
structured data, which is common in surface denoising tasks
(Wang, Liu, and Tong 2016; Shen et al. 2022; Zhao et al.
2022). While these representations can be processed with
standard deep learning algorithms, from a data transformation perspective, they are lossy and cannot meet the precision requirements of tasks such as surface optimization.

Introduction
The field of computer graphics is rife with discrete surface optimization problems, spanning applications such as
3D modeling, digital fabrication, physical simulation, and
medical imaging. These problems encompass a variety of
tasks such as the optimization of developable surfaces, surface flattening, and surface denoising (without emphasis, the
term “surface” in this paper refers to “discrete surface” or
“mesh” in general). Despite their different objectives, these
tasks share a common foundation: optimizing certain geometric properties of the surface, such as flatness, smoothness, and curvature, while adhering to a set of geometric
constraints such as surface continuity and boundary conditions.
Conventional surface optimization heavily relies on various numerical optimization techniques, including methods
used in nonlinear optimization. While these methods have
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8163

