The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Interactive Theorem Provers: Applications in AI, Opportunities, and Challenges
Mohammad Abdulaziz
King’s College London, London, United Kingdom

Interactive theorem provers (ITPs) are computer programs in which axioms and a conjecture are stated in a formal language; a user provides the ITP with relatively highlevel steps of a formal proof for the conjecture; then, by invoking automated theorem provers, the ITP tries to generate
low-level steps that fill the gaps between the steps provided
by the user, thus forming a complete formal proof of the conjecture. The ITP also checks the entire formal proof against
the axioms, thus confirming the soundness of all derivations
in the formal proof.
The first topic I will cover in my talk is why should the
AI community consider ITPs? The most obvious benefit is
that, using ITPs, we can construct correct-by-construction
AI software. Indeed, ITPs, more than any other methodology, have been used to construct mathematically proven,
correct-by-constuction software in other areas of CS, and
they thus offer a promising way to significantly improve the
trustworthiness of AI software. Also, using an ITP to reason
about mathematically involved AI concepts or algorithms
usually leads to new conceptual or abstract insights.
The second topic I will cover is how can ITPs be (feasibly)
applied to reason about and verify concepts and algorithms
in AI? In general, using ITPs to reason about mathematical
concepts or software is known to be hard, e.g. it is estimated
that the number of proof lines to prove a piece of software
correct grows quadratically with the number of lines in that
piece of software. This complexity is further compounded
if the goal for a verified piece of software is to perform as
efficiently as its optimised, unverified counterpart.
Furthermore, in the context of AI, in addition to the general scalability issues faced by ITP-based software verification, there is the extra problem of the relatively mathematically involved theory behind an AI algorithm or a piece
of AI software. For instance, to prove that algorithms for
planning under uncertainty are ’correct’, one needs to build
within the ITP an entire background formal theory that formalises notions and theorems about probabilities, Markov
Decision Processes, and functional analysis. Such involved
mathematical background theory is usually not required for
applying ITPs to other domains for which most current ITPbased verification methodologies were developed, like in operating systems and security.

I will discuss those two topics based on examples from
my own work on reasoning about and verifying: 1. classical planning algorithms (Abdulaziz, Norrish, and Gretton 2018; Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish 2019; Abdulaziz and Kurz 2023), 2. (temporal) planning semantics and
validation software (Abdulaziz and Lammich 2018; Abdulaziz and Koller 2022), 3. algorithms for probabilistic planning (Schäffeler and Abdulaziz 2023), and 4. algorithms
for matching, and applications in algorithmic game theory (Abdulaziz, Mehlhorn, and Nipkow 2019; Abdulaziz
and Madlener 2023).
I will use examples from my work to 1. show how verifying AI software using ITPs can lead to finding bugs lurking
in state-of-the-art, stable, decades old AI software systems,
2. demonstrate how new mathematical concepts and proofs
as well as improved algorithms, can be discovered assisted
by ITPs, and 3. show the measures and trade-offs my collaborators and I took to improve the feasibility of using ITPs
within the context of the mathematically heavy AI software
and algorithms.

References
Abdulaziz, M.; Gretton, C.; and Norrish, M. 2019. A Verified Compositional Algorithm for AI Planning. In ITP.
Abdulaziz, M.; and Koller, L. 2022. Formal Semantics and
Formally Verified Validation for Temporal Planning. In
AAAI.
Abdulaziz, M.; and Kurz, F. 2023. Formally Verified SATBased AI Planning. In AAAI.
Abdulaziz, M.; and Lammich, P. 2018. A Formally Verified
Validator for Classical Planning Problems and Solutions. In
ICTAI.
Abdulaziz, M.; and Madlener, C. 2023. A Formal Analysis
of RANKING. In ITP.
Abdulaziz, M.; Mehlhorn, K.; and Nipkow, T. 2019. Trustworthy Graph Algorithms (Invited Paper). In MFCS.
Abdulaziz, M.; Norrish, M.; and Gretton, C. 2018. Formally
Verified Algorithms for Upper-Bounding State Space Diameters. J. Autom. Reason.
Schäffeler, M.; and Abdulaziz, M. 2023. Formally Verified Solution Methods for Infinite-Horizon Markov Decision
Processes. In AAAI.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22660

