The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing the Efficiency of Altruism and Taxes
in Affine Congestion Games through Signalling
Vittorio Bilò , Cosimo Vinci
Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Università del Salento
Provinciale Lecce-Arnesano, P.O. Box 193, 73100 Lecce, Italy
vittorio.bilo@unisalento.it, cosimo.vinci@unisalento.it
√
price of stability equals 1 + 1/ 3 ≈ 1.577 (Caragiannis
et al. 2011; Christodoulou and Koutsoupias 2005a).
A fundamental question in this domain is whether better performances can be obtained when applying plausible changes to the game model. Among these, we consider two well-studied scenarios: partially altruistic players
(Bilò 2014; Caragiannis et al. 2010; Hoefer and Skopalik
2013) and resource taxation (Bilò and Vinci 2019; Caragiannis, Kaklamanis, and Kanellopoulos 2010; Paccagnan
et al. 2021; Paccagnan and Gairing 2021; Vijayalakshmi and
Skopalik 2020).
For a parameter θ ∈ [0, 1], a θ-altruistic player seeks to
minimize 1 − θ times her personal cost, plus θ times the sum
of the personal costs of all other players. Thus, θ = 0 recovers the model of purely selfish players and, the more θ increases, the more players become altruistic. A surprising result by Caragiannis, Kaklamanis, and Kanellopoulos (2010)
shows that altruism has a negative impact on the worst-case
efficiency of pure Nash equilibria. In fact, the price of anarchy in games with θ-altruistic players is never smaller than
5/2 and equals 5/2 only when θ = 0. Although Caragiannis,
Kaklamanis, and Kanellopoulos (2010) proved that a better
price of anarchy holds in symmetric singleton games (i.e.,
games in which all players share the same strategy space
which is made of single resources only) as long as θ < 0.7,
and Bilò (2014) showed
that the price of stability improves
√
3
≈
0.72,
the question of whether other
as long as θ < 17+
26
forms of altruism can yield a better price of anarchy in general (i.e., non-singleton and asymmetric) affine congestion
games remained open.
A taxation mechanism in congestion games adds an extra cost for using a resource, in the form of either a tax or
a toll, which is equal for all players. Taxes are usually distinguished in two types: refundable and non-refundable. In
the first case, players consider the presence of taxes when
determining their strategy, but, when considering the social cost of a realized profile, the cost yielded by taxes is
left out. That is, the efficiency of a strategy profile is still
measured by the sum of the personal tax-free costs of all
players. When assuming non-refundable taxes, instead, the
amount of taxes paid by every player is considered in the
equilibrium social cost, but left out from the social optimum.
Bilò and Vinci (2019) and Caragiannis, Kaklamanis, and
Kanellopoulos (2010) show that, through refundable taxa-

Abstract
We address the problem of improving the worst-case efficiency of pure Nash equilibria (aka, the price of anarchy) in
affine congestion games, through a novel use of signalling.
We assume that, for each player in the game, a most preferred strategy is publicly signalled. This can be done either
distributedly by the players themselves, or be the outcome of
some centralized algorithm. We apply this signalling scheme
to two well-studied scenarios: games with partially altruistic
players and games with resource taxation. We show a significant improvement in the price of anarchy of these games,
whenever the aggregate signalled strategy profile is a good
approximation of the game social optimum.

Introduction
The analysis of the inefficiencies caused by selfish uncoordinated behaviour in multi-agent systems has been a fervent
research topic during the last twenty-five years. The celebrated notions of price of anarchy (Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou 1999) and price of stability (Anshelevich et al.
2008) are the state-of-the-art measures for these degraded
performances. The former compares the social value of the
worst stable outcome, usually a Nash equilibrium (Nash
1950), against that of a socially optimal solution, while the
latter follows a best-case approach.
One of the most studied classes of games in the literature is that of (atomic) congestion games (Rosenthal 1973).
These are cost-minimization games defined by a set of n
players competing for the usage of a set of resources. The
cost that a player incurs when using a resource is given by
a resource-specific function, called latency function, which
only depends on the number of players using it. A particularly meaningful subclass of congestion games, called
affine congestion games (Fotakis, Kontogiannis, and Spirakis 2005; Harks and Klimm 2012; Panagopoulou and Spirakis 2006), focuses on the case of affine latency functions.
As congestion games are known to always possess pure
Nash equilibria (Rosenthal 1973), their price of anarchy and
price of stability are usually expressed with respect to this
solution concept. For affine congestion games, in particular,
the price of anarchy equals 5/2 (Awerbuch, Azar, and Epstein 2005; Christodoulou and Koutsoupias 2005b) and the
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9511

