The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improved Anonymous Multi-Agent Path Finding Algorithm
Zain Alabedeen Ali1 , Konstantin Yakovlev2, 3
2

1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia
Federal Research Center for Computer Science and Control of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
3
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
ali.za@phystech.edu, yakovlev@isa.ru

Abstract

In this work we aim to solve the AMAPF problem optimally w.r.t makespan cost function, which is the arrival
time of the last agent. In other words, our task is to find a
solution where the last agent arrives at its goal location as
early as possible. State-of-the-art optimal AMAPF solvers
are reduction-based, i.e. the initial problem is reduced to another one and the latter is solved with an off-shelf solver. In
the case of AMAPF, the common reduction is the following.
Based on the input graph, another one is constructed. Then a
maximum flow problem on this auxiliary graph, called a network, is formulated and solved. The latter can be interpreted
as finding several paths (subject to certain constraints) on the
reduced network. The major bottleneck here is that the size
of the network is much larger, both in the number of vertices and edges, compared to the initial AMAPF graph, and,
therefore, finding paths on it is burdensome. Moreover, the
AMAPF reduction scheme, in general, assumes that numerous networks may be consecutively constructed (each one
being larger than the previous one) and the search should be
repeated.
To this end, we present an improved optimal AMAPF
solver that follows the reduction-to-the-flow-problem approach while utilizing a novel search method to find paths
on the (flow) networks. The crux of our search method is the
concept of bulk states and implicit expansions. In brief, instead of generating and expanding numerous search states,
we compress them into the bulks that form a sequence, exploiting the special structure of the underlying network, and
explicitly store in the search tree only the certain representatives of those bulks (while implicitly reasoning about all
other states in the bulk). On the theoretical side, we show
that our search method, dubbed Bulk Search, is complete.
On the practical side, we compare our improved AMAPF
solver that utilizes Bulk Search with the state-of-the-art optimal AMAPF solver and show that our algorithm notably
scales better to large maps (due to significantly lower number of expansions when finding the paths on the flow networks) and outperforms the competitor on all maps of the
well-known MAPF benchmark from (Stern et al. 2019).

We consider the Anonymous Multi-Agent Path-Finding
(AMAPF) problem where the agents are confined to a graph,
a set of goal vertices is given, and each of these vertices has
to be reached by some agent. The problem is to find an assignment of the goals to the agents as well as the collisionfree paths, and we seek to find the solution with the minimal
makespan. A well-established approach to solving this problem is by reducing it to a special type of graph search problem, i.e. to the problem of finding a maximum flow on an auxiliary graph induced by the input one. The size of the former
graph may be very large, and the search on it may become
a bottleneck. To this end, we suggest a specific search algorithm that leverages the idea of exploring the search space not
through considering separate search states but rather bulks of
them simultaneously. That is, we implicitly compress, store,
and expand bulks of the search states as single states, reducing the runtime and memory consumption. Empirically, the
resultant AMAPF solver demonstrates superior performance
compared to the state-of-the-art competitor and is able to
solve all publicly available MAPF instances from the wellknown MovingAI benchmark in less than 30 seconds.

Introduction
The Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) problem is a problem which generally asks to find a set of collision-free paths
for a set of agents that operate in a shared environment and
have to reach predefined goal locations from the current
(start) ones. MAPF has many applications, including automated warehouses, autonomous vehicles, and video games
and is being widely studied in the literature. Depending on
the application, many variants of MAPF have been proposed (Stern et al. 2019) and numerous solutions have been
already presented. One variant is the Anonymous MAPF
(AMAPF). In AMAPF, the agents are interchangeable and
each agent may be assigned to any goal, assuming that, in
the end, all goal locations will be reached (in case the number of goal locations is smaller than or equal to the number
of agents) or each agent will arrive to one goal location (otherwise). This problem naturally arises in such environments
where the tasks can be performed by any agent, e.g. identical robots carrying packages/inventory pods in automated
warehouses.

Related Works
In a conventional MAPF formulation (Stern et al. 2019) a
set of agents is given as well as the specification where
each agent starts and the goal it should reach. Even when

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17291

