The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Label Skews in Federated Learning with Model Concatenation
Yiqun Diao1 , Qinbin Li2 , Bingsheng He1
1

National University of Singapore
University of California, Berkeley
{yiqun, hebs}@comp.nus.edu.sg, qinbin@berkeley.edu
2

Abstract

to the server, and the server averages the local models to
update the global model in each round. It has been shown
that data heterogeneity is a challenging problem in FL, since
non-IID data distributions among FL clients can degrade
the FL model performance and slow down model convergence (Karimireddy et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020b; Hsu, Qi, and
Brown 2019; Li et al. 2021). According to Li et al. (2021),
non-IID data includes label skews, feature skews and quantity skews. In this paper, we focus on label skews (i.e., the
label distributions of different clients are different), which
is popular in reality (e.g., disease distributions vary across
different areas).
Researchers have put some promising effort to address the
above label skew challenge. For example, FedProx (Li et al.
2020a) uses the L2 distance between the local model and
the global model to regularize the local training. MOON (Li,
He, and Song 2021) regularizes the local training using the
similarity between representations of the local model and the
global model. FedRS (Li and Zhan 2021) restricts the updates of unseen classes during local training. FedLC (Zhang
et al. 2022) further calibrates logits to reduce the updates of
minority classes. The key idea of existing studies is usually
to reduce the drift produced in local training (Li et al. 2020a;
Li, He, and Song 2021; Karimireddy et al. 2020; Li and Zhan
2021; Zhang et al. 2022) or design a better federated averaging scheme in the server (Wang et al. 2020b,a). Those algorithms are based on the averaging framework. They attempt
to address the label skew problem by mitigating its side effect in federated averaging. However, existing methods cannot achieve satisfactory performance. In label skews, the averaging methods may not make much sense, as each party
may have very different models to predict different classes.
Especially under extreme label skews where each client has
quite different classes (e.g., face recognition), since the local
optima are far from each other, averaging these local models
leads to significant accuracy degradation. Even worse, it is
challenging to quantify how label skews influence the model
due to the diversity of label skews in practice.
In this paper, we think out of the model-averaging
scheme, and propose to use model concatenation as the aggregation method. Since each local model is good at classifying samples of several classes due to label skews, we propose to concatenate the features learned by the local models to combine the knowledge from the local models. For

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising solution
to perform deep learning on different data owners without exchanging raw data. However, non-IID data has been a key
challenge in FL, which could significantly degrade the accuracy of the final model. Among different non-IID types, label
skews have been challenging and common in image classification and other tasks. Instead of averaging the local models
in most previous studies, we propose FedConcat, a simple
and effective approach that concatenates these local models
as the base of the global model to effectively aggregate the
local knowledge. To reduce the size of the global model, we
adopt the clustering technique to group the clients by their label distributions and collaboratively train a model inside each
cluster. We theoretically analyze the advantage of concatenation over averaging by analyzing the information bottleneck of deep neural networks. Experimental results demonstrate that FedConcat achieves significantly higher accuracy
than previous state-of-the-art FL methods in various heterogeneous label skew distribution settings and meanwhile has
lower communication costs. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/sjtudyq/FedConcat.

Introduction
A good machine learning model usually needs a large highquality dataset to train. However, due to privacy concern
and regulations such as GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche
2017), sometimes it is not allowed to collect original data for
centralized training. Federated learning (FL) (Kairouz et al.
2019; Li et al. 2019a,b; Yang et al. 2019) is proposed to let
data owners collaboratively train a better machine learning
model without exposing raw data. It has become a hot research topic (Li, Wen, and He 2020; Dai, Low, and Jaillet
2020; He, Annavaram, and Avestimehr 2020; Li et al. 2020a;
Karimireddy et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020). FL
has many potential practical applications (Bonawitz et al.
2019; Hard et al. 2018; Kaissis et al. 2020). For example,
different hospitals can collectively train a FL model for diagnosing diseases through medical imaging, while protecting
the privacy of individual patients.
A typical framework of FL is FedAvg (McMahan et al.
2016), where the clients train and send their local models
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11784

