The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parameterized Approximation Algorithms for Sum of Radii Clustering and
Variants
Xianrun Chen1, 2 , Dachuan Xu3 , Yicheng Xu1, 2, * , Yong Zhang1, 2
1

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China

ters) in the k-center have the same maximum radius, leading
to significant overlap between clusters. Consequently, data
points that should ideally belong to the same cluster may
end up being assigned to different clusters due to this overlap. This phenomenon is called the dissection effect, which
can be reduced by using SoR as the objective instead.
Sum of Radii is a well-known clustering problem first introduced in a seminal work of Monma and Suri (1989). This
problem is NP-hard to solve, as a straightforward reduction
from the Set Cover (to the non-metric SoR) can be identified. On the positive side, Charikar and Panigrahy (2004)
presents the first constant approximation algorithm for SoR,
achieving a 3.504-approximation through primal-dual technique. This result has held the state-of-the-art in polynomial
time for nearly two decades until recently when Friggstad
and Jamshidian (2022) surpasses it. They introduce a novel
approach, achieving a superior 3.389-approximation using
an improved LP rounding procedure. Meanwhile, for the inapproximability results, it is intriguing to note that the lower
bound is unknown for SoR despite extensive research. Gibson et al. (2010) show that SoR can be solved exactly in
nO(log n·log Γ) where Γ is the diameter of the metric (i.e.
maximum distance between two points from the dataset). By
standard techniques, this yields a QPTAS (Quasi Polynomial
Time Approximation Scheme) for SoR with running time
2
nO(log 1/ε+log n) . They also show that SoR is NP-hard even
in metrics with constant doubling dimensions or shortestpath metrics of edge-weighted planar graphs. Surprisingly,
it is polynomial-solvable for SoR in constant-dimensional
Euclidean metrics (Gibson et al. 2012).
Indeed, devising polynomial time constant approximations for clustering problems poses a significant challenge in
the realm of computer science. As a result, the approach of
developing fixed-parameter tractable (fpt) approximations
has emerged as a successful alternative for tackling clustering problems. Though admitting an exponential factor on the
parameter k, fpt algorithm for clustering is practical as the
value of cluster number k is usually less than 10 in real scenarios (Pedregosa et al. 2011; Steinbach, Karypis, and Kumar 2000). Moreover, this approach has yielded interesting
and valuable results that may not be achievable in polynomial time in different clustering objectives.
For k-center, Hochbaum and Shmoys (1986) proved that
unless P = NP, it is NP-hard to approximate the optimal so-

Abstract
Clustering is one of the most fundamental tools in artificial
intelligence, machine learning, and data mining. In this paper, we follow one of the recent mainstream topics of clustering, Sum of Radii (SoR), which naturally arises as a balance
between the folklore k-center and k-median. SoR aims to determine a set of k balls, each centered at a point in a given
dataset, such that their union covers the entire dataset while
minimizing the sum of radii of the k balls. We propose a general technical framework to overcome the challenge posed by
varying radii in SoR, which yields fixed-parameter tractable
(fpt) algorithms with respect to k (i.e., whose running time
is f (k)ploy(n) for some f ). Our framework is versatile and
obtains fpt approximation algorithms with constant approximation ratios for SoR as well as its variants in general metrics, such as Fair SoR and Matroid SoR, which significantly
improve the previous results.

Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental tool in information technology and has been widely implemented in various fields, including artificial intelligence, data mining, bioinformatics,
pattern recognition, computer vision, and more. Clustering
aims to partition a set of data points into partitions, called
clusters. Many clustering problems involve finding k cluster centers to minimize some objective functions. One of the
most studied such objective functions is k-center which minimizes the maximum radius of clusters. Another example is
the k-median, which aims to minimize the sum of distances
from data points to their closest centers. Both problems have
proved invaluable in various real-world applications, such as
facility layout planning, healthcare resource allocation, and
transportation network design, etc.
In this paper, we focus on a rather different objective function for clustering, called Sum of Radii (SoR). This problem asks to find k clusters to cover all data points, such that
the sum of these cluster radii is minimized. This objective
is more useful as it reduces the so-called dissection effect
(Hansen and Jaumard 1997; Monma and Suri 1989), which
seamlessly incorporates the strengths of both k-center and kmedian. The dissection effect occurs as multiple balls (clus* Corresponding author. Email: yc.xu@siat.ac.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20666

