The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding and Leveraging the Learning Phases of Neural Networks*
Johannes Schneider1† , Mohit Prabhushankar 2
1 University of Liechtenstein, Vaduz, Liechtenstein
2 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA

johannes.schneider@uni.li, mohit.p@gatech.edu

Abstract

reason for good generalization performance. It is frequently
discussed in the literature (Geiger 2021; Jakubovitz, Giryes,
and Rodrigues 2019). Such a finding can be considered a
breakthrough in understanding deep neural networks. However, its validity has been disputed, i.e., Saxe et al. (2019)
claimed that statements by Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby (2017)
do not generalize to common activation functions. Today, the
debate is still ongoing (Lorenzen, Igel, and Nielsen 2021). A
key challenge is approximating the IB. This, makes a rigorous
mathematical treatment very hard – even empirical analysis
is non-trivial.

The learning dynamics of deep neural networks are not well understood. The information bottleneck (IB) theory proclaimed
separate fitting and compression phases. But they have since
been heavily debated. We comprehensively analyze the learning dynamics by investigating a layer’s reconstruction ability
of the input and prediction performance based on the evolution
of parameters during training. We empirically show the existence of three phases using common datasets and architectures
such as ResNet and VGG: (i) near constant reconstruction loss,
(ii) decrease, and (iii) increase. We also derive an empirically
grounded data model and prove the existence of phases for
single-layer networks. Technically, our approach leverages
classical complexity analysis. It differs from IB by relying on
measuring reconstruction loss rather than information theoretic measures to relate information of intermediate layers and
inputs. Our work implies a new best practice for transfer learning: We show empirically that the pre-training of a classifier
should stop well before its performance is optimal.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are arguably the key driver of the
current boom in artificial intelligence(AI) in academia and industry. They achieve superior performance in a variety of domains. Still, they suffer from poor understanding, leading to
an entire branch of research, i.e., explainability(XAI) (Meske
et al. 2022), and to widespread debates on trust in AI within
society. Thus, enhancing our understanding of how deep neural networks work is arguably one of key problems in ongoing machine learning research (Poggio, Banburski, and Liao
2020). Unfortunately, the relatively few theoretical findings
and reasonings are often subject to rich controversy.
One debate surrounds the core of machine learning: learning behavior. Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby (2017) leveraged
the information bottleneck(IB) framework to investigate the
learning dynamics of neural networks. IB relies on measuring
mutual information between activations of a hidden layer and
the input as well as the output. A key qualitative, experimental
finding was the existence of a fitting and compression phase
during the training process. Compression is conjectured a
* Code/Proofs: https://github.com/JohnTailor/LearnPhase
† Work conducted during holidays.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14886

Figure 1: Normalized accuracy and reconstruction loss for a
linear classifier and the FashionMNIST dataset
In this work, we study the learning behavior with a similar focus, i.e., classification and reconstruction capability of
layers. We propose a different lens for investigation rooted in
classical complexity analysis that leads to more precise statements. We perform a rigorous analysis of a linear classifier
and a data model built on empirical evidence. First, to the
best of our knowledge prior work relies on general statements
that lack mathematical proof. Instead, we show bounds on the
duration of phases, also highlighting interplays among data
characteristics, e.g., between the number of samples, the number of classes and the number of input attributes. Second, we
utilize different measures from IB. IB measures information
of a layer with respect to input and output (Shwartz-Ziv and
Tishby 2017). We measure (i) accuracy, e.g., how well the
network classifies samples, and (ii) the reconstruction error
of the input given the layer by utilizing a decoder.Third, we
provide a data model and prove for single-layer networks, i.e.,
linear networks, that it can cause the three learning phases,
i.e., the reconstruction error is likely to decrease early in
training after a phase of near constant behavior and increases

