The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Domain Deep Learning from a Multi-View Perspective for Cross-Border
E-commerce Search
Yiqian Zhang1 * , Yinfu Feng2 * , Wen-Ji Zhou2 * , Yunan Ye2 , Min Tan1 , Rong Xiao2 , Haihong Tang2 ,
Jiajun Ding1 , Jun Yu1†
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University
Alibaba International Digital Commerce Group
yiqian.zyq@gmail.com, fyf200502@gmail.com, eric.zwj@alibaba-inc.com, yunan.yyn@alibaba-inc.com,
tanmin@hdu.edu.cn, xiaorong.xr@taobao.com, tanghaihong@alibaba-inc.com, djj@hdu.edu.cn, yujun@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract

1.00

0.08

Building click-through rate (CTR) and conversion rate (CVR)
prediction models for cross-border e-commerce search requires modeling the correlations among multi-domains. Existing multi-domain methods would suffer severely from poor
scalability and low efficiency when number of domains increases. To this end, we propose a Domain-Aware Multiview mOdel (DAMO), which is domain-number-invariant,
to effectively leverage cross-domain relations from a multiview perspective. Specifically, instead of working in the original feature space defined by different domains, DAMO maps
everything to a new low-rank multi-view space. To achieve
this, DAMO firstly extracts multi-domain features in an explicit feature-interactive manner. These features are parsed
to a multi-view extractor to obtain view-invariant and viewspecific features. Then a multi-view predictor inputs these
two sets of features and outputs view-based predictions. To
enforce view-awareness in the predictor, we further propose a lightweight view-attention estimator to dynamically
learn the optimal view-specific weights w.r.t. a view-guided
loss. Extensive experiments on public and industrial datasets
show that compared with state-of-the-art models, our DAMO
achieves better performance with lower storage and computational costs. In addition, deploying DAMO to a large-scale
cross-border e-commence platform leads to 1.21%, 1.76%,
and 1.66% improvements over the existing CGC-based model
in the online AB-testing experiment in terms of CTR, CVR,
and Gross Merchandises Value, respectively.

FR
ES
BR
US
KR
ALL

0.80

0.06

0.60

0.04
0.02

Normalized singular value

Proportion of the sample data size

2

(84, 0.001)

0.00
Country index

(a)

0.40
0.20
0.051

16
32
48
64
Singular value index

256

(b)

Figure 1: Statistical analysis on a large-scale cross-border ecommerce platform. (a) The proportion of user behavior data
within two weeks among different countries. (b) Normalized
singular values of multi-domain feature representations.

in Russia, Spain, the USA, and Brazil is only 31.8%, 17.1%,
and even 5.1%, respectively. Statistics show that consumers
from different countries naturally exhibit distinctive shopping preferences, leading to cruel multi-domain problems
in e-commerce data. These problems, such as domain imbalance (refer to Fig 1(a)) and domain-specific modeling,
become more severe in real-world applications where hundreds of countries can be involved.
Multi-domain learning based methods (Zhu et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2018) are popular choices in terms of addressing the above-mentioned problems. Typically, multi-domain
features are extracted and further decomposed into domainspecific and domain-invariant cues (Ma et al. 2018a; Sheng
et al. 2021). Though providing satisfactory performance in
experiments, existing methods suffer from poor scalability
and low efficiency with an increasing number of domains
due to their domain-number-variant design. Furthermore,
the domain-specific parameters of some domains with limited data may also face the inadequate training problem. An
engineering trick can mitigate this by working on data clusters rather than the original separated multi-domain data.
However, their enhanced efficiency often accompanies a reduction in performance capabilities as these methods may
disrupt domain correlations within multi-domain data.
In this work, we propose a Domain-Aware Multi-view
mOdel (DAMO) to address the scalability and efficiency

Introduction
Click-through rate (CTR) and conversion rate (CVR) prediction are two important tasks for e-commerce search, attracting increasing attention from both academia and industry in recent years (Cheng et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2018;
Tang et al. 2020). Cross-border scenarios, in particular,
bring more challenges when building effective yet efficient
CTR/CVR models. According to our statistics on a crossborder e-commerce platform which is active in more than
230 countries and available in 18 languages, the overlap rate
among the top-1k exposed, clicked, and purchased products
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9387

