The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FG-EmoTalk: Talking Head Video Generation
with Fine-Grained Controllable Facial Expressions
Zhaoxu Sun1 , Yuze Xuan1 , Fang Liu2 * , Yang Xiang1
1

2

Xiaobing.ai
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China
sunzhaoxu@xiaobing.ai, ozawaoy xyz@bupt.edu.cn, fangliu@cuc.edu.cn, xiangyang@xiaobing.ai

Source Image

Abstract
Although deep generative models have greatly improved
one-shot video-driven talking head generation, few studies
address fine-grained controllable facial expression editing,
which is crucial for practical applications. Existing methods
rely on a fixed set of predefined discrete emotion labels or
simply copy expressions from input videos. This is limiting
as expressions are complex, and methods using only emotion
labels cannot generate fine-grained, accurate or mixed expressions. Generating talking head video with precise expressions
is also difficult using 3D model-based approaches, as 3DMM
only models facial movements and tends to produce deviations. In this paper, we propose a novel framework enabling
fine-grained facial expression editing in talking face generation. Our goal is to achieve expression control by manipulating the intensities of individual facial Action Units (AUs) or
groups. First, compared with existing methods which decouple the face into pose and expression, we propose a disentanglement scheme to isolates three components from the human
face, namely, appearance, pose, and expression. Second, we
propose to use input AUs to control muscle group intensities in the generated face, and integrate the AUs features with
the disentangled expression latent code. Finally, we present
a self-supervised training strategy with well-designed constraints. Experiments show our method achieves fine-grained
expression control, produces high-quality talking head videos
and outperforms baseline methods.

Driving Video

no AU control

AU-12(Lip Corner Puller)
Set to Intensity Level 5
Output Video with
AU-12 (Lip Corner Puller)
and AU-1 (Inner Brow Raiser)
Set to Intensity Level 5

Figure 1: Our FG-EmoTalk enables fine-grained facial expression control via taking input AUs to control the activation intensities of muscle groups in the generated talking
face. Our method is subject-agnostic, and can be applied for
both audio-driven and video-driven talking head synthesis.

expressions from input videos (Cheng et al. 2022) by assigning expressions frame-by-frame from input video templates,
or enable expression editing using predefined emotions (Sun
et al. 2022). However, fixed emotions can only represent
limited types of emotions in a coarse-grained and discrete
manner, making it difficult to achieve natural and precise
emotion editing. In addition, emotions from driving videos
also introduce ambiguity if input emotions are misjudged.
Talking head video generation with fine-grained controllable
facial expressions 1 is still an unaddressed problem.
In this work, we address the fine-grained expression editing task in talking head videos, enabling overall emotion
control as well as editing expression details with facial
AU constraints. Our method uses AUs (Ekman and Friesen
1978) as the fundamental units of expression, and the goal is
to control fine-grained expression by manipulating individual AUs or groups. For example, activating AU-12 (lip corner puller) when generating a smile, or manipulating inner
brow raiser by setting AU-1 intensity to level 5 (see Fig. 1).

Introduction
Talking head generation has attracted much attention in the
field of computer vision over recent years. Though tremendous progress has been made in enhancing the visual quality
of generated videos, most existing studies aim at producing
more realistic videos (Ren et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022) or
focus on the audio-based lip synchronization (Prajwal et al.
2020b; Cheng et al. 2022). Recently, a few facial expression
editing in talking head works have been proposed (de Barros Reis, Dornhofer Paro Costa, and De Martino 2020; Li
et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2022), which conduct emotional
video synthesis at a coarse granularity to generate specific
emotions like happy or sad. These methods either transfer

1

Note the facial expression here is different from emotion.
Emotion is referred to as a specific type of facial expression with a
set of predefined AUs’ intensities in this paper.

* Fang Liu is the corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5043

