The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fed-QSSL: A Framework for Personalized Federated Learning under Bitwidth and
Data Heterogeneity
Yiyue Chen1 , Haris Vikalo1 , Chianing Wang2 *
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Toyota InfoTech Lab USA
yiyuechen@utexas.edu, hvikalo@utexas.edu, johnny.wang@toyota.com

Abstract
Motivated by high resource costs of centralized machine learning schemes as well as data privacy concerns, federated learning (FL) emerged as an efficient alternative that relies on aggregating locally trained models rather than collecting clients’
potentially private data. In practice, available resources and
data distributions vary from one client to another, creating an
inherent system heterogeneity that leads to deterioration of the
performance of conventional FL algorithms. In this work, we
present a federated quantization-based self-supervised learning scheme (Fed-QSSL) designed to address heterogeneity
in FL systems. At clients’ side, to tackle data heterogeneity
we leverage distributed self-supervised learning while utilizing low-bit quantization to satisfy constraints imposed by
local infrastructure and limited communication resources. At
server’s side, Fed-QSSL deploys de-quantization, weighted
aggregation and re-quantization, ultimately creating models
personalized to both data distribution as well as specific infrastructure of each client’s device. We validated the proposed
algorithm on real world datasets, demonstrating its efficacy,
and theoretically analyzed impact of low-bit training on the
convergence and robustness of the learned models.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz et al.
2021) recently emerged in response to the challenges in data
privacy, storage cost and computation commonly faced by the
conventional (centralized) learning systems. In centralized
learning, a server collects and stores data to be used for model
training, raising concerns regarding potential leakage of sensitive information and inefficient utilization of the storage
and computation resources. Lately, advancements in software
and hardware technologies have equipped smart edge devices
with computational power that enables local data processing,
allowing implementation of distributed frameworks such as
FL in a variety of real-world applications (Chen, Sun, and Jin
2019). In FL systems, participating devices collaboratively
learn a model while preserving privacy by training on local
data that remains private. A server aggregates local updates
to obtain a global model which is then distributed to the
clients; in turn, the clients continue local training using the
* This work was supported by Toyota Motor North America.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11443

latest global model as a starting point. In addition to the conventional supervised learning, federated learning is suitable
for meta-learning and unsupervised learning problems (Jiang
et al. 2019; Servetnyk, Fung, and Han 2020).
Heterogeneity in local data distribution, as well as imbalance in the computation and memory capabilities of the
participating devices, present major challenges to federated
learning (Zhao et al. 2018; Yoon et al. 2022). Practical scenarios where both sources of heterogeneity occur include
healthcare disorder prediction for patients with different profiles and monitoring devices, transportation systems over
different vehicles and terrain, and indoor/outdoor air quality
detection, to name just a few. Several recent FL techniques
aim to alleviate the impact of data, model or device heterogeneity (Jiang, Shan, and Zhang 2020; Lin et al. 2020; Diao,
Ding, and Tarokh 2020; Wang et al. 2022). However, variations in bitwidth available to the clients that participate in
training have been much less studied (Yoon et al. 2022). To
our knowledge, there exists no prior work in literature investigating FL in setting where both the local data and device
bitwidth are heterogeneous – the focus of our work.
On one hand, clients’ devices collect and/or generate data
at different times and locations, leading to discrepancy in
data amounts and distribution. When distributed devices train
locally, each learned model optimizes an objective specified
in regard to a local dataset. If the data across participating
devices is non-IID, the devices end up optimizing distinct
objectives which generally adversely affects training convergence and, ultimately, negatively impacts performance of
the resulting global model trained by classical FL algorithms
such as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019). This is
exacerbated when a client’s dataset contains only a small subset of classes or few data points, leading to an insufficiently
expressive local model. In turn, using such models in the aggregation step at the server leads to a global model that lacks
robustness and in general may significantly underperform its
centrally trained counterparts (Zhao et al. 2018).
On the other hand, to satisfy the constraints on local compute and memory footprint as well as on the communication
bandwidth between clients and the central server, each client
needs to train a local model in low bitwidth operations and
store the updated model in low bitwidth (Yoon et al. 2022).
When the clients’ devices have different bitwidth capabilities,
a number of novel challenges arise including: (1) Quantized

