The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Arbitrary-Scale Point Cloud Upsampling by Voxel-Based Network with Latent
Geometric-Consistent Learning
Hang Du* , Xuejun Yan* , Jingjing Wang, Di Xie† , Shiliang Pu
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Social Security Big Data, China
{duhang, yanxuejun, wangjingjing9, xiedi, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Recently, arbitrary-scale point cloud upsampling mechanism
became increasingly popular due to its efficiency and convenience for practical applications. To achieve this, most previous approaches formulate it as a problem of surface approximation and employ point-based networks to learn surface representations. However, learning surfaces from sparse
point clouds is more challenging, and thus they often suffer
from the low-fidelity geometry approximation. To address it,
we propose an arbitrary-scale Point cloud Upsampling framework using Voxel-based Network (PU-VoxelNet). Thanks to
the completeness and regularity inherited from the voxel representation, voxel-based networks are capable of providing
predefined grid space to approximate 3D surface, and an arbitrary number of points can be reconstructed according to the
predicted density distribution within each grid cell. However,
we investigate the inaccurate grid sampling caused by imprecise density predictions. To address this issue, a densityguided grid resampling method is developed to generate highfidelity points while effectively avoiding sampling outliers.
Further, to improve the fine-grained details, we present an
auxiliary training supervision to enforce the latent geometric
consistency among local surface patches. Extensive experiments indicate the proposed approach outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches not only in terms of fixed upsampling
rates but also for arbitrary-scale upsampling. The code is
available at https://github.com/hikvision-research/3DVision

Figure 1: Differences between previous representative methods (Qian et al. 2021b; Zhao et al. 2023) and our voxelbased surface approximation for arbitrary-scale point cloud
upsampling. Resorting to the regular structure of voxel grids,
the surface patch is approximated as a density distribution of
points within each grid cell, and then we can reconstruct an
arbitrary number of points from the density predictions.

since their network architectures are specifically designed to
be coupled with the upsampling rate. After one-time training, they can only be used for a fixed upsampling rate, which
are inefficient and inconvenient for practical applications. To
fulfill upsampling with varying rates, they need to build multiple networks trained at different rates or repeat running the
fixed-scale model multiple times, thus increasing the storage
cost and computation burden (Zhao et al. 2023). So, they are
not able to handle varying upsampling rates effectively.
In recent years, arbitrary-scale upsampling is more desirable for practical applications, which allows for upsampling
with flexible rates in a one-time training. To achieve this,
some works (Qian et al. 2021b; Luo et al. 2021) focus on
learning linear approximation of local surface (Fig. 1(a)),
and others (Feng et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2023; He et al.
2023) apply implicit surface learning to sample arbitrary
points from the learned surface or push the points towards
the underlying surface (Fig. 1(b)). In general, existing methods tackle arbitrary-scale upsampling by formulating it as a
surface approximation problem, and utilize point-based net-

Introduction
3D point clouds are widely used in many real-world applications (Qi et al. 2017b; Yuan et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Guo
et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2024). However, raw point clouds
captured by 3D scanners are often sparse and noisy. Point
cloud upsampling is a necessary procedure to obtain dense
and high-fidelity point, enabling to provide more geometric and semantic information for downstream tasks, such as
3D classification (Qi et al. 2017a; Guo et al. 2021a), rendering (Chang et al. 2023), and reconstruction (Ma et al. 2021).
Most learning-based upsampling approaches (Yu et al.
2018a,b; Wang et al. 2019b; Li et al. 2019; Qian et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021; Qian et al. 2021a) merely support fixed rates,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1626

