The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Resource Efficient Deep Learning Hardware Watermarks with Signature
Alignment
Joseph Clements1,2 , Yingjie Lao1,3
1

2

Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina, 29634
Applied Research Associates, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 87110
3
Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, 02155
jclements@ara.com, yingjie.lao@tufts.edu

Abstract

and have predominately focused on defending deep learning models from theft (Zhu et al. 2021; Xue, Wang, and Liu
2021). Deep learning watermarks embed the owner’s signature into a model, often through an identifiable behavior
in response to specific inputs (i.e., key samples) (Adi et al.
2018). The embedding of this signature is usually achieve
through the utilization of the injection of non-adversarial
backdoors into the model. After embedding, the presence of
the watermark should be easily verifiable by using the key
samples even without direct access to the model. Thus, watermarks can allow the reclaiming of the model after a theft
has occurred and are often the final defense against piracy.
Other deep learning IPs are similarly vulnerable to theft.
Recent interest has been directed at defending other deep
learning components, such as training data (Zou, Gong,
and Wang 2021). Meanwhile, the hardware on which a
deep learning model is executed has significant impact on
the system’s performance and is known to be vulnerable
through modern supply chains. Various deep learning hardware accelerators have been developed which show significant improvement in speed and efficiency (Talib et al. 2021;
Peng et al. 2021; Azghadi et al. 2020). Introducing watermarks to deep learning hardware IPs, gives hardware developers the ability to defend their hardware designs. It has
been demonstrated that by purposefully introducing welloptimized modifications into a hardware design, it is possible to inject a backdoor into a deep learning model executed
on the hardware (Clements and Lao 2019).
By merging the concept of deep learning watermarks and
hardware backdoors, a recent work developed DeepHardMark, the first framework for protecting deep learning hardware using watermarks (Clements and Lao 2022). Despite
the success of embedding watermarks into a hardware design, the impact of the key samples is overlooked, as this previous approach exclusively utilized randomly selected key
samples. However, the specific key samples used strongly
correlate to the defense’s efficacy and the hardware’s efficiency. In this work, we expand deep learning hardware
watermarks by incorporating the key samples into the watermark generation process. We propose a novel methodology for aligning the watermark’s key samples with hardware
modifications to produce resource efficient hardware watermarks. Specifically, this work makes the following contributions in producing deep learning hardware watermarks:

Deep learning intellectual properties (IPs) are high-value assets that are frequently susceptible to theft. This vulnerability
has led to significant interest in defending the field’s intellectual properties from theft. Recently, watermarking techniques
have been extended to protect deep learning hardware from
privacy. These technique embed modifications that change
the hardware’s behavior when activated. In this work, we
propose the first method for embedding watermarks in deep
learning hardware that incorporates the owner’s key samples
into the embedding methodology. This improves our watermarks’ reliability and efficiency in identifying the hardware
over those generated using randomly selected key samples.
Our experimental results demonstrate that by considering the
target key samples when generating the hardware modifications, we can significantly increase the embedding success
rate while targeting fewer functional blocks, decreasing the
required hardware overhead needed to defend it.

Introduction
Deep learning has seen a significant rise to prominence in recent years due to various technological advancements (Dave
et al. 2022; Bernstein et al. 2021; Lucas et al. 2021). Systems powered by this technology have displaced conventional approaches in many domains. Unfortunately, deep
learning systems require heavy data acquisition and processing, expertise, and computing resources (Thompson et al.
2021). Further, many works have demonstrated that the security of such systems is a significant concern (Chakraborty
et al. 2021; Mani, Moh, and Moh 2021; Zhao and Lao 2022;
Allen-Zhu and Li 2022). These factors make deep learning
Intellectual Properties (IPs) high-value assets that are prime
targets for modern piracy (Wei et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020).
In addition, the theft of deep learning IPs can often be trivial
such as through model stealing attacks (Tramèr et al. 2016).
Watermarks create avenues of detecting stolen IPs and remedying such property violations (Zhu et al. 2021).
Due to the negative impacts of piracy, protecting deep
learning IPs will become increasingly important to encourage healthy practices in the field. However, defenses for
mitigating deep learning IP piracy are in their early stages
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11651

