The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Modality-Specific Encoders and Multimodal Anchors
for Personalized Brain Tumor Segmentation
†

Qian Dai1,* , Dong Wei2,* , Hong Liu2,3,* , Jinghan Sun2,3 , Liansheng Wang1, , Yefeng Zheng2
1
School of informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent Youtu Lab / Tencent Healthcare (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
3
School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
{daiqian,liuhong,jhsun}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lswang@xmu.edu.cn, {donwei,yefengzheng}@tencent.com,

2

Abstract
Most existing federated learning (FL) methods for medical image analysis only considered intramodal heterogeneity, limiting their applicability to multimodal imaging applications. In practice, it is not uncommon that some FL participants only possess a subset of the complete imaging modalities, posing inter-modal heterogeneity as a challenge to effectively training a global model on all participants’ data. In
addition, each participant would expect to obtain a personalized model tailored for its local data characteristics from
the FL in such a scenario. In this work, we propose a new
FL framework with federated modality-specific encoders and
multimodal anchors (FedMEMA) to simultaneously address
the two concurrent issues. Above all, FedMEMA employs an
exclusive encoder for each modality to account for the intermodal heterogeneity in the first place. In the meantime, while
the encoders are shared by the participants, the decoders are
personalized to meet individual needs. Specifically, a server
with full-modal data employs a fusion decoder to aggregate
and fuse representations from all modality-specific encoders,
thus bridging the modalities to optimize the encoders via
backpropagation reversely. Meanwhile, multiple anchors are
extracted from the fused multimodal representations and distributed to the clients in addition to the encoder parameters.
On the other end, the clients with incomplete modalities calibrate their missing-modal representations toward the global
full-modal anchors via scaled dot-product cross-attention,
making up the information loss due to absent modalities while
adapting the representations of present ones. FedMEMA is
validated on the BraTS 2020 benchmark for multimodal brain
tumor segmentation. Results show that it outperforms various
up-to-date methods for multimodal and personalized FL and
that its novel designs are effective. Our code is available.

Figure 1: (a) Example images of the four modalities in
BraTS 2020 (Menze et al. 2014). (b) Histograms of the brain
and tumor pixels for the four modalities.

2021, 2020). However, most FL methods for medical image
analysis only considered intramodal heterogeneity, limiting
their applicability to multimodal imaging in practice.
One such application is brain tumor segmentation in
multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Iv
et al. 2018). Specifically, four MRI modalities (in this work,
we refer to MRI sequences as modalities following literature
(Dorent et al. 2019; Menze et al. 2014; Shen and Gao 2019;
Zhou et al. 2021)) are commonly used to provide complementary information and support sub-region analysis: T1weighted (T1), contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (T1c), T2weighted (T2), and T2 fluid attenuation inversion recovery
(FLAIR), where the first two highlight tumor core and the
last two highlight peritumoral edema (Fig. 1(a)). When applying FL to such multimodal applications in practice, it is
not uncommon that some participant institutes only possess
a subset of the full modalities due to different protocols practiced, presenting a new challenge with the inter-modal heterogeneity (Fig. 1(b)) across the participants of FL. In such a
scenario, there can be two objectives for FL: 1) collectively
training an optimal global model for full-modal input, and
2) obtaining a personalized model for each participant (Chen
and Zhang 2022; Wang et al. 2019), adapted for its data characteristics, and more importantly, better than trained locally
without FL. To our knowledge, these two objectives were
rarely considered together in FL for medical image analysis.
In this paper, we propose a new FL framework with

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) enables participants to collaboratively train a global model on their collective data without
breaching privacy (Li et al. 2020). The decentralized mechanism makes it particularly suitable for privacy-sensitive application scenarios such as medical image analysis (Kaissis
et al. 2020; Adnan et al. 2022; Bercea et al. 2021; Yan et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1445

