The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cooperative Knowledge Distillation: A Learner Agnostic Approach
Michael Livanos, Ian Davidson, Stephen Wong
University of California, Davis
mjlivanos@ucdavis.edu, lavidson@cs.ucdavis.edu, stswong@ucdavis.edu

Abstract

In this work, we extend knowledge distillation to novel
settings by creating what we call cooperative distillation.
This is useful in domains where there are multiple learners,
each of which can be considered a semi-expert deficient in
one or more particular aspect(s) of a task, and can help overcome each other’s limitations. This setting is not covered
by existing distillation work. Consider our FashionMNIST
dataset experiment. Here, we create ten classifiers (one for
each class) trained with one class being undersampled by
95% to induce a conceptual deficiency. A model might understand the majority of clothes it sees, but since it hasn’t
seen many, say, ankle boots, it struggles to classify them correctly and will rely on other models to teach it this concept.
This will require targeted and multidirectional transfer: this
model needs to be taught only about ankle boots and can be
a teacher for other classes.
In the tradition of knowledge distillation simplicity, we
propose a learner agnostic, counterfactual-based cooperative
approach. Consider an instance x which model i can predict correctly, but model j cannot. We say that model i is a
qualified teacher to model j for the specific instance x. Our
method will have model i teach model j about x by generating a new type of quintessential counterfactual x′ which can
be added to j’s training set. We call this type of counterfactual quintessential because instead of modifying the instance
to change its label, we have the model i make this instance
look even more like the true class. Counterfactuals were chosen as the method to generate virtual instances since they are
both model agnostic and virtual instance generation is driven
by the model. Our approach is multidirectional as any model
can teach any other and focused as we transfer only some instances between models via counterfactuals.
Our work can be viewed as being in a similar setting to domain adaptation and transfer learning but has notable differences. Typically, domain adaptation is from a chosen single
expert source to a single novice target, whereas our work is
cooperative between semi-experts with no need to choose a
target/source. Further in our work, the domain of the teacher
and student models are the same which is not the case for
transfer learning. Our contributions are:

Knowledge distillation is a simple but powerful way to transfer knowledge between a teacher model to a student model.
Existing work suffers from at least one of the following key
limitations in terms of direction and scope of transfer which
restrict its use: all knowledge is transferred from teacher to
student regardless of whether or not that knowledge is useful, the student is the only one learning in this exchange,
and typically distillation transfers knowledge only from a single teacher to a single student. We formulate a novel form
of knowledge distillation in which many models can act as
both students and teachers which we call cooperative distillation. The models cooperate as follows: a model (the student) identifies specific deficiencies in it’s performance and
searches for another model (the teacher) who encodes learned
knowledge into instructional virtual instances via counterfactual instance generation. Because different models may have
different strengths and weaknesses, all models can act as either students or teachers (cooperation) when appropriate and
only distill knowledge in areas specific to their strengths (focus). Since counterfactuals as a paradigm are not tied to any
specific algorithm, we can use this method to distill knowledge between learners of different architectures, algorithms,
and even feature spaces. We demonstrate that our approach
not only outperforms baselines such as transfer learning, selfsupervised learning, and multiple knowledge distillation algorithms on several datasets, but it can also be used in settings
where the aforementioned techniques cannot.

Introduction
Knowledge distillation is a simple and elegant approach that
allows one machine (the teacher) to instruct another machine
(the student). Typically, the teacher model is more complex
than the student model, and knowledge distillation compresses models for efficiency (Hinton 2015), though more
recent work explores improving performance as well (Xie
et al. 2020). However, existing knowledge distillation has
its limitations. First, offline knowledge distillation, that is, a
trained teacher teaching an untrained student, assumes that
all of the teacher’s knowledge is good and should be learned
by the student even if the teacher performs worse than the
student. Second, it is unidirectional and singular; one teacher
informs one student, and students do not inform teachers.

• New Style of Distillation. We propose a simple yet powerful approach to a new form of distillation we call cooperative distillation. This is achieved using a novel type
(quintessential) and use of counterfactuals.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14124

