The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fairness with Censorship: Bridging the Gap between
Fairness Research and Real-World Deployment
Wenbin Zhang
Florida International University, FL, USA
wenbin.zhang@fiu.edu

Talk Summary

involving censored information and the general framework
for fair predictions in the presence of censorship allow us to
measure and mitigate discrimination amidst censorship that
bridges the gap between the design of a “fair” model in the
lab and its deployment in the real-world.

Real-life instances of Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based
decision-making systems have consistently demonstrated
discrimination and bias, particularly towards marginalized
groups. Consequently, a burgeoning body of research has
emerged to quantify and mitigate unfairness in AI. Most of
them address fairness by assuming the presence of the class
label, in which the fairness notions are defined based on the
class label either actual or predicted, and the same predictive model is trained contingent upon for new instance prediction. However, limited attention has been given to censoring settings, where the class label could be absent due to
censorship on the time to an event of interest, hindering the
application of existing fairness notions and approaches.
On the other hand, the censoring phenomenon is
widespread in various real-world applications and fairness
benchmark datasets, such as predicting criminal recidivism
(COMPAS dataset), customer profiling for business planning (KKBOX dataset), and estimating the probability of
a specific disease or clinical outcome in clinical prediction
(METABRIC dataset), among many others, in which the
participants could lost to follow-up, withdraw from the study
or experiencing a competing event, etc., leading to the absent of class label. Due to the inability to handle censorship
information, existing fairness studies focus on bias quantification and mitigation of class label proportions by either
excluding observations with uncertain class labels due to
censorship or omitting censorship information for these instances. However, both of them contain crucial information,
and their removal could bias results even towards those with
known class labels. To this end, this talk revisits fairness and
reveals idiosyncrasies of existing fairness literature assuming the availability of class label that limits their real-world
utility. The primary artifacts are formulating fairness with
censorship to account for scenarios where the class label is
not guaranteed, and a suite of corresponding new fairness
notions, algorithms, and theoretical constructs (Zhang and
Weiss 2021, 2022, 2023; Zhang, Hernandez-Boussard, and
Weiss 2023; Zhang et al. 2023). I argue that this formulation
has a broader applicability to practical scenarios concerning
fairness. I also show how the newly devised fairness notions

Biography
Dr. Wenbin Zhang is an Assistant Professor in the Knight
Foundation School of Computing & Information Sciences
at Florida International University, and an Associate Member at the Te Ipu o te Mahara Artificial Intelligence Institute. His research investigates the theoretical foundations of
machine learning with a focus on societal impact and welfare. In addition, he has worked in a number of application
areas, highlighted by work on healthcare, geophysics, transportation, forestry, and finance. He is a recipient of the NSF
CRII Award, and best paper awards/candidates at FAccT’23,
ICDM’23, DAMI and ICDM’21. He also regularly serves in
the organizing committees across computer science and interdisciplinary venues, most recently Travel Award Chair at
AAAI’24, Volunteer Chair at WSDM’24, and Student Program Chair at AIES’23.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant No. 2245895.

References
Zhang, W.; Hernandez-Boussard, T.; and Weiss, J. 2023.
Censored fairness through awareness. In Proceedings of
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37,
14611–14619.
Zhang, W.; Wang, Z.; Kim, J.; Cheng, C.; Oommen, T.;
Ravikumar, P.; and Weiss, J. 2023. Individual Fairness under
Uncertainty. In ECAI 2020, 3042–3049.
Zhang, W.; and Weiss, J. 2021. Fair Decision-making Under Uncertainty. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining (ICDM). IEEE.
Zhang, W.; and Weiss, J. C. 2022. Longitudinal fairness
with censorship. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, 12235–12243.
Zhang, W.; and Weiss, J. C. 2023. Fairness with censorship
and group constraints. Knowledge and Information Systems,
1–24.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22685

