The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Disentangled Contrastive Learning with Personalized Transfer
for Cross-Domain Recommendation
Jing Liu, Lele Sun, Weizhi Nie, Peiguang Jing, Yuting Su*
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
{jliu tju, sunlele, weizhinie, pgjing, ytsu}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

layers to combine the representations learned within their respective domains (see Fig. 1 (a)). For instance, CoNet (Hu,
Zhang, and Yang 2018) utilizes cross-connections networks to transfer information. To avoid the negative impact
caused by transferring domain-specific features, Disentangled Cross-Domain Recommendation (DCDR) has gained
traction. The typical paradigm of DCDR is illustrated in
Fig. 1 (b). MADD (Zhang et al. 2023b) introduces an orthogonal loss to differentiate between domain-invariant and
domain-specific user features within intra-domains. DisenCDR (Cao et al. 2022) employs variational inference for
disentanglement, relying on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence distance of user features.
However, we argue that the existing DCDR methods lead
to sub-optimal feature disentanglement due to three reasons. Firstly, it is overlooked that each interaction carries an
individual underlying intent, implying that diverse interactions play varying roles in generating disentangled features.
For example, when transferring knowledge from clothes
to books, purchasing a cotton skirt may enhance domainspecific features more than domain-invariant features, as
cotton material is of little relevance to book recommendation. Neglecting the distinctiveness of interactions hinders
the model from capturing finer-grained disentangled representations. Secondly, existing orthogonal loss or KL divergence used for feature disentanglement only manipulate
user features regardless of items. The domain-specific and
domain-invariant user features are constrained to stay away
from each other (Fig. 1 (b)) whereas there is no guarantee on
their corresponding correlation to individual item. Yet, modern RSs collectively consider both user and item features for
practical recommendation, which implies the inefficiency
of existing feature disentanglement methods. Thirdly, even
with disentangled user representations in hand, effective
transfer of domain-invariant features remains a formidable
challenge. The diversity of user personalities highlights the
need for personalized cross-domain transfer, which is currently untouched in existing DCDR methods that simply
adopt weighted fusion or concatenation (Zhang et al. 2023a).
In this paper, we propose to address the above-mentioned
limitations through Graph Disentanglement and Contrastive
learning with meta-networks for CDR. Specifically, to capture interaction nuances and refine disentangled features,
we design an adaptive parameter-free filter in graph convo-

Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) has been proven to
effectively alleviate the data sparsity problem in Recommender System (RS). Recent CDR methods often disentangle
user features into domain-invariant and domain-specific features for efficient cross-domain knowledge transfer. Despite
showcasing robust performance, three crucial aspects remain
unexplored for existing disentangled CDR approaches: i) The
significance nuances of the interaction behaviors are ignored
in generating disentangled features; ii) The user features are
disentangled irrelevant to the individual items to be recommended; iii) The general knowledge transfer overlooks the
user’s personality when interacting with diverse items. To this
end, we propose a Graph Disentangled Contrastive framework for CDR (GDCCDR) with personalized transfer by
meta-networks. An adaptive parameter-free filter is proposed
to gauge the significance of diverse interactions, thereby facilitating more refined disentangled representations. In sight of
the success of Contrastive Learning (CL) in RS, we propose
two CL-based constraints for item-aware disentanglement.
Proximate CL ensures the coherence of domain-invariant features between domains, while eliminatory CL strives to disentangle features within each domains using mutual information between users and items. Finally, for domain-invariant
features, we adopt meta-networks to achieve personalized
transfer. Experimental results on four real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of GDCCDR over state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Recommender systems (RS) find wide-ranging applications
on consumer platforms such as Kuaishou and Amazon, primarily due to their effectiveness in capturing personalized
user preferences. However, the presence of limited useritem interactions in certain scenarios (i.e., data sparsity issue) places difficulties in creating precise interest models. To
tackle this, Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) seeks to
transfer valuable knowledge from the source domain to improve performance on the target domain.
The existing CDR methods can be roughly divided into
two branches, which we call blended methods and disentangled methods. Blended approaches employ diverse transfer
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8769

