The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Anytime Multi-Agent Path Finding Using
Bandit-Based Large Neighborhood Search
Thomy Phan, Taoan Huang, Bistra Dilkina, Sven Koenig
University of Southern California, USA
{thomy.phan, taoanhua, dilkina, skoenig}@usc.edu

Abstract

of paths, until the time budget runs out. MAPF-LNS represents the current state-of-the-art in anytime MAPF and
has been experimentally shown to scale up to large-scale
scenarios with hundreds of agents (Li et al. 2021). Due to
its increasing popularity, several extensions have been recently proposed like fast local repairing, integration of primal heuristics, or machine learning-guided neighborhood
selection (Huang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022; Lam et al. 2023).
However, MAPF-LNS and its variants currently suffer
from two limitations that can lead to low-quality solutions
in general:
1. The neighborhood size is typically fixed, which limits the
flexibility of the optimization process, thus possibly affecting the solution quality, especially for a large number
of agents (Li et al. 2021). Therefore, prior tuning is required – in addition to the actual LNS procedure – to
obtain good solutions.
2. Roulette wheel selection is commonly used to execute
and adapt the destroy heuristic selection to determine the
neighborhood (Mara et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021). During optimization, roulette wheel selection could greedily
converge to poor choices due to the lack of exploration.
Offline machine learning can guide the selection with solution score prediction but requires sufficient data acquisition and feature engineering (Huang et al. 2022).
In this paper, we address these limitations by proposing
Bandit-based Adaptive LArge Neighborhood search Combined with Exploration (BALANCE). BALANCE uses a bilevel multi-armed bandit scheme to adapt the selection of
destroy heuristics and neighborhood sizes on the fly during
search. Our contributions are as follows:
• We formulate BALANCE as a simple but effective
MAPF-LNS framework with an adaptive selection of destroy heuristics and neighborhood sizes during search.
• We propose and discuss three concrete instantiations of
BALANCE based on roulette wheel selection, UCB1,
and Thompson Sampling, respectively.
• We evaluate BALANCE on multiple maps from the
MAPF benchmark set and empirically demonstrate cost
improvements of at least 50% compared to state-of-theart anytime MAPF in large-scale scenarios. We find that
Thompson Sampling performs particularly well compared to alternative multi-armed bandit algorithms.

Anytime multi-agent path finding (MAPF) is a promising
approach to scalable path optimization in large-scale multiagent systems. State-of-the-art anytime MAPF is based on
Large Neighborhood Search (LNS), where a fast initial solution is iteratively optimized by destroying and repairing a
fixed number of parts, i.e., the neighborhood of the solution,
using randomized destroy heuristics and prioritized planning.
Despite their recent success in various MAPF instances, current LNS-based approaches lack exploration and flexibility
due to greedy optimization with a fixed neighborhood size
which can lead to low-quality solutions in general. So far,
these limitations have been addressed with extensive prior effort in tuning or offline machine learning beyond actual planning. In this paper, we focus on online learning in LNS and
propose Bandit-based Adaptive LArge Neighborhood search
Combined with Exploration (BALANCE). BALANCE uses a
bi-level multi-armed bandit scheme to adapt the selection of
destroy heuristics and neighborhood sizes on the fly during
search. We evaluate BALANCE on multiple maps from the
MAPF benchmark set and empirically demonstrate performance improvements of at least 50% compared to state-ofthe-art anytime MAPF in large-scale scenarios. We find that
Thompson Sampling performs particularly well compared to
alternative multi-armed bandit algorithms.

1

Introduction

A wide range of real-world applications like goods transportation in warehouses, search and rescue missions, and
traffic management can be formulated as Multi-Agent Path
Finding (MAPF) problem, where the goal is to find collisionfree paths for multiple agents with each having an assigned
start and goal location. Finding optimal solutions, w.r.t. minimal flowtime or makespan is NP-hard, which limits scalability of most state-of-the-art MAPF solvers (Ratner and
Warmuth 1986; Yu and LaValle 2013; Sharon et al. 2012).
Anytime MAPF based on Large Neighborhood Search
(LNS) is a popular approach to finding fast and near-optimal
solutions to the MAPF problem within a fixed time budget
(Li et al. 2021). Given an initial feasible solution and a set
of destroy heuristics, LNS iteratively destroys and replans
so-called neighborhoods of the solution, i.e., a fixed number
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17514

