The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Diffusions under Uncertainty
Hao Huang1 , Qian Yan1 , Keqi Han1 , Ting Gan1 , Jiawei Jiang1 , Quanqing Xu2 , Chuanhui Yang2
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
OceanBase, Ant Group, China
{haohuang, qy, hankeqi, ganting, jiawei.jiang}@whu.edu.cn, {xuquanqing.xqq, rizhao.ych}@oceanbase.com

Abstract

understanding of the underlying interactions between nodes,
and is essential for developing strategies to control future
diffusion processes (Huang et al. 2021).
Most existing approaches assume that observation data
contain the exact times when node infections occurred.
With this temporal information, they determine potential
influence relationships between nodes by identifying frequent sequences of node infections, since nodes infected
sequentially within a short time interval are considered more
likely to possess influence relationships (Gomez-Rodriguez,
Leskovec, and Krause 2010; Myers and Leskovec 2010;
Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2011; GomezRodriguez and Schölkopf 2012; Du et al. 2012; GomezRodriguez, Leskovec, and Schölkopf 2013a,b; Daneshmand
et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2014). Nonetheless, monitoring
every node constantly during each diffusion process to
obtain such temporal information of node infections is often
expensive in practice. Therefore, some other approaches aim
to carry out diffusion network inference without temporal
information, using only the eventual infection statuses of
nodes observed at the end of each diffusion process (Amin,
Heidari, and Kearns 2014; Huang et al. 2019, 2021, 2022,
2023a; Han et al. 2020; Gan et al. 2021). Toward this,
they measure the statistical correlations of node infections,
and identify influence relationships by checking which node
pairs have high infection correlations.
In this paper, we study the problem of diffusion network
inference in a less idealized and more realistic setting, i.e.,
only probabilistic information about node infection statuses
is provided. This uncertainty is interpreted differently in
various contexts. For example, in epidemic containment, it is
difficult to confirm the infection statuses of outpatients based
on observable symptoms such as headache and fatigue, since
there is a certain probability that these symptoms may be
caused by other reasons like lack of sleep; in viral marketing
campaigns, it is often the case that the respondents are more
prone to probabilistic feedback than a clear-cut answer. To
the best of our knowledge, only one existing work (Sefer
and Kingsford 2015) has partially addressed the problem
of inferring diffusion networks based on probabilistic data.
In addition to the probabilistic information about node infection statuses, that work further requires prior knowledge
on the transmission probabilities between different node
statuses, and the temporal information of node infections.

To infer a diffusion network based on observations from
historical diffusion processes, existing approaches assume
that observation data contain exact occurrence time of each
node infection, or at least the eventual infection statuses of
nodes in each diffusion process. They determine potential
influence relationships between nodes by identifying frequent
sequences, or statistical correlations, among node infections.
In some real-world settings, such as the spread of epidemics,
tracing exact infection times is often infeasible due to a
high cost; even obtaining precise infection statuses of nodes
is a challenging task, since observable symptoms such as
headache only partially reveal a node’s true status. In this
work, we investigate how to effectively infer a diffusion
network from observation data with uncertainty. Provided
with only probabilistic information about node infection
statuses, we formulate the problem of diffusion network
inference as a constrained nonlinear regression w.r.t. the
probabilistic data. An alternating maximization method is
designed to solve this regression problem iteratively, and
the improvement of solution quality in each iteration can be
theoretically guaranteed. Empirical studies are conducted on
both synthetic and real-world networks, and the results verify
the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach.

Introduction
The spread of viewpoints, rumors, and diseases are often
modelled as probabilistic processes over a diffusion network. In the network, a directed edge represents a parentchild influence relationship, which indicates that the parent
node can influence the child node with a certain probability. In most cases, such influence relationships are not
naturally visible or traceable, and we only observe a set
of diffusion results from a limited number of historical
diffusion processes (Gan et al. 2021). Diffusion network
inference aims to infer the diffusion network structure (i.e.,
the topology of influence relationships) from the observation
data. This problem has received considerable attention in
areas such as information propagation (He et al. 2015),
viral marketing (Leskovec, Adamic, and Huberman 2007),
and epidemic prevention (Wallinga and Teunis 2004) since
the inferred diffusion network structure enables an intuitive
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20430

