The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bidirectional Temporal Plan Graph: Enabling Switchable Passing Orders for
More Efficient Multi-Agent Path Finding Plan Execution
Yifan Su, Rishi Veerapaneni, Jiaoyang Li
Carnegie Mellon University
{yifansu,rveerapa}@andrew.cmu.edu, jiaoyangli@cmu.edu

Abstract
The Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) problem involves
planning collision-free paths for multiple agents in a shared
environment. The majority of MAPF solvers rely on the assumption that an agent can arrive at a specific location at a
specific timestep. However, real-world execution uncertainties can cause agents to deviate from this assumption, leading
to collisions and deadlocks. Prior research solves this problem by having agents follow a Temporal Plan Graph (TPG),
enforcing a consistent passing order at every location as defined in the MAPF plan. However, we show that TPGs are
overly strict because, in some circumstances, satisfying the
passing order requires agents to wait unnecessarily, leading
to longer execution time. To overcome this issue, we introduce a new graphical representation called a Bidirectional
Temporal Plan Graph (BTPG), which allows switching passing orders during execution to avoid unnecessary waiting
time. We design two anytime algorithms for constructing a
BTPG: BTPG-naı̈ve and BTPG-optimized. Experimental results show that following BTPGs consistently outperforms
following TPGs, reducing unnecessary waits by 8-20%.

(a) Scenario 1.

(b) Scenario 2.

(c) TPG for Scenario 2.

Figure 1: Motivating examples. In Scenario 1 (2), the MAPF
plan requires the agents to follow the arrows with the green
agent passing through location F (E) before the blue agent.

of stopping in place, leading to delays. Both Ma, Kumar, and
Koenig (2017) and Hoenig et al. (2016) show that as long as
the agents adhere to the inter-agent dependencies required
by the MAPF plan, they can complete their respective paths
without collisions or deadlocks. These dependencies ensure
that the order in which the agents pass through every location is consistent with the planned path. Both studies capture these dependencies by defining a graph representation,
called the Temporal Plan Graph (TPG). Requiring agents
to execute according to the dependencies in the TPG ensures completion of the MAPF plan without collisions and
deadlocks, even if agents reach some locations at different
timesteps than specified in the MAPF plan.
In Figure 1a, the MAPF plan specifies that the green agent
should pass location F before the blue agent. If they follow
the corresponding TPG, the green agent will pass F first.
Switching this order would lead to a deadlock, with the blue
agent trying to move from F to E and the green agent from E
to F. In contrast, Figure 1b shows a different scenario. Here,
the green agent is supposed to pass location E first. If the
green agent is delayed at D, the TPG makes the blue agent
wait at B until the green agent passes E. However, if the
green agent is delayed, the blue agent can safely pass E first
without causing a deadlock. This flexibility in switching the
order of passing can reduce unnecessary waiting and shorten
the overall execution time.
The goal of this paper is to determine when the dependencies can be switched, allowing agents to pass such locations
in a “first-come-first-served” manner in execution to minimize unnecessary waiting time. Our main contributions are:

Introduction
The Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) problem involves
finding paths for multiple agents to reach their respective
destinations from their starting points in a shared environment without collisions (Stern et al. 2019). The importance
of solving the MAPF problem is reflected in its wide range
of applications, such as warehouse automation (Varambally,
Li, and Koenig 2022), traffic management (Li et al. 2021a),
and drone swarm coordination (Honig et al. 2018).
The MAPF problem discretizes time into unit timesteps,
assuming that an agent can reach a particular location at a
particular timestep. However, in practice, agents face challenges such as communication delays, physical constraints,
or hardware failures that prevent them from meeting this assumption. When an agent is unable to reach a location required by the MAPF plan at a specific timestep, it may result
in deadlocks or collisions with other agents.
To address this issue, Ma, Kumar, and Koenig (2017) proposed a MAPF with Delay Probability (MAPF-DP) model
where, at each timestep, each agent has a certain probability
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Defining a new graphical representation called the Bidi-

17559

