The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EDA: Evolving and Distinct Anchors for Multimodal Motion Prediction
Longzhong Lin1,2 , Xuewu Lin2 , Tianwei Lin2 , Lichao Huang2 , Rong Xiong1 , Yue Wang1 *
1

Zhejiang University
2
Horizon Robotics
linlongzhong2000@zju.edu.cn, {xuewu.lin, tianwei.lin, lichao.huang}@horizon.cc, {rxiong, ywang24}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Motion prediction is a crucial task in autonomous driving,
and one of its major challenges lands in the multimodality of
future behaviors. Many successful works have utilized mixture models which require identification of positive mixture
components, and correspondingly fall into two main lines:
prediction-based and anchor-based matching. The prediction
clustering phenomenon in prediction-based matching makes
it difficult to pick representative trajectories for downstream
tasks, while the anchor-based matching suffers from a limited regression capability. In this paper, we introduce a novel
paradigm, named Evolving and Distinct Anchors (EDA), to
define the positive and negative components for multimodal
motion prediction based on mixture models. We enable anchors to evolve and redistribute themselves under specific
scenes for an enlarged regression capacity. Furthermore, we
select distinct anchors before matching them with the ground
truth, which results in impressive scoring performance. Our
approach enhances all metrics compared to the baseline
MTR, particularly with a notable relative reduction of 13.5%
in Miss Rate, resulting in state-of-the-art performance on the
Waymo Open Motion Dataset. Appendix and code are available at https://github.com/Longzhong-Lin/EDA.

Figure 1: The outcomes from different matching paradigms.
All of the strategies share the same network structure with
64 learnable queries. The top 6 predictions are selected from
the original ones by non-maximum suppression (NMS).

term, which necessitates identifying the positive and negative mixture components. For selecting positive components, there are two main categories of existing methods:
prediction-based and anchor-based matching.
The prediction-based matching methods (Ngiam et al.
2021; Varadarajan et al. 2022) choose the predicted trajectory that is closest to the ground truth as the positive component, which is demonstrated in Fig. 2(a). Predictions generated by these methods honestly reflect the high degree of
uncertainty in future behaviors, which results in an originally lower minimum error and miss rate (Fig. 1(a)). However, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c), the output trajectories from
prediction-based matching tend to cluster around the most
probable regions and similar scores are made upon such predictions, making it difficult to pick representative trajectories for downstream tasks (Fig. 1(b)).
As demonstrated in Fig. 2(b), the anchor-based matching
methods (Shi et al. 2022a; Chai et al. 2019) associate each
component with an anchor endpoint or trajectory, and select
the positive one corresponding to the closest predefined anchor to ground truth. The introduction of spatial priors considerably alleviates the burden of optimization in classification, and the methods would prefer to generate trajecto-

Introduction
In the field of autonomous driving, motion prediction is
an important task which contributes to scene understanding and safe planning. Motion prediction utilizes historical
agent states and road maps to predict the future trajectories
of traffic participants. In recent years, an increasing amount
of research works (2023; 2023; 2022a; 2022; 2021; 2021;
2020; 2019; 2018; 2017) have focused on motion prediction.
A major challenge of motion forecasting is the multimodality of future behaviors, which means an agent could carry
out one of many underlying possibilities.
A bunch of works (Ngiam et al. 2021; Varadarajan et al.
2022; Shi et al. 2022a; Chai et al. 2019) have adopted mixture models, like Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), to represent multimodal future behaviors and have gained great
success, where potential trajectories are modeled as scored
components. These approaches typically employ a winnertakes-all regression loss in conjunction with a classification
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3432

