The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Physics-Informed Graph Neural Networks for Water Distribution Systems
Inaam Ashraf, Janine Strotherm, Luca Hermes, Barbara Hammer
Center for Cognitive Interaction Technology, Bielefeld University, Inspiration 1, 33619 Bielefeld, Germany
mashraf@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de, jstrotherm@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de, lhermes@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de,
bhammer@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

and Deep Learning (DL) to solve various tasks in critical infrastructure systems (Dick et al. 2019). In this contribution,
we center on one important aspect related to planning and
control of WDS: Since WDS cannot be experimented with in
practice, the efficient emulation of realistic large-scale WDS
constitutes a crucial prerequisite for planning and optimization based on such digital twins. We investigate how to derive an efficient emulation of WDS based on DL.
Currently, hydraulic simulators play a key role in planning
and expansion of WDS. The EPANET simulator (Rossman
et al. 2020) is one of the most popular hydraulic simulator
for WDS. However, it requires considerable resources for
extended time simulations that scale non-linearly with the
size of the WDS, making WDS optimization a slow process.
Since critical infrastructure systems such as WDS are naturally structured as graphs, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
carry great promises as an alternative, faster, modeling tool.
A WDS consists of Nn junctions and Ne links connecting
these junctions. Junctions can be reservoirs, tanks or water
consumers, while links can be pipes, valves or pumps. The
first step in planning a WDS is to define the structure, i.e.,
the number of junctions and links. Next, one can estimate
the hydraulic state at every junction and link, given a set of
features. These features are the head (see section ) at the
reservoirs and the water demand of every consumer. Based
on this, one needs to estimate the head at every junction and
the flow through every link. EPANET iteratively solves Nn
differential equations (Rossman et al. 2020), leading to slow
simulations for extended time or larger systems.
In this paper, we combine a local graph convolutional neural network (GCN) model with a physics informed global
algorithm that emulates the hydraulic simulator. Since explicit values for heads or flows are not available, we use
hydraulic formulas governing the relationships between demands, heads and flows, instead, as physics-informed learning signals.
Our key contributions are as follows:

Water distribution systems (WDS) are an integral part of critical infrastructure which is pivotal to urban development. As
70% of the world’s population will likely live in urban environments in 2050, efficient simulation and planning tools
for WDS play a crucial role in reaching UN’s sustainable developmental goal (SDG) 6 – “Clean water and sanitation for
all”. In this realm, we propose a novel and efficient machine
learning emulator, more precisely, a physics-informed deep
learning (DL) model, for hydraulic state estimation in WDS.
Using a recursive approach, our model only needs a few graph
convolutional neural network (GCN) layers and employs an
innovative algorithm based on message passing. Unlike conventional machine learning tasks, the model uses hydraulic
principles to infer two additional hydraulic state features in
the process of reconstructing the available ground truth feature in an unsupervised manner. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first DL approach to emulate the popular hydraulic simulator EPANET, utilizing no additional information. Like most DL models and unlike the hydraulic simulator, our model demonstrates vastly faster emulation times that
do not increase drastically with the size of the WDS. Moreover, we achieve high accuracy on the ground truth and very
similar results compared to the hydraulic simulator as demonstrated through experiments on five real-world WDS datasets.

Introduction
As it is expected that 70% of world’s population will live
in urban areas in 2050 (Ritchie and Roser 2018), urban development presents a number of complex challenges. In the
light of deep uncertainties caused, among others, by climate change and migration, building smart cities requires
flexible and efficient short and long-term planning, monitoring and expansion of its critical infrastructure, i.e., its
transportation systems, electricity distribution systems, and
water distribution systems (WDS). Reliable WDS, in particular, constitute one critical demand of UN’s SDG 6. In
this realm, AI technologies carry great promises since AI
can be used for intelligent planning, monitoring and control
of these systems (Eichenberger and et al. 2022; Omitaomu
and Niu 2021; Kammoun, Kammoun, and Abid 2022). Currently, there exist first approaches of both classical AI tools

• We propose a novel GNN architecture which combines
trainable local aspects with global state estimation.
• We use hydraulic principles to infer the required state
features rather than example-driven supervised learning.
• We display the accuracy of the model for various WDS
benchmarks.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21905

