The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Complexity of Neural Network Training and ETR:
Extensions with Effectively Continuous Functions
Teemu Hankala1 , Miika Hannula1 , Juha Kontinen1 , Jonni Virtema2
1

University of Helsinki, Finland
2
University of Sheffield, UK
teemu.hankala@helsinki.fi, miika.hannula@helsinki.fi, juha.kontinen@helsinki.fi, j.t.virtema@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
The training problem of neural networks (NNs) is known to be
∃R-complete with respect to ReLU and linear activation functions. We show that the training problem for NNs equipped
with arbitrary activation functions is polynomial-time bireducible to the existential theory of the reals extended with the
corresponding activation functions. For effectively continuous
activation functions (e.g., the sigmoid function), we obtain an
inclusion to low levels of the arithmetical hierarchy. Consequently, the sigmoid activation function leads to the existential
theory of the reals with the exponential function, and hence the
decidability of training NNs using the sigmoid activation function is equivalent to the decidability of the existential theory of
the reals with the exponential function, a long-standing open
problem. In contrast, we obtain that the training problem is
undecidable if sinusoidal activation functions are considered.

Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) constitute the driving force behind
the remarkable achievements of modern artificial intelligence
and machine learning. A crucial stage in their development is
training, during which NNs adapt to training data and form
the capability to generalize their learned patterns to novel
scenarios. The objective is to set up the NN’s internal parameters in a way that minimizes the selected cost function. In
practice, this involves gradually adjusting the NN’s weights
and biases, making use of cost function gradients at each step.
Due to its inherently local nature, and since the cost function
is not necessarily convex, the process is not guaranteed to
converge to the cost function’s global minimum. It is then natural to ask: What is the computational cost of training neural
networks in a globally optimized manner? The corresponding
decision problem is to decide whether it is even possible to
train the NN to work under a given threshold error.
This paper studies the computational complexity of neural
network training problems parameterized by various activation functions. Such a training problem asks, given a neural
network architecture, finite training data, a cost function and
a threshold, whether there exist real-valued edge weights
and neuron biases for the network such that the total training error with respect to the training data is below the given
threshold value. Neural network training problems have been
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12278

studied extensively (see (Šı́ma 2002) for a comprehensive
historical survey). Recently, certain versions of this problem were shown to be complete for the complexity class ∃R
(Abrahamsen, Kleist, and Miltzow 2021; Bertschinger et al.
2022), defined as the class of all decision problems P that
are polynomial-time reducible to the existential theory of the
reals (ETR). This class has turned out to have many interesting complete problems, such as the so-called art gallery
problem (Abrahamsen, Adamaszek, and Miltzow 2022), twodimensional packing problems (Abrahamsen, Miltzow, and
Seiferth 2020), and certain decision problems on symmetric
Nash equilibria (Bilò and Mavronicolas 2017).
Hardness results for complexity classes above NP give
theoretical explanations on why methods suitable for solving problems in NP do not work for the training problem.
The activation functions in the ∃R-complete training problems mentioned above are restricted to linear functions and
the rectified linear unit (ReLU). In practice, there are also
other useful activation functions, such as the standard logistic
sigmoid function, which is defined in terms of the exponential function, and sinusoidal activation functions. However,
whereas ETR is NP-hard and included in PSPACE (Canny
1988), it is a long-standing and influential open problem
posed by Alfred Tarski whether exponential arithmetic is
decidable. This problem is known to be related to another
major open question – Schanuel’s conjecture – in transcendental number theory (see, e.g., (Wilkie 1997; Servi 2008)).
On the other hand, the theory of the reals extended by the
sine function is known to be undecidable, even under some
further restrictions on the allowed syntax of the formulae
(Richardson 1968).
In this article, we generalize the connection between ETR
and the neural network training problem from linear functions
and the ReLU activation function to arbitrary real-valued
functions. On the ETR side, the corresponding activation
function is added as a new function symbol to the signature
of the underlying structure (R, +, ×, <, =, 0, 1). We show
that the NN training problem using f as an activation function together with the identity activation function is complete
for the extension ∃Rf of the class ∃R. In other words, this
training problem is polynomial-time many-one bireducible
to the existential theory of the reals extended with f . Besides
a single activation function f , we allow the use of a set τ of
activation functions both in the training problem and in the

