The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Wavelet Dynamic Selection Network for Inertial Sensor Signal Enhancement
Yifeng Wang, Yi Zhao*
School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
wangyifeng@stu.hit.edu.cn, zhao.yi@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

consumption, they are widely used in various applications
such as navigation (Li et al. 2022), robotics (Gromov et al.
2019), gaming (Ehatisham-ul Haq et al. 2021), and health
monitoring (Montesinos, Castaldo, and Pecchia 2018). In
addition, inertial sensors are not affected by light, occlusion,
noise, and other external environments during data acquisition compared with optical sensors, ultrasonic sensors, and
other motion capture equipment (Liu et al. 2020a; Li et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2018).
In the field of localization and navigation, inertial sensors can be used to estimate the location and trajectory of
an object or a vehicle, which play a critical role when GPS
signals are unavailable indoors, underground, or underwater (Zhuang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2020; Ferrera et al.
2019). Inertial sensors can also be combined with other sensors, such as cameras, lasers, or radio signals, to improve the
accuracy and robustness of localization and navigation systems (Qin, Li, and Shen 2018; Weber, Gühmann, and Seel
2021). Moreover, inertial sensors can serve to create maps of
unknown environments by tracking motion (Esfahani et al.
2019a). In the field of health care and sports engineering,
inertial sensors can be worn on the body or attached to medical devices to monitor the physical activity and health status
of a person (Qiu et al. 2022). For instance, inertial sensors
are employed to measure the step length, cadence, and stride
variability of a Parkinson’s patient (Nguyen et al. 2017), and
detect falls, injuries, or abnormal behaviors of elderly people or patients (Tunca, Salur, and Ersoy 2019). In the field
of gaming and virtual reality, inertial sensors create immersive and interactive virtual reality experiences by tracking
the motion and orientation of the user (Caserman, GarciaAgundez, and Göbel 2019; Wang and Zhao 2024). Inertial
sensors are also used to control the movement of virtual
characters by mimicking the user’s actions (Pan and Hamilton 2018). Moreover, an inertial measurement unit (IMU)
can simulate realistic physical effects such as gravity, inertia,
and collisions in virtual environments (Foehn et al. 2022). In
summary, inertial sensors are versatile and powerful for object orientation and tracking in various contexts (Liu et al.
2020b; Burri et al. 2016).
However, the major drawback of inertial sensors in practice is the presence of noise, including quantization noise,
scale factor error, cross-coupling error, etc., which can
severely affect their accuracy and reliability (Chen et al.

As attitude and motion sensing components, inertial sensors
are widely used in various portable devices, covering consumer electronics, sports health, aerospace, etc. But the severe intrinsic errors of inertial sensors heavily restrain their
function implementation, especially the advanced functionality, including motion trajectory recovery and motion semantic recognition, which attracts considerable attention. As a
mainstream signal processing method, wavelet is hailed as
the mathematical microscope of signal due to the plentiful
and diverse wavelet basis functions. However, complicated
noise types and application scenarios of inertial sensors make
selecting wavelet basis perplexing. To this end, we propose
a wavelet dynamic selection network (WDSNet), which intelligently selects the appropriate wavelet basis for variable
inertial signals. In addition, existing deep learning architectures excel at extracting features from input data but neglect
to learn the characteristics of target categories, which is essential to enhance the category awareness capability, thereby
improving the selection of wavelet basis. Therefore, we propose a category representation mechanism (CRM), which enables the network to extract and represent category features
without increasing trainable parameters. Furthermore, CRM
transforms the common fully connected network into category representations, which provide closer supervision to the
feature extractor than the far and trivial one-hot classification
labels. We call this process of imposing interpretability on a
network and using it to supervise the feature extractor the feature supervision mechanism, and its effectiveness is demonstrated experimentally and theoretically in this paper. The enhanced inertial signal can perform impracticable tasks with
regard to the original signal, such as trajectory reconstruction.
Both quantitative and visual results show that WDSNet outperforms the existing methods. Remarkably, WDSNet, as a
weakly-supervised method, achieves the state-of-the-art performance of all the compared fully-supervised methods.

Introduction
Inertial sensors can provide information about the position,
velocity, attitude, and movement patterns of a moving object in different environments (Shaeffer 2013; Madgwick,
Harrison, and Vaidyanathan 2011; Esfahani et al. 2019b).
Due to their small size, portable wearing, and low power
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15680

