The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Safe Action Models with Partial Observability
Hai S. Le1 , Brendan Juba1 , Roni Stern2
1

Washington University in St. Louis
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
bjuba@wustl.edu, hsle@wustl.edu, roni.stern@gmail.com
2

Abstract

goals. SAM Learning, however, is limited to learning from
fully observed trajectories.
In this paper, we propose two algorithms for learning safe
PDDL models in partially observed domains. The first algorithm, PI-SAM, extends SAM (Juba, Le, and Stern 2021) to
support partially observable domains by only applying the
SAM learning rules when a literal is observed in the states
immediately before and after an action is applied. PI-SAM
is easy to implement, has a polynomial running time, and
outputs a classical planning PDDL model that provides the
desired safety guarantee. The second algorithm, EPI-SAM,
utilizes observations that PI-SAM ignores to learn a stronger
formulation. EPI-SAM compiles its knowledge and uncertainty about the underlying action model into a conformant
planning problem, whose solution is also a safe solution to
the underlying classical planning problem. We analyze the
running time of EPI-SAM and prove that the conformant
planning problem created by EPI-SAM is the strongest safe
problem formulation.
In terms of sample complexity, we show that in general it
is not possible to guarantee efficient learning of a safe action
model when the observations are partially observable. Nevertheless, we introduce a form of bounded concealment assumption, adapted from prior work on learning from partial
observations (Michael 2010), under which both PI-SAM and
EPI-SAM are guaranteed probabilistic completeness with a
tractable sample complexity. Experimentally, we evaluated
the performance of both algorithms and compared them with
FAMA (Aineto, Celorrio, and Onaindia 2019) on common
domains from the International Planning Competition (IPC)
(McDermott 2000). Our results show that PI-SAM and EPISAM often outperform FAMA in terms of the number of
samples they require to learn effective action models, while
still preserving our safety guarantee.

A common approach for solving planning problems is to
model them in a formal language such as the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL), and then use an appropriate PDDL planner. Several algorithms for learning PDDL
models from observations have been proposed but plans created with these learned models may not be sound. We propose
two algorithms for learning PDDL models that are guaranteed to be safe to use even when given observations that include partially observable states. We analyze these algorithms
theoretically, characterizing the sample complexity each algorithm requires to guarantee probabilistic completeness. We
also show experimentally that our algorithms are often better
than FAMA, a state-of-the-art PDDL learning algorithm.

Introduction
Classical planning, i.e., planning in a discrete, deterministic, and fully observable environment, is a useful abstraction
for solving many planning problems. In order to use these
planners, however, one must first model the problem at hand
in a formal language, such as the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL). This is not an easy task. Therefore,
several approaches to learning a PDDL model from observations have been proposed (Aineto, Celorrio, and Onaindia 2019; Stern and Juba 2017; Juba, Le, and Stern 2021;
Cresswell, McCluskey, and West 2013; Wu, Yang, and Jiang
2007). A prominent example is FAMA (Aineto, Celorrio,
and Onaindia 2019), which is a state-of-the-art algorithm for
learning a PDDL model from observations. A major advantage of FAMA is that it is able to learn a PDDL model even if
the given observations are incomplete, in the sense that only
a subset of the actions and state variables are observed. A
major disadvantage of FAMA and most PDDL model learning algorithms is that they do not provide any guarantee
on the performance of the learned model. Plans generated
with the learned model may not be executable or may fail to
achieve their intended goals. SAM Learning (Stern and Juba
2017; Juba, Le, and Stern 2021; Juba and Stern 2022; Mordoch et al. 2022) is a recently introduced family of learning
algorithms that provide safety guarantees over the learned
PDDL model: any plan generated with the model they return is guaranteed to be executable and achieve the intended

Background and Problem Definition
A classical planning domain is defined by a tuple ⟨F, A⟩
where F is a set of Boolean state variables, also known as
fluents, and A is a set of actions. A state is a complete assignment of values to all fluents, i.e., s : F → {true, false}.
A partial state is an assignment of values to some (possibly all) of the fluents. For a fluent f and a partial state p,
we denote by p[f ] the value assigned to f according to p. A
partial state p is consistent with a partial state p′ if for every

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20159

