The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

STAR: Boosting Low-Resource Information Extraction by Structure-to-Text Data
Generation with Large Language Models
Mingyu Derek Ma1 , Xiaoxuan Wang1 , Po-Nien Kung1
P. Jeffrey Brantingham2 , Nanyun Peng1 , Wei Wang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
2
Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles
{ma, xw27, ponienkung, violetpeng, weiwang}@cs.ucla.edu, branting@ucla.edu
Abstract

models are also expected to be aware of the dynamic skeleton of the event structure because the different predicted
event types result in their respective sets of argument roles
being filled in. Supervised models learn the implicit requirement and ontology knowledge from training data in the form
of (passage, target structure) pairs (Ma et al. 2021a). Promptbased inference-only approaches with Large Language
Models (LLMs) are shown to be unable to solve these complicated IE tasks (Li et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2023; Han et al.
2023). In real-world applications, text from various sources
and domains contains a broad range of output spaces and
label definitions. It is costly and rigid to annotate sufficient
training data, thus, performing IE given minimal seed data
instances is of particular interest for realistic IE applications.
The limited resources make understanding the task requirement and structure skeleton even harder. Existing lowresource IE methods mostly leverage other tasks via transfer
learning (Huang et al. 2018; Zhang, Wang, and Roth 2021)
or reformulate the task into alternative data-rich tasks for
indirect supervision (Sainz et al. 2022; Xu, Ma, and Chen
2023; Lu et al. 2022). These works heavily depend on the
availability of the source tasks’ data and the compatibility
between tasks, limiting its application to richer and broader
output label spaces and under-represented domains.
Synthesizing additional training data to fine-tune supervised models would be a generalizable method and has
demonstrated its success for tasks like sentiment analysis (Ye et al. 2022) and relation extraction (Josifoski et al.
2023). Some works annotate unlabeled examples with existing models as weak annotators (Xgold → Y ) (He et al.
2021; Chia et al. 2022), produce analogous input (Xgold →
X ′ ) (Kumar, Choudhary, and Cho 2020; Lee et al. 2021), or
generate input assuming the labels are available (Ygold → X)
(Meng et al. 2022; Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Josifoski
et al. 2023). However, these works require ground-truth
Xgold or Ygold , limiting their generalizability and scalability.
What’s more, they are designed for classification or straightforward IE tasks, and the performance drops significantly
as the task complexity increases. Applying them to complicated IE tasks with sub-task dependencies and dynamic
output structures such as EE produces noisy data that may
impair task performance.
In this paper, we present S TAR, a Structure-to-Text DatA
GeneRation pipeline to produce dependable data instances

Information extraction tasks such as event extraction require
an in-depth understanding of the output structure and subtask dependencies. They heavily rely on task-specific training data in the form of (passage, target structure) pairs to obtain reasonable performance. However, obtaining such data
through human annotation is costly, leading to a pressing
need for low-resource information extraction approaches that
require minimal human labeling for real-world applications.
Fine-tuning supervised models with synthesized training data
would be a generalizable method, but the existing data generation methods either still rely on large-scale ground-truth
data or cannot be applied to complicated IE tasks due to
their poor performance. To address these challenges, we propose S TAR, a data generation method that leverages Large
Language Models (LLMs) to synthesize data instances given
limited seed demonstrations, thereby boosting low-resource
information extraction performance. Our approach involves
generating target structures (Y ) followed by generating passages (X), all accomplished with the aid of LLMs. We design
fine-grained step-by-step instructions to obtain the initial data
instances. We further reduce errors and improve data quality
through self-reflection error identification and self-refinement
with iterative revision. Our experiments show that the data
generated by S TAR significantly improve the performance of
low-resource event extraction and relation extraction tasks,
even surpassing the effectiveness of human-curated data. Human assessment of the data quality shows S TAR-generated
data exhibit higher passage quality and better align with the
task definitions compared with the human-curated data.

1

Introduction

Information extraction (IE) aims to extract knowledge of
certain perspectives from natural language and consolidate it
into an output structure (Ma et al. 2021b). To induce the target structure, the IE models need to understand fine-grained
task requirements and constraints. Taking event extraction
(EE), which is a component for IE systems to identify event
triggers, event types, and their related details as arguments,
as an example, task-specific rules include the predicted
spans should be subsequences of the input passage, and arguments should be participants or attributes of the event. EE
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18751

