The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Explainable Joint Models via Information Theory for
Multiple Intent Detection and Slot Filling
Xianwei Zhuang* , Xuxin Cheng* , Yuexian Zou†

Overall Accuracy (%)

Abstract
Recent joint models for multi-intent detection and slot filling
have obtained promising results through modeling the unidirectional or bidirectional guidance between intent and slot.
However, existing works design joint models heuristically
and lack some theoretical exploration, including (1) theoretical measurement of the joint-interaction quality; (2) explainability of design and optimization methods of joint models,
which may limit the performance and efficiency of designs. In
this paper, we mathematically define the cross-task information gain (CIG) to measure the quality of joint processes from
an information-theoretic perspective and discover an implicit
optimization of CIG in previous models. Based on this, we
propose a novel multi-stage iterative framework with theoretical effectiveness, explainability, and convergence, which
can explicitly optimize information for cross-task interactions. Further, we devise an information-based joint model
(InfoJoint) that conforms to this theoretical framework to
gradually reduce the cross-task propagation of erroneous semantics through CIG iterative maximization. Extensive experiment results on two public datasets show that InfoJoint
outperforms the state-of-the-art models by a large margin.

50
40
30
20
Our Model
AGIF

10
0

75

100

125

150

Estimated Cross-Task Information

Ours vs AGIF

Overall Accuracy (%)

School of ECE, Peking University, China
{xwzhuang, chengxx}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zouyx@pku.edu.cn

50
40
30
20
Our Model
Co-guiding

10
0

75

100

125

150

Estimated Cross-Task Information

Ours vs Co-guiding

Figure 1: Comparison of statistical results based on the perspective of cross-task information (in color). We run each
model five times on the MixATIS (Qin et al. 2020) to obtain statistical results, and observe that: (i) There is an implicit positive correlation between the performance of prior
joint models and the CIG. (ii) Our joint model explicitly optimizes cross-task information to obtain higher interactive
information and better performance.

proposes a variant of attention for reducing error propagation. Co-guiding Net (Xing and Tsang 2022) proposes heterogeneous attention (HGAT) to achieve bidirectional interaction. These works heuristically design cross-task interaction modules to improve performance.
Although promising progress has been made in previous
works, these studies regrettably lack exploration of some
core issues at the theoretical level, including:
(1) Why does the joint SLU model work better and how
to quantitatively measure the enhancement quality of joint
models in theory? Our work innovatively defines the crossinformation gain (CIG) to measure the interaction quality of
the beneficial information between ID and SF, and explains
that the process of joint optimization is the process of maximizing CIG and minimizing the information gap between
dual-task branches. Based on this perspective, we discover
that previous works implicitly improve CIG although they
do not explicitly mention CIG (i.e., there is a positive correlation between CIG and performance, as shown in Fig. 1).
(2) How to design an explainable model for the joint processes? Existing joint models are essentially single-stage
models (Fig. 2a and b) which perform single interaction,
and lack theoretical guidance. We construct the model as a

Introduction
Spoken language understanding (SLU) is a critical task in dialog systems (Young et al. 2013), which generally includes
two subtasks: intent detection (ID) and slot filling (SF) (Tur
and De Mori 2011). Recently, joint models (Goo et al. 2018;
Qin et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2023c; Zhu et al. 2023a,b) for
ID and SF have achieved impressive performance, and have
proved that there exists a strong correlation between this two
tasks (Weld et al. 2022). The recent studies (Gangadharaiah
and Narayanaswamy 2019) recognize that a single utterance
often contains multiple intentions in real-world scenarios,
i.e., Multi-Intent SLU. Thus, joint multi-intent SLU gradually attracting increasing attention. One of the mainstream
insights works on devising attention mechanisms against
joint tasks. AGIF (Qin et al. 2020, 2021b) explore unidirectional joint models from ID to SF based on graph attention
(GAT) for multi-intent SLU. Cheng, Yang, and Jia (2023)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19786

