The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Effect Size Estimation for Duration Recommendation in Online Experiments:
Leveraging Hierarchical Models and Objective Utility Approaches
Yu Liu* , Runzhe Wan* , James McQueen, Doug Hains, Jinxiang Gu, Rui Song
Amazon.com Inc
{liuyu0jlu, runzhe.wan}@gmail.com, {jmcq, dhains, gjinxian, ruisong}@amazon.com

Abstract

1997; Weiss 1997), one crucial step is to specify the assumed effect size (the absolute or percent lift from the treatment over the control). For example, it is a critical component in statistical power analysis used for SSD, in either the
frequentist or the Bayesian setting (Du and Wang 2016).
First of all, we need to distinguish the true effect size of an
experiment and the assumed effect size (AES). The first is
an objective unknown quantity, while the latter is a subjective manually specified number. In traditional power analysis problems (e.g., in clinical trials), AES mainly reflects (i)
the experimenter’s expectation (e.g., what level of improvement would be regarded as acceptable) and (ii) the trade-off
between the opportunity cost of running a longer experiment
and the accuracy. AES does not necessarily relate to the true
effect size (or its estimate). Moreover, using observed power
based on the true effect size of an experiment to determine
its sample size is inappropriate, due to its 1-1 mapping to pvalue (Hoenig and Heisey 2001). For example, in case where
an experiment lacks a noticeable effect size, the resulting observed power tends to be small. Using this value in SSD can
lead to overestimating the required experiment duration.
Traditionally, the AES is established by domain experts or
experimenters, rather than by the experimentation services
itself. For instance, Lenth (2001) offers general guidance for
selecting appropriate AES. However, within the sphere of
online experiments - a setting where tens of thousands of experiments are conducted annually - a significant number of
experimenters may lack the requisite domain knowledge or
statistical acumen to define an appropriate AES. Additionally, statistical consultants are often resource-constrained,
limiting their ability to offer personalized guidance to each
team. In such scenarios, harnessing the vast amount of data
gleaned from similar past experiments can be invaluable in
determining the AES. Employing data-centric methodologies, such as meta-analysis, can automatically direct experimenters towards an appropriate AES for power analysis.
This empowers them to make decisions grounded in robust,
empirical evidence.
Contribution. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is
the first work on data-driven effect size recommendation for
large-scale online experiments in the literature. Our contributions are three-fold:

The selection of the assumed effect size (AES) critically determines the duration of an experiment, and hence its accuracy and efficiency. Traditionally, experimenters determine
AES based on domain knowledge. However, this method becomes impractical for online experimentation services managing numerous experiments, and a more automated approach is hence of great demand. We initiate the study of datadriven AES selection for online experimentation services by
introducing two solutions. The first employs a three-layer
Gaussian Mixture Model considering the heteroskedasticity
across experiments, and it seeks to estimate the true expected
effect size among positive experiments. The second method,
grounded in utility theory, aims to determine the optimal effect size by striking a balance between the experiment’s cost
and the precision of decision-making. Through comparisons
with baseline methods using both simulated and real data,
we showcase the superior performance of the proposed approaches.

Introduction
Sample size determination (SSD) plays a pivotal role in online experiments, answering the critical question of ”how
long should an experiment run?” (Richardson et al. 2022). In
the spheres of online A/B testing and related classic application such as clinical trials, it is paramount to ascertain the
minimal sample size during the experiment planning phase.
If the sample size is too small, it may not accurately represent the whole population being studied, thereby introducing both bias in the results that limit drawing conclusions
or generalizing the inferences. It can also compromise the
statistical power of the experiment, leading to inaccuracies
in detecting meaningful effects (Ramsey and Schafer 2012;
Lenth 2001). Conversely, if the sample size is selected as too
large, it could unnecessarily extend the duration of the experiment and inflate the associated costs, such as the human
and hardware resources and opportunity costs (Wan et al.
2023). Therefore, selecting an appropriate sample size is imperative to maintain a balance between decision accuracy
and resource utilization.
Among the numerous methodologies for SSD in the literature (Kelley and Rausch 2006; Adcock 1997; Lindley
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We design a three-layer Gaussian mixture model for the
distribution of observed effect sizes across experiments,

14044

