The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Settling Decentralized Multi-Agent Coordinated Exploration by Novelty Sharing
Haobin Jiang1 , Ziluo Ding1,2 , Zongqing Lu1†
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{haobin.jiang, ziluo, zongqing.lu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

elty and global state novelty, which makes the exploration
merely based on local novelty highly unreliable (Wang et al.
2019a; Iqbal and Sha 2019). Fortunately, communication
can help ease partial observability by providing extra information about other agents (Jiang and Lu 2018; Das et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2019b; Ding, Huang, and Lu 2020). However, unlimited communication may incur too much communication overhead, and it can indeed transform the decentralized setting into a centralized setting. Therefore, we
resort to decentralized learning with limited communication
to address such problems.
In addition to the challenge of novelty measurement, in
cooperative tasks, agents must also acquire the ability to coordinate with each other to explore and achieve the final
goal. Ideally, the optimal exploration strategy should consider others’ observations and actions. Previous work (Wang
et al. 2019a; Iqbal and Sha 2019; Liu et al. 2021) finds that
independent exploration is not efficient and redundant exploration occurs. By coordination in exploration, we mean
agents help other agents to achieve novel observations or
reach novel states together through cooperation. In other
words, an agent should be encouraged when its action enables other agents to reach more novel observations.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective MultiAgent Coordinated Exploration method, namely MACE.
MACE introduces a novelty-based intrinsic reward and a
hindsight-based intrinsic reward to enable coordinated exploration in decentralized cooperative tasks. Within the confines of limited communication, agents only share their local
novelties (merely a floating point number) during training.
Each agent leverages this shared information to approximate
the global novelty, which serves as the novelty-based intrinsic reward. This approach aims to bridge the gap between the
local novelty and the global novelty. Moreover, we encourage agents to exert more influence on others’ explorations
through the hindsight-based intrinsic reward, thereby boosting coordinated exploration. To this end, we measure the
weighted mutual information (Guiasu 1977; Schaffernicht
and Gross 2011) between the action of the agent and the accumulated novelty obtained thereafter by others given the
local observation. The higher the weighted mutual information value, the higher the hindsight-based intrinsic reward
the agent receives.
We evaluate MACE in three multi-agent environments:

Exploration in decentralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning faces two challenges. One is that the novelty of global states is unavailable, while the novelty of local
observations is biased. The other is how agents can explore
in a coordinated way. To address these challenges, we propose MACE, a simple yet effective multi-agent coordinated
exploration method. By communicating only local novelty,
agents can take into account other agents’ local novelty to
approximate the global novelty. Further, we newly introduce
weighted mutual information to measure the influence of one
agent’s action on other agents’ accumulated novelty. We convert it as an intrinsic reward in hindsight to encourage agents
to exert more influence on other agents’ exploration and boost
coordinated exploration. Empirically, we show that MACE
achieves superior performance in three multi-agent environments with sparse rewards.

Introduction
Recent progress in decentralized learning theories and algorithms for multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
(Zhang et al. 2018; de Witt et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2021;
Daskalakis, Golowich, and Zhang 2022; Jiang and Lu 2022)
makes it feasible to learn high-performant policies in a decentralized way for cooperative multi-agent tasks. However,
one critical issue remains, i.e., how to enable agents to effectively explore in a coordinated way under such a learning
paradigm, especially for sparse-reward tasks where the environment rarely provides rewards.
One of the most popular exploration schemes in the
single-agent setting is novelty-based exploration (Bellemare
et al. 2016; Pathak et al. 2017; Burda et al. 2018b; Zhang
et al. 2021b), where the agent is encouraged by welldesigned intrinsic reward to visit novel states it rarely sees.
However, things could be different when migrating to decentralized multi-agent settings, which leads to an unsolved
problem: as only the local observation instead of the global
state is available, how should each agent measure the novelty of the global state?
In decentralized settings, partial observability expands the
discrepancy between each agent’s local observation nov†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17444

