The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Primal-Dual Algorithm for Hybrid Federated Learning
Tom Overman1 , Garrett Blum2 , Diego Klabjan3
1

Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics, Northwestern University
2
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern University
3
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University
tomoverman2025@u.northwestern.edu, garrettblum2024@u.northwestern.edu, d-klabjan@northwestern.edu

Abstract

subset of all of the patients, and since each patient may have
visited multiple hospitals, the patient’s features are split between many hospitals. The same situation exists in banking
for fraud detection with explainable convex models (Lv et al.
2021).
Another example is in telecommunication where each
tower collects data from cell devices that ping the tower.
Each cell tower has different specifications and thus collects
different measurements than other towers. Therefore, each
tower collects different features, and since not every user
connects to every tower and most users interact with multiple different towers, the samples are also split across towers.
We introduce a primal-dual algorithm, Hybrid Federated
Dual Coordinate Ascent (HyFDCA), that solves convex
problems in the hybrid FL setting. This algorithm extends
CoCoA, a primal-dual distributed optimization algorithm introduced by Jaggi et al. (2014) and Smith et al. (2017), to the
case where both samples and features are partitioned across
clients. We provide privacy considerations that ensure that
client data cannot be reconstructed by the server. Next, we
provide proofs of convergence under various problem settings including special cases where only subsets of clients
are available for participation in each iteration. The algorithm and associated proofs can also be utilized in the distributed optimization setting where both samples and features are distributed. As far as we know, this is the only
algorithm in the doubly distributed case that has guaranteed convergence outside of block-splitting ADMM developed by (Parikh and Boyd 2014). ADMM has not been designed with FL in mind, but the algorithm has no data sharing. On the down side, block-splitting ADMM requires full
client participation which makes it much more restrictive
than HyFDCA and essentially impractical for FL. HyFDCA
is also the only known hybrid FL algorithm that converges to
the same solution as if the model is trained centrally. Finally,
we provide extensive experimental results that demonstrate
the performance improvements of HyFDCA over FedAvg, a
commonly-used FL algorithm (McMahan et al. 2017), and
HyFEM, a hybrid FL algorithm (Zhang et al. 2020).
Our main contributions in this work are as follows:

Very few methods for hybrid federated learning, where clients
only hold subsets of both features and samples, exist. Yet,
this scenario is extremely important in practical settings. We
provide a fast, robust algorithm for hybrid federated learning that hinges on Fenchel Duality. We prove the convergence of the algorithm to the same solution as if the model
is trained centrally in a variety of practical regimes. Furthermore, we provide experimental results that demonstrate
the performance improvements of the algorithm over a commonly used method in federated learning, FedAvg, and an existing hybrid FL algorithm, HyFEM. We also provide privacy
considerations and necessary steps to protect client data.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has quickly become a top choice
for privacy-aware machine learning (Li et al. 2020a). The
basic premise of federated learning is that a group of external nodes called clients hold parts of the data and a central server coordinates the training of a model representative of these data but without directly accessing the data
itself. This requires the clients to train local models, then
pass some information (such as model weights) to the server
where the server aggregates the clients’ contributions to update its global model. The goal of FL is to build algorithms
that result in convergence to a similar objective value as the
centralized case, as if the server had access to all data directly, and perform well over various problem settings with
minimal communication overhead.
Federated learning can be classified based on how the data
are gathered on the clients. In horizontal FL, each client
holds a subset of the samples that contain all of their features. In vertical FL, each client holds all of the samples but
only a subset of each sample’s features. These are both special cases of hybrid FL where each client contains a subset
of the samples and a subset of the features.
Hybrid FL is less studied than the case of horizontal and
vertical FL, but it is still extremely important in practice. An
example of hybrid FL is the case where multiple hospitals
wish to build a central model but cannot directly share data
between hospitals due to privacy laws. Each hospital has a

1. Provide HyFDCA, a provably convergent primal-dual algorithm for hybrid FL. The proofs cover a variety of FL
problem settings such as incomplete client participation.
Furthermore, the convergence rates provided for the spe-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14482

