The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Constrained Meta-Reinforcement Learning for Adaptable Safety Guarantee
with Differentiable Convex Programming
Minjae Cho1 , Chuangchuang Sun2
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Mississippi State University, MS 39762
Department of Aerospace Engineering, Mississippi State University, MS 39762
mc3216@msstate.edu, csun@ae.msstate.edu

2

Abstract

is observed that, despite those significant successes, deployable Learning-Enabled Systems (LES, (Marcus and Davis
2019)) are far less pervasive. One of the most critical concerns among others towards deployability is safety. In many
scenarios, the safety of LES is not compromisable, especially those with humans in the loop. For example, autonomous driving vehicles should guarantee the safety of the
drivers and other entities by following the driving rules and
operating under various internal and external disturbances,
such as partial sensor dysfunction and weather conditions.
In healthcare and medicine, the treatment should guarantee
that the side effects should not exceed the prescribed threshold. Therefore, learning-enable components should rigorously guarantee safety, and failing to do so can result in undesirable or even disastrous outcomes.
In this paper, we focus on the safety issues of reinforcement learning (RL), a popular framework for sequential decision-making. A significant amount of effort
has been made to advance safe RL. For example, constrained reinforcement learning (Chow et al. 2017; Achiam
et al. 2017) offers a compelling solution for training policy safely and responsibly by complying with safety constraints. However, there are still major gaps toward deployability in more restrictive environmental assumptions. Consider a non-stationary environment with dynamically changing specifications, including the safety criterion. In this case,
safety-aware RL policies trained point-wisely with fixed
tasks are likely to violate safety constraints in different task
settings. In other words, for AI to truly mirror human intelligence, it must possess the ability to adapt quickly to new
tasks under constraints. Therefore, it is crucial to develop
learning algorithms that enable LES to rapidly adapt while
adhering to safety specifications. As it is still challenging for
existing safe learning approaches, our goal here is to bridge
such a gap by achieving a fast adaptation regarding both performance and safety guarantees in non-stationary environments.
Specifically, we investigate fast-adapting safe RL through
the lens of meta-learning, which admits a bi-level structure. Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO, (Achiam et al.
2017)) is employed as the base module for the updates of
task-specific parameters and meta parameters at the inner
and outer levels, respectively. However, it is well-known that
unconstrained meta-learning already admits complex differ-

Despite remarkable achievements in artificial intelligence, the
deployability of learning-enabled systems in high-stakes realworld environments still faces persistent challenges. For example, in safety-critical domains like autonomous driving,
robotic manipulation, and healthcare, it is crucial not only
to achieve high performance but also to comply with given
constraints. Furthermore, adaptability becomes paramount in
non-stationary domains, where environmental parameters are
subject to change. While safety and adaptability are recognized as key qualities for the new generation of AI, current
approaches have not demonstrated effective adaptable performance in constrained settings. Hence, this paper breaks
new ground by studying the unique challenges of ensuring
safety in non-stationary environments by solving constrained
problems through the lens of the meta-learning approach
(learning-to-learn). While unconstrained meta-learning already encounters complexities in end-to-end differentiation
of the loss due to the bi-level nature, its constrained counterpart introduces an additional layer of difficulty, since the
constraints imposed on task-level updates complicate the differentiation process. To address the issue, we first employ
successive convex-constrained policy updates across multiple tasks with differentiable convex programming, which allows meta-learning in constrained scenarios by enabling endto-end differentiation. This approach empowers the agent
to rapidly adapt to new tasks under non-stationarity while
ensuring compliance with safety constraints. We also provide a theoretical analysis demonstrating guaranteed monotonic improvement of our approach, justifying our algorithmic designs. Extensive simulations across diverse environments provide empirical validation with significant improvement over established benchmarks.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) has made significant progress in
the past few decades, ranging from mastering board games
(AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016)), and predicting protein structure (AlphaFold2 (Jumper et al. 2021)) to generating humanlike texts (GPT-4 (Brown et al. 2020)). Though it has the
potential to revolutionize human society like electricity did
about one hundred years ago, currently its real-world impact
in high-stakes scenarios is still yet proven beyond games. It
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20975

