The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Collaborative Weakly Supervised Video Correlation Learning
for Procedure-Aware Instructional Video Analysis
Tianyao He1 , Huabin Liu1 , Yuxi Li1 , Xiao Ma2 , Cheng Zhong2 , Yang Zhang2 , Weiyao Lin1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
AI Lab, Lenovo Research, Beijing, China
{hetianyao,huabinliu,lyxok1}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{maxiao3, zhongcheng3, zhangyang20}@lenovo.com, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Video Correlation Learning (VCL), which aims to analyze the
relationships between videos, has been widely studied and applied in various general video tasks. However, applying VCL
to instructional videos is still quite challenging due to their intrinsic procedural temporal structure. Specifically, procedural
knowledge is critical for accurate correlation analyses on instructional videos. Nevertheless, current procedure-learning
methods heavily rely on step-level annotations, which are
costly and not scalable. To address this problem, we introduce a weakly supervised framework called Collaborative
Procedure Alignment (CPA) for procedure-aware correlation
learning on instructional videos. Our framework comprises
two core modules: collaborative step mining and frame-tostep alignment. The collaborative step mining module enables
simultaneous and consistent step segmentation for paired
videos, leveraging the semantic and temporal similarity between frames. Based on the identified steps, the frame-to-step
alignment module performs alignment between the frames
and steps across videos. The alignment result serves as a
measurement of the correlation distance between two videos.
We instantiate our framework in two distinct instructional
video tasks: sequence verification and action quality assessment. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our
approach in providing accurate and interpretable correlation
analyses for instructional videos.

A

Comparison

C

B

A: install the iron clamp
B: take up the test tube
C: pour the conical flask

(a) VCL on general videos
Video-1

Step-level of video-1

(b) VCL on instructional videos

Collaborative
Step Mining
Frame-to-Step
Alignment

Video-2

Step-level of video-2

(c) Collaborative Procedure Alignment (ours)

Figure 1: (a)(b) VCL on general videos and instructional
videos; (c) Our Collaborative Procedure Alignment framework, which conducts a procedural alignment between
frames and collaboratively mined steps.

Introduction
Video Correlation Learning (VCL) focuses on examining
and quantifying the relationships between videos through
a comparative paradigm. It empowers researchers to discover temporal and conceptual knowledge from the intrinsic associations between videos. Numerous previous studies
have explored VCL in general videos. For example, some
methods adopt VCL to grasp the similarities and differences
between videos, including video contrastive learning (Qian
et al. 2021; Park et al. 2022), and video retrieval (Zhou et al.
2018; Wang, Jabri, and Efros 2019). Other studies utilize
VCL to analyze individual videos referring to given exemplars (or called support videos), such as video quality assessment (Mozhaeva et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2020), and fewshot action recognition (Zhu and Yang 2018; Ben-Ari et al.

2021). As depicted in Fig. 1(a), VCL in general videos primarily centers on the video and frame-level comparison.
However, applying traditional VCL approaches to instructional videos encounters significant challenges. Specifically, instructional videos comprise multiple fine-grained
steps with varying durations and temporal locations. This
results in more complex procedural structures compared to
general videos (see Fig. 1(b)). Therefore, to achieve precise and interpretable correlation learning for instructional
videos, the crux lies in capturing procedural knowledge.
Currently, many procedure-learning methods for instructional videos are emerging (Behrmann et al. 2022; Han, Xie,
and Zisserman 2022; Xu et al. 2022). However, they heavily rely on step-level annotations. These annotations require
step semantic labels and their temporal boundaries, incurring substantial costs and lacking scalability. This naturally

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2112

