The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attacks on Continual Semantic Segmentation by Perturbing Incremental Samples
Zhidong Yu1 , Wei Yang1,2* , Xike Xie1,3* , Zhenbo Shi1,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
2
Hefei National Laboratory, Hefei 230088, China
3
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China
qubit@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Attack for Samples

Dt

As an essential computer vision task, Continual Semantic
Segmentation (CSS) has received a lot of attention. However, security issues regarding this task have not been fully
studied. To bridge this gap, we study the problem of attacks
in CSS in this paper. We first propose a new task, namely,
attacks on incremental samples in CSS, and reveal that the
attacks on incremental samples corrupt the performance of
CSS in both old and new classes. Moreover, we present an
adversarial sample generation method based on class shift,
namely Class Shift Attack (CS-Attack), which is an offline
and easy-to-implement approach for CSS. CS-Attack is able
to significantly degrade the performance of models on both
old and new classes without knowledge of the incremental
learning approach, which undermines the original purpose of
the incremental learning, i.e., learning new classes while retaining old knowledge. Experiments show that on the popular
datasets Pascal VOC, ADE20k, and Cityscapes, our approach
easily degrades the performance of currently popular CSS
methods, which reveals the importance of security in CSS.

Gt

Incremental Training

...

Mt-1
Perturbations

Dt-1

Dt

Mt-1

Mt

...

Figure 1: Overview of adversarial attacks on incremental
samples. In this case, the attack on the incremental samples is separate from the incremental training. The attack
phase occurs before the incremental training, using only the
old training model and the new data Dt . The incremental
model forgets the old knowledge due to the interference of
the training data.

Introduction

takes into account the problem of background bias in CSS
and models it to alleviate the confusion of new classes and
the old knowledge. Moreover, there are works (Cha et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2022) that utilize other techniques to retain the old classes, such as saliency detection and model
compression.
However, with the rapid development of CSS, a potential risk in this task remains neglected. It is well known that
the standard CSS task is to update the model by incremental samples to learn new classes and retain old knowledge.
These incremental samples may be provided by third parties,
and thus they can be exploited to corrupt the old knowledge
of the model for attack purposes. Specifically, it is feasible
to corrupt the performance of the model by perturbing the
incremental samples so that the predictions of certain pixels
deviate from the previous model.
Adversarial attacks against incremental classification
were first proposed by Han et al. (Han et al. 2022). It assumes that the losses of the model in incremental training
can be obtained. Based on this, adversarial samples are generated in real-time to attack the model, which is an online
attack. Unlike it, we first consider the adversarial attack in
CSS. Furthermore, we propose a more difficult and practical

Semantic segmentation is a crucial computer vision task extensively applied in diverse real-world scenarios (Siam et al.
2018; Milioto, Lottes, and Stachniss 2018; Asgari Taghanaki
et al. 2021). Recently, numerous models (Shelhamer, Long,
and Darrell 2017; Chen et al. 2017; Cheng, Schwing, and
Kirillov 2021) have been developed to tackle this task, displaying encouraging outcomes. However, these models encounter a significant hurdle known as the catastrophic forgetting (Michieli and Zanuttigh 2019) in the scenario of
continual learning. In other words, the network learns new
classes while rapidly forgetting those it has already acquired.
The continual semantic segmentation (CSS) task was
originally proposed by Michieli et al. (Michieli and Zanuttigh 2019). After that, some methods are proposed to solve
this task with better results. A number of works (Cermelli
et al. 2020; Douillard et al. 2021; Michieli and Zanuttigh
2021a,b; Phan et al. 2022) address the catastrophic forgetting of this task by distilling the knowledge of the old model
to the new one. For example, MiB (Cermelli et al. 2020)
*Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6844

