The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ShapeBoost: Boosting Human Shape Estimation with Part-Based
Parameterization and Clothing-Preserving Augmentation
Siyuan Bian1 , Jiefeng Li1 , Jiasheng Tang3,4 , Cewu Lu1,2
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba group, Hangzhou, China
4
Hupan Lab, Hangzhou, China
{biansiyuan, ljf likit, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, jiasheng.tjs@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

for the first kind of methods, the synthetic images are unnatural with unrealistic texture and clothing, and the extracted proxy representations may be ambiguous and inaccurate. The situation is especially severe when the individual is wearing thick garments or is occluded in the image.
For the second kind of methods, since 2D clues such as
segmentations and silhouettes are highly correlated with the
human pose and clothing, supervising with 2D clues may
give wrong guidance of human shape in the case of inaccurate pose estimation or thick clothing. Moreover, the
real-world images of extreme shapes are still insufficient.
SHAPY (Choutas et al. 2022) improves the second kind of
methods by using linguistic attributes and body measurements as supervision, which allows it making better estimates for clothed people. However, similar to other models
trained on real-world datasets, it still performs poorly on images of people with extreme body shapes because of the lack
of extreme body shapes in the training datasets. To sum up,
just as shown in Fig. 1, the first kind of methods often fail
on images with people in occlusion or thick clothing, while
the second kind of methods often fail on images containing
people with extreme body shapes.

Accurate human shape recovery from a monocular RGB image is a challenging task because humans come in different
shapes and sizes and wear different clothes. In this paper,
we propose ShapeBoost, a new human shape recovery framework that achieves pixel-level alignment even for rare body
shapes and high accuracy for people wearing different types
of clothes. Unlike previous approaches that rely on the use of
PCA-based shape coefficients, we adopt a new human shape
parameterization that decomposes the human shape into bone
lengths and the mean width of each part slice. This partbased parameterization technique achieves a balance between
flexibility and validity using a semi-analytical shape reconstruction algorithm. Based on this new parameterization, a
clothing-preserving data augmentation module is proposed to
generate realistic images with diverse body shapes and accurate annotations. Experimental results show that our method
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in diverse body
shape situations as well as in varied clothing situations.

1

Introduction

Human pose and shape (HPS) recovery from monocular
RGB images is an essential task of computer vision. It serves
as a basis for human behavior understanding and has applications in various fields such as Virtual Reality, Augmented
Reality, and Autopilot. Recent methods (Zhang et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022b,a, 2021) achieve high accuracy in human pose
estimation, but their results of human shape estimation are
often suboptimal.
Due to the scarcity of image datasets featuring diverse
body shapes, many existing methods for recovering human
pose and shape suffer from overfitting on body shape estimation. Their results are particularly unsatisfactory for very
thin or plump people. Previous approaches have attempted to
solve the overfitting issue through two main strategies. The
first kind of methods (Varol et al. 2017; Sengupta, Budvytis,
and Cipolla 2020, 2021b,a) train on synthetic data and exploit proxy representations to reduce the domain gap, while
the second kind of methods (Dwivedi et al. 2021; Omran
et al. 2018; Agarwal and Triggs 2005) exploit shape cues
which are easy to annotate as weak supervision. However,

To overcome the above limitations, we propose ShapeBoost, a new shape recovery framework based on a novel
part-based shape parameterization. The new shape parameters are composed of bone lengths and mean widths of
body part slices. Using a novel semi-analytical algorithm,
the body shape can be accurately and robustly recovered
from these parameters. During training, the bone lengths can
be calculated from human keypoints, and the part widths
are regressed by the neural network. Compared to the original shape parameters derived from PCA coefficients, our
new part-based parameterization has a clear local semantic meaning, making it easier to regress and more flexible
in application. During training, ShapeBoost augments new
image-shape pairs by randomly transforming the raw image
and calculating the corresponding part-based parameters.
For image transformation, a clothing-preserving augmentation method is proposed: we first segment the human body
out of the image and randomly transform it into a different
shape. Then, the human segmentation is pasted back onto
the inpainted background image with the guidance of the appearance consistency heatmap (Fang et al. 2019). The corresponding shape parameters can be analytically retrieved by

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

828

