The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedASMU: Efficient Asynchronous Federated Learning with Dynamic
Staleness-Aware Model Update
Ji Liu1 * Juncheng Jia2,3∗ , Tianshi Che4 , Chao Huo2 , Jiaxiang Ren4 , Yang Zhou4 , Huaiyu Dai5 ,
Dejing Dou6
1

Hithink RoyalFlush Information Network Co., Ltd., China.
2
Soochow University, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, China
4
Auburn University, United States
5
North Carolina State University, United States
6
Boston Consulting Group, China
jiliuwork@gmail.com, jiajuncheng@suda.edu.cn
Abstract

nature language processing (Liu et al. 2021), bioinformatics
(Chen et al. 2021), and healthcare (Nguyen et al. 2022a).
Traditional FL commonly uses a parameter server (server)
(Liu et al. 2023a) to manage training on various devices
synchronously (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2023b; Jia et al. 2023). This synchronous process
involves multiple rounds, each with five steps: 1) device
selection by the server (Shi et al. 2020), 2) broadcasting
the global model to chosen devices, 3) local training on
each device, 4) uploading updated models (gradients) to the
server, and 5) the server aggregating these models to update the global model after all devices complete the first four
steps. Although straightforward, this mechanism can be inefficient due to stragglers, especially with heterogeneous devices (Jiang et al. 2022; Lai et al. 2021). Faster devices often
idle while waiting for slower devices, leading to efficiency
loss (Wu et al. 2020).
In federated learning (FL), device heterogeneity is notable
in both computational and communication capacities (Wu
et al. 2020; Che et al. 2022, 2023b), and in data distribution (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020;
Che et al. 2023a). This results in varying local training and
model update times. Some devices, due to limited bandwidth
or high latency, struggle to upload their models promptly,
a challenge termed as system heterogeneity. Additionally,
the data on each device often exhibits non-Independent and
Identically Distributed (non-IID) characteristics, leading to
statistical heterogeneity. This can cause divergent local objectives (Wang et al. 2020) and client drift (Karimireddy
et al. 2020; Hsu, Qi, and Brown 2019), thereby impacting
the accuracy of the global FL model.
Asynchronous FL (Xu et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2020; Nguyen
et al. 2022a) allows server-side model aggregation without
waiting for slower devices. However, it faces potential accuracy issues due to stale model uploads and non-IID data
(Zhou et al. 2021a). For instance, a device might upload
a model based on an outdated global model, causing the
current global model to regress, leading to lower accuracy.
Additionally, without proper staleness control (Xie, Koyejo,
and Gupta 2019), asynchronous FL might struggle to converge (Su and Li 2022).

As a promising approach to deal with distributed data, Federated Learning (FL) achieves major advancements in recent
years. FL enables collaborative model training by exploiting the raw data dispersed in multiple edge devices. However, the data is generally non-independent and identically
distributed, i.e., statistical heterogeneity, and the edge devices
significantly differ in terms of both computation and communication capacity, i.e., system heterogeneity. The statistical
heterogeneity leads to severe accuracy degradation while the
system heterogeneity significantly prolongs the training process. In order to address the heterogeneity issue, we propose
an Asynchronous Staleness-Aware Model Update FL framework, i.e., FedASMU, with two novel methods. First, we propose an asynchronous FL system model with a dynamical
model aggregation method between updated local models and
the global model on the server for superior accuracy and high
efficiency. Then, we propose an adaptive local model adjustment method by aggregating the fresh global model with local
models on devices to further improve the accuracy. Extensive
experimentation with 6 models and 5 public datasets demonstrates that FedASMU significantly outperforms baseline approaches in terms of accuracy (0.60% to 23.90% higher) and
efficiency (3.54% to 97.98% faster).

Introduction
In recent years, numerous edge devices have been generating large amounts of distributed data.Due to the implementation of laws and regulations, e.g., General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU 2018), the traditional training
approach, which aggregates the distributed data into a central server or a data center, becomes almost impossible. As
a promising approach, Federated Learning (FL) (Kairouz,
McMahan, and et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022a) enables collaborative model training by transferring gradients or models
instead of raw data. FL avoids privacy or security issues incurred by direct raw data transfer while exploiting multiple
edge devices to train a global model. FL has been applied
in diverse areas, such as computer vision (Liu et al. 2020),
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13900

