The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Implicit Modeling of Non-rigid Objects with Cross-Category Signals
Yuchun Liu, Benjamin Planche, Meng Zheng, Zhongpai Gao, Pierre Sibut-Bourde,
Fan Yang, Terrence Chen, Ziyan Wu
United Imaging Intelligence
{yuchun.liu01, benjamin.planche, meng.zheng, zhongpai.gao, fan.yang03, terrence.chen, ziyan.wu}@uii-ai.com

Abstract

(Zhang et al. 2022) tends to overlook the interrelations between the different categories that constitute each instance.
E.g., for organs, their shape and location depends on a variety of criteria such as body pose(Guo et al. 2022), metabolic
cycles, etc. More importantly, their shapes undergo deformation based on the interactions and pressure they exert on
one another. In this context, learning the implicit function of
each category in isolation is both ineffective and problematic, as it could potentially lead to shape interpenetration.
Dealing with multiple objects presents several challenges.
First, the rigidity and shape variability across different object categories adds complexity to the task of simultaneously modeling various types of surface deformation fields.
This challenge is often exacerbated by the scarcity of training data, particularly in the context of medical applications.
This scarcity makes the task of achieving shape generalization even more complex. Secondly, the model must jointly
account for the interactions among objects. This involves not
only capturing their relative positions but also modeling the
contact regions occurring between these objects.
To address these challenges, we introduce our MultiObject Deformed Implicit Field (MODIF) model, designed
to learn implicit multi-object shape functions. It incorporates a cross-category refinement mechanism that allows us
to capture interactions between objects while still maintaining the accuracy of individual reconstructions. The model
facilitates the generation of both point correspondences and
separate per-category templates, which can be utilized for
extrapolating the shape of a specific object missing in an unseen instance. In summary, the primary contributions of our
paper can be outlined as follows:

Deep implicit functions (DIFs) have emerged as a potent
and articulate means of representing 3D shapes. However,
methods modeling object categories or non-rigid entities have
mainly focused on single-object scenarios. In this work, we
propose MODIF, a multi-object deep implicit function that
jointly learns the deformation fields and instance-specific latent codes for multiple objects at once. Our emphasis is on
non-rigid, non-interpenetrating entities such as organs. To effectively capture the interrelation between these entities and
ensure precise, collision-free representations, our approach
facilitates signaling between category-specific fields to adequately rectify shapes. We also introduce novel inter-object
supervision: an attraction-repulsion loss is formulated to refine contact regions between objects. Our approach is demonstrated on various medical benchmarks, involving modeling
different groups of intricate anatomical entities. Experimental results illustrate that our model can proficiently learn the
shape representation of each organ and their relations to others, to the point that shapes missing from unseen instances
can be consistently recovered by our method. Finally, MODIF
can also propagate semantic information throughout the population via accurate point correspondences.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been extensive research into deep
implicit functions (DIFs) as a means of representing 3D
object categories. In comparison to conventional geometric
representations, DIFs exhibit potential in effectively reconstructing geometric intricacies, even for non-rigid objects or
object categories with large variability. This potential holds
significant advantages for various clinical imaging applications, such as 3D organ reconstruction, anatomical segmentation, and surgical navigation. For example, various medical procedures depend on accurately locating precise organ regions, which implies accurately modeling the whole
anatomical structure.
However, methods proposed so far to represent 3D entities (Park et al. 2019; Mescheder et al. 2019; Sitzmann
et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022) are constrained to single-object
scenarios. The exploration of multi-object 3D neural representations remains relatively uncharted, and prior research

• We introduce a comprehensive method for representing
multiple non-rigid objects using an implicit approach.
Our model not only produces accurate reconstructions of
shapes but also offers precise predictions of individual
object positions.
• We design a cross-category refinement mechanism,
incorporating the features from each individual subfunction to generate an overall correction field. With this,
an attraction-repulsion loss is formulated to supervise
contact regions between objects and to effectively reduce
erroneous object interpenetration.
• Our model can generate point correspondences for mul-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3802

