The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Colorizing Monochromatic Radiance Fields
Yean Cheng1,2,3 , Renjie Wan4* , Shuchen Weng1,2 , Chengxuan Zhu5 ,
Yakun Chang1,2 , Boxin Shi1,2,3*
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
5
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
cya17@stu.pku.edu.cn, renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk, {shuchenweng, peterzhu, yakunchang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
(b)

Though Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) can produce colorful
3D representations of the world by using a set of 2D images,
such ability becomes non-existent when only monochromatic
images are provided. Since color is necessary in representing the world, reproducing color from monochromatic radiance fields becomes crucial. To achieve this goal, instead of
manipulating the monochromatic radiance fields directly, we
consider it as a representation-prediction task in the Lab color
space. By first constructing the luminance and density representation using monochromatic images, our prediction stage
can recreate color representation on the basis of an image
colorization module. We then reproduce a colorful implicit
model through the representation of luminance, density, and
color. Extensive experiments have been conducted to validate the effectiveness of our approaches. Our project page:
https://liquidammonia.github.io/color-nerf.

(c)

(d)

(e)
(a)

Figure 1: With multi-view monochromatic images (a) as inputs, (b-e) are three novel views synthesised by NeRF models. Existing color editing NeRFs (b) ARF (Zhang et al.
2022) and (c) CLIP-NeRF (Wang et al. 2022a) could not
guarantee pixel-wise color adherence, while using “colorizethen-fuse” solution (d) CT2 (Weng et al. 2022)+NeRF) suffers from color inconsistency across different views. The
proposed ColorNeRF (e) can generate a more plausible and
vivid colorized NeRF compared to previous models.

Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) is
able to create a colorful 3D representation of the world by
using a set of 2D images. Can this created implicit 3D model
still be colorful when only monochromatic images are available?
The answer is frustrating. The original design of NeRF is
unable to create a colorful appearance from monochrome,
and colorizing the monochromatic radiance fields using
external forces seems to be the only option. Colorization is a classical problem being studied for more than a
decade (Cheng, Yang, and Sheng 2015; Ironi, Cohen-Or, and
Lischinski 2005; Levin, Lischinski, and Weiss 2004; Luan
et al. 2007), with various applications in artistic creation,
and legacy photo restoration. During its evolution on images/videos, there are two common standards that a good
colorization scheme should follow: 1) plausibility, which
requires the colorized results to demonstrate visually reasonable appearance (Iizuka, Simo-Serra, and Ishikawa 2016;
Larsson, Maire, and Shakhnarovich 2016); 2) vividness,
which ensures the high level of saturation for colorized results (Weng et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2021; Zhang, Isola, and
Efros 2016; Zhang et al. 2017). These standards should be

applied to colorizing monochromatic radiance fields as
well, but how to achieve this remains an open problem.
Directly manipulating radiance fields seems to be a
straightforward way to achieve this goal of colorization. One
solution is to regard the color as a kind of “style” and then
transfer the style into radiance fields (Zhang et al. 2022).
However, as displayed in Fig. 1(b), since such a strategy cannot guarantee pixel-wise color adherence, the color can only
distribute on radiance fields irregularly, thus violating the
plausibility standard. A different approach involves manipulating the color attributes in radiance fields directly (Tojo
and Umetani 2022; Wang et al. 2022a). This technique is intended for replacing colors by identifying the current color
attributes and replacing them with new ones. However, it is
not applicable to monochromatic radiance fields where there
are no existing color attributes. As displayed in Fig. 1(c), the

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1317

