The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

All Should Be Equal in the Eyes of LMs: Counterfactually Aware Fair Text
Generation
Pragyan Banerjee* 2† , Abhinav Java* 1 , Surgan Jandial* 1 , Simra Shahid* 1 , Shaz Furniturewala3 ,
Balaji Krishnamurthy1 , Sumit Bhatia1
1
MDSR Labs, Adobe
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
3
Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani
banerjeepragyan@gmail.com
2

Abstract

(2021) and Bender et al. (2021) suggest careful curation of
finetuning and training datasets that can improve the fairness of LMs. However, given that modern LMs are trained
on trillions of tokens (Touvron et al. 2023), manually curating and auditing the training datasets is infeasible. Other debiasing techniques propose Optimization based alternatives
that typically involve either the fine-tuning or complete retraining of the LM, or the utilization of auxiliary classifiers
(CDA (Zmigrod et al. 2019a), INLP (Ravfogel et al. 2020a),
Dropout (Webster et al. 2021), AutoDebias (Guo, Yang,
and Abbasi 2022), GN-Glove (Zhao et al. 2018)). Within
the optimization-based approaches, several other techniques
(SD (Liang et al. 2020a), INLP (Ravfogel et al. 2020a)) necessitate computationally intensive optimizations for adapting off-the-shelf LM embeddings. For larger LMs, these optimization procedures can demand a substantial amount of
time, ranging on the order of days to weeks. Despite their potential, these optimization-based approaches encounter several challenges. Firstly, training may become impractical
due to computational constraints. Secondly, altering model
embeddings can lead to unexpected behaviors. Additionally,
these approaches require training separately for every bias
type like gender or race. Further, the Privacy and Intellectual Property (IP) concerns push the modern-day LLMs to
be made available as highly secure APIs; even the paid commercial users can merely access the prompt, and output layers of these models. Hence, to promote fairness in a diverse
set of downstream applications, it’s essential to reduce reliance on the constraints posed by the aforementioned approaches. To address these challenges, a much more practical alternative is to perform inference time transformations to the output probabilities (Schick, Udupa, and Schütze
2021; Hallinan et al. 2023) or consider common promptbased interventions (Chain-of-Thought reasoning (Kojima
et al. 2023) and Instruction following (Borchers et al. 2022;
Si et al. 2023)). Broadly the transformation-based techniques first generate the probabilities of highly toxic/biased
output using either the model’s inherent knowledge (Schick,
Udupa, and Schütze 2021) or an external model (Hallinan
et al. 2023) and then reduce the toxicity/bias by contrasting
the model’s outputs from the probabilities of the toxic/biased
output. Most of these works focus on adjusting the probabil-

Fairness in Language Models (LMs) remains a long-standing
challenge, given the inherent biases in training data that can
be perpetuated by models and affect the downstream tasks.
Recent methods employ expensive retraining or attempt debiasing during inference by constraining model outputs to contrast from a reference set of biased templates/exemplars. Regardless, they don’t address the primary goal of fairness to
maintain equitability across different demographic groups. In
this work, we posit that inferencing LMs to generate unbiased
output for one demographic under a context ensues from being aware of outputs for other demographics under the same
context. To this end, we propose Counterfactually Aware Fair
InferencE (CAFIE), a framework that dynamically compares
the model’s understanding of diverse demographics to generate more equitable sentences. We conduct an extensive empirical evaluation using base LMs of varying sizes and across
three diverse datasets and found that CAFIE outperforms
strong baselines. CAFIE produces fairer text and strikes the
best balance between fairness and language modeling capability.

Introduction
The success of Language Models (LMs) such as GPTs (Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020), FlanT5 (Chung et al.
2022), and Pythia (Biderman et al. 2023), etc. has yielded
widespread public adoption. However, these LMs are known
to perpetuate harmful social biases, primarily due to their
large-scale unvetted training data sources (Vig et al. 2020;
Ferrara 2023), that comprises substantial biases. With their
increasing use in crucial applications (healthcare, education,
and marketing), there are already several reports of such issues plaguing downstream tasks such as job recommendation engines (Steed et al. 2022; Ferrara 2023) and text summarization (Ladhak et al. 2023).
As a result, there has been a growing interest in methods
to tackle the issue of bias in language modeling. Dataset
based approaches proposed by Solaiman and Dennison
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during internship at MDSR Labs, Adobe.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17673

