The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revisiting the Information Capacity of Neural Network Watermarks:
Upper Bound Estimation and Beyond
Fangqi Li, Haodong Zhao, Wei Du, Shilin Wang*
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{solour_lfq, zhaohaodong, dddddw, wsl}@sjtu.edu.cn

Identity
information

Abstract
To trace the copyright of deep neural networks, an owner can
embed its identity information into its model as a watermark.
The capacity of the watermark quantify the maximal volume of
information that can be verified from the watermarked model.
Current studies on capacity focus on the ownership verification accuracy under ordinary removal attacks and fail to
capture the relationship between robustness and fidelity. This
paper studies the capacity of deep neural network watermarks
from an information theoretical perspective. We propose a new
definition of deep neural network watermark capacity analogous to channel capacity, analyze its properties, and design
an algorithm that yields a tight estimation of its upper bound
under adversarial overwriting. We also propose a universal
non-invasive method to secure the transmission of the identity
message beyond capacity by multiple rounds of ownership
verification. Our observations provide evidence for neural network owners and defenders that are curious about the tradeoff
between the integrity of their ownership and the performance
degradation of their products.

Retrieved
identity

Encode
m = 1000111
KeyGen

Decode
Key



0
 0

· · ·
1

1
0
···
0

···
···
···
···

0



···

Verify

1

· · ·
0

c
○

···
···

m̂ = 1001011
Submit ownership key

Embed

○
?

···
···
···

Attack

···
···
···

···

···

···

Clean model

Watermarked
model

Victim
model

Ownership embedding

Ownership verification

Figure 1: The workflow of a DNN watermarking scheme.

Introduction
The intellectual property protection of artificial intelligence
models, especially deep neural networks (DNN), is drawing
increasing attention since the expense of building large models has become prohibitively high. For example, the training
of GPT-4 involves over 24,000 graphic processing units and
more than 45TB manually proofread data (Liu et al. 2023). If
internal enemies steal and distribute the model, watermarking
schemes continue to safeguard the intellectual property.
As demonstrated in Fig. 1, a DNN watermarking scheme
adds the owner’s identity message into the model to be protected. Once the model is stolen, the owner can claim its
copyright publicly by requesting a third-party judge to verify
the identity message hidden in the victim model (Adi et al.
2018). Watermarking schemes have been designed for various kinds of DNN models including image classifier (Zhang
et al. 2018), image generator (Quan et al. 2021), pretrained
natural language encoder (Li et al. 2023), graph neural networks (Zhao, Wu, and Zhang 2021), etc.
Most discussions on the applicability of DNN watermarking schemes focus on unambiguity (Fan, Ng, and Chan 2019)
* Shilin Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21331

and robustness (Lukas et al. 2022). It has been proven that
incorporating pseudorandomness and connecting the triggers
into a chain (Zhu et al. 2020) result in security against ambiguity attacks, i.e., an unauthorized party cannot pretend itself
as the owner of an arbitrary DNN model. A robust ownership
proof remains valid even if the watermarked DNN model
undertakes adversarial modifications. There have been many
methods to foster robustness including adding regularizer (Jia
et al. 2021), training with surrogate models (Cong, He, and
Zhang 2022), using error correction code for the identity
message (Feng and Zhang 2020), etc.
Nonetheless, the information capacity of DNN watermark,
i.e., the maximal number of bits that can be accurately transmitted, has not undergone sufficient studies. So far, there is
no uniform definition of capacity, especially for schemes that
rely on backdoors. As a result, a fair comparison between
different schemes regarding capacity is intractable. Moreover,
the overlook of information theory-based capacity makes it
hard to determine the configurations of DNN watermarking schemes with regard to the identity information and the
expense of copyright protection.
To tangle with these deficiencies, we revisit the capacity
of the DNN watermark. The contributions of this paper are:
• We give the first information theory-based definition of
DNN watermark capacity and demonstrate how the expense of copyright protection is measured in the degradation of the watermarked model’s performance.
• We design a capacity estimation algorithm that yields a

