The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

All Beings Are Equal in Open Set Recognition
Chaohua Li1,2 * , Enhao Zhang1,2 * , Chuanxing Geng1,2 , Songcan Chen1,2†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{chaohuali, zhangeh, gengchuanxing, s.chen}@nuaa.edu.cn

K+1

Abstract

Unknown : Car & Deer
Known: Cat

Known: Frog

In open-set recognition (OSR), a promising strategy is
exploiting pseudo-unknown data outside given K known
classes as an additional K+1-th class to explicitly model potential open space. However, treating unknown classes without distinction is unequal for them relative to known classes
due to the category-agnostic and scale-agnostic of the unknowns. This inevitably not only disrupts the inherent distributions of unknown classes but also incurs both classwise and instance-wise imbalances between known and unknown classes. Ideally, the OSR problem should model the
whole class space as K+∞, but enumerating all unknowns is
impractical. Since the core of OSR is to effectively model
the boundaries of known classes, this means just focusing
on the unknowns nearing the boundaries of targeted known
classes seems sufficient. Thus, as a compromise, we convert
the open classes from infinite to K, with a novel concept
Target-Aware Universum (TAU) and propose a simple yet effective framework Dual Contrastive Learning with TargetAware Universum (DCTAU). In details, guided by the targeted known classes, TAU automatically expands the unknown classes from the previous 1 to K, effectively alleviating the distribution disruption and the imbalance issues mentioned above. Then, a novel Dual Contrastive (DC) loss is
designed, where all instances irrespective of known or TAU
are considered as positives to contrast with their respective
negatives. Experimental results indicate DCTAU sets a new
state-of-the-art.

88
86

Overwhelm

Unknown: Car

Overwhelm

K+K
Known: Cat

Known: Frog

AUROC

1

84
82
K+1, t = 57.87 min
K+K, t = 58.13 min
K+2K, t = 93.08 min

80
78

0

100

200

300

400

Unknown: Deer

Epochs

(a)

(b)

500

600

Figure 1: (a) The K+1 stereotype (top) inevitably disrupts
the inherent distributions of unknowns and incurs a bigger unknown class overwhelming other known classes. The
K+K strategy introduced (below) can alleviate the issues
existing in K+1; (b) An illustrated experiment on partial
data of CIFAR10 indicates K+K can be as a compromise.
K+K (red) outperforms K+1 (yellow) by a wide margin and
shows comparable performance to K+2K (blue), while requiring less time cost.

obtaining the pseudo-unknown data through GANs or augmentation methods (Ge et al. 2017; Neal et al. 2018; Kong
and Ramanan 2021; Du et al. 2022; Zhou, Ye, and Zhan
2021; Dhamija, Günther, and Boult 2018; Gunther et al.
2017; Perera and Patel 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Xu, Shen,
and Zhao 2023). This strategy treats the pseudo-unknown
classes as an additional K+1-th class, excluding K known
classes, and improves performance to varying degrees. However, consider a realistic scenario, even at the first sight of
animals and vehicles, we would never categorize them as
one class without distinction at all. This reveals that it is
counter-intuitive to treat the category-agnostic and scaleagnostic unknowns (i.e., the scale involves the number of
instances in each unknown class and the number of classes
of unknowns) as the K+1-th class. Such an extreme K+1
strategy will cause two issues. First, the inherent class distributions of unknowns will be disrupted since the initially specific categories of unknowns are fused into a single mixed
class. Second, imbalance occurs on both class- and instancewise: there are K classes for knowns but only one class for
unknowns; on the latter, copious unknown instances forced

Introduction
In real-world classification tasks, the deployed model may
encounter data from unknown classes as the incomplete
knowledge obtained during training(Geng, Huang, and Chen
2020). Thus, a more realistic recognition scenario has been
introduced, namely open-set recognition (OSR), aiming to
classify known data and reject unknown data simultaneously
(Scheirer et al. 2012).
With the rapid emergence of algorithms crafted for OSR,
the strategy of utilizing pseudo-unknown data participated
in training has garnered increasing attention, which involves
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13446

