The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Diffusion-Based Pre-training Framework for Crystal Property Prediction
Zixing Song, Ziqiao Meng, Irwin King
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zxsong@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, zqmeng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

2023). These models often rival the accuracy of Densityfunctional theory (DFT) methods while being substantially
faster (Orio, Pantazis, and Neese 2009). Recent state-of-theart (SOTA) models (Louis et al. 2020; Xie and Grossman
2018; Choudhary and DeCost 2021; Yan et al. 2022) usually construct multi-edge graphs for a 3D crystal structure
where edges are created between nearby atoms within a prespecified distance threshold, and apply the Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) model to learn representations of crystal structures that are optimized for the downstream property prediction task. However, the success of such methods
is largely tied to the large number of labeled crystal structure
data with target property values, which demands extensive
time and resources in physical simulations or laboratory experiments (Yu et al. 2023). Therefore, these crystal property
predictors are often powerless for real scenarios when the
annotations of the crystal properties are sparse, but the 3D
crystal structure data are more readily available.
Consequently, a pertinent question is how to leverage vast
unlabeled datasets of 3D crystal structures to enhance downstream crystal property prediction that also relies on 3D
structures as input. Our answer is a form of self-supervised
pre-training paradigm (Liu et al. 2023b) that constructs the
surrogate task of exploring the intrinsic structure within
the untagged crystal structures and generates useful hidden
representations for the downstream prediction task. Recent
studies (Jiao et al. 2023a; Zaidi et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a)
have successfully applied similar strategies to molecular
property prediction, and motivate this design of the pretrainfinetune framework in our method. For example, Zaidi et al.
(2023) describe a pre-training technique based on denoising
by utilizing large datasets of 3D molecular structures at equilibrium to learn meaningful representations for downstream
prediction tasks. Yet, in the realm of crystal property prediction from 3D structures, such pre-training remains underexplored. To our knowledge, CrysGNN (Das et al. 2023b) is
the only relevant published work for a pre-training framework that extracts distilled knowledge from unlabeled crystal structure data and injects it into different property predictors to enhance their prediction accuracy. Nonetheless, CrysGNN heavily relies on the existing train-from-scratch property predictors like Matformer (Yan et al. 2022) and fails to
take the crystal symmetry properties into account.
We aim to investigate the possibility of using crystal struc-

Many significant problems involving crystal property prediction from 3D structures have limited labeled data due
to expensive and time-consuming physical simulations or
lab experiments. To overcome this challenge, we propose a
pretrain-finetune framework for the crystal property prediction task named CrysDiff based on diffusion models. In the
pre-training phase, CrysDiff learns the latent marginal distribution of crystal structures via the reconstruction task. Subsequently, CrysDiff can be fine-tuned under the guidance of
the new sparse labeled data, fitting the conditional distribution of the target property given the crystal structures. To better model the crystal geometry, CrysDiff notably captures the
full symmetric properties of the crystals, including the invariance of reflection, rotation, and periodic translation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CrysDiff can significantly
improve the performance of the downstream crystal property
prediction task on multiple target properties, outperforming
all the SOTA pre-training models for crystals with good margins on the popular JARVIS-DFT dataset.

Introduction
Predicting crystal properties remains a significant challenge in materials science (Schütt et al. 2014; Du et al.
2023). Unlike molecules, which are commonly represented
as graphs (Wieder et al. 2020), crystals consist of a minimum unit cell repeating itself on a regular lattice in 3D
space, which can be viewed as a point cloud of atoms with
an orderly repeating pattern (Schütt et al. 2014). The properties of a crystal, such as its electronic, mechanical, and thermal characteristics, are fundamentally linked to its atomic
arrangement or structure. Hence, the crystal property prediction task involves predicting these properties based on
the crystal’s 3D structure. Through the prediction of crystal
properties, we may identify promising crystalline materials
with tailored properties before actual synthesis or testing,
speeding up the discovery process with reduced cost (Datta
and Grant 2004; Oganov et al. 2019).
Recently, we have witnessed a surge of interest in developing deep-learning models for crystal property prediction (Chibani and Coudert 2020; Das et al. 2023a; Lin et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8993

