The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MusER: Musical Element-Based Regularization for Generating Symbolic Music
with Emotion
Shulei Ji, Xinyu Yang ∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China
taylorji@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yxyphd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

video content, video games, and movies. Furthermore, generating emotional music holds promise for medical applications (Pratt, Abel, and Skidmore 1995), such as music therapy. For annotating emotions, the two-dimensional arousalvalence (A-V) emotion model (Russell 1980) is widely
adopted in the literature. Within this model, the two dimensions, namely arousal and valence, respectively indicate the
level of autonomic activation and pleasantness. These two
dimensions divide the A-V model into four quadrants, each
corresponding to a specific class of emotions. In this paper,
we employ the four quadrants (4Q) as the emotion labels for
generating emotional music.
Music conveys emotion influenced by multiple musical
elements, such as pitch, duration, velocity, and tempo. However, existing research (Ferreira, Lelis, and Whitehead 2020;
Hung et al. 2021; Ferreira et al. 2022; Neves, Fornari, and
Florindo 2022; Bao and Sun 2022; Wang, Zhang, and Zhou
2023) on deep learning-based emotional music generation
has not thoroughly explored the relationship between individual musical elements and emotion, nor have they investigated how manipulations of musical elements impact emotional expressions. Instead, with the help of music datasets
with emotional labels, end-to-end models were often employed to learn the distributions of musical emotion features.
To investigate the relationships between distinct musical
elements and emotions, it is first necessary to disentangle individual elements within the latent space. For a certain element, its variation pattern over time seems to be particularly
important for conveying emotions as opposed to its statistical properties. For instance, the same pitch distribution (implying the same pitch range, number of pitch classes, etc.)
may produce either positive or negative valence, depending
on the shifts in pitch over time. Therefore, two requirements
should be satisfied for the disentangled latent representation
of a musical element: i) it should encode a certain element
independent of other elements; ii) it should learn not only
the statistical properties of the element but also its variation
patterns over time.
Previous disentanglement learning techniques for music
(Yang et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020a; Chen, Xia, and Dubnov 2020b; Wei and Xia 2021) have learned to disentangle
musical elements, but they were limited to decoupling only
a few elements (i.e., pitch and rhythm). Moreover, these approaches lacked explicit modeling of the variations within

Generating music with emotion is an important task in automatic music generation, in which emotion is evoked through
a variety of musical elements (such as pitch and duration)
that change over time and collaborate with each other. However, prior research on deep learning-based emotional music
generation has rarely explored the contribution of different
musical elements to emotions, let alone the deliberate manipulation of these elements to alter the emotion of music,
which is not conducive to fine-grained element-level control
over emotions. To address this gap, we present a novel approach employing musical element-based regularization in
the latent space to disentangle distinct elements, investigate
their roles in distinguishing emotions, and further manipulate
elements to alter musical emotions. Specifically, we propose
a novel VQ-VAE-based model named MusER. MusER incorporates a regularization loss to enforce the correspondence
between the musical element sequences and the specific dimensions of latent variable sequences, providing a new solution for disentangling discrete sequences. Taking advantage
of the disentangled latent vectors, a two-level decoding strategy that includes multiple decoders attending to latent vectors
with different semantics is devised to better predict the elements. By visualizing latent space, we conclude that MusER
yields a disentangled and interpretable latent space and gain
insights into the contribution of distinct elements to the emotional dimensions (i.e., arousal and valence). Experimental
results demonstrate that MusER outperforms the state-of-theart models for generating emotional music in both objective and subjective evaluation. Besides, we rearrange music
through element transfer and attempt to alter the emotion of
music by transferring emotion-distinguishable elements.

Introduction
Generating music with emotion is a crucial and challenging
research problem in the field of automatic music generation
(Ji, Yang, and Luo 2023). The generated emotional music
can convey and elicit human emotions, thereby enhancing
human-machine interaction. The application scenarios for
generating music that evokes specific emotions are gradually
increasing, e.g., composing soundtracks (Ferreira, Lelis, and
Whitehead 2020) for media forms such as user-generated
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12821

