The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Backpropagation Through Agents
Zhiyuan Li1 , Wenshuai Zhao2 , Lijun Wu1 , Joni Pajarinen2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University
zhiyuanli@std.uestc.edu.cn, {wenshuai.zhao,joni.pajarinen}@aalto.fi, wljuestc@sina.com

Abstract

agent’s fully independent policy. However, this factorization
ignores the coordination between agents and severely limits
the complexity of the joint policy, causing the learning algorithm to converge to a Pareto-dominant equilibrium (Christianos, Papoudakis, and Albrecht 2022). This phenomenon
is commonly referred to as relative overgeneralization (Wei
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021b) and can occur even in simple
scenarios (Fu et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2023). To tackle these issues, some recent works (Wang, Ye, and Lu 2023; Wen et al.
2022; Fu et al. 2022) present the joint policy in an autoregressive form based on the chain rule (Box et al. 2015).
The auto-regressive model specifies that an agent’s policy
depends on its preceding agents’ actions. In this way, the
dependency among agents’ policies is explicitly considered
and the expressive limitations of the joint policy can be significantly relaxed. However, they only take into account the
preceding agents‘ actions during decision-making, i.e., the
forward process, while disregarding reactions from subsequent agents during policy improvement, i.e., the backward
process (Li et al. 2023). This may lead to conflicting directions in policy updates for individual agents, where their local improvements may jointly result in worse outcomes. In
contrast, the neural circuits in the central nervous system responsible for the sensorimotor loop consist of two internal
models (Müller, Ohström, and Lindenberger 2021): 1) the
forward model, which builds the causal flow by integrating
the joint actions, and 2) the backward model, which maps
the relation between an action and its consequence to invert
the causal flow. Such two bidirectional models internally interact in order to enhance learning mechanisms.

A fundamental challenge in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is to learn the joint policy in an extremely
large search space, which grows exponentially with the number of agents. Moreover, fully decentralized policy factorization significantly restricts the search space, which may
lead to sub-optimal policies. In contrast, the auto-regressive
joint policy can represent a much richer class of joint policies by factorizing the joint policy into the product of a series of conditional individual policies. While such factorization introduces the action dependency among agents explicitly in sequential execution, it does not take full advantage
of the dependency during learning. In particular, the subsequent agents do not give the preceding agents feedback about
their decisions. In this paper, we propose a new framework
Back-Propagation Through Agents (BPTA) that directly accounts for both agents’ own policy updates and the learning
of their dependent counterparts. This is achieved by propagating the feedback through action chains. With the proposed framework, our Bidirectional Proximal Policy Optimisation (BPPO) outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Extensive experiments on matrix games, StarCraftII v2, Multiagent MuJoCo, and Google Research Football demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a promising approach to many real-world applications that naturally
comprise multiple decision-makers interacting at the same
time, such as cooperative robotics (Yu et al. 2023), traffic
management (Ma and Wu 2020), and autonomous driving
(Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016). Although
reinforcement learning (RL) has recorded sublime success in
various single-agent domains, trivially applying single-agent
RL algorithms in this setting brings about the curse of dimensionality. In multi-agent settings, agents need to explore
an extremely large policy space, which grows exponentially
with the team size, to learn the optimal joint policy.
Existing popular multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG)
frameworks (Lowe et al. 2017; Foerster et al. 2018; Yu et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021) often directly
represent the joint policy as the Cartesian Product of each

In this paper, we aim to augment the existing MAPG
framework with bidirectional dependency (Li et al. 2023),
i.e. forward and backward process, to provide richer peer
feedback and align the policy improvement directions of individual agents with that of the joint policy. To this end,
we propose Back-Propagation Through Agents (BPTA), a
multi-agent reinforcement learning framework that follows
the Back-Propagation Through Time (BPTT) used for training recursive neural networks (RNN) (Cho et al. 2014).
Specifically, BPTA begins by unfolding the execution sequence in agents. The actions passed to subsequent agents
during the forward process will be integrated with their own
actions and serve as latent variables (Kingma and Welling
2022) in the backward process, the reactions from the subse-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13718

