The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Energy Guided Image Translation with Stochastic Differential Equations
for Near-Infrared Facial Expression Recognition
Bingjun Luo1 , Zewen Wang1 , Jinpeng Wang1 , Junjie Zhu1 , Xibin Zhao1 * , Yue Gao1 *
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University
luobingjun@gmail.com, {wang-zw19,wjp21,zhujj18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Illumination variation has been a long-term challenge in realworld facial expression recognition (FER). Under uncontrolled or non-visible light conditions, near-infrared (NIR)
can provide a simple and alternative solution to obtain highquality images and supplement the geometric and texture details that are missing in the visible (VIS) domain. Due to the
lack of large-scale NIR facial expression datasets, directly extending VIS FER methods to the NIR spectrum may be ineffective. Additionally, previous heterogeneous image synthesis methods are restricted by low controllability without prior
task knowledge. To tackle these issues, we present the first approach, called for NIR-FER Stochastic Differential Equations
(NFER-SDE), that transforms face expression appearance between heterogeneous modalities to the overfitting problem on
small-scale NIR data. NFER-SDE can take the whole VIS
source image as input and, together with domain-specific
knowledge, guide the preservation of modality-invariant information in the high-frequency content of the image. Extensive experiments and ablation studies show that NFERSDE significantly improves the performance of NIR FER and
achieves state-of-the-art results on the only two available NIR
FER datasets, Oulu-CASIA and Large-HFE.

Figure 1: Comparison of VIS and NIR facial images under
extreme lighting. The red frame in the center of the figure is
NIR images. Even under low lighting or complete darkness,
the geometric and texture details of volunteers in NIR images are still very well preserved.

sors result in the loss of crucial geometric and textural details, especially in key areas such as the cheek or lips. Consequently, even experienced annotators find it arduous to accurately identify the expression type depicted in such images. Hence, it becomes exceedingly challenging to solely
rely on algorithmic enhancements to address this issue. Fortunately, the implementation of near-infrared (NIR) imaging techniques offers a low-cost and effective solution to
enhance the performance of VIS FER systems in low-light
conditions. Furthermore, given their reduced sensitivity to
visible (VIS) light illumination variations, NIR face sensors have been widely used in security surveillance within
finance, transportation, and other related domains.
However, achieving better performance for NIR FER is
still a challenging problem for deep models due to the following two reasons: 1) Insufficient training samples. In the
field of VIS, after decades of hard work, more and more
high-quality data sets, such as CK+, RAF-DB, KDEF, etc.,
continue to emerge, and the overall amount of available
training data is also growing rapidly. In contrast, there are
currently only two NIR facial expression datasets available,
Oulu-CASIA (80 subjects) and Large-HFE (360 subjects).
2) The large modal discrepancy. VIS and NIR face images
taken of the same individual are obtained through distinct

Introduction
Facial expression (FE) is one of the most powerful, natural, and universal means for human beings to convey their
emotions. In various human-computer interaction applications, automatic facial expression recognition (FER) can
provide more insights into users’ emotional states and intentions, which is essential for achieving better behavioral
responses in driver fatigue surveillance, sociable robotics,
and healthcare. To improve the robustness of FER in these
real-world applications, tremendous efforts have been made
from different perspectives, such as occluded facial image
[34], noisy labels [25, 29], cross-dataset generalization [15],
and so on [30, 44]. However, FER under extreme lighting
conditions is still an open question.
As illustrated in Fig 1, it’s quite difficult for visible (VIS)
sensors to capture high-quality images in low lighting or
complete darkness conditions. The limitations of these sen* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

565

