The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

High-Fidelity Diffusion-Based Image Editing
Chen Hou1 , Guoqiang Wei2 , Zhibo Chen1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
ByteDance Research
houchen@mail.ustc.edu.cn, weiguoqiang.9@bytedance.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Recons.

Abstract

Ours

DiffusionCLIP

Asyrp

Diffusion models have attained remarkable success in the domains of image generation and editing. It is widely recognized that employing larger inversion and denoising steps
in diffusion model leads to improved image reconstruction
quality. However, the editing performance of diffusion models tends to be no more satisfactory even with increasing denoising steps. The deficiency in editing could be attributed
to the conditional Markovian property of the editing process, where errors accumulate throughout denoising steps. To
tackle this challenge, we first propose an innovative framework where a rectifier module is incorporated to modulate
diffusion model weights with residual features, thereby providing compensatory information to bridge the fidelity gap.
Furthermore, we introduce a novel learning paradigm aimed
at minimizing error propagation during the editing process,
which trains the editing procedure in a manner similar to denoising score-matching. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our proposed framework and training strategy achieve
high-fidelity reconstruction and editing results across various
levels of denoising steps, meanwhile exhibits exceptional performance in terms of both quantitative metric and qualitative
assessments. Moreover, we explore our model’s generalization through several applications like image-to-image translation and out-of-domain image editing.

50

Introduction

200

1000

Figure 1: Reconstruction and editing results under various
levels of inversion and denoising steps. While increasing
steps makes reconstruction nearly perfect, the outcomes of
editing still remain far from satisfactory (attribute: smiling).

As a rising star of generative models, tremendous works of
diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song et al.
2020) have been exploded in recent years. Except for works
focusing on optimizing diffusion algorithm itself (Nichol
and Dhariwal 2021; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020), others devote to studying how to add controllable conditions
to diffusion models, including adding image guidance (Choi
et al. 2021), classifier guidance (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021;
Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022), using representation
learning (Kwon, Jeong, and Uh 2022) or additional networks
(Rombach et al. 2022; Zhang and Agrawala 2023). These
methods then inspire series of applications based on diffusion models, like image inpainting (Lugmayr et al. 2022),
image translation (Meng et al. 2021), super resolution (Ho

et al. 2022) and image editing (Nichol et al. 2021; Kwon,
Jeong, and Uh 2022; Hertz et al. 2022).
Existing work on image editing based on diffusion models
could be roughly divided into two categories. One is through
image guidance (Nichol et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023), these
methods take advantage of diffusion model’s image-level
noisy maps, and achieve editing by adding pixel-wise control through denoising process. But the disadvantages are
that these methods need either mask (Avrahami, Lischinski,
and Fried 2022), estimating mask (Couairon et al. 2022) or
segmentation map (Matsunaga et al. 2022) to get fine control
of images, besides, they are not suitable for semantic editing

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2184

