The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ViSTec: Video Modeling for Sports Technique Recognition and Tactical Analysis
Yuchen He* , Zeqing Yuan* , Yihong Wu, Liqi Cheng, Dazhen Deng† , Yingcai Wu†
Zhejiang University
{heyuchen, leoyuan, wuyihong, lycheecheng, dengdazhen, ycwu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

promising direction for facilitating and democratizing racket
sports analysis.
Previous methods for racket sports analysis (Wu et al.
2018; Polk et al. 2014; Chu et al. 2022) heavily depend
on fine-grained data and suffer from low scalability due to
the demand of labor-intensive annotation from domain experts. On the other hand, recent attempts utilize video perception models for automatic annotation, yet are hindered by
the sparsity of visual information in broadcast videos, particularly challenges such as motion-induced blurring, subtle movement amplitude, and frequent occlusions of wrists
and rackets. Moreover, they concentrate only on low-level
objects and coarse-grained events, such as ball trajectories (Huang et al. 2019) and stroke timestamps (Voeikov,
Falaleev, and Baikulov 2020). As for techniques, which involves high-level semantics and contextual knowledge, it
cannot be taken as mere actions and state-of-the-art action
segmentation models (Bian et al. 2022) fall short in recognizing racket sports techniques.
In this paper, we aim to recognize and analyze finegrained stroke techniques from low-quality broadcast
videos, bridging the gap between professional expertise and
automated analysis. We propose ViSTec, which incorporates
domain knowledge as inductive prior. We select table tennis
as a representative racket sport for our study, considering it
the most challenging for stroke recognition and well-known
for being highly strategic. We collaborated closely with two
senior data analysts from the Chinese national table tennis
team when developing and evaluating our methods.
ViSTec is composed of an action perception module and
a domain knowledge module. The action perception module
operates in a two-stage manner, leveraging visual information. It first segments each stroke clip from raw video, and
then classifies the specific stroke techniques, working collaboratively with the domain knowledge module to enhance
accuracy. The domain knowledge module models contextual
knowledge, with a focus on technique sequence dependencies. It adopts the form of a graph to explicitly represent
the transition relations between techniques, thus integrating
this relational understanding as prior knowledge. The two
modules are thoughtfully aggregated and jointly trained to
achieve better synergy.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, we
perform comparative experiments with state-of-the-art ac-

The immense popularity of racket sports has fueled substantial demand in tactical analysis with broadcast videos. However, existing manual methods require laborious annotation,
and recent attempts leveraging video perception models are
limited to low-level annotations like ball trajectories, overlooking tactics that necessitate an understanding of stroke
techniques. State-of-the-art action segmentation models also
struggle with technique recognition due to frequent occlusions and motion-induced blurring in racket sports videos. To
address these challenges, We propose ViSTec, a Video-based
Sports Technique recognition model inspired by human cognition that synergizes sparse visual data with rich contextual
insights. Our approach integrates a graph to explicitly model
strategic knowledge in stroke sequences and enhance technique recognition with contextual inductive bias. A two-stage
action perception model is jointly trained to align with the
contextual knowledge in the graph. Experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms existing models by a significant
margin. Case studies with experts from the Chinese national
table tennis team validate our model’s capacity to automate
analysis for technical actions and tactical strategies. More details are available at: https://ViSTec2024.github.io/.

Introduction
Racket sports, including tennis, badminton, and table tennis,
are distinguished by their highly strategic nature, drawing
millions of players and fans to explore in-depth tactical analysis. A game in racket sports consists of rallies, which are
sequences of strokes executed by players alternately from
both sides. Here, a stroke refers to the action of hitting the
ball with a racket, and each stroke can employ a certain technique, such as “topspin” and “push.” A tactic is characterized by a series of consecutive stroke techniques. In a match,
it is of paramount importance to analyze the interplay of tactics and players’ characteristics in technical actions. Both aspects necessitate an understanding of the techniques used in
each stroke. Every year, numerous tournaments are held and
broadcasted, generating a vast amount of video data. Therefore, modeling broadcast videos on the technique level is a
* Equal contribution; alphabetically ordered; each reserves the

right to be listed first.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8490

