The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Earthfarseer: Versatile Spatio-Temporal Dynamical Systems Modeling
in One Model
Hao Wu1 , Yuxuan Liang2 , Wei Xiong3 * , Zhengyang Zhou1 , Wei Huang3 ,
Shilong Wang1 , Kun Wang1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
University of Tokyo
4
Tsinghua University
{Tsinghua2024@outlook.com; wk520529@mail.ustc.edu.cn; yuxliang@outlook.com; zzy0929@ustc.edu.cn;
weihuang.uts@gmail.com; wslong2000@gmail.com; xiongw21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Physial Dynamical System
Fire Dynamics

Surface Process

....

Efficiently modeling spatio-temporal (ST) physical processes
and observations presents a challenging problem for the deep
learning community. Many recent studies have concentrated
on meticulously reconciling various advantages, leading to
designed models that are neither simple nor practical. To address this issue, this paper presents a systematic study on
existing shortcomings faced by off-the-shelf models, including lack of local fidelity, poor prediction performance over
long time-steps, low scalability, and inefficiency. To systematically address the aforementioned problems, we propose
an EarthFarseer, a concise framework that combines parallel local convolutions and global Fourier-based transformer
architectures, enabling dynamically capture the local-global
spatial interactions and dependencies. EarthFarseer also incorporates a multi-scale fully convolutional and Fourier architectures to efficiently and effectively capture the temporal evolution. Our proposal demonstrates strong adaptability across various tasks and datasets, with fast convergence
and better local fidelity in long time-steps predictions. Extensive experiments and visualizations over eight human society
physical and natural physical datasets demonstrates the stateof-the-art performance of EarthFarseer. We release our code
at https://github.com/easylearningscores/EarthFarseer.

May. 26-28, 2023

Results

Solution

Prediction

Deep Learning

Meteorology

Hurricanes

Latitude

45
40

Send

35
30
25

-100

-90

-80

-70 Longitude

Figure 1: A natural phenomenon in which global and local evolution are inconsistent. The hurricanes primarily exhibit clockwise
rotation while in certain localized areas, the presence of convection
results in the emergence of counterclockwise rotation.

numerous versatile techniques for various applications. It is
crucial in climate science for predicting environmental impacts, in economics and finance for market analysis, in engineering for system design, in public health for disease outbreak modeling, in neuroscience for understanding brain activity, in robotics for AI development, and in logistics for
optimizing supply chains. (Hale and Koçak 2012; Humar
2012). Actually, such dynamic systems can naturally model
the time-varying evolution including both intricate natural
system like meterology dynamics (Wiggins, Wiggins, and
Golubitsky 2003; Humar 2012; Harish and Kumar 2016)
and complex society system of human mobility like traffic
evolutions (Ji et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022a).
Since dynamical systems are intrinsically tied to physical processes, they theoretically adhere to the constraints
imposed by partial differential equations (PDEs). However,
modeling and figuring out the above-mentioned dynamics with inherent physical theories is complicated and intractable to resolve. Fortunately, due to the similar properties of both spatial dependencies and temporal evolution between a general physical process and spatio-temporal modeling, we can opportunely attribute the physical process to a

Introduction
Modeling spatio-temporal (ST) physical dynamics involves
estimating states and physical parameters from a sequence
of observations (Benacerraf 1973; Newell 1980). Generally,
the understanding of a physical process is based on plenty of
physical laws, such as Newton’s second law (Pierson 1993)
and Conservation of energy law (Sharan et al. 1996; Egan
and Mahoney 1972). As tailor-made techniques, dynamical
systems, primarily rooted in diverse physical systems, have
been demonstrated to conform to most fundamental principles of real-world physical phenomena (Chmiela et al. 2017;
Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019), where such phenomena can be mostly recognized by existing mathematical frameworks. To this end, the modeling of dynamic systems has increasingly become a generic approach that yields
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15906

