The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SFC: Shared Feature Calibration in Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Xinqiao Zhao1,2 * , Feilong Tang1 * , Xiaoyang Wang1,2,3 , Jimin Xiao1†
1

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Metavisioncn
xqz@liverpool.ac.uk, Feilong.Tang19@xjtlu.edu.cn, wangxy@liverpool.ac.uk, Jimin.Xiao@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract

level pseudo labels, which are then used to train a semantic
segmentation model (Chen et al. 2016).
However, we find the training data of WSSS are naturally
long-tailed distributed (Fig. 1(a)), which makes the shared
feature components (Li and Monga 2020) tend to be positive
in head-class classifier weight and negative in tail-class classifier weight because the head-class weight receives more
positive gradients (denoted as ⊕) than the negative ones (denoted as ⊖) and the tail-class weight receives more negative
gradients than the positive ones (Fig. 1(b)). This makes the
pixels containing shared features activated by the head-class
classifier weight (i.e., the dot product (denoted as ·) of feature and weight > 0) while the pixels containing tail-class
feature not activated by the tail-class weight (i.e., the dot
product of feature and weight < 0) as shown in Fig. 1(c).
Thus, the CAM calculated through classifier weights inevitably becomes over-activated for head classes and underactivated for tail classes (Fig. 1(d)). This degrades the qualities of pseudo labels and further influences the final WSSS
performances. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 1(d),
the CAM activated by the head-class prototype (Chen et al.
2022a) is less-activated compared to the CAM activated by
the head-class classifier weight, and the CAM activated by
the tail-class prototype is more-activated compared to the
CAM activated by the tail-class classifier weight.
Inspired by the above findings (a detailed theoretical
analysis is provided in Analysis On SFC section of main
paper), we propose a Shared Feature Calibration (SFC)
method to reduce shared feature proportions in head-class
classifier weights and increase the ones in tail-class classifier weights, avoiding shared-feature-caused over-/underactivation issues. Particularly, a Multi-Scaled DistributionWeighted (MSDW) consistency loss is calculated on the
CAMs generated through class prototypes and classifier
weights, where the consistency loss magnitude on one
class is re-weighted by the total sample number gaps between this class and other classes. The theories behind
this re-weighting strategy is also demonstrated, proving
that pseudo-labels with better boundaries can be achieved
through our SFC. The contributions of this work include:

Image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation has received increasing attention due to its low annotation cost.
Existing methods mainly rely on Class Activation Mapping
(CAM) to obtain pseudo-labels for training semantic segmentation models. In this work, we are the first to demonstrate that long-tailed distribution in training data can cause
the CAM calculated through classifier weights over-activated
for head classes and under-activated for tail classes due to
the shared features among head- and tail- classes. This degrades pseudo-label quality and further influences final semantic segmentation performance. To address this issue, we
propose a Shared Feature Calibration (SFC) method for
CAM generation. Specifically, we leverage the class prototypes that carry positive shared features and propose a
Multi-Scaled Distribution-Weighted (MSDW) consistency
loss for narrowing the gap between the CAMs generated through classifier weights and class prototypes during
training. The MSDW loss counterbalances over-activation
and under-activation by calibrating the shared features in
head-/tail-class classifier weights. Experimental results show
that our SFC significantly improves CAM boundaries and
achieves new state-of-the-art performances. The project is
available at https://github.com/Barrett-python/SFC.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation (Minaee et al. 2021) assigns semantic labels to image pixels and is crucial for applications
like autonomous driving, robotics (Zhang et al. 2022). Obtaining accurate pixel annotations for training deep learning models is laborious and time-consuming. One alternative approach is to adopt Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation (WSSS) with only image-level labels provided (Ahn, Cho, and Kwak 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020; Lee, Kim, and Yoon 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2023a, 2021a). Generally, these methods employ Class
Activation Mapping (CAM) (Zhou et al. 2016) to generate
discriminative semantic masks from a classification model.
Then, a series of post-processing methods (Krähenbühl and
Koltun 2011) are adopted to refine the masks to obtain pixel-

• We first point out that the features shared by head and tail
classes can enlarge the classifier-weight-generated CAM
for the head class and shrink it for the tail class under a
long-tailed scenario.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7525

