The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stitching Segments and Sentences towards Generalization in Video-Text
Pre-training
Fan Ma1 * , Xiaojie Jin2† , Heng Wang2 , Jingjia Huang2 ,
Linchao Zhu1 , Yi Yang1†
1

Zhejiang University
2
Bytedance Inc.
mafan@zju.edu.cn, {jinxiaojie, heng.wang, huangjingjia}@bytedance.com, {zhulinchao, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

1

Video-language pre-training models have recently achieved
remarkable results on various multi-modal downstream tasks.
However, most of these models rely on contrastive learning or
masking modeling to align global features across modalities,
neglecting the local associations between video frames and
text tokens. This limits the model’s ability to perform finegrained matching and generalization, especially for tasks that
selecting segments in long videos based on query texts. To
address this issue, we propose a novel stitching and matching pre-text task for video-language pre-training that encourages fine-grained interactions between modalities. Our task
involves stitching video frames or sentences into longer sequences and predicting the positions of cross-model queries
in the stitched sequences. The individual frame and sentence representations are thus aligned via the stitching and
matching strategy, encouraging the fine-grained interactions
between videos and texts. in the stitched sequences for the
cross-modal query. We conduct extensive experiments on various benchmarks covering text-to-video retrieval, video question answering, video captioning, and moment retrieval. Our
results demonstrate that the proposed method significantly
improves the generalization capacity of the video-text pretraining models.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Stitched
video
Query
sentence

S3VL

6th to 8th
frames matched
the sentence

S3VL

3rd sentence
matched the
video

spiderman playing with a basketball
making different moves

Query
video

Stitched
sentence

1. some animated super heroes are
standing around 2. spiderman playing with
a basketball making different moves. 3.
man talking to cartoon spiderman

Figure 1: Stitching and matching for video-language pretraining (S3VL). The upper part is to predict the start and
end frames from the stitched video given the text query. The
lower part is to match the video with merged long sentences.
The stitched videos and sentences are from different videotext pairs.

videos and texts (Radford et al. 2021; Lei et al. 2021). However, this approach ignores the fine-grained associations between video frames and text tokens, which may result in
misalignment due to irrelevant frames in the video. For example, a party video with the caption “the person is cutting
cake” may also include frames of children running around
the table. Global alignment of the entire video with the sentence may not only degrade the performance of text-to-video
matching, but also limit the generalization capability of the
model when applied to video downstream tasks that requires
temporal relationships in long form videos. Therefore, finegrained alignment between relevant texts and video frames
is crucial for learning generic multi-modal representations.
Masked language modeling (MLM) has been used recently to achieve fine-grained interactions via predicting the
masked element with unmasked visual and text features (Fu
et al. 2021; Ge et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2022b). However,
MLM can not assure the alignment between different modalities along the temporal dimension, which is essential for
many reasoning tasks such as video QA and captioning.

Introduction
Video-language pre-training is a burgeoning research area
that aims to learn universal representations from large-scale
multi-modal data (Radford et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022b, 2023). These pre-trained representations facilitate various downstream video-related tasks, such as video
question answering (QA) (Xu et al. 2016; Jin et al. 2023),
text-to-video retrieval (Anne Hendricks et al. 2017; Maharaj
et al. 2017), and video captioning (Lin et al. 2022; Xu et al.
2017). By leveraging massive video-text pairs to align crossmodal features, the pre-trained video-language models have
demonstrated remarkable performance on diverse applications (Radford et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021a).
Contrastive learning is a common technique for videolanguage pre-training that aims to align global features of
* This work was done during Fan’s internship at Bytedance.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4080

