The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Preference Aware Dual Contrastive Learning for Item Cold-Start
Recommendation
Wenbo Wang1 , Bingquan Liu1 * , Lili Shan1 , Chengjie Sun1 , Ben Chen2 , Jian Guan3
1

Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, 310000, China
3
Group of Intelligent Signal Processing, College of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China
wwb1325864697@outlook.com, {liubq, shanlili, sunchengjie}@hit.edu.cn, chenben.cb@alibaba-inc.com,
j.guan@hrbeu.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing cold-start recommendation methods often adopt
item-level alignment strategies to align the content feature
and the collaborative feature of warm items for model training, however, cold items in the test stage have no historical interactions with users to obtain the collaborative feature. These existing models ignore the aforementioned condition of cold items in the training stage, resulting in the
performance limitation. In this paper, we propose a preference aware dual contrastive learning based recommendation
model (PAD-CLRec), where the user preference is explored
to take into account the condition of cold items for feature
alignment. Here, the user preference is obtained by aggregating a group of collaborative feature of the warm items in the
user’s purchase records. Then, a group-level alignment between the user preference and the item’s content feature can
be realized via a proposed preference aware contrastive function for enhancing cold-item recommendation. In addition, a
joint objective function is introduced to achieve a better tradeoff between the recommendation performance of warm items
and cold items from both item-level and group-level perspectives, yielding better overall recommendation performance.
Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, and the results show the
superiority of our method, as compared with the state-of-thearts.

Figure 1: Illustration of the limitation of the item-level alignment strategy and the advantage of the proposed alignment
strategy in our PAD-CLRec from both item-level and grouplevel perspectives.

Introduction
Collaborative filtering (CF) has achieved remarkable success in personalized recommendation. The CF based models aim at learning quality collaborative feature (i.e, IDembedding) from the historical interactions (i.e., clicks,
rates, and views) to represent users and items (Yu et al. 2021;
Wu et al. 2021; He et al. 2020, 2017; Rendle et al. 2012; Wei
et al. 2019). However, these methods cannot generate collaborative feature for cold items that are newly coming without
any historical interaction, and suffer from item cold-start issue. A common solution is to introduce items’ multimedia
information (i.e., image, video, and attributes) as content
feature to represent the cold items. From the perspective of

robustness, some methods (i.e., DropoutNet (Volkovs, Yu,
and Poutanen 2017) and MTPR (Du et al. 2020)) incorporate the item’s content feature with the collaborative feature
as the item’s final representation, and treat a subset warm
items as cold items via dropping their collaborative feature
part in the training stage. Although these methods consider
the condition of cold items with the dropout operation in
the training stage, they often neglect the relation between
item’s content feature and collaborative feature, resulting in
the limited overall performance.
To this end, recent studies often adopt item-level alignment strategy to explore the relation between item’s content feature and collaborative feature from an item-level perspective in the training stage, and achieve improved performance. For example, GAR (Chen et al. 2022) and CLCRec

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9125

