The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Correlation Matching Transformation Transformers for UHD Image Restoration
Cong Wang1 * , Jinshan Pan2 , Wei Wang3 , Gang Fu1 ,
Siyuan Liang4 , Mengzhu Wang5 , Xiao-Ming Wu1 , Jun Liu6
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Dalian University of Technology
4
National University of Singapore
5
Hebei University of Technology
6
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2

Abstract
This paper proposes UHDformer, a general Transformer for
Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) image restoration. UHDformer
contains two learning spaces: (a) learning in high-resolution
space and (b) learning in low-resolution space. The former
learns multi-level high-resolution features and fuses low-high
features and reconstructs the residual images, while the latter
explores more representative features learning from the highresolution ones to facilitate better restoration. To better improve feature representation in low-resolution space, we propose to build feature transformation from the high-resolution
space to the low-resolution one. To that end, we propose two
new modules: Dual-path Correlation Matching Transformation module (DualCMT) and Adaptive Channel Modulator
(ACM). The DualCMT selects top C/r (r is greater or equal
to 1 which controls the squeezing level) correlation channels
from the max-pooling/mean-pooling high-resolution features
to replace low-resolution ones in Transformers, which can effectively squeeze useless content to improve the feature representation in low-resolution space to facilitate better recovery. The ACM is exploited to adaptively modulate multi-level
high-resolution features, enabling to provide more useful features to low-resolution space for better learning. Experimental results show that our UHDformer reduces about ninetyseven percent model sizes compared with most state-of-theart methods while significantly improving performance under
different training sets on 3 UHD image restoration tasks, including low-light image enhancement, image dehazing, and
image deblurring. The source codes will be made available at
https://github.com/supersupercong/UHDformer.

L

- gh

G

dT

h

UHDF

Ha e

G

dT

h Deha eF

B

G

dT

h

FFTf

UHDf me

e

e

UHDf me

UHDf me

Figure 1: Challenging examples. Our UHDformer with only
0.3393M parameters outperforms SOTAs with about 50×
more parameters than ours (see Tabs. 2-4).
achieved impressive performance on general image restoration (Wang et al. 2020a,b; Zhu et al. 2020; Tsai et al. 2022;
Jin et al. 2022, 2023; Jin, Yang, and Tan 2022; Cui et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2023). Unfortunately, these methods are
typically based on general image restoration tasks, which
are not capable of handling UHD image sizes or effectively
recovering high-quality images. This limitation restricts the
potential applications of UHD imaging systems.
Recently, with the demand for handling UHD degraded
images, several approaches have been developed for UHD
restoration (Zheng et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023). Zheng et al.
(2021) propose a multi-guided bilateral upsampling model
for UHD image dehazing. Different from the above methods which handle restoration in the spatial domain, Li et al.
(2023) incorporate Fourier transform into low-light image
enhancement by leveraging the amplitude and phase within
a cascaded network. However, these methods usually fail to
explore the valuable content for low-resolution space from
the high-resolution one, which could contain useful information that significantly affects restoration quality. Furthermore, existing methods often rely on large-capacity models
to achieve optimal performance. For instance, UHDFour (Li
et al. 2023) and UHD (Zheng et al. 2021) methods have
17.7M and 34.5M parameters, respectively, making them
unsuitable for deployment on small-capacity devices.
To solve the above problems, we propose the UHD-

Introduction
In recent years, the rapid development of advanced imaging
sensors and displays has greatly contributed to the progress
of Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) imaging. However, UHD
images captured under low-light, hazy, or high-speed movement conditions often suffer from undesirable degradation,
resulting in visually low quality and hindering high-level vision tasks. This paper presents a unified framework to address the challenging UHD image restoration problem.
With the emergence of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and Transformers, learning-based methods have
* supercong94@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5336

