The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Comprehensive Augmentation Framework for Anomaly Detection
Jiang Lin,Yaping Yan*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
{220215663, yan}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

scars (thin rectangular areas) (Li et al. 2021), randomized
masks (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021), and masks obtained by thresholding difference (Schlüter et al. 2022). As
for the anomaly source, simple CutOut (replace with zeros) (DeVries and Taylor 2017), random noises, external
texture sources (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021), and
in-distribution sampling (Li et al. 2021) are widely adopted.
As various as the choices could be, previous solutions create data augmentation methods based on two common perspectives. They either focus on creating anomalies with high
variety or approximating realistic appearances.
In this paper, we support the use of diverse shapes and
randomly distributed locations in anomaly generation. However, we oppose the empirical thoughts that believe mimicking or approximating the distribution of real anomalies
could lead to optimal solutions. The anomaly detection problem is known for the unpredictability of anomalies. It means
that we shall hold no presumptions about the appearance of
anomalies in the real world. The hypothesized anomaly distribution that previous methods try to approach is a biased
distribution that is extrapolated from past observations of the
test set or real-world experience. Mimicking a biased distribution leads to biased solutions which could provide false
comfort in the test set which is heavily involved with human experience in its creation process. The results are therefore not representative enough, and the performance of these
methods might not be as promising in the real world. On the
other hand, other methods seek to create anomalies with a
high variety, but the current way of executing it is unsatisfying as a randomized source does not produce anomalies
with a truly high variety. Simply using randomly selected
anomaly sources, whether internal or external, could only
achieve variety in values, not the type of anomalies. These
attempts previous methods have made are empirical, and further analysis is required to produce anomalies with different
intrinsic natures to cover the possible situations from different angles.
In terms of a reconstructive perspective, anomalies could
be divided into transparent and opaque ones for they require to be treated differently by the network. For transparent ones, the original normal areas are covered by anomalies
but still visible, so the goal is to retrieve them. For opaque
ones, the original regions are completely gone, so the goal is
to reconstruct based on the information from their surround-

Data augmentation methods are commonly integrated into the
training of anomaly detection models. Previous approaches
have primarily focused on replicating real-world anomalies
or enhancing diversity, without considering that the standard
of anomaly varies across different classes, potentially leading to a biased training distribution. This paper analyzes crucial traits of simulated anomalies that contribute to the training of reconstructive networks and condenses them into several methods, thus creating a comprehensive framework by
selectively utilizing appropriate combinations. Furthermore,
we integrate this framework with a reconstruction-based approach and concurrently propose a split training strategy that
alleviates the overfitting issue while avoiding introducing interference to the reconstruction process. The evaluations conducted on the MVTec anomaly detection dataset demonstrate
that our method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art approach, particularly in terms of object classes. We also generate a simulated dataset comprising anomalies with diverse
characteristics, and experimental results demonstrate that our
approach exhibits promising potential for generalizing effectively to various unseen anomalies encountered in real-world
scenarios.

Introduction
Surface anomaly detection is an important task in quality inspection and automation. It aims to find outliers based on
the normal samples provided. Many recent methods take a
reconstructive approach that models the distribution of normal samples and then discriminates the anomalous ones. The
training of the reconstruction process often requires the presence of anomalous samples, data augmentations are therefore often used as a way to produce simulated anomalies as
it is difficult to collect real samples. In practice, the characteristics of the simulated anomalies significantly impact the
quality of the reconstruction results.
The core idea of existing data augmentation methods is
to randomly replace a region of normal areas with other
values, thus creating an anomaly. Two natural questions
raised in this process are how to select the target region
and what to use as the anomaly source. In previous methods, the choice of target region includes rectangular areas,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8742

