The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Symbolic Reasoning Methods for AI Planning
Gregor Behnke
Universiteit van Amsterdam
g.behnke@uva.nl

Planning is the act of deliberative thinking before acting (Haslum 2006). It is based on a symbolic model of the
world and the options to act in it, usually defined in functionfree first-order logic. The planner has to find a sequence
of actions (a plan) that leads from the current state to a
desired goal state. The purely physical description may be
augmented with a partially ordered grammar-like structure
(a Hierarchical Task Network or HTN), describing expert
knowledge, or practical, legal, or operational requirements.
In this talk, I will survey a variety of methods for automatically deriving plans using symbolic methods for planning.These symbolic methods – in some sense – translate
planning problems into other, simpler symbolic representations and reason over them to find plans.
As a basis for these methods, I will firstly introduce relevant theoretical results on planning. First, I will discuss the
expressive power of planning formalisms (Höller et al. 2014;
Höller et al. 2016) and second, the computational complexity of HTN planning and related tasks such as HTN plan verification, plan modification, and plan recognition (Behnke,
Höller, and Biundo 2015; Behnke et al. 2016).
Based on these theoretical results, I will develop why
SAT-based HTN planning is possible and how it can be implemented. To this end, I will survey several of my publications at top-tier conferences (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo
2017, 2018, 2019a,b; Behnke et al. 2020; Behnke 2021) –
in which I developed an highly SAT-based planner for HTN
problems including the ability to find optimal plans as well
as the grounding as a preprocessing step.
Next, I present the idea of expressing lifted classical planning as SAT (Höller and Behnke 2022). The resulting planner LiSAT was the first lifted SAT-based planner – and
proved highly efficient and outperformed all other lifted
planners at the time of publication. Notably, LiSAT was the
first planner (lifted or grounded) and still is the only one
to solve the challenging OrganicSynthesis benchmark – and
could even prove optimality for all plans.
Lastly, I introduce the notion of planning with symbolic
representations (Behnke and Speck 2021; Behnke et al.
2023) – using Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) to encode
large sets of states compactly. Using a combination of finite automata annotated with BDDs, we can the structure of

HTNs. Based on this representation, an efficient and optimal planning algorithm can be derived. This algorithm can
be extended to also cover oversubscription planning.

References
Behnke, G. 2021. Block Compression and Invariant Pruning
for SAT-based Totally-Ordered HTN Planning. In ICAPS.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2016.
Change the Plan – How hard can that be? In ICAPS.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2015. On the Complexity of HTN Plan Verification and Its Implications for
Plan Recognition. In ICAPS.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2017. This is a solution! (... but is it though?) – Verifying solutions of hierarchical planning problems. In ICAPS.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2018. totSAT –
Totally-Ordered Hierarchical Planning through SAT. In
AAAI.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2019a. Bringing Order to Chaos – A Compact Representation of Partial Order
in SAT-based HTN Planning. In AAAI.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2019b. Finding Optimal Solutions in HTN Planning – A SAT-based Approach.
In IJCAI.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; Schmid, A.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo,
S. 2020. On Succinct Groundings of HTN Planning Problems. In AAAI.
Behnke, G.; and Speck, D. 2021. Symbolic Search for Optimal Total-Order HTN Planning. In AAAI.
Behnke, G.; Speck, D.; Katz, M.; and Sohrabi, S. 2023. On
Partial Satisfaction Planning with Total-Order HTNs. In
ICAPS.
Haslum, P. 2006. Admissible Heuristics for Automated Planning. Phd dissertation, Linköpings Universitet.
Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2014.
Language Classification of Hierarchical Planning Problems.
In ECAI.
Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2016.
Assessing the Expressivity of Planning Formalisms through
the Comparison to Formal Languages. In ICAPS.
Höller, D.; and Behnke, G. 2022. Encoding Lifted Classical
Planning in Propositional Logic. In ICAPS.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22661

