The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Solving Non-rectangular Reward-Robust MDPs via Frequency Regularization
Uri Gadot1 , Esther Derman2 , Navdeep Kumar1 , Maxence Elfatihi4 , Kfir Levy1 , Shie Mannor1,3
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2
MILA, Université de Montréal
3
NVIDIA Research
4
IMT Atlantique
ugdaot@gmail.com, esther.derman@mila.quebec, navdeepkumar@campus.technion.ac.il
Abstract

above studies have mostly focused on RMDPs with a known
reward model but uncertain dynamics. Hence, little attention
has been given to RMDPs with coupled reward uncertainty
and known transition.
Even when the model is comprehensively understood, the
challenge of obtaining a precise reward function persists
in many practical applications. This predicament can arise
when employing a reward model trained on a subset of
labeled data or when learning relies on human feedback
or preferences. Additionally, although allowing ambiguity
on the reward only can seem restrictive, it models a large
class of sequential decision-making problems, including
MDPs with deterministic transitions such as path planning.
Consider again our self-driving car example and assume
that its policy is deployed on real road conditions to
drive towards a destination point. In this setting, not
accounting for reward uncertainty during training could
lead the car toward a different destination. On the other
hand, a robust policy under rectangular reward uncertainty
could yield overly conservative behavior and prevent the
car from approaching its goal. The rationale behind this
is visually depicted in Figure 1, showcasing why opting
for a rectangular uncertainty set might lead to excessive
conservatism. This phenomenon is further elaborated upon
in Section within the context of a tabular model-based
setting.
In this work, we study a subclass of RMDPs where the
transition model is known and the reward is uncertain but
coupled. We first characterize the nice properties induced
by this type of RMDP, as well as the challenges raised
by reward coupling. Specifically, we show that without
rectangularity, resorting to the common robust Bellman
recursion leads to an incorrect and overly conservative
value function. Then, under a (general) convex and compact
reward uncertainty set, we establish the sufficiency of
stationary policies to reach optimal robust return and prove
strong duality. For reward uncertainty sets that are further
specified as a norm ball centered around a nominal, we
explicitly formulate the worst-case reward. The norm of
interest being over the whole state-action space, the resulting
set is non-rectangular. In this setting, the robust return comes
out to be a regularized version of the non-robust return,
where the regularization function involves the visitation
frequency. This finding also enables us to: (i) devise an

In robust Markov decision processes (RMDPs), it is assumed
that the reward and the transition dynamics lie in a given
uncertainty set. By targeting maximal return under the most
adversarial model from that set, RMDPs address performance
sensitivity to misspecified environments. Yet, to preserve
computational tractability, the uncertainty set is traditionally
independently structured for each state. This so-called
rectangularity condition is solely motivated by computational
concerns. As a result, it lacks a practical incentive and
may lead to overly conservative behavior. In this work, we
study coupled reward RMDPs where the transition kernel
is fixed, but the reward function lies within an α-radius
from a nominal one. We draw a direct connection between
this type of non-rectangular reward-RMDPs and applying
policy visitation frequency regularization. We introduce a
policy-gradient method and prove its convergence. Numerical
experiments illustrate the learned policy’s robustness and its
less conservative behavior when compared to rectangular
uncertainty.

Introduction
The Markov decision process (MDP) framework formalizes
sequential decision-making problems where the goal is
to find a policy that maximizes the agent’s performance
in a particular environment (Sutton and Barto 2018;
Puterman 2014). In most scenarios, the environment’s
dynamics and/or the reward function are partially known,
perturbed by noise, or attacked in an adversarial way.
For example, considering a self-driving car simulator, the
discrepancy between the idealized virtual environment and
unexpectedly varying weather, traffic, and road conditions
raises significant challenges during training. Ignoring such
model uncertainty can have detrimental effects on the
agent’s performance, potentially leading to catastrophic
failure (Mannor et al. 2004).
On the other hand, solving RMDPs with general
uncertainty sets is known to be NP-hard (Wiesemann, Kuhn,
and Rustem 2013). To address this issue, previous studies
have focused on identifying sub-classes of coupled RMDPs
that are still solvable in polynomial time (Mannor, Mebel,
and Xu 2016; Goyal and Grand-Clement 2023). Yet, the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21090

