The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Null Space Matters: Range-Null Decomposition for Consistent Multi-Contrast
MRI Reconstruction
Jiacheng Chen* , Jiawei Jiang* , Fei Wu, Jianwei Zheng†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China
zjw@zjut.edu.cn

0

45

Abstract

RNU (Ours)

PSNR (dB)

Consistency and interpretability have long been the critical issues in MRI reconstruction. While interpretability has
been dramatically improved with the employment of deep unfolding networks (DUNs), current methods still suffer from
inconsistencies and generate inferior anatomical structure.
Especially in multi-contrast scenes, different imaging protocols often exacerbate the concerned issue. In this paper,
we propose a range-null decomposition-assisted DUN architecture to ensure consistency while still providing desirable interpretability. Given the input decomposed, we argue
that the inconsistency could be analytically relieved by feeding solely the null-space component into proximal mapping,
while leaving the range-space counterpart fixed. More importantly, a correlation decoupling scheme is further proposed to narrow the information gap for multi-contrast fusion,
which dynamically borrows isotropic features from the opponent while maintaining the modality-specific ones. Specifically, the two features are attached to different frequencies
and learned individually by the newly designed isotropy encoder and anisotropy encoder. The former strives for the
contrast-shared information, while the latter serves to capture
the contrast-specific features. The quantitative and qualitative results show that our proposal outperforms most cuttingedge methods by a large margin. Codes will be released on
https://github.com/chenjiachengzzz/RNU.

RNU

DuDorNet

Δ Log amplitude

42

MDDAN

39

GAHQS
DuDoCAF

36
MDUNet

33
30
0

MICCAN

ISTA
-5

Unet

1

2

3

4

5

Params (M)

6

7

8

-10
0

π/2

π

Frequency

Figure 1: (Left) Comparisons of PSNR/Params-Flops
among competing methods. The circle radius denotes the
metrics of Flops (G). (Right) Relative log amplitudes of
spectral feature maps.

2021). This paradigm shift significantly accelerates the MRI
acquisition. Unfortunately, due to the extreme violation of
Nyquist theorem, the undersampled k-space data often suffer from aliasing artifacts that may spread throughout the
image. This phenomenon of inconsistency severely impedes
the clinical diagnosis and is surely unacceptable in areas of
life and health.
To address the challenges, most conventional approaches
borrow certain hand-crafted priors to enforce the reconstructed images enjoy truthful visual properties. For example, techniques such as sparse representation (Wang et al.
2023a), low rankness (Peng et al. 2023), edge sharpness
(Huang et al. 2022), and non-local similarity (Wen et al.
2023) have been extensively investigated and yield commendable performance. These solutions incrementally ameliorate image quality through iterative updates, which often suffer from the expense of massive execution time and
the risk of oversmoothed recoveries. Moreover, the necessity for meticulous hyperparameter fine-tuning remains
a formidable concern. With the contiguous progress of
hardware and software, reconstruction methods centering
around deep neural networks (DNNs) have emerged as the
prevailing paradigm. Early DNN-based reconstruction approaches often borrow architectures from the natural image domain, such as UNet (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015), ResNet (He et al. 2016), or Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017). However, a high-quality performance cannot
be guaranteed since these architectures are not designed
specifically for MRI reconstruction. Moreover, poor inter-

Introduction
As a non-invasive and radiation-free in vivo imaging technique, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Yang et al. 2022;
Feng et al. 2021c), has evolved into an indispensable medical resource, delivering exceptional soft tissue contrast and
precise anatomical visualization alongside signal quantification. However, the acquisition of high-resolution MR image demands prolonged scan intervals, which poses problems such as patient discomfort and motion-induced distortions. Consequently, a specific investigation emerges to
speed up the acquisition process while ensuring a high image quality. The most vital solution lies in an undersampling
step in k-space, coupled with a reconstruction algorithm using compressed sensing technique (Song, Chen, and Zhang
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1081

