The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scalable Enumeration of Trap Spaces in Boolean Networks via Answer Set
Programming
Giang Trinh1 , Belaid Benhamou1 , Samuel Pastva2 , Sylvain Soliman3
1

LIRICA team, LIS, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France
2
Institute of Science and Technology, Klosterneuburg, Austria
3
Lifeware team, Inria Saclay, Palaiseau, France
trinh.van-giang@lis-lab.fr, belaid.benhamou@lis-lab.fr, samuel.pastva@ist.ac.at, Sylvain.Soliman@inria.fr
Abstract

and Kauffman 1973; Wang, Saadatpour, and Albert 2012).
Attractor analysis can provide insights into the origin of diseases (e.g., SARS-CoV-2, Alzheimer, and cancers) or play
a role in systems medicine (Schwab et al. 2020; Park et al.
2021). However, exact attractor enumeration is challenging
due to the complex dynamics of large-scale models.
Recently, the concept of trap spaces (Klarner, Bockmayr,
and Siebert 2015) was introduced as a more computationally viable alternative to attractors. A trap space is a hypercube in the state space of a BN that cannot be escaped once
entered. Every such minimal hypercube thus approximates
one or more attractors. Not only are minimal trap spaces a
good approximation of attractors in practice, but the much
improved tractability of this problem also enabled analysis
of a significantly larger class of Boolean models. This makes
minimal (and other) trap spaces popular in many biological
applications such as control (cell reprogramming) and model
inference (Chevalier et al. 2019; Paulevé et al. 2020; Rozum
et al. 2021b; Trinh et al. 2022; Richard and Tonello 2023;
Trinh, Benhamou, and Soliman 2023).
To the best of our knowledge, the theoretical complexity of the different variants of this problem has not
been fully explored yet. However, has been shown recently that even one of the simplest decision variants of
the problem is coNP-complete in the general case (Moon,
Lee, and Paulevé 2023). Several methods have been proposed for enumerating (minimal or maximal) trap spaces
such as pyboolnet (Klarner, Streck, and Siebert 2017),
bioLQM (Naldi 2018), mpbn (Paulevé et al. 2020), and
trappist (Trinh et al. 2022; Trinh, Benhamou, and Soliman 2023), and trapmvn (Trinh et al. 2023). However,
they still suffer from scalability and efficiency issues, particularly for very large and complex models. The main reason
often being that they require intermediate representations of
the original BN which may be expensive or even intractable
to obtain, e.g., prime implicants, Petri Nets (PNs), Disjunctive Normal Forms (DNFs), or Binary Decision Diagrams
(BDDs). The Related Work section gives a more detailed
summary of these methods. In particular, the constantly increasing complexity of recently proposed models (Aghamiri
et al. 2020) shows the limitations of these methods and motivates the search for a more scalable alternative.
Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1988) has found widespread application in computational

Boolean Networks (BNs) are widely used as a modeling
formalism in several domains, notably systems biology and
computer science. A fundamental problem in BN analysis
is the enumeration of trap spaces, which are hypercubes in
the state space that cannot be escaped once entered. Several
methods have been proposed for enumerating trap spaces,
however they often suffer from scalability and efficiency
issues, particularly for large and complex models. To our
knowledge, the most efficient and recent methods for the
trap space enumeration all rely on Answer Set Programming
(ASP), which has been widely applied to the analysis of BNs.
Motivated by these considerations, our work proposes a new
method for enumerating trap spaces in BNs using ASP. We
evaluate the method on a mix of 250+ real-world and 400+
randomly generated BNs, showing that it enables analysis
of models beyond the capabilities of existing tools (namely
pyboolnet, mpbn, trappist, and trapmvn).

Introduction
Boolean Networks (BNs) are a simple yet efficient mathematical formalism with many applications in various areas
from science to engineering (Schwab et al. 2020; Rozum
et al. 2021b). A BN includes n nodes, s.t. each node is associated with a Boolean variable and with a Boolean function that determines the value update of this node over time.
In systems biology, BNs are used to model complex biological phenomena (Glass and Kauffman 1973; Thomas
1973). The utility of BNs has been demonstrated primarily in cases where not enough quantitative biological data is
available (Wang, Saadatpour, and Albert 2012). Here, BNs
provide explainable and executable abstractions of largescale processes (including, but not limited to gene regulation and cell signalling). This leads to an ever-increasing
complexity of network topology and Boolean functions in
logical models à la Thomas (Aghamiri et al. 2020), as new
qualitative genomics datasets are continuously being measured and integrated into existing models.
The main component of BN analysis is the computation of
attractors: minimal sets of states that cannot be escaped once
entered. These represent the long-term behaviour of a BN
and are linked to observable biological phenotypes (Glass
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10714

