The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GLDL: Graph Label Distribution Learning
Yufei Jin1 , Richard Gao2 , Yi He3 , Xingquan Zhu1
1

Dept. of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
2
Dept. of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA
3
Dept. of Computer Science, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
yjin2021@fau.edu; rdg3@rice.edu; yihe@cs.odu.edu; xzhu3@fau.edu

Abstract
Label Distribution Learning (LDL), as a more general learning setting than generic single-label and multi-label learning,
has been commonly used in computer vision and many other
applications. To date, existing LDL approaches are designed
and applied to data without considering the interdependence
between instances. In this paper, we propose a Graph Label
Distribution Learning (GLDL) framework, which explicitly
models three types of relationships: instance-instance, labellabel, and instance-label, to learn the label distribution for
networked data. A label-label network is learned to capture
label-to-label correlation, through which GLDL can accurately learn label distributions for nodes. Dual graph convolution network (GCN) Co-training with heterogeneous message passing ensures two GCNs, one focusing on instanceinstance relationship and the other one targeting label-label
correlation, are jointly trained such that instance-instance relationship can help induce label-label correlation and vice
versa. Our theoretical study derives the error bound of GLDL.
For verification, four benchmark datasets with label distributions for nodes are created using common graph benchmarks. The experiments show that considering dependency
helps learn better label distributions for networked data, compared to state-of-the-art LDL baseline. In addition, GLDL not
only outperforms simple GCN and graph attention networks
(GAT) using distribution loss but is also superior to its variant considering label-label relationship as a static network.
GLDL and its benchmarks are the first research endeavors to
address LDL for graphs. Code and benchmark data are released for public access.

Figure 1: A motivating example of graph label distribution
learning, where the label of each colored (labeled) node is
a distribution, influenced by its position within the network.
Class 3 is the dominant label for nodes v1 , v2 , and v3 . For v3 ,
Class 3 demonstrates a weaker correlation to other classes
(e.g., a company with a focused business); in contrast, for
v1 and v2 , Class 3 exhibits a stronger correlation to other
classes (e.g., a company with more diverse business scope).

Enabling the modeling of label distribution allows LDL to
have a richer and more nuanced description of the underlying objects, invaluable for many computer vision (CV) and
natural language processing (NLP) applications. For example, in an image portraying a lake surrounded by trees with a
mountain in the distance, LDL aptly captures the essence of
the scene by indicating that the lake is the most prominent
element in terms of pixel coverage, while the mountain, being less visible, holds a minor presence (Xu et al. 2023).
Despite its success across various domains, LDL has primarily been applied to data characterized by independent
and identically distributed (i.e. IID) properties. Yet, recent
advances in social networks and complex information systems have resulted in a large number of applications where
data convey dependency relationships. Consider the task of
analyzing a business collaboration network, as shown in
Fig. 1, where nodes represent companies and edges signify
shared users or customers. A company may offer a variety
of services with different levels of emphasis (e.g., a bike
store might also provide rental or coaching services). Predicting the companies’ business scopes in this network can
be conceptually cast as an LDL task. The Yelp and Yelp2
datasets explored in our experiments present similar applications, where the label distribution of a node (i.e. a restaurant) reflects the diverse ratings from customers. In this case,
label distribution modeling is more informative than a single aggregate rating, as it provides a richer understanding

Introduction
Label distribution learning (LDL) enables the assignment of
a distribution to the label of each instance, quantitatively
representing the description degree of the label to the instance (Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013; Chen et al. 2020). As
such, LDL advances the traditional single/multi-label learning’s aim from answering the question of “can this/these label(s) describe the instance?” (i.e. binary answers) to “how
well a label characterizes the instance?” (i.e. numeric answers) (Carbonell, Michalski, and Mitchell 1983; Kotsiantis,
Zaharakis, and Pintelas 2006; Zhang et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2019; Xie et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12965

