The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Deweather Mixture-of-Experts with Uncertainty-Aware
Feature-Wise Linear Modulation
Rongyu Zhang1,2 , Yulin Luo2 , Jiaming Liu2 , Huanrui Yang3 , Zhen Dong3 , Denis Gudovskiy4 ,
Tomoyuki Okuno4 , Yohei Nakata4 , Kurt Keutzer3 , Yuan Du1 * , Shanghang Zhang2 *
2

1
Nanjing University
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
University of California, Berkeley
4
Panasonic
yuandu@nju.edu.cn, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) approach has demonstrated
outstanding scalability in multi-task learning including lowlevel upstream tasks such as concurrent removal of multiple
adverse weather effects. However, the conventional MoE architecture with parallel Feed Forward Network (FFN) experts
leads to significant parameter and computational overheads
that hinder its efficient deployment. In addition, the naive
MoE linear router is suboptimal in assigning task-specific
features to multiple experts which limits its further scalability. In this work, we propose an efficient MoE architecture
with weight sharing across the experts. Inspired by the idea
of linear feature modulation (FM), our architecture implicitly
instantiates multiple experts via learnable activation modulations on a single shared expert block. The proposed Feature
Modulated Expert (FME) serves as a building block for the
novel Mixture-of-Feature-Modulation-Experts (MoFME) architecture, which can scale up the number of experts with low
overhead. We further propose an Uncertainty-aware Router
(UaR) to assign task-specific features to different FM modules with well-calibrated weights. This enables MoFME to
effectively learn diverse expert functions for multiple tasks.
The conducted experiments on the multi-deweather task show
that our MoFME outperforms the state-of-the-art in the image
restoration quality by 0.1-0.2 dB while saving more than 74%
of parameters and 20% inference time over the conventional
MoE counterpart. Experiments on the downstream segmentation and classification tasks further demonstrate the generalizability of MoFME to real open-world applications.

(a) MoE

(b) M3 Vit

(c) MoFME

Figure 1: t-SNE visualization of the router’s outputs between
different MoE architectures with adverse weather inputs.

rather than an efficient deployment.
One promising way to address several weather effects
concurrently is the conditional computation paradigm (Bengio 2013), where a model can selectively activate certain
parts of architecture, i.e. the task-specific experts, depending on the input. In particular, the sparse Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) (Riquelme et al. 2021) with parallel Feed Forward
Network (FFN) experts rely on a router to activate a subset of FFNs for each weather-specific input image. Figure 2
shows a pipeline with an upstream MoE model to overcome
a number of weather effects. For example, Ye et al. (2022)
propose the DAN-Net method that estimates gated attention
maps for inputs and uses them to properly dispatch images
to task-specific experts. Similarly, Luo et al. (2023) develop
a weather-aware router to assign an input image to a relevant
expert without a weather-type label at test time.
Meanwhile, challenges exist in building a practical MoEbased model for deweather applications: ➊ Efficient deployment. Conventional MoE-based models with multiple parallel FFN experts require a significant amount of memory
and computing. For example, MoWE (Luo et al. 2023) architecture contains up to hundreds of experts with billions
of parameters. Hence, it is infeasible to apply such architectures to edge devices with limited resources for practical
upstream tasks, e.g. to increase the safety of autonomous
driving(Chi et al. 2023). Previous attempts to reduce memory and computation overheads inevitably sacrifice model
performance (Xue et al. 2022). ➋ Diverse feature calibration. Existing MoE networks typically use naı̈ve linear

Introduction
There is a growing interest in low-level upstream tasks such
as adverse weather removal (deweather) (Valanarasu et al.
2022). It intends to eliminate the impact of weather-induced
noise on decision-critical downstream tasks such as detection and segmentation (Zamir et al. 2022). Previous methods (Ren et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021) approach each type
of weather effect independently, yet multiple effects can appear simultaneously in the real world. Moreover, such methods mainly focus on the deweathering performance metrics
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16812

