The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Gradient Explosion in Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning:
A Probabilistic Perspective
Wanying Wang1, * , Yichen Zhu2, * , Yirui Zhou1 , Chaomin Shen3 ,
Jian Tang2 , Zhiyuan Xu2 , Yaxin Peng1,† , Yangchun Zhang1,†
1

Department of Mathematics, College of Sciences, Shanghai University
2
Midea Group
3
School of Computer Science, East China Normal University
{wywang, zyr050798, yaxin.peng, zycstatis}@shu.edu.cn, cmshen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
{zhuyc25, xuzy70, tangjian22}@midea.com

Abstract

fuse the discriminator. GAIL is promising for many realworld scenarios where designing reward functions to learn
the optimal control policies requires significant effort. It has
made remarkable achievements in physical-world tasks, i.e.,
robot manipulation (Jabri 2021), mobile robot navigating
(Tai et al. 2018), commodities search (Shi et al. 2019) and
endovascular catheterization (Chi et al. 2020).
The GAIL can be bifurcated into two genres: stochastic policy algorithms and deterministic policy algorithms,
namely DE-GAIL (Kostrikov et al. 2019; Zuo et al. 2020)
and ST-GAIL (Ho and Ermon 2016; Zhou et al. 2022).
The ST-GAIL with stochastic policy guarantees global convergence in high-dimensional environments, outperforming traditional Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) methods (Ng, Russell et al. 2000; Ziebart et al. 2008; Boularias, Kober, and Peters 2011). Nevertheless, its application in
real-world scenarios is limited due to low sample efficiency
and excessive training times (Zuo et al. 2020). On the contrary, DE-GAIL has become a preferred approach due to its
exceptional data efficiency. Typically, it outpaces GAIL with
stochastic policy by a factor of more than ten, significantly
accelerating the learning process.
However, while the DE-GAIL is much more data-efficient
than ST-GAIL, it is not flawless: we observe a significant
likelihood of generating near-zero rewards from the very
beginning of the training stage. To elucidate this, we carried out experiments on three environments in Mujuco with
multiple DE-GAIL and ST-GAIL algorithms. Among 11 experiments under uniform training settings, we observed DEGAIL method frequently failed during the training phase.
The average divergence rate is over 36% (Details can be
found in Fig. 2).
Why does DE-GAIL have such a high probability of diverging? To shed light on this question, we prove a probabilistic lower bound that describes the gradient explosion in
DE-GAIL. Our proof is built upon the policy disparity between expert demonstration and imitative action. In short,
if the agent fails to mimic the expert’s action, the expert
has a large reward; then, the gradient could explode during training. We verify our conclusion by showing a simple manipulation of the reward function, i.e., switching to

Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) stands
as a cornerstone approach in imitation learning. This paper
investigates the gradient explosion in two types of GAIL:
GAIL with deterministic policy (DE-GAIL) and GAIL with
stochastic policy (ST-GAIL). We begin with the observation
that the training can be highly unstable for DE-GAIL at the
beginning of the training phase and end up divergence. Conversely, the ST-GAIL training trajectory remains consistent,
reliably converging. To shed light on these disparities, we
provide an explanation from a theoretical perspective. By establishing a probabilistic lower bound for GAIL, we demonstrate that gradient explosion is an inevitable outcome for
DE-GAIL due to occasionally large expert-imitator policy
disparity, whereas ST-GAIL does not have the issue with it.
To substantiate our assertion, we illustrate how modifications
in the reward function can mitigate the gradient explosion
challenge. Finally, we propose CREDO, a simple yet effective strategy that clips the reward function during the training
phase, allowing the GAIL to enjoy high data efficiency and
stable trainability.

Introduction
Imitation learning trains a policy directly from expert
demonstrations without reward signals (Ng, Russell et al.
2000; Syed and Schapire 2007; Ho and Ermon 2016). It
has been broadly studied under the twin umbrellas of behavioral cloning (Pomerleau 1991) and inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) (Ziebart et al. 2008). Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) (Ho and Ermon 2016), established by the policy training of trust region policy optimization (Schulman et al. 2015), plugs the inspiration of generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014) into
the maximum entropy IRL. The discriminator in GAIL aims
to distinguish whether a state-action pair comes from the
expert demonstration or is generated by the agent. Meanwhile, the learned policy generates interaction data to con* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors: Yangchun Zhang, Yaxin Peng.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15625

