The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generative Model for Decision Trees
Riccardo Guidotti1,2 , Anna Monreale1 , Mattia Setzu1 , Giulia Volpi1
1

University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
2
ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy
riccardo.guidotti@unipi.it, anna.monreale@unipi.it, mattia.setzu@unipi.it, giuliavolpi25.93@gmail.com

Abstract
Decision trees are among the most popular supervised models due to their interpretability and knowledge representation
resembling human reasoning. Commonly-used decision tree
induction algorithms are based on greedy top-down strategies.
Although these approaches are known to be an efficient heuristic, the resulting trees are only locally optimal and tend to have
overly complex structures. On the other hand, optimal decision
tree algorithms attempt to create an entire decision tree at once
to achieve global optimality. We place our proposal between
these approaches by designing a generative model for decision trees. Our method first learns a latent decision tree space
through a variational architecture using pre-trained decision
tree models. Then, it adopts a genetic procedure to explore
such latent space to find a compact decision tree with good
predictive performance. We compare our proposal against classical tree induction methods, optimal approaches, and ensemble models. The results show that our proposal can generate
accurate and shallow, i.e., interpretable, decision trees.

Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) techniques are currently employed
in AI systems in high-stakes decision fields. The most effective ML predictors are considered “black-box” models (Guidotti et al. 2019b; Pasquale 2015) due to their
complexity, which renders the decision process uninterpretable (Li et al. 2022; Miller 2019). However, interpretability is fundamental for predictive models adopted in sensitive
domains (Freitas 2013; Mehrabi et al. 2022). Hence, there has
recently been a flourishing of proposals for both post-hoc (Li
et al. 2022; Guidotti et al. 2019b) and by-design explainability of AI models (Rudin 2019). Our proposal follows the
latter direction by focusing on decision trees (DTs) (Breiman
et al. 2017) that have a structure directly providing the learned
decision logic in human-comprehensible terms (Craven et al.
1995; Guidotti et al. 2019a).
Finding optimal decision trees is an NP-hard problem (Hyafil et al. 1976) with prohibitive computational requirements that optimal induction algorithms can not really
avoid (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017; Demirovic et al. 2022;
Verwer et al. 2019; Khan et al. 2020; Blanquero et al. 2021;
Mazumder et al. 2022). Instead, trees are most often learned
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21116

through greedy sub-optimal induction algorithms, which
yield decent performance at a fraction of the cost. Suboptimal trees are also prone to overfitting, which pruning
techniques attempt to minimize.
In between optimal and greedy sub-optimal trees, we
find non-greedy sub-optimal trees such as evolutionary (Son
1998) and genetic (Kretowski 2004) trees, which provide a
middle ground in terms of performance and complexity (Barros et al. 2012). Genetic induction algorithms encode trees
in predefined representations, which are in turn optimized.
Notably, since the encoding is predefined, the algorithm is
limited by the quality of such representation, which can lead
to unstable (Kretowski et al. 2006; Basgalupp et al. 2014) and
sub-optimal solutions. To offset the performance gap, suboptimal trees are combined into ensembles either through
boosting (Chen et al. 2016) or bagging (Breiman 2001),
which sacrifice interpretability for the sake of performance.
Our objective is to design a method to learn interpretable
decision trees with high predictive performance and low complexity, overcoming the current limitations of state-of-the-art
proposals. Therefore, we propose GENTREE, a generative
model for decision trees able to induce sub-optimal and shallow decision trees. Notably, and unlike state-of-the-art induction algorithms, GENTREE is comprised of a representation
model, which learns a subsymbolic latent space of trees, and
an optimization model, which samples and optimizes trees
from said latent space. Specifically, GENTREE implements
the two with a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling 2014) and a genetic algorithm (Eiben and Smith
2003), respectively. To the best of our knowledge, our proposal is the first tree induction algorithm which jointly exploits generative models and evolutionary algorithms to learn
decision trees. We leverage the strong representation capabilities of VAEs, and the flexibility of evolutionary algorithms
to encode and search trees with high performance and low
complexity, respectively. We validated GENTREE on a large
set of datasets for the classification problem, on which it
performs favorably compared to classical decision trees and
optimal trees, and on par w.r.t. trees ensembles.

Related Work
Decision trees are a widely used approach in supervised learning. Most induction algorithms recursively induce splits by
locally optimizing a predefined split function. Several studies

