The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Visual Instruction Tuning with Polite Flamingo
Delong Chen1,2 , Jianfeng Liu1 , Wenliang Dai2 , Baoyuan Wang1
1
Xiaobing.AI
Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE),
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{delong.chen, wdaiai}@connect.ust.hk, {liujianfeng, wangbaoyuan}@xiaobing.ai
2

Abstract

Instruction: What do you think of this logo design?
Distorted Response: simple. clean.
minimalistic.

Recent research has demonstrated that the multi-task finetuning of multi-modal Large Language Models (LLMs) using
an assortment of annotated vision-language datasets significantly enhances their performance. Yet, during this process, a
side effect, which we termed as the “multi-modal alignment
tax”, surfaces. This side effect negatively impacts the model’s
ability to format responses appropriately - for instance, its
“politeness” - due to the overly succinct and unformatted nature of raw annotations, resulting in reduced human preference. In this paper, we introduce Polite Flamingo, a multimodal response rewriter that transforms raw annotations into
a more appealing, “polite” format. Polite Flamingo is trained
to reconstruct high-quality responses from their automatically
distorted counterparts and is subsequently applied to a vast
array of vision-language datasets for response rewriting. After rigorous filtering, we generate the PF-1M dataset and further validate its value by fine-tuning a multi-modal LLM with
it. Combined with novel methodologies including U-shaped
multi-stage tuning and multi-turn augmentation, the resulting
model, Clever Flamingo, demonstrates its advantages in both
multi-modal understanding and response politeness according to automated and human evaluations. Code and dataset
are available at https://github.com/ChenDelong1999/politeflamingo

Original Response: The logo
design is simple and minimalistic,
with a pink line drawing of a
flamingo standing on one leg in
the water…

Distortion
Distorted
Instructions

Polite
Flamingo

High-quality
Instructions

3. Visual
instruction
tuning

1. Train a multi-modal response rewriter

Clever
Flamingo

2. Rewrite raw annotations into a “polite” style
Vision-language
Datasets

Polite
Flamingo

Filtering

PF-1M
Instruction Dataset

Instruction: : Who wrote this book?
Raw Annotation: L. frank baum
(From OCR-VQA Dataset)

Rewritten
Response:
The
Wonderful Wizard of Oz was
written by L. Frank Baum

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed approach.

representations with LLMs to transfer such powerful capability to vision-language tasks. Massive image-text data collected from the Internet can be used to train the visual representation (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al. 2021)) and the connector (e.g., Flamingo (Alayrac et al. 2022), Kosmos-1 (Huang
et al. 2023), LLaVA (Liu et al. 2023b), MiniGPT-4 (Zhu
et al. 2023)), but such supervision is usually noisy and could
not cover much fine-grained information that encourages
deeper visual understanding beyond shallow semantics. A
promising direction is introducing annotated captioning /
VQA / visual reasoning datasets, which exhibit a stronger
alignment of real-world human needs than these image-text
pairs sourced from the Internet. Concurrent works such as
InstructBLIP (Dai et al. 2023), Otter (Li et al. 2023b), PaLIX (Chen et al. 2023), and Ying-LM (Li et al. 2023c), have
shown encouraging results of using a collection of visionlanguage datasets for visual instruction tuning.
However, there exists a significant challenge yet to be
resolved in the process of visual instruction tuning. Existing captioning, VQA, and visual reasoning datasets typically provide very concise ground truths or answers. However, as human users, we generally prefer AI assistants that

Introduction
General-purpose AI systems have attracted a significant
amount of interest due to their broad range of applications (e.g., smart assistants). They are expected to be capable of accurately perceiving the visual world, comprehending diverse human requests, and providing helpful
yet natural responses. Prior works towards this goal (e.g,
OFA (Wang et al. 2022a), Unified-IO (Lu et al. 2022), UniPerceiver (Zhu et al. 2022)) have focused on training multimodal transformers via multi-task learning, but they lack the
generalization ability to unseen tasks or instructions, and
they are not capable of offering user-friendly natural responses. Recently, instruction tuning empowers Large Language Models (LLMs) strong instruction-following and response formatting abilities, making it more convenient and
efficient to access its encoded knowledge and complex reasoning ability. Many researchers attempted to connect visual
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17745

