The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

T-SciQ: Teaching Multimodal Chain-of-Thought Reasoning via Large Language
Model Signals for Science Question Answering
1,2

3

3

3

1

4

Lei Wang , Yi Hu , Jiabang He , Xing Xu , Ning Liu * , Hui Liu , Heng Tao Shen

3

1

School of Information Science and Technology, Beijing Forestry University, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Beijing Rongda Technology Co., Ltd., China
demolwang@gmail.com, yihu0118@gmail.com, JiaBangH@outlook.com
xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn, liuning0928@bjfu.edu.cn, ryuki122382@gmail.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com
Sample of ScienceQA
Problem
Question: Which of these states is
farthest north?
Context: N/A
Skill: Read a map: cardinal directions
Options: (A) West Virginia (B)
Louisiana (C) Arizona (D) Oklahoma
Answer: The answer is (A)

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated
exceptional performance in various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. They have also shown the ability to
perform chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning to solve complex
problems. Recent studies have explored CoT reasoning in
complex multimodal scenarios, such as the science question
answering task, by fine-tuning multimodal models with highquality human-annotated CoT rationales. However, collecting
high-quality COT rationales is usually time-consuming and
costly. Besides, the annotated rationales are hardly accurate
due to the external essential information missed. To address
these issues, we propose a novel method termed T-SciQ that
aims at teaching science question answering with LLM signals.
The T-SciQ approach generates high-quality CoT rationales as
teaching signals and is advanced to train much smaller models
to perform CoT reasoning in complex modalities. Additionally, we introduce a novel data mixing strategy to produce
more effective teaching data samples for simple and complex
science question answer problems. Extensive experimental
results show that our T-SciQ method achieves a new stateof-the-art performance on the ScienceQA benchmark, with
an accuracy of 96.18%. Moreover, our approach outperforms
the most powerful fine-tuned baseline by 4.5%. The code is
publicly available at https://github.com/T-SciQ/T-SciQ.

Vision

Human-Annotated CoT Signal
Lecture: Maps have four cardinal directions, or main directions. Those
directions are north, south, east, and west. A compass rose is a set of
arrows that point to the cardinal directions. A compass rose usually
shows only the first letter of each cardinal direction. The north arrow
points to the North Pole. On most maps, north is at the top of the map.
Solution: To find the answer, look at the compass rose. Look at which
way the north arrow is pointing. West Virginia is farthest north.
Generated CoT Signal
Lecture: N/A
Solution: West Virginia is the farthest north of the four states listed.
West Virginia is located in the Appalachian region of the United States,
which is in the northeastern part of the country. Louisiana, Arizona, and
Oklahoma are all located in the southern and southwestern parts of the
United States. West Virginia is the northernmost of the four states,
making it the farthest north.

Figure 1. The input of a ScienceQA data example includes a
question, context, image, skill, and options. Annotations include the ground truth answer and CoT rationale (lecture and
solution). Compared to annotated CoT, LLM-generated CoT
includes greater amounts of essential external knowledge.

Introduction
Scientific problem solving has recently been employed to
evaluate the multi-hop reasoning capability and interpretability of AI systems (Kembhavi et al. 2017; Sampat, Yang, and
Baral 2020; Dalvi et al. 2021). However, these datasets (Kembhavi et al. 2017; Jansen et al. 2018) suffer from limited scale.
To address this issue, Lu et al. (2022a) introduces a largescale science question-answering dataset across broad topics
and skills called ScienceQA. This dataset consists of 21,208
multimodal data examples associated with questions, context,
images, options, lectures, and explanations. An example is
shown in Figure 1, illustrating that a model must comprehend
*

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19162

multimodal inputs and incorporate external knowledge to
answer scientific questions.
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown
exceptional performance in various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (Brown et al. 2020; Thoppilan et al.
2022). Specifically, they have demonstrated the chain-ofthought (CoT) ability to solve complex reasoning problems
by using a few demonstration examples without additional
training (Wei et al. 2022a; Kojima et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022). However, the existing research on CoT reasoning is
mainly limited to the language modality (Wang et al. 2022a;
Zhou et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2022b; Fu et al. 2022), with little
attention paid to multimodal scenarios, such as science question answering. To address this issue, a common approach

