The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MWSIS: Multimodal Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation with 2D Box
Annotations for Autonomous Driving
Guangfeng Jiang1 , Jun Liu1 * , Yuzhi Wu1 , Wenlong Liao2 , Tao He3 , Pai Peng3 *
1

Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
COWAROBOT
jgf1998@mail.ustc.edu.cn, junliu@ustc.edu.cn, pengpai@cowarobot.com
Abstract

their respective modalities. However, the fully supervised instance segmentation approaches (He et al. 2017; Tian, Shen,
and Chen 2020; Cheng, Schwing, and Kirillov 2021; Jiang
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022) rely on pixel-wise or point-wise
instance annotations, which are labor-intensive and costly
(Behley et al. 2019; Cheng, Parkhi, and Kirillov 2022). As a
result, many weakly supervised approaches (Hsu et al. 2019;
Lee et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2021; Tian et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2021; Cheng, Parkhi, and Kirillov 2022; Chibane et al.
2022; Dong et al. 2022) using weak labels have emerged,
e.g., BoxInst (Tian et al. 2021) is trained with 2D box
annotations to predict 2D masks in the image space, and
Box2Mask(Chibane et al. 2022) is trained with 3D box annotations to predict 3D masks in the point cloud space. However, the 3D box annotation is also costly.
These early weakly supervised works are mostly limited
to a single modality. Thanks to the development of multimodal datasets, e.g., nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020) and
Waymo (Sun et al. 2020), which offer millions of images
and hundreds of thousands of LiDAR scans. To the best of
our knowledge, LWSIS (Li et al. 2023) is the first to focus on
multimodal instance segmentation, which employs LiDAR
points inside 3D box annotations to guide the 2D instance
segmentation. However, LWSIS only utilizes multimodal
information to obtain a single-modal segmentor and uses
costly 3D box annotations. This leads us to the question: Is
it possible to leverage well synchronized & aligned camera and LiDAR data, along with only much simpler and
more cost-effective 2D box annotations, to train both image and point cloud segmentors simultaneously via weak
supervision?
Motivated by this question, we propose a novel framework called Multimodal Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation (MWSIS). It trains both 2D and 3D segmentors
using only 2D box annotations, leveraging complementary
information from different modalities through cross-modal
distillation.
However, our framework inevitably faces two challenges:
one is how to deal with the low signal-to-noise ratio introduced by 2D box annotations as weak supervision signals, and the other is how to implement cross-modal distillation. To address these challenges, we devise several modules for pseudo label generation and correction at various
granularity, such as the Instance-based Pseudo Mask Gen-

Instance segmentation is a fundamental research in computer
vision, especially in autonomous driving. However, manual
mask annotation for instance segmentation is quite timeconsuming and costly. To address this problem, some prior
works attempt to apply weakly supervised manner by exploring 2D or 3D boxes. However, no one has ever successfully
segmented 2D and 3D instances simultaneously by only using 2D box annotations, which could further reduce the annotation cost by an order of magnitude. Thus, we propose a
novel framework called Multimodal Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation (MWSIS), which incorporates various
fine-grained label correction modules for both 2D and 3D
modalities, along with a new multimodal cross-supervision
approach. In the 2D pseudo label generation branch, the
Instance-based Pseudo Mask Generation (IPG) module utilizes predictions for self-supervised correction. Similarly, in
the 3D pseudo label generation branch, the Spatial-based
Pseudo Label Generation (SPG) module generates pseudo
labels by incorporating the spatial prior information of the
point cloud. To further refine the generated pseudo labels,
the Point-based Voting Label Correction (PVC) module utilizes historical predictions for correction. Additionally, a
Ring Segment-based Label Correction (RSC) module is proposed to refine the predictions by leveraging the depth prior
information from the point cloud. Finally, the Consistency
Sparse Cross-modal Supervision (CSCS) module reduces the
inconsistency of multimodal predictions by response distillation. Particularly, transferring the 3D backbone to downstream tasks not only improves the performance of the 3D
detectors, but also outperforms fully supervised instance segmentation with only 5% fully supervised annotations. On the
Waymo dataset, the proposed framework demonstrates significant improvements over the baseline, especially achieving
2.59% mAP and 12.75% mAP increases for 2D and 3D instance segmentation tasks, respectively. The code is available
at https://github.com/jiangxb98/mwsis-plugin.

Introduction
In the field of autonomous driving, instance segmentation
of images and point clouds are two important research directions, each providing fine-grained perception results in
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2507

