The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Simplifying Complex Observation Models in Continuous POMDP Planning with
Probabilistic Guarantees and Practice
Idan Lev-Yehudi1 , Moran Barenboim1 , Vadim Indelman2
1

Technion Autonomous Systems Program (TASP), Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
2
Department of Aerospace Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
moranbar, idanlev@campus.technion.ac.il, vadim.indelman@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Solving partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) with high dimensional and continuous observations, such as camera images, is required for many real life
robotics and planning problems. Recent researches suggested
machine learned probabilistic models as observation models,
but their use is currently too computationally expensive for
online deployment. We deal with the question of what would
be the implication of using simplified observation models for
planning, while retaining formal guarantees on the quality of
the solution. Our main contribution is a novel probabilistic
bound based on a statistical total variation distance of the simplified model. We show that it bounds the theoretical POMDP
value w.r.t. original model, from the empirical planned value
with the simplified model, by generalizing recent results of
particle-belief MDP concentration bounds. Our calculations
can be separated into offline and online parts, and we arrive at
formal guarantees without having to access the costly model
at all during planning, which is also a novel result. Finally,
we demonstrate in simulation how to integrate the bound into
the routine of an existing continuous online POMDP solver.

Figure 1: An illustration of a planning session with a simplified observation model. The scattered dots are the presampled states, and the dot size is relative to ∆Z , the estimated discrepancy between the simplified and original observation models. The simplified observation model is less
accurate on the bottom where the surroundings are more visually complex. For the two policies, we compute the bound
as a summation over ∆Z weighted by the transition model.
We bound the summation to a truncation distance indicated
by the cyan circles, and ∆Z within it is marked in red. The
bottom policy chooses actions that give higher weights to
states with greater ∆Z , resulting in looser bounds.

Introduction
Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDP)
are a flexible mathematical framework for modeling real
world decision-making and planning problems with inherent uncertainty. Yet, POMDPs are notoriously hard to solve
(Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1987). Online solvers like
POMCP (Silver and Veness 2010) and DESPOT (Ye et al.
2017) focus on finding a solution for the current belief only,
rather than solving for the entire belief space, hereby restricting the complexity of solution.
These planners are not trivially suitable for problems with
continuous observation or action spaces. In recent years
there have been several practical approaches for continuous solvers, such as POMCPOW, PFT-DPW (Sunberg and
Kochenderfer 2018) and LABECOP (Hoerger and Kurniawati 2021). However the current state of the art is divided between practical algorithms and those with guarantees (Lim, Tomlin, and Sunberg 2021).
Recently were suggested deep neural networks for probabilistic visual observation models in AI. (Eslami et al. 2018)

suggested a neural model for scene rendering. Both (Jonschkowski, Rastogi, and Brock 2018) and (Karkus, Hsu,
and Lee 2018) suggested DPF and PF-NET respectively,
which are models aimed at learning particle filtering. In the
context of model free planning, examples include QMDPnet (Karkus, Hsu, and Lee 2017) and Deep Variational Reinforcement Learning (Igl et al. 2018). In the context of
model based planning, recent approaches include DualSMC
(Wang et al. 2020) and VTS (Deglurkar et al. 2023). All of
these works demonstrate the computational challenges arising from incorporating deep neural visual models into practical POMDP planning.
Our research focuses on the implications of using a different observation model, less accurate but computationally favorable, during planning in continuous POMDPs. This could
describe for example the case of using a shallower neural

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20176

