The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Permutation-Based Hypothesis Testing for Neural Networks
Francesca Mandel, Ian Barnett
Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA
fmandel@pennmedicine.upenn.edu, ibarnett@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract

ants contribute to susceptibility of diseases such as Parkinson’s (Bryant et al. 2021). Prognostic models for patients
with severe brain injuries are critical to prescribing appropriate individualized treatment, and machine learning models
that combine varied sources of information have great potential for enhancing the medical decision-making process.
However, these models require a level of interpretability to
be implemented in practice (Farzaneh et al. 2021).

Neural networks are powerful predictive models, but they
provide little insight into the nature of relationships between
predictors and outcomes. Although numerous methods have
been proposed to quantify the relative contributions of input features, statistical inference and hypothesis testing of
feature associations remain largely unexplored. We propose
a permutation-based approach to testing that uses the partial derivatives of the network output with respect to specific
inputs to assess both the significance of input features and
whether significant features are linearly associated with the
network output. These tests, which can be flexibly applied to
a variety of network architectures, enhance the explanatory
power of neural networks, and combined with powerful predictive capability, extend the applicability of these models.

Despite the well-documented need for interpretability
with neural networks, there is not a clear consensus on
what interpretability in this context means (Doshi-Velez and
Kim 2017; Lipton 2018). A wide variety of methods have
been proposed to address different elements of interpretability. Many can be categorized as feature importance methods. Early work in this area included connection weights
introduced in Garson (1991) and a saliency measure described in Ruck, Rogers, and Kabrisky (1990). Dimopoulos, Bourret, and Lek (1995) proposed using partial derivatives to measure network sensitivity and thereby determine
its generalizability. Newer work has extended these ideas to
more general concepts of feature relevance and explainability. Bach et al. (2015) proposed layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP), a framework for determining the relevance of
inputs in the determination of the network output. For each
observation, the output is propagated backward through the
network according to a set of rules that incorporate information from the weights and can be tailored to the network
architecture. Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin (2016) introduced
local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME), a
technique for explaining the predictions of any classifier or
regressor, including neural networks, by learning an interpretable model locally around a prediction. DeepLIFT, an
algorithm for assigning contribution scores to inputs based
on a difference-from-reference approach, was presented in
Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje (2017). Lundberg and
Lee (2017) unified these concepts and introduced Shapley additive explanation (SHAP) values, which quantify the
contribution of each input for a particular prediction. Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan (2017) proposed integrated gradients as a measure of feature relevance. Zhang et al. (2021)
provides a useful survey. Several of these methods use some
form of network gradients, however, their focus is on constructing measures of feature importance or interpretability
rather than conducting formal tests of statistical significance.

Introduction
While neural networks are well known for their predictive
capability, compared to traditional regression approaches,
they generally provide little explanatory insight into how
they make predictions. While the mathematics of each layerto-layer transformation are relatively simple, how a network
combines information from the inputs to predict the outputs becomes more difficult to understand as the architecture grows in complexity. The issue of interpretability of
neural networks has been addressed extensively in the literature (Gilpin et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2021). Despite the
challenges, there are many settings in which interpretability
is desirable or necessary. In applications such as employment and criminal justice, understanding how predictions
are made is extremely useful for evaluating whether the algorithms are non-discriminatory (Bostrom and Yudkowsky
2014; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016). Recent laws mandating the “right to explanation,” a right to information about
individual decisions made by algorithms, have accelerated
the need for interpretability of complex models (Goodman
and Flaxman 2017). In research fields where data contain
highly complex patterns, there is interest not only in accurate
prediction but also in gleaning knowledge from the model
fit. Machine learning methods are well-equipped to handle
the size and complexity of genetic sequencing data, but interpretability can enhance understanding of how novel variCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14306

