The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BAT: Behavior-Aware Human-Like Trajectory Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Haicheng Liao1 * , Zhenning Li1∗† , Huanming Shen2 , Wenxuan Zeng3 , Dongping Liao1 , Guofa Li4 ,
Shengbo Eben Li5 , Chengzhong Xu1
1
University of Macau
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Peking University
4
Chongqing University
5
Tsinghua University
{yc27979, zhenningli, yb97428, czxu}@um.edu.mo,
huanmingshen@outlook.com, zwx.andy@stu.pku.edu.cn, hanshan198@gmail.com, lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The ability to accurately predict the trajectory of surrounding vehicles is a critical hurdle to overcome on the journey
to fully autonomous vehicles. To address this challenge, we
pioneer a novel behavior-aware trajectory prediction model
(BAT) that incorporates insights and findings from traffic psychology, human behavior, and decision-making. Our model
consists of behavior-aware, interaction-aware, priority-aware,
and position-aware modules that perceive and understand the
underlying interactions and account for uncertainty and variability in prediction, enabling higher-level learning and flexibility without rigid categorization of driving behavior. Importantly, this approach eliminates the need for manual labeling in the training process and addresses the challenges
of non-continuous behavior labeling and the selection of appropriate time windows. We evaluate BAT’s performance
across the Next Generation Simulation (NGSIM), Highway
Drone (HighD), Roundabout Drone (RounD), and Macao
Connected Autonomous Driving (MoCAD) datasets, showcasing its superiority over prevailing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
benchmarks in terms of prediction accuracy and efficiency.
Remarkably, even when trained on reduced portions of the
training data (25%), our model outperforms most of the baselines, demonstrating its robustness and efficiency in predicting vehicle trajectories and the potential to reduce the amount
of data required to train autonomous vehicles, especially in
corner cases. In conclusion, the behavior-aware model represents a significant advancement in the development of autonomous vehicles capable of predicting trajectories with the
same level of proficiency as human drivers. The project page
is available on our GitHub.

Figure 1: An overview of our proposed behavior-aware pooling mechanism and the classical pooling mechanism. Left:
Modeling the vehicle using polar coordinates. Right: Modeling the vehicle using fixed-size grids and representing the
position in Cartesian coordinates.

Driving, for humans, necessitates continuous monitoring
of the current states of surrounding vehicles and forecasting
their future states before actions like acceleration or overtaking. These states, predominantly determined by trajectories,
form the bedrock of safe driving and collision prevention.
This demands a keen assessment of the interaction among
vehicles and an unbiased grasp of their behavior, in line
with traffic regulations and accumulated driving experience
(Müller, Risto, and Emmenegger 2016).
In our quest to enhance the trajectory prediction capabilities of AVs, mimicking human-like comprehension and response to surrounding scenarios might be a breakthrough.
As highlighted in (Schwarting et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2022a), accounting for the behaviors of other drivers in the
decision-making processes of AVs can potentially result in
enhanced driving performance. With this understanding, we
advocate that a deeper dive into driver behavior can significantly uplift trajectory prediction for AVs.
Previous investigations have posited that there exists a
certain relationship between different drivers’ behaviors and

Introduction
Recent advancements in autonomous driving (AD) have
been remarkable. Nonetheless, as we move towards the
commercialization of high-level AD technology, challenges
abound. One of the most significant barriers is equipping
autonomous vehicles (AVs) with the ability to anticipate the
trajectory of nearby vehicles in intricate situations as skillfully as humans.
* Authors contributed equally; †Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10332

