The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Structural Entropy Based Graph Structure Learning for Node Classification
Liang Duan1,2 , Xiang Chen1,2 , Wenjie Liu1,2 , Daliang Liu1,2 , Kun Yue1,2 * , Angsheng Li2,3
1

Yunnan Key Laboratory of Intelligent Systems and Computing, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{duanl, kyue}@ynu.edu.cn, {chenx, liudl}@mail.ynu.edu.cn, liuwenjie@stu.ynu.edu.cn, angsheng@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

GSL, most of these methods aim to learn the optimal structure based on the mutual information over different views.
However, traditional mutual information is unsuitable for
quantifying the structural information and theoretical analysis on what is the optimal graph structure for node classification is still unexplored (Li and Pan 2016; Li et al. 2018).
Many GSL methods focus on combining different but simple
structural features of the original graph to improve the performance of GNNs, and rarely consider the graph semantics
like hierarchical communities (Zhu et al. 2021). As a result,
these methods might be insufficient when tackling the complex and noisy graphs from real-world systems (Zou et al.
2023). To address these issues, it is essential to develop a
novel theoretic principle for measuring the optimal graph
structure and make full use of the structural information to
improve the GSL for node classification.
Recently, graph information bottleneck (GIB) has been
proposed to optimize node embeddings by extracting the information from both graph structure and node features (Wu
et al. 2020). GIB provides an interesting theoretic principle for GSL that an optimal graph structure should contain the minimal sufficient information for downstream tasks
(Liu et al. 2022). Furthermore, GIB relies on the localdependence assumption for graph data and enhances the embedding of each node by its neighborhood information. Actually, real-world graphs usually contain hierarchical communities. This structural information is useful for node classification, since the nodes within the same community are
more likely to have the same class label. How to incorporate
the hierarchical community information with GSL to generate the optimal graph structure for node classification is still
an underexplored problem.
In this paper, we propose a structural information theory
based GSL framework for node classification. Based on the
structural entropy (Li and Pan 2016) and GIB, we provide a
theoretic principle for GSL to find the optimal graph structure for node classification. We then prove that an encoding
tree, as a hierarchical abstraction of a graph, could contain
the information for classifying nodes and remove redundant
noise by minimizing its structural entropy. We next design
an efficient algorithm to construct the encoding tree from
each basic view, such that the GSL could be guided for optimizing the graph structure. To fully use the information in
the basic views, we also enhance each basic view by a sim-

As one of the most common tasks in graph data analysis,
node classification is frequently solved by using graph structure learning (GSL) techniques to optimize graph structures
and learn suitable graph neural networks. Most of the existing GSL methods focus on fusing different structural features
(basic views) extracted from the graph, but very little graph
semantics, like hierarchical communities, has been incorporated. Thus, they might be insufficient when dealing with the
graphs containing noises from real-world complex systems.
To address this issue, we propose a novel and effective GSL
framework for node classification based on the structural information theory. Specifically, we first prove that an encoding
tree with the minimal structural entropy could contain sufficient information for node classification and eliminate redundant noise via the graph’s hierarchical abstraction. Then, we
provide an efficient algorithm for constructing the encoding
tree to enhance the basic views. Combining the community
influence deduced from the encoding tree and the prediction
confidence of each view, we further fuse the enhanced views
to generate the optimal structure. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on a variety of datasets. The results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art competitors on effectiveness and robustness.

Introduction
Node classification aims to classify the nodes in a graph
with limited labels, which is a fundamental problem in
graph analysis and widely used in many applications (Song,
Zhang, and King 2022). The mainstream solution is training
graph neural networks (GNNs) to generate node embeddings
for classification (Kipf and Welling 2017). Since the performance of GNNs is highly dependent on the quality of the
input graph structure, various techniques of graph structure
learning (GSL) have been proposed to enhance the graph
structure and fine-tune the GNN parameters for better classification (Sun et al. 2022).
Existing GSL methods mainly extract multiple graph
structures (basic views) from the given graph to generate an
optimal structure (final view), which should contain the information for classification while reduce redundant noise as
much as possible (Sun et al. 2023). Despite the success of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8372

