The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From Retrieval to Generation: A Simple and Unified Generative Model for
End-to-End Task-Oriented Dialogue
Zeyuan Ding, Zhihao Yang* , Ling Luo, Yuanyuan Sun, Hongfei Lin
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China
zeyuanding@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {yangzh, lingluo, syuan, hflin}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Retrieving appropriate records from the external knowledge
base to generate informative responses is the core capability of end-to-end task-oriented dialogue systems (EToDs).
Most of the existing methods additionally train the retrieval
model or use the memory network to retrieve the knowledge base, which decouples the knowledge retrieval task from
the response generation task, making it difficult to jointly
optimize and failing to capture the internal relationship between the two tasks. In this paper, we propose a simple and
unified generative model for task-oriented dialogue systems,
which recasts the EToDs task as a single sequence generation task and uses maximum likelihood training to train the
two tasks in a unified manner. To prevent the generation of
non-existent records, we design the prefix trie to constrain
the model generation, which ensures consistency between
the generated records and the existing records in the knowledge base. Experimental results on three public benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our method achieves robust performance on generating system responses and outperforms the
baseline systems. To facilitate future research in this area, the
code is available at https://github.com/dzy1011/Uni-ToD.

name

food

area

price

address

postcode

thanh binh
chiquito
golden wok
chiquito
la raza

italian
mexican
chinese
italian
spanish

west
west
south
south
center

cheap
expensive
moderate
cheap
cheap

13 histon roal
21 park road
19 histon road
14 cherry road
77 alger road

cb234p
cb17dy
b126le
c24lop
cb23ll

User : i am looking for a restaurant that serves chinese food in the south of town.
Systems: golden wok is a moderate chinese restaurant in the south of town.
User : what is the address and postcode ?
Systems: the address to golden wok is 19 histon road and its postcode is b126le

Figure 1: A restaurant reservation example based on the
CamRest dataset along with the knowledge base information. The blue word in the dialogue is the entity in the knowledge base.

Harris, and Zhao 2022; Qin et al. 2023) employ the memory
network to encode the knowledge base and then generate
the sketch response1 based on the dialogue history. By retrieving the memory network, the sketch tags are replaced
with the knowledge base entities. Since these methods need
to retrieve the memory network frequently, it is difficult for
joint optimization when dealing with a large-scale knowledge base. Unlike the previous studies, another approach
(Rony, Usbeck, and Lehmann 2022; Xie et al. 2022) concatenates knowledge base and dialogue history as input to
the language model for generating system responses, which
is shown in Figure 2(b). These methods can avoid querying the knowledge base and capture the relation between the
knowledge base and the dialogue. However, even large language models have input length limitations, in practice, there
are thousands of records in the knowledge base, resulting in
long input sequences that cannot be completely fed into the
language model.
To mitigate this issue, as shown in Figure 2(c), Tian et al.
(2022) uses the language model to generate query sentences
and then employs an off-the-shelf retrieval model to retrieve
the knowledge records based on the query sentences. Finally,

Introduction
Task-oriented Dialogue systems (ToDs) aim to assist users
in accomplishing various tasks, such as hotel and restaurant
reservations (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015; Wang et al.
2020). Since the system response is guided not only by the
dialogue history but also by the query knowledge base results, the ability to query the external knowledge base is essential in the EToDs (He et al. 2020a; Qin et al. 2021; He,
Wang, and Chen 2020). Figure 1 illustrates such an example
where the user asks for information about the chinese restaurant. By querying the knowledge base, the system provides
the correct entities from the knowledge base to answer the
user in natural language form.
Recent researches focus on various knowledge retrieval
methods for task-oriented dialogue systems, which retrieve
relevant records from the knowledge base for response generation. As shown in Figure 2(a), some studies (Wu, Socher,
and Xiong 2019; Qin et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Wu,

1
sketch response refers to employing entity types in sentences
to replace specific entities. For example, the response: ‘golden wok
is a Chinese restaurant’. The sketch-response: ‘@name is a @food
restaurant,’ where ‘@name’ and ‘@food’ are sketch tags.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17907

