The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Conversational Modeling for Constraint Satisfaction
Eugene C. Freuder
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
eugene.freuder@insight-centre.org

Abstract

role in a richer and more balanced, and therefore more succinct and satisfying, conversation. Such an approach would
also be in keeping with the increasing emphasis on humanmachine collaboration.
This paper argues that the time is ripe for pursuing this
view of the interaction between automated constraint programmer and human domain expert (or for that matter, automated domain expert), and suggests promising avenues
for this pursuit. In particular, it argues for more research directed towards automating the ability to use, and draw out,
input from the domain expert that goes beyond responding
to “yes or no” queries, and which includes a more proactive
role for the domain expert.
There are three subtracks of the AAAI Senior Member
Presentation Track: bridge talks, summary talks, and blue
sky idea talks. This paper identifies as one for a blue sky
talk; but, of course, nothing is entirely new under the sun,
and blue sky presentations are asked to “relate the talk as
much as possible to the existing literature”. Pointers to some
of the relevant earlier work that might be built upon are provided here, especially work on expanding the range of questions that can be put to an oracle. In this respect the paper
has some of the flavor of a summary presentation. In addition, the conversational goal advanced here is very much a
“bridge” challenge. Most obviously it bridges constraint
programming with natural language processing and machine
learning, but other fields, such as recommender systems,
knowledge representation, analogical reasoning, explanatory AI, human-in-the-loop AI, even computer vision, are
also relevant.
While conversational problem acquisition is addressed
here primarily in a high level, generic fashion, the implementation challenge can be simplified, at least initially, by
targeting automation for specific, individual problem domains, or even to work with specific problem domain experts. Sleeman and Chalmers (2006) built a number of interfaces for specific problem domains that ask the user highly
focused questions.

Many problems, from Sudoku to factory scheduling, can be
regarded as constraint satisfaction problems. A key component of real world problem solving is a conversation between
a constraint programming expert and a problem domain expert to specify the problem to be solved. This paper argues
that the time is ripe for progress in automating the constraint
programmer side of this conversation and suggests promising
avenues for this pursuit.

Introduction
Many problems, from Sudoku to factory scheduling, can be
regarded as constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs). These
involve finding values for problem variables that satisfy a
set of constraints on allowable combinations of values. Constraint programmers model and solve such problems. Many
methods, algorithms and languages have been developed for
use by constraint programmers, but beyond developing tools
for human constraint programmers, we can envision building automated constraint programmers.
Considerable progress has been made on aspects of this
vision (viz. the Progress Towards the Holy Grail Workshops
held at the International Conferences on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming). However, relatively narrow progress has been made specifically on a key component of real world problem solving: a conversation between
the constraint programming expert and the problem domain
expert to specify (or model) the problem to be solved. More
precisely, research on automating this conversation has primarily limited the domain expert’s role to that of an “oracle”
that only responds “yes” or “no” to questions posed.
A basic oracle question is simply a “membership query”:
is this a solution or not? Good progress has been made on
expanding the range of questions that can be asked of such
oracles, but the research emphasis has remained on placing
as much of the burden as possible on the machine. This, of
course, is a natural AI objective, and the intent here is not to
discourage further progress in that direction. However, in
practice domain experts may also be capable of playing a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22592

