The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SemTra: A Semantic Skill Translator for Cross-Domain Zero-Shot Policy
Adaptation
Sangwoo Shin, Minjong Yoo, Jeongwoo Lee, Honguk Woo*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
jsw7460@skku.edu, mjyoo2@skku.edu, ljwoo98@skku.edu, hwoo@skku.edu

Abstract

In the realm of reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning, policy adaptation has seen some exploration,
with researchers leveraging various forms of task specification to deduce the given task domain. For instance, several studies utilized video demonstrations or expert trajectories from similar domains (Zhao et al. 2022; Kim et al.
2020), while others pivoted towards language instructions
provided by users (Goyal, Mooney, and Niekum 2023; Ichter
et al. 2022), or video-language interleaved demonstrations in
multi-modal user interfaces (Jiang et al. 2023). Furthermore,
in (Xu et al. 2022), expert trajectories from the target domain
were directly employed for task inference.
In this work, we investigate the problem of cross-domain
zero-shot policy adaptation, with a focus on an inclusive and
generalized approach to process user inputs relevant to longhorizon tasks across diverse domains. To be specific, we
consider situations where the policy is prompted with a taskrelevant input, presented as multi-modal interleaved snippets
encompassing video, sensor data, and textual elements. In
light of this consideration, we introduce a novel framework
SemTra, grounded in the notion of semantic skill translation
that spans multi-domains. The framework is designed with
a two-tiered hierarchical adaptation process, first at the task
level, followed by the skill level, to enhance the potential for
zero-shot policy adaptation to target domains.
During task adaptation, our framework harnesses the reasoning strengths of Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) to
interpret the task specification (Ichter et al. 2022; Huang
et al. 2022). This specification, encapsulated within a sequence of multi-modal interleaved snippets, is transformed
into a sequence of semantically interpretable skill representations (semantic skills). For skill adaptation, the framework
employs a parametric approach to instantiate skills, integrating domain contexts into the semantic skills. These contexts
may not be solely encapsulated in the task specification or
input snippets, as they can also be dynamically captured
during the evaluation time through interactions with the
deployment environment. Subsequently, these domain contexts form domain-randomized meta-knowledge, enabling
the framework to achieve context-parameterized skill instantiation.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows.
(i) We present the novel framework SemTra, addressing the
challenging yet practical issues of cross-domain zero-shot

This work explores the zero-shot adaptation capability of
semantic skills, semantically interpretable experts’ behavior
patterns, in cross-domain settings, where a user input in interleaved multi-modal snippets can prompt a new long-horizon
task for different domains. In these cross-domain settings, we
present a semantic skill translator framework SemTra which
utilizes a set of multi-modal models to extract skills from
the snippets, and leverages the reasoning capabilities of a
pretrained language model to adapt these extracted skills to
the target domain. The framework employs a two-level hierarchy for adaptation: task adaptation and skill adaptation.
During task adaptation, seq-to-seq translation by the language model transforms the extracted skills into a semantic
skill sequence, which is tailored to fit the cross-domain contexts. Skill adaptation focuses on optimizing each semantic
skill for the target domain context, through parametric instantiations that are facilitated by language prompting and
contrastive learning-based context inferences. This hierarchical adaptation empowers the framework to not only infer a
complex task specification in one-shot from the interleaved
multi-modal snippets, but also adapt it to new domains with
zero-shot learning abilities. We evaluate our framework with
Meta-World, Franka Kitchen, RLBench, and CARLA environments. The results clarify the framework’s superiority in
performing long-horizon tasks and adapting to different domains, showing its broad applicability in practical use cases,
such as cognitive robots interpreting abstract instructions and
autonomous vehicles operating under varied configurations.

1

Introduction

The promise of zero-shot policy deployment across different
domains stems from the capability to immediately adapt its
pre-trained knowledge to unfamiliar environments without
the need for extensive data collection or fine-tuning. Such
capability could revolutionize fields where safety is crucial,
and where a single failure can lead to significant consequences and substantial costs, such as autonomous driving
and robotics. However, achieving robust zero-shot adaptation in these fields remains challenging due to the intricacies
of given tasks and the dynamic nature of their deployment
environments (Chalaki et al. 2019; Harrison et al. 2017).
* Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15000

