The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Composing Biases by Using CP to Decompose Minimal Functional Dependencies
for Acquiring Complex Formulae
Ramiz Gindullin1,2 * , Nicolas Beldiceanu1,2 , Jovial Cheukam-Ngouonou1,2,4† ,
Rémi Douence1,2,3 , Claude-Guy Quimper4
1

IMT Atlantique, Nantes, France
2
LS2N, Nantes, France
3
INRIA, Nantes, France
4
Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada
ramiz.gindullin@imt-atlantique.fr, nicolas.beldiceanu@imt-atlantique.fr, jovial.cheukam-ngouonou.1@ulaval.ca,
Remi.Douence@imt-atlantique.fr, Claude-Guy.Quimper@ift.ulaval.ca
Abstract

approaches for acquiring discrete functions rely on a grammar to define a domain-specific learning bias. They use
a generate-and-test method to produce candidate formulae
of increasing complexity. Several improvements were made
to limit the combinatorial explosion of candidate formulae.
They include the use of probabilistic grammar or statistical
methods (Brence, Todorovski, and Džeroski 2021) to focus
on more likely candidate formulae first, to generate partially
instantiated formulae whose coefficients are determined by
a CP or a MIP model (Ligeza et al. 2020; Beldiceanu et al.
2022), or to apply metaheuristics (Hansen and Caporossi
2000). However, their main weakness is twofold: first, they
usually deal with formulae from a restricted domain-specific
learning bias; second, they try to directly acquire a formula
that mentions all the relevant input parameters at once.

Given a table with a minimal set of input columns that functionally determines an output column, we introduce a method that tries to gradually decompose the corresponding minimal functional dependency (mfd) to acquire a formula expressing the output column in terms of the input columns. A
first key element of the method is to create sub-problems
that are easier to solve than the original formula acquisition
problem, either because it learns formulae with fewer inputs
parameters, or as it focuses on formulae of a particular class,
such as Boolean formulae; as a result, the acquired formulae
can mix different learning biases such as polynomials, conditionals or Boolean expressions. A second key feature of
the method is that it can be applied recursively to find formulae that combine polynomial, conditional or Boolean subterms in a nested manner. The method was tested on data for
eight families of combinatorial objects; new conjectures were
found that were previously unattainable. The method often
creates conjectures that combine several formulae into one
with a limited number of automatically found Boolean terms.

1

Contribution We generally do not know how to effectively combine learning biases for acquiring formulae. A system that knows how to solve problems with learning bias (A)
and another system that knows how to solve problems with
learning bias (B) can be combined to handle not only problems with learning bias (A) or (B), but also can combine
both learning biases in a nested manner. The problem is how
to find decomposition methods to facilitate the discovery and
combination of multiple learning biases.
The proposed method partly answers this question
through the following observation. Although many formulae
are complex, i.e. they involve various operators in different
sub-terms of a same formula, some parameters only appear
in a few sub-terms, and some sub-terms have a very specific
form. We show that by analysing an mfd of a table, while
relying on the input columns and the output column, it is
possible to identify different sub-terms of a formula to be
learnt and the operators that connect its sub-terms. We carry
out this analysis by using Constraint Programming (CP)
to solve certain sub-problems that allows us to decompose
the formula we are looking for, into its sub-terms, without
knowing yet the formula to be found. In Sect. 2, we give
concrete examples of complex formulae obtained using our
new decompositions, and describe them in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4,
we evaluate the performance of our contribution.

Introduction

While the problem of synthesising formulae from data (Alur
et al. 2018) is central to many areas such as programming
by example (e.g. finding formulae in spreadsheets (Gulwani
2011; Gulwani, Harris, and Singh 2012; Paramonov et al.
2017)), program verification (e.g. identifying loop invariants (Srivastava, Gulwani, and Foster 2013)), and conjecture generation (e.g. proposing bounds for combinatorial
objects (Aouchiche et al. 2005; Larson and Cleemput 2016;
Beldiceanu et al. 2022)), acquisition techniques are limited
when the learning bias, i.e. “the set of assumptions that the
learner uses to predict outputs of given inputs” (Wikimedia
Commons 2003), is vast. In this paper, these assumptions
correspond to the type of formulae we acquire.
Besides the recent work of S.-M. Udrescu et al. (Udrescu
et al. 2020) which applies to continuous functions, most
* Funded by the EU ASSISTANT project no. 101000165.
†

Funded by the ANR AI@IMT project and by Laval University.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8030

