The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unified Framework for Diffusion Generative Models in SO(3): Applications in
Computer Vision and Astrophysics
Yesukhei Jagvaral1,2 , Francois Lanusse3,4 , Rachel Mandelbaum1,2

2

1
McWilliams Center for Cosmology, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
NSF AI Planning Institute for Data-Driven Discovery in Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
3
AIM, CEA, CNRS, Universite Paris-Saclay, Universite Paris Cite, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
4
Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY 10010, USA
yjagvara@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models represent the current stateof-the-art for image generation. However, standard diffusion
models are based on Euclidean geometry and do not translate
directly to manifold-valued data. In this work, we develop
extensions of both score-based generative models (SGMs)
and Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) to
the Lie group of 3D rotations, SO(3). SO(3) is of particular
interest in many disciplines such as robotics, biochemistry
and astronomy/cosmology science. Contrary to more general
Riemannian manifolds, SO(3) admits a tractable solution to
heat diffusion, and allows us to implement efficient training of
diffusion models. We apply both SO(3) DDPMs and SGMs to
synthetic densities on SO(3) and demonstrate state-of-the-art
results. Additionally, we demonstrate the practicality of our
model on pose estimation tasks and in predicting correlated
galaxy orientations for astrophysics/cosmology.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models (DGM) are trained to learn the underlying data distribution and then generate new samples
that match the empirical data. There are several classes of
deep generative models, including Generative Adversarial
Networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014), Variational Auto Encoders (Kingma and Welling 2013) and Normalizing Flows
(Rezende and Mohamed 2015). Recently, a new class of
DGMs based on Diffusion, such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) and
Score Matching with Langevin Dynamics (SMLD) , a subset
of general score-based generative models (SGMs), (Song
and Ermon 2019), have achieved state-of-the-art quality in
generating images, molecules, audio and graphs1 (Song et al.
2021). Unlike GANs, training diffusion models is usually
very stable and straightforward, they do not suffer as much
from mode collapse issues, and they can generate images of
similar quality. In parallel with the success of these diffusion
models, (Song et al. 2021) demonstrated that both SGMs
and DDPMs can mathematically be understood as variants
of the same process. In both cases, the data distribution is
progressively perturbed by a noise diffusion process defined
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For a comprehensive list of articles on score-based generative
modeling, see https://scorebasedgenerativemodeling.github.io/

by a specific Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE), which
can then be time-reversed to generate realistic data samples
from initial noise samples.
While the success of diffusion models has mainly been
driven by data with Euclidean geometry (e.g., images), there
is great interest in extending these methods to manifoldvalued data, which are ubiquitous in many scientific disciplines. Examples include high-energy physics (Brehmer
and Cranmer 2020; Craven et al. 2022), astrophysics (Hemmati et al. 2019), geoscience (Gaddes, Hooper, and Bagnardi
2019), and biochemistry (Zelesko et al. 2020). Very recently,
pioneering work has started to develop generic frameworks
for defining SGMs on arbitrary compact Riemannian manifolds (De Bortoli et al. 2022), and non-compact Riemannian
manifolds (Huang et al. 2022).
In this work, instead of considering generic Riemannian
manifolds, we are specifically concerned with the Special
Orthogonal group in 3 dimensions, SO(3), which corresponds
to the Lie group of 3D rotations. Modeling 3D orientations
is of particularly high interest in many fields including for
instance in robotics (estimating the pose of an object, Hoque
et al. 2021); and in biochemistry (finding the conformation
angle of molecules that minimizes the binding energy, Mansimov et al. 2019).
Contrary to more generic Riemannian manifolds, SO(3)
benefits from specific properties, including a tractable heat
kernel and efficient geometric ODE/SDE solvers, that will
allow us to define very efficient diffusion models specifically
for this manifold.
The contributions of our paper are summarized as follows:
• We reformulate Euclidean diffusion models on the SO(3)
manifold, and demonstrate how the tractable heat kernel
solution on SO(3) can be used to recover simple and
efficient algorithms on this manifold.
• We provide concrete implementations of both ScoreBased Generative Model and Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models specialized for SO(3).
• We reach a new state-of-the-art in sample quality on synthetic SO(3) distributions with our proposed SO(3) ScoreBased Generative Model.
• We demonstrate the practicality and the expressive utility
of our model in computer vision and astrophysics.

12754

