The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Partial Multi-View Clustering via Self-Supervised Network
Wei Feng1 , Guoshuai Sheng2 , Qianqian Wang2 * , Quanxue Gao2 , Zhiqiang Tao3 , Bo Dong4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, 710049
2
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, 710071
3
School of Information, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA, 14623
4
School of Continuing Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, 710049
weifeng.ft@xjtu.edu.cn, agussheng@foxmail.com, qqwang@xidian.edu.cn, qxgao@xidian.edu.cn, zhiqiang.tao@rit.edu,
dong.bo@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Partial multi-view clustering is a challenging and practical research problem for data analysis in real-world applications,
due to the potential data missing issue in different views.
However, most existing methods have not fully explored the
correlation information among various incomplete views. In
addition, these existing clustering methods always ignore discovering discriminative features inside the data itself in this
unsupervised task. To tackle these challenges, we propose
Partial Multi-View Clustering via Self-Supervised Network
(PVC-SSN) in this paper. Specifically, we employ contrastive
learning to obtain a more discriminative and consistent subspace representation, which is guided by a self-supervised
module. Self-supervised learning can exploit effective cluster
information through the data itself to guide the learning process of clustering tasks. Thus, it can pull together embedding
features from the same cluster and push apart these from different clusters. Extensive experiments on several benchmark
datasets show that the proposed PVC-SCN method outperforms several state-of-the-art clustering methods.

Figure 1: The illustration of changes in cluster assignments,
where solid points and hollow points with the same shape
represent different views, and different shapes represent different clusters.

subspace of each view; (Wang et al. 2018b) develops multiview spectral clustering by utilizing low-rank matrix factorization. Though they are effective in multi-view data, they
are unable to capture complex features of multi-view data.
To overcome the weakness and inspired by deep learning,
deep MVC methods (Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2020a)
are explored to capture non-linear relationships of multiview data. For example, (Li et al. 2019) designed deep MVC
via adversarial networks; (Andrew et al. 2013) developed
deep canonical correlation analysis (CCA) method for crossview data (Gao et al. 2020).
Although MVC methods have achieved successful results,
they cannot work well on the multi-view data, of which
some samples lack information in one or two views, i.e.,
partial/incomplete multi-view data (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015;
Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020). This makes these methods difficult to apply in real-world applications since partial
multi-view data is inevitable in practice because of noises,
sensor failure, and transmission loss. To tackle this problem,
several partial multi-view clustering (PMVC)/incomplete
multi-view clustering (IMC) methods (Liu et al. 2018; Shao
et al. 2016) are proposed. Original PMVC methods are
mainly designed for two-view data (Zhao, Liu, and Fu 2016;
Wang et al. 2018a, 2023b). For example, (Li, Jiang, and
Zhou 2014) uses NMF and ℓ-norm to obtain a complete subspace for partial two-view clustering, named PVC. To well
process partial multi-view data with more than two views,
(Shao, He, and Philip 2015) develops multiple incomplete

Introduction
Multi-view data contain multiple features from different
views, such as sensors, modalities, viewpoints, sources,
etc. Nowadays, multi-view data become quite ubiquitous in
practice due to abundant multi-media data collection equipment. For example, a video has image view, text view, and
audio view (Wang et al. 2023a). However, it is difficult to
process multi-view data because of the lack of reliable labels. A basic solution is to employ multi-view clustering
(MVC) (Li et al. 2019; Wen et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022)
to separate the unlabeled multi-view data to different groups
where data in the same groups may belong to the same class
with high probability. Owing to its promising performance,
MVC has been well researched, and numerous MVC methods (Tao et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2022) are
proposed. Traditional MVC methods are based on subspace
learning, graph learning, spectral learning, and non-negative
matrix factorization. For example, (Gao et al. 2015) proposes multi-view subspace clustering (MVSC) which performs clustering on a consistent structure learned from the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11988

