The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ScanERU: Interactive 3D Visual Grounding Based on
Embodied Reference Understanding
Ziyang Lu1 , Yunqiang Pei1 , Guoqing Wang1 * , Peiwei Li2 , Yang Yang1 , Yinjie Lei3 , Heng Tao Shen1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Sichuan University
zi.yang.lu@foxmail.com, simon1059770342@foxmail.com, gqwang0420@uestc.edu.cn,
1pw0622@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yang. yang@uestc.edu.cn, yinjie@scu.edu.cn, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract
Aiming to link natural language descriptions to specific regions in a 3D scene represented as 3D point clouds, 3D visual grounding is a very fundamental task for human-robot
interaction. The recognition errors can significantly impact
the overall accuracy and then degrade the operation of AI
systems. Despite their effectiveness, existing methods suffer
from the difficulty of low recognition accuracy in cases of
multiple adjacent objects with similar appearance. To address
this issue, this work intuitively introduces the human-robot
interaction as a cue to facilitate the development of 3D visual
grounding. Specifically, a new task termed Embodied Reference Understanding (ERU) is first designed for this concern. Then a new dataset called ScanERU is constructed to
evaluate the effectiveness of this idea. Different from existing datasets, our ScanERU dataset is the first to cover semisynthetic scene integration with textual, real-world visual,
and synthetic gestural information. Additionally, this paper
formulates a heuristic framework based on attention mechanisms and human body movements to enlighten the research
of ERU. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method, especially in the recognition of multiple identical objects. Our codes and dataset are available in
the ScanERU repository.

Non-interactive 3DVG

Interactive 3DVG

This is a chair with no arms. it is in between two chairs
(a) Ambiguous Description

Non-interactive 3DVG

Interactive 3DVG

The officer chair is in front of the desk at the center of the room in
front of the entrance. The chair is black and has a round backrest

(b) Complex Spatial Relationship

Figure 1: The comparisons between non-interactive and interactive visual grounding. The image displays two typical
difficult scenarios, ambiguous description and complex spatial relationship, for non-interactive visual grounding. Nevertheless, the inclusion of gestural information conveyed by
a human agent can aid in the localization of the referred object by robots and AI systems.

Introduction
The ability to understand and localize objects from natural
expression is critical for the operation of AI systems. To this
end, both 2D (Deng et al. 2018, 2021; Yang et al. 2022; Qiao,
Deng, and Wu 2020; Wang et al. 2019) and 3D (Huang et al.
2022; Chen, Chang, and Nießner 2020; Yang et al. 2021;
Huang et al. 2021; Yuan et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021) visual
groundings refer to understanding how words and language
can be linked to visual information in images and videos,
and how this information can be used to recognize and understand objects in the environment. The former takes 2D
images or video frames as input and suffers from the limitation of fully localize objects and problems, where object
localization fails to capture the true 3D extent of an object

(Chen, Chang, and Nießner 2020), which is caused by the
restricted nature of 2D images. Compared with 2D visual
grounding methods, 3D visual grounding methods capture
the true physical extent and spatial relationships of objects,
adapt better to the 3D context, and improve performance
on complex and diverse descriptions (Chen, Chang, and
Nießner 2020). Therefore, the research of 3D visual grounding based on 3D point cloud data has emerged, and this line
of research aims at locating a specific object or region in
a 3D scene referred by a natural language description. Because of 3D point cloud data, it can describe the objects in

* Corresponding author
Our project page: https://github.com/MrLearnedToad/ScanERU
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3936

