The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedGCR: Achieving Performance and Fairness for Federated Learning with
Distinct Client Types via Group Customization and Reweighting
Shu-Ling Cheng1 Chin-Yuan Yeh1,3 , Ting-An Chen2,3 , Eliana Pastor4 Ming-Syan Chen1,2 ,
1

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
3
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
4
Department of Control and Computer Engineering, Politecnico di Torino, Italy
{csling, cyyeh, tachen}@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, eliana.pastor@polito.it, mschen@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract
To achieve better performance and greater fairness in Federated Learning (FL), much of the existing research has centered on individual clients, using domain adaptation techniques and redesigned aggregation schemes to counteract
client data heterogeneity. However, an overlooked scenario
exists where clients belong to distinctive groups, or, client
types, in which groups of clients share similar characteristics such as device specifications or data patterns. Despite being common in group collaborations, this scenario
has been overlooked in previous research, potentially leading to performance degradation and systemic biases against
certain client types. To bridge this gap, we introduce Federated learning with Group Customization and Reweighting (FedGCR). FedGCR enhances both performance and
fairness for FL with Distinct Client Types, consisting of
a Federated Group Customization (FedGC) model to provide customization via a novel prompt tuning technique
to mitigate the data disparity across different client-types,
and a Federated Group Reweighting (FedGR) aggregation
scheme to ensure uniform and unbiased performances between clients and between client types by a novel reweighting approach. Extensive experiment comparisons with prior
FL methods in domain adaptation and fairness demonstrate
the superiority of FedGCR in all metrics, including the
overall accuracy and performance uniformity in both the
group and the individual level. FedGCR achieves 82.74%
accuracy and 12.26(↓) in performance uniformity on the
Digit-Five dataset and 81.88% and 14.88%(↓) on DomainNet with a domain imbalance factor of 10, which significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art. Code is available at
https://github.com/celinezheng/fedgcr.

Figure 1: Illustration of the Federated Learning with Distinct Client Types scenario. Clients from a platform hosting paintings (in green) collaborate with another platform,
where individual clients possess personal hand-drawn images (in blue), to jointly train an image classifier. The scenario reveals a unique setting where collective differences
may pose challenges to traditional FL approaches.

address these issues, such as integrating domain adaptation
techniques into the model for enhanced performance (Jiang,
Wang, and Dou 2022; Qu et al. 2022; Yoon et al. 2021) and
redesigning the aggregation scheme for performance uniformity to promote individual fairness (Li et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2023; Li et al. 2021a).
However, existing research has mostly focused on the individual client level, neglecting the potential existence of diverse types of clients in FL. In Fig. 1, the scenario of Federated Learning with Distinct Client Types (FL-DCT) naturally appears in collaborations between large online platforms, each hosting multiple clients with their respective private data. To illustrate the scenario, consider the setting presented in Figure 1. Clients from a platform hosting data with
a certain characteristics (e.g., paintings, illustrated in green
in the figure) collaborate with another platform, where individual clients possess images of another domain (e.g., personal hand-drawn images, in blue) to train an image classifier jointly. The collective differences under this setting
pose challenges to traditional FL approaches. Recent developments of decentralized social networking protocols such
as ActivityPub (Kominers and Wu 2023; Pierce 2023),1 a decentralized social networking protocol, suggests that future

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) enables multiple clients to collaborate in training deep learning models while maintaining
the privacy of their data by only sharing the model updates
after each round of local training (McMahan et al. 2017).
While individual clients gain a more sophisticated model effectively trained on the collective data by aggregating each
client’s model update in a central server, the heterogeneity
of the data between each client may induce biased results as
well as performance degradation. Efforts have been made to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11498

cf. https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/.

