The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Few-Shot Learning from Augmented Label-Uncertain Queries in Bongard-HOI
Qinqian Lei1 , Bo Wang2 , Robby T. Tan1
1

National University of Singapore
2
CtrsVision
qinqian.lei@u.nus.edu, hawk.rsrch@gmail.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Negative support set
! Ride surfboard

Positive support set
Ride surfboard

Abstract
Detecting human-object interactions (HOI) in a few-shot setting remains a challenge. Existing meta-learning methods
struggle to extract representative features for classification
due to the limited data, while existing few-shot HOI models rely on HOI text labels for classification. Moreover, some
query images may display visual similarity to those outside
their class, such as similar backgrounds between different
HOI classes. This makes learning more challenging, especially with limited samples. Bongard-HOI epitomizes this
HOI few-shot problem, making it the benchmark we focus
on in this paper. In our proposed method, we introduce novel
label-uncertain query augmentation techniques to enhance
the diversity of the query inputs, aiming to distinguish the
positive HOI class from the negative ones. As these augmented inputs may or may not have the same class label as
the original inputs, their class label is unknown. Those belonging to a different class become hard samples due to their
visual similarity to the original ones. Additionally, we introduce a novel pseudo-label generation technique that enables
a mean teacher model to learn from the augmented labeluncertain inputs. We propose to augment the negative support
set for the student model to enrich the semantic information,
fostering diversity that challenges and enhances the student’s
learning. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
sets a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance by achieving
68.74% accuracy on the Bongard-HOI benchmark, a significant improvement over the existing SOTA of 66.59%. In our
evaluation on HICO-FS, a more general few-shot recognition
dataset, our method achieves 73.27% accuracy, outperforming the previous SOTA of 71.20% in the 5-way 5-shot task.

Query: Jump surfboard

Methods

Query prediction

Meta-baseline

Ride surfboard

HOITrans

Ride surfboard

DSN

Ours

Ride surfboard

! Ride surfboard

×
×
×
√

Figure 1: Illustration of a Bongard-HOI task: 3 out of 6 positive and negative support images are shown due to space
limit. In comparison to three existing methods (Chen et al.
2021; Simon et al. 2020; Zou et al. 2021), only our method
correctly predicts the query’s binary class.

a question of whether a query image belongs to the positive or negative sets. The significance of the Bongard-HOI
benchmark extends beyond its immediate application. Solving the challenges it presents holds the potential to address
broader issues in few-shot HOI learning (Yuan et al. 2022;
Ji et al. 2023) and, by extension, contribute to resolving the
long-tail problem in general HOI detection (Zhong et al.
2020; Hou et al. 2021).
Existing meta-learning methods struggle to extract representative HOI features due to the limited data per class in
each task. This challenge is heightened in the Bongard-HOI
setting due to its hard negative design, where the positive and
negative classes only disagree on action labels (Jiang et al.
2022). As a result, extracting quality object features alone
is insufficient, causing existing methods to perform suboptimally, achieving only up to a 62.23% accuracy rate.
On the other hand, state-of-the-art HOI detection models have limitations in addressing small datasets or few-shot
scenarios such as the Bongard-HOI setting. This is due to
their requirement for a large amount of labeled data during
the training process (Liu et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2022). Recent
few-shot HOI methods require HOI class text labels, including the few-shot HOI transfer learning method (Yuan et al.
2022) and few-shot HOI recognition methods (Ji et al. 2020,
2023). However, Bongard-HOI demands a model to learn a
novel HOI class solely from images, as no text is provided.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection plays a pivotal
role in recognizing interactions between human-object pairs.
However, a significant challenge arises when dealing with
HOI classes that have limited labeled data, especially for
novel or rare classes. The importance of few-shot HOI learning becomes even more pronounced when considering the
extensive range of potential HOI classes. In response to this
challenge, Bongard-HOI (Jiang et al. 2022) has been introduced as a new few-shot HOI benchmark, where given 6
positive and 6 negative support images in each task, it poses
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2974

