The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LDMVFI: Video Frame Interpolation with Latent Diffusion Models
Duolikun Danier, Fan Zhang, David Bull
University of Bristol
{duolikun.danier, fan.zhang, dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

Forward Diffusion

Existing works on video frame interpolation (VFI) mostly
employ deep neural networks that are trained by minimizing
the L1, L2, or deep feature space distance (e.g. VGG loss)
between their outputs and ground-truth frames. However, recent works have shown that these metrics are poor indicators
of perceptual VFI quality. Towards developing perceptuallyoriented VFI methods, in this work we propose latent diffusion model-based VFI, LDMVFI. This approaches the VFI
problem from a generative perspective by formulating it as a
conditional generation problem. As the first effort to address
VFI using latent diffusion models, we rigorously benchmark
our method on common test sets used in the existing VFI literature. Our quantitative experiments and user study indicate
that LDMVFI is able to interpolate video content with favorable perceptual quality compared to the state of the art,
even in the high-resolution regime. Our code is available at
https://github.com/danier97/LDMVFI.

1

Denoising U-Net

Concat.

C

Conditional Generation Process

Figure 1: Overview of the diffusion processes in LDMVFI.
The encoder and decoder enable projection between image
and latent spaces, and the diffusion processes take place in
the latent space.

Introduction

Video frame interpolation (VFI) aims to generate intermediate frames between two existing consecutive video frames.
It is commonly used to synthetically increase frame rate,
e.g., to produce jitter-free slow-motion content (Jiang et al.
2018). VFI has also been used in video compression (Wu,
Singhal, and Krahenbuhl 2018), view synthesis (Flynn et al.
2016), medical imaging (Karargyris and Bourbakis 2010)
and animation production (Siyao et al. 2021).
Existing VFI methods (Jiang et al. 2018; Xue et al. 2019;
Lee et al. 2020; Niklaus and Liu 2020; Kalluri et al. 2023)
are mostly based on deep neural networks. These deep models differ in architectural designs and motion modeling approaches, but are mostly trained to minimize the L1, L2,
or VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) feature distance
between their outputs and the ground-truth intermediate
frames. However, recent works (Men et al. 2020; Danier,
Zhang, and Bull 2022d) have shown that these optimization objectives are not indicative of the perceptual quality
of interpolated videos, as they correlate poorly with human judgments. As a result, it has been reported (Danier,
Zhang, and Bull 2022d) that existing methods, while achieving high PSNR values, tend to under-perform perceptually,

especially under challenging scenarios involving dynamic
textures with complex motion.
A potential approach to improve the perceptual performance of VFI methods is to develop more accurate perceptual metrics for training VFI models, and this is the
focus of another research area, namely Video Quality Assessment (Saha et al. 2023). In this work, instead of relying on particular metrics, we explore a new direction for
perception-oriented VFI based on diffusion models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach et al. 2022). Diffusion
models have recently exhibited remarkable performance
in generating realistic, perceptually-optimized images and
videos, reportedly outperforming other generative models
including GANs and VAEs (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021;
Ho et al. 2022). However, despite their ability to synthesize high-fidelity visual content, the application of diffusion
models for VFI has not been fully investigated.
In the above context, we propose a latent diffusion model
for video frame interpolation (LDMVFI), where VFI is formulated as a conditional image generation problem. Specifically, we adopt the recently proposed latent diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022) (LDMs) within a framework comprising an autoencoding model that projects images into

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1472

