The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Upper Bounding Barlow Twins: A Novel Filter for Multi-Relational Clustering
Xiaowei Qian1 * , Bingheng Li1 * , Zhao Kang1†
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
{xiaoweiqian0311, bingheng86}@gmail.com, zkang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

key component of these methods is graph filtering, which
fuses the topology structure and attribute information. They
show that impressive performance can be achieved even
without using neural networks (Lin et al. 2023; Pan and
Kang 2023b). This provides a smart way for traditional machine learning methods to benefit from representation learning techniques. Nevertheless, they simply use a low-pass filter without fully considering the correlation between different views. Moreover, these filters are empirically designed
and fixed, which is not flexible to suit different data.
How to explore the correlation among multiple graphs is a
critical problem in multi-view learning. Lyu et al (Lyu et al.
2022) theoretically illustrate that the correlation-based objective functions are effective in extracting shared and private information in multi-view data under some assumptions. Among them, Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al. 2021) is
particularly popular. It consists of two parts: the invariance
term maximizes the correlation between the same feature
across different views, while the redundancy term decorrelates different features across various views. The feature
decorrelation operation not only exploits the correlation of
multiple views but also effectively alleviates the problem of
representation collapse in self-supervised learning. This idea
has been applied to graph clustering, such as MVGC (Xia
et al. 2022) and MGDCR (Mo et al. 2023). However, existing methods simply use Barlow Twins, without any special
operations catering to multi-relational graphs. Consequently,
they still suffer from collapse. To show this, we visualize
the feature distributions of several representative methods
in ACM data: contrastive learning-based method MGCCN
(Liu et al. 2022b), Barlow Twins-based method MGDCR
(Mo et al. 2023), and our proposed method Barlow Twins
Guided Filter (BTGF). Comparing Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), we
can observe the advantage of Barlow Twins. From Figs.
1(b) and 1(c), a more evident enhancement in BTGF can
be found.
In this work, we reveal that an input with a negative semidefinite inner product will lead to a lower bound for Barlow
Twins loss, while an input with a positive semi-definite inner product has an upper bound. To minimize Barlow Twins
loss as much as possible, we employ a graph filter to make
the inner product positive semi-definite. Therefore, our filter
upper bounds Barlow Twins, which means that the loss will
never be too large to dominate other terms.

Multi-relational clustering is a challenging task due to the
fact that diverse semantic information conveyed in multilayer graphs is difficult to extract and fuse. Recent methods
integrate topology structure and node attribute information
through graph filtering. However, they often use a low-pass
filter without fully considering the correlation among multiple graphs. To overcome this drawback, we propose to learn
a graph filter motivated by the theoretical analysis of Barlow
Twins. We find that input with a negative semi-definite inner
product provides a lower bound for Barlow Twins loss, which
prevents it from reaching a better solution. We thus learn a filter that yields an upper bound for Barlow Twins. Afterward,
we design a simple clustering architecture and demonstrate its
state-of-the-art performance on four benchmark datasets. The
source code is available at https://github.com/XweiQ/BTGF.

Introduction
The advancements in information technology have led
to a substantial proliferation of complex data, e.g., nonEuclidean graphs and multi-view data. Data originating
from a variety of sources, each of which exhibits different
characteristics, are often referred to as multi-view data. As a
special type of multi-view data, multi-relational graphs contain two or more relations over a vertex set (Qu et al. 2017).
For instance, in the case of social networks, users and their
profiles are considered as nodes and attributes, where each
user interacts with others through multiple types of relationships such as friendship, colleague, and co-following.
Clustering is a practical technique to handle rich multirelational graphs by finding a unique cluster pattern of
nodes. One principle underlying multi-relational clustering is to leverage consistency and complementarity among
multiple views to achieve good performance. For example,
SwMC (Nie et al. 2017) learns a shared graph from multiple graphs by using a weighting strategy; O2MAC (Fan
et al. 2020) extracts shared representations across multiple
views from the most informative graph; MCGC (Pan and
Kang 2021) utilizes a set of adaptive weights to learn a highquality graph from the original multi-relational graphs. A
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14660

