The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hierarchical Planning and Learning for Robots in Stochastic Settings
Using Zero-Shot Option Invention
Naman Shah, Siddharth Srivastava
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
shah.naman, siddharths@asu.edu

Robot: Husky

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of inventing and using hierarchical representations for stochastic robot-planning problems.
Rather than using hand-coded state or action representations
as input, it presents new methods for learning how to create a high-level action representation for long-horizon, sparse
reward robot planning problems in stochastic settings with
unknown dynamics. After training, this system yields a robotspecific but environment independent planning system. Given
new problem instances in unseen stochastic environments, it
first creates zero-shot options (without any experience on the
new environment) with dense pseudo-rewards and then uses
them to solve the input problem in a hierarchical planning
and refinement process. Theoretical results identify sufficient
conditions for completeness of the presented approach. Extensive empirical analysis shows that even in settings that go
beyond these sufficient conditions, this approach convincingly
outperforms baselines by 2× in terms of solution time with
orders of magnitude improvement in solution quality.

1

Figure 1: Performance of the two state-of-the-art approaches
as a measure of fraction of problems solved (y-axis) in the
given time (x-axis). The blue line presents the lower performing variant of the approach developed in this paper. Existing
approaches for robot planning show limited scalability in
stochastic environments. As the environment size increases,
performance falls below that of naïve RRT-Replan.

Introduction

Recent work on robot planning and learning has led to strong
progress on problems with short horizons, dense rewards,
and/or deterministic dynamics encoded in simulators such as
MuJoCo. While state-of-the-art methods perform well in such
settings this progress has been difficult to translate to pervasive robotics problems that feature long-horizons, sparse
rewards, and stochastic dynamics. In these settings, their performance falls rapidly. E.g., Fig. 1 shows that recent advances
fail to scale for robot motion planning in a large office space
with stochastic dynamics. In fact, their performance drops
below that of naïve approaches such as continual re-planning.
Such settings constitute a massive departure from the short,
dense and/or deterministic settings that has been the focus of
much recent work on the topic.
This paper addresses the problem of robot planning in
the relatively under-studied long horizon, sparse reward and
stochastic setting with unknown system dynamics. Solving
such problems is challenging: stochasticity implies that deterministic motion planning is not sufficient: the robot can
reach unexpected states and thus we need solutions in the
form of policies rather than motion plans. Furthermore, the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10358

absence of well-defined dynamics models typically requires
reinforcement learning (RL) based approaches, but RL algorithms are difficult to scale in long-horizon, sparse-reward
settings (as also evidenced in Fig. 1).
We address these technical problems using a novel approach for hierarchical planning and learning that learns
how to invent neuro-symbolic abstractions of stochastic robot
planning problems in terms of useful high-level actions represented as options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) or composable sub-policies. A training phase adapts our general
approach to a given robot-class, and yields a robot-attuned,
environment-independent planning system (Sec. 3). In other
words, this approach learns how to transform an input continuous problem into a discrete symbolic search problem over
the identified options, which is then solved and refined using
a hierarchical planning and refinement algorithm (Sec. 4).
After training, when given a new robot planning problem in an unseen, stochastic environment, this approach invents zero-shot options (without any new experience) in the
form of desirable pairs of initiation and termination sets, and
zero-shot, dense pseudo-reward that can be used to carry

