The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalizing across Temporal Domains with Koopman Operators
Qiuhao Zeng1 , Wei Wang1 , Fan Zhou2 , Gezheng Xu1 , Ruizhi Pu1 , Changjian Shui3 ,
Christian Gagné4 , Shichun Yang2 , Charles X. Ling1 , Boyu Wang1 *
1

University of Western Ontario
2
Beihang University
3
Vector Institute
4
Université Laval

Abstract

Katabi 2020). However, one intrinsic problem with these existing DG methods is that most of them treat all the domains
equally and ignore the relationship between them, implicitly
assuming that they are all sampled from a stationary environment. For example, it is common that source domains are
constituted of images collected over the last few years and
the target domain is the unseen future. For geological applications, the source samples can be collected along different
altitudes, longitude, and latitude, while the target is to generalize to some regions where the data is absent due to inaccessibility. Medical data is also often collected with age or other
indicators as intervals, and we hope the model can perform
well on younger or elder age groups where the samples may
be rare. As a more concrete example, Fig. 1(a) shows several instances from the rotated MNIST (RMNIST) dataset,
a widely used benchmark in the DG literature, where the
digit images of each subsequent domain are rotated by 15◦ .
Fig. 1(b) reports the generalization performances of several
state-of-the-art DG algorithms on the data set, from which it
can be clearly observed that the performances drop when deploying the models on outer domains (i.e., domains of 0 and
75 degrees). The results indicate that the algorithms ignore
the evolving pattern between the domains. Consequently,
they are good at “interpolation” but not at “extrapolation”.

In the field of domain generalization, the task of constructing a predictive model capable of generalizing to a target
domain without access to target data remains challenging.
This problem becomes further complicated when considering evolving dynamics between domains. While various approaches have been proposed to address this issue, a comprehensive understanding of the underlying generalization theory is still lacking. In this study, we contribute novel theoretic results that aligning conditional distribution leads to the
reduction of generalization bounds. Our analysis serves as a
key motivation for solving the Temporal Domain Generalization (TDG) problem through the application of Koopman
Neural Operators, resulting in Temporal Koopman Networks
(TKNets). By employing Koopman Operators, we effectively
address the time-evolving distributions encountered in TDG
using the principles of Koopman theory, where measurement
functions are sought to establish linear transition relations between evolving domains. Through empirical evaluations conducted on synthetic and real-world datasets, we validate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning techniques have achieved unprecedented success over the past decades in numerous areas. However, one fundamental limitation of most existing
techniques is that a model trained on one dataset cannot generalize well on another dataset if it is sampled from a different distribution. Domain generalization (DG) aims to alleviate the prediction gap between the observed source domains
and an unseen target domain by leveraging the knowledge
extracted from multiple source domains (Blanchard, Lee,
and Scott 2011; Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013;
Arjovsky et al. 2019; Li et al. 2018a).
Existing DG methods can be roughly categorized into
three groups: data augmentation / generation, disentangled /
domain-invariant feature learning, and meta-learning (Wang
et al. 2021). In many real-world applications, the temporal
dynamics across domains are common and can be leveraged to improve accuracy for the unseen target domain (Kumar, Ma, and Liang 2020; Liu et al. 2020; Wang, He, and

In this paper, we address this learning scenario as temporal domain generalization (TDG) (Zeng et al. 2023; Bai,
Ling, and Zhao 2022; Nasery et al. 2021; Qin, Wang, and
Li 2022), which aims to capture and exploit the temporal
dynamics in the environment. TDG aims to generalize to a
target domain along a specific direction by extracting and
leveraging the relations between source domains. Specifically, we develop a novel theoretical analysis that highlights
the importance of modeling the relation between two consecutive domains to extract the evolving pattern of the environment. Koopman theory (Koopman 1931) states that any
complex dynamics can be modeled by a linear Koopman
operator acting on the space of measurement functions. Inspired by our theoretical results, we propose to capture the
temporal dynamics using the Koopman operator and align
the distribution of data in the Koopman space. As a comparison, Fig. 1(c) shows the performance improvement of
TKNets over the other algorithms on RMNIST dataset. It
can be observed that the performance gap between TKNets

* Corresponding authors: Fan Zhou, Charles X. Ling, Boyu
Wang.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16651

