The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

OSFFNet: Omni-Stage Feature Fusion Network
for Lightweight Image Super-Resolution
Yang Wang, Tao Zhang*
School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China
yangwang@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn, taozhang@jiangnan.edu.cn

IMDB IMDB IMDB IMDB IMDB IMDB

Deep Concatenation

Upscale

ILR

Conv-3

Recently, several lightweight methods have been proposed to
implement single-image super-resolution (SISR) on resourceconstrained devices. However, these methods primarily focus on simplifying network structures without the full utilization of shallow features. The fact remains that shallow features encompass crucial details for the super-resolution task,
including edges, textures, and colors. Therefore, developing
a novel architecture that can effectively integrate features
from different levels and capitalize on their mutual complementarity is necessary. We first analyze the relationship between multi-stage features and the restoration tasks in a classic lightweight SR method. Based on these observations, we
propose an Omni-Stage Feature Fusion (OSFF) architecture,
which incorporates Original Image Stacked Initialisation,
Shallow Feature Global Connection, and Multi-Receptive
Field Dynamic Fusion. An Attention-Enhanced Feature Distillation module is also designed to enhance the model performance. Finally, leveraging these contributions, we construct
an Omni-Stage Feature Fusion Network (OSFFNet). Through
extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets, the
proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Notably, it achieves a 0.26dB PSNR improvement over the
second-best method for ×2 SR on the Urban100 dataset.

Conv-1
Conv-3

Residual Connection

Abstract

ISR

Figure 1: Visualization of feature maps at different stages in
IMDN.

of these methods is to design efficient network structures,
which involve strategies such as parameter sharing, feature distillation, attention mechanisms, and convolution optimization. These SR methods have successfully balanced
reconstruction performance and computational cost. However, these networks often rely on sequentially simplifying network structures to improve computational efficiency,
which leads to the underutilization of low-level features during the forward propagation process. Figure 1 illustrates how
feature maps in IMDN (Hui et al. 2019) contain detailed information, with low-level features emphasizing edges and
textures near the network input, while deep-level features
focus on extracting local features with fewer details near the
output. Neglecting low-level features may lead to the loss
of crucial details, affecting SR model performance. Therefore, a new network architecture needs to be designed to
effectively integrate feature maps from different stages and
leverage their complementarity. Such an architecture will be
able to maintain computational efficiency and enhance SR
performance. To achieve this, we propose a novel OmniStage Feature Fusion (OSFF) architecture to efficiently
fuse multi-level features. OSFF includes Original Image
Stacked Initialization (OISI), Shallow Feature Global Connection (SFGC), and Multi-Receptive Field Dynamic Fusion
(MFDF). OISI duplicates and stacks the original image multiple times along the channel dimension to enrich details
in shallow features. SFGC combines shallow features with

Introduction
As a typical branch of low-level vision methods, singleimage super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image from a degraded low-resolution (LR)
image. Compared to traditional methods, deep learning (DL)
methods have achieved outstanding performance and realistic visual effects thanks to their learnable feature representations (Wang, Chen, and Hoi 2020). As a result, some
studies have aimed to improve image restoration quality by
increasing convolutional layers or adopting complex network topologies. These characteristics often restrict practical applications as resource-constrained mobile devices
struggle with intensive SR methods. Therefore, the design
of lightweight and efficient SR models has become essential
and also a challenging problem.
Researchers have proposed several lightweight and efficient SR methods to address this challenge. The main idea
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5660

