The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Using Symmetries to Lift Satisfiability Checking
Pierre Carbonnelle1 , Gottfried Schenner2 , Maurice Bruynooghe1 , Bart Bogaerts3 , Marc Denecker1
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
2
Siemens, Austria
3
Vrije Universiteit Brussels, Belgium
{pierre.carbonnelle, maurice.bruynooghe, marc.denecker}@kuleuven.be,
gottfried.schenner@siemens.com, bart.bogaerts@vub.be
Abstract

We observed that solutions to configuration problems can
be compressed in what we call a “lifted model”, and that the
solution of the original problem can be obtained by expanding the lifted model. This suggested that configuration problems, and, more generally, satisfiability problems, could be
solved in the compressed domain: if the compressed domain
is significantly smaller, it could lead to better performance.
As a toy example, consider the following pigeonhole
problem: “given 10 pigeons and 5 pigeonholes, assign each
pigeon to a pigeonhole such that each hole has (at most) 2
pigeons.” With the appropriate vocabulary, a solution is:

We analyze how symmetries can be used to compress structures (also known as interpretations) onto a smaller domain
without loss of information. This analysis suggests the possibility to solve satisfiability problems in the compressed domain for better performance. Thus, we propose a 2-step novel
method: (i) the sentence to be satisfied is automatically translated into an equisatisfiable sentence over a “lifted” vocabulary that allows domain compression; (ii) satisfiability of the
lifted sentence is checked by growing the (initially unknown)
compressed domain until a satisfying structure is found. The
key issue is to ensure that this satisfying structure can always
be expanded into an uncompressed structure that satisfies the
original sentence to be satisfied.
We present an adequate translation for sentences in typed
first-order logic extended with aggregates. Our experimental
evaluation shows large speedups for generative configuration
problems. The method also has applications in the verification
of software operating on complex data structures. Our results
justify further research in automatic translation of sentences
for symmetry reduction.

1

Pigeon “ tp1 , . . . , p10 u
Hole “ th1 , . . . , h5 u
isIn “ tpp1 , h1 q, pp2 , h2 q, . . . , pp5 , h5 q,
pp6 , h1 q, pp7 , h2 q, . . . , pp10 , h5 qu

(1)
(2)
(3)

Note the symmetries: another solution is obtained by exchanging 2 pigeons or 2 holes in the interpretation of isIn.
This solution can be compressed to:
Pigeon “ tp1 u
Hole “ th1 u
mul “ tp1 ÞÑ 10, h1 ÞÑ 5u
isIn “ tpp1 , h1 qu

Introduction

In made-to-order manufacturing, the configuration problem
is the problem of finding a configuration of components
that satisfies the customer requirements and feasibility constraints (Felfernig et al. 2014). Such problems can be solved
by choosing a formal vocabulary and by representing the
customer requirements and the feasibility criteria as a logic
sentence to be satisfied. A structure satisfying the sentence
(a model) represents an acceptable configuration.
Methods to solve configuration problems do not scale
well, and various heuristics have been used to improve performance (Schenner and Taupe 2017). Configurations often have components that are interchangeable. They are the
source of many redundancies in the search space that negatively impact performance. The standard approach is to add
symmetry breaking rules (Crawford et al. 1996). Here, we
use another approach: we reformulate the problem to reduce
symmetries (Gent, Petrie, and Puget 2006). This approach
has been less studied, and is more an art than a science.

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

where the mul function indicates how many concrete domain elements each “lifted” domain element represents,
and thus allows the domain compression. The lifted pigeon
(resp. hole) represents 10 concrete pigeons (resp. 5 concrete
holes).
Even though the compressed structure only has 2 domain
elements (p1 , h1 , excluding the naturals), it contains enough
information to allow us to expand it into a model isomorphic
to the original model. Following the theory we develop in
Section 3, the expansion is as follows:
p1 ⇝ p1 , . . . , p10
h 1 ⇝ h1 , . . . , h 5
pp1 , h1 q ⇝ tpp1 , h1 q, . . . , pp5 , h5 q, pp6 , h1 q, . . . , pp10 , h5 qu
Furthermore, in Section 4, we present a translation of sentences in typed first-order logic extended with aggregates
into sentences that allow domain compression. We show that

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7961

