The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Actor Prioritized Experience Replay (Abstract Reprint)
Baturay Saglam1 , Furkan Mutlu2 , Dogan Cicek2 , Suleyman Kozat2
1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Saglam, Mutlu, Cicek, and Kozat (2023).

Abstract
A widely-studied deep reinforcement learning (RL) technique known as Prioritized Experience Replay (PER) allows
agents to learn from transitions sampled with non-uniform
probability proportional to their temporal-difference (TD)
error. Although it has been shown that PER is one of the
most crucial components for the overall performance of
deep RL methods in discrete action domains, many empirical studies indicate that it considerably underperforms offpolicy actor-critic algorithms. We theoretically show that actor networks cannot be effectively trained with transitions
that have large TD errors. As a result, the approximate policy gradient computed under the Q-network diverges from
the actual gradient computed under the optimal Q-function.
Motivated by this, we introduce a novel experience replay
sampling framework for actor-critic methods, which also regards issues with stability and recent findings behind the
poor empirical performance of PER. The introduced algorithm suggests a new branch of improvements to PER and
schedules effective and efficient training for both actor and
critic networks. An extensive set of experiments verifies our
theoretical findings, showing that our method outperforms
competing approaches and achieves state-of-the-art results
over the standard off-policy actor-critic algorithms.

References
Saglam, B.; Mutlu, F.; Cicek, D.; and Kozat, S. 2023. Actor
Prioritized Experience Replay. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 78: 639–672.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22710

