The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Eliciting Kemeny Rankings
Anne-Marie George1 , Christos Dimitrakakis1, 2
1

University of Oslo, Norway
University of Neuchatel, Switzerland
annemage@uio.no, christos.dimitrakakis@unine.ch
2

Abstract

online-shopping platforms. Next we describe our contributions for efficiently eliciting aggregated rankings under Kemeny’s rule, related work and outline of this paper.

We formulate the problem of eliciting agents’ preferences
with the goal of finding a Kemeny ranking as a Dueling Bandits problem. Here the bandits’ arms correspond to alternatives that need to be ranked and the feedback corresponds to
a pairwise comparison between alternatives by a randomly
sampled agent. We consider both sampling with and without
replacement, i.e., the possibility to ask the same agent about
some comparison multiple times or not.
We find approximation bounds for Kemeny rankings dependant on confidence intervals over estimated winning probabilities of arms. Based on these we state algorithms to find
Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) solutions and elaborate on their sample complexity for sampling with or without
replacement. Furthermore, if all agents’ preferences are strict
rankings over the alternatives, we provide means to prune
confidence intervals and thereby guide a more efficient elicitation. We formulate several adaptive sampling methods that
use look-aheads to estimate how much confidence intervals
(and thus approximation guarantees) might be tightened. All
described methods are compared on synthetic data.

1

Contributions and Related Work
We formulate the problem of eliciting voter preferences as a
Dueling Bandit problem (Bengs et al. 2021) in which arms
of bandits correspond to alternatives, and the bandit feedback for pulling two arms corresponds to a random voter’s
preference over the two arms. This feedback is then summarised in a matrix of winning probabilities over arms. Our
goal is to elicit an aggregated ranking of voter preferences
based on some voting rule. Here, the duelling bandit formulation is applicable for any voting rule that is a C2 function
according to Fishburn’s classification of preference aggregation functions (Fishburn 1977). That is, functions that only
require the margin of voters that prefer one alternative over
another as input, and not the exact combinations of pairwise
preferences the voters have. For such functions, we can thus
assume the input to be a preference matrix indicating the
fraction of voters preferring an alternative over another for
all pairs of alternatives. The results by (Boehmer et al. 2022)
imply that it is NP-hard to decide whether a given matrix
corresponds to a set of voters’ preference orders (i.e., linear
orders) over the alternatives. It follows that it is not possible to find a characterisation of such matrices that can be
checked in polynomial time. Nevertheless, we identify properties of such matrices.
Contribution 1: In Section 2, we connect the vote elicitation and dueling bandit frameworks for C2 functions, and
propose three properties of preference matrices, which will
help devising adaptive elicitation strategies: Completeness,
Triangle Inequality and Realisable Borda Scores.
Next, we focus our attention on the voting rule devised
by John Kemeny in 1959 (Kemeny 1959), which is a preference aggregation function with compelling properties such
as monotonicity and Condorcet winner consistency (Young
and Levenglick 1978). The output of this rule is a set of
rankings over the alternatives which minimise the Kemeny
score. The Kemeny score measures voter disagreement in
terms of pairwise disagreement over the ranked alternatives,
i.e., Kendall’s tau distance (Kendall 1938). In general, it
is NP-hard to compute Kemeny rankings (Bartholdi, Tovey,
and Trick 1989) but polynomial time solvable for specific

Introduction

Decision making based on the preferences of a group of
individuals’ is tackled in various settings by AI systems.
To ensure a good societal outcome, the fair aggregation of
the society members’ preferences over alternatives plays a
central role. Many such aggregation functions for agents’
or voters’ preferences have been proposed by politicians,
mathematicians, economists and computer scientists. Research in the area of Social Choice and more specifically
Voting Theory analyses and develops such aggregation functions algorithmically and axiomatically (Brandt et al. 2016).
While impossibility results force all such functions to be
flawed by computational complexity or violation of fairness
guarantees, e.g. (Arrow 1950; Satterthwaite 1975), many
are well researched and applied in practise. However, it is
usually assumed that voters specify their preferences completely before the desired aggregation can be determined.
This can be excessively time consuming or costly for voters,
especially for large numbers of alternatives as in movie or
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12164

