The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rolling-Unet: Revitalizing MLP’s Ability to Efficiently Extract Long-Distance
Dependencies for Medical Image Segmentation
Yutong Liu, Haijiang Zhu* , Mengting Liu, Huaiyuan Yu, Zihan Chen, Jie Gao
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China
2021400211@buct.edu.cn, zhuhj@mail.buct.edu.cn, 2023400221@buct.edu.cn, joneyu1@163.com,
chenzihan0484@163.com, 2021210535@mail.buct.edu.cn

Abstract

well, due to the inherent locality of convolution operations,
pure CNN architectures are difficult to learn clear global and
remote semantic information (Chen et al. 2021).
To overcome the limitations of CNN, inspired by the great
success of Transformer in the natural language processing
(NLP) domain, researchers have tried to introduce Transformer into the vision domain (Carion et al. 2020). Vision
Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) is completely
based on multi-head self-attention mechanism, which enables the network to capture remote dependencies and encode shape representations. However, it requires a large
amount of training data to achieve good performance. Moreover, it has high computational complexity, which prevents
the network from supporting high-resolution input (Azad
et al. 2022). Swin Transformer (Liu et al. 2021) reduces
the computation, but at the cost of no information interaction between its windows, resulting in a smaller receptive
field. Compared with CNN models, pure Transformer models also perform poorly in capturing local representations
(Chen et al. 2021). In view of the characteristics of CNN
and Transformer, some methods attempt to combine CNN
and Transformer (Chen et al. 2021; Valanarasu et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2022) to further enhance the network’s ability.
But these methods still cannot balance the performance and
computational cost well.
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) or fully connected (FC) is
the earliest type of neural network, which consists of multiple linear layers and nonlinear activations stacked together
(Rosenblatt 1957). Theoretically, MLP is a universal approximator (Pinkus 1999). However, MLP has large computation and is prone to overfitting when data is insufficient.
Moreover, input flattening limits the input resolution. Due
to the limitations of hardware and available datasets at that
time, the development of MLP was not smooth. In 2021,
MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al. 2021) revived the vitality of
MLP. It mainly consists of two modules: Token-Mixing
MLP and Channel-Mixing MLP, which achieve competitive
performance without convolution and attention. MLP has a
small inductive bias, and on large datasets, pure MLP architectures can better extract global semantic information.
But this also makes it perform poorly on small datasets. To
achieve better performance, local bias was introduced (Hou
et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Lian et al. 2021).
But they lost sight of the global aspect.

Medical image segmentation methods based on deep learning
network are mainly divided into CNN and Transformer. However, CNN struggles to capture long-distance dependencies,
while Transformer suffers from high computational complexity and poor local feature learning. To efficiently extract and
fuse local features and long-range dependencies, this paper
proposes Rolling-Unet, which is a CNN model combined
with MLP. Specifically, we propose the core R-MLP module, which is responsible for learning the long-distance dependency in a single direction of the whole image. By controlling and combining R-MLP modules in different directions, OR-MLP and DOR-MLP modules are formed to capture long-distance dependencies in multiple directions. Further, Lo2 block is proposed to encode both local context information and long-distance dependencies without excessive
computational burden. Lo2 block has the same parameter size
and computational complexity as a 3×3 convolution. The experimental results on four public datasets show that RollingUnet achieves superior performance compared to the state-ofthe-art methods.

Introduction
With the rapid development of computer technology and artificial intelligence, the powerful modeling ability of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been widely studied. Deep learning-based segmentation algorithms have also
been introduced into medical image. U-Net (Ronneberger,
Fischer, and Brox 2015) is one of the most famous network
architectures in the field of medical image segmentation, and
it is a fully convolutional segmentation network. U-Net’s encoder and decoder are symmetrical, forming a U-shaped segment, and fusing feature maps from different stages through
skip connections. U-Net can adapt to small training sets and
output more accurate segmentation results. This advantage
makes U-Net a huge success and widely used. Following
this technical route, such as UNet++ (Zhou et al. 2018), AttUNet (Oktay et al. 2018), 3D U-Net (Çiçek et al. 2016) and
V-Net (Milletari, Navab, and Ahmadi 2016) have been developed for image and volume segmentation of various medical imaging modalities. Although these methods perform
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3819

