The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Minimum Coverage Sets for Training Robust Ad Hoc Teamwork Agents
Muhammad Rahman1 , Jiaxun Cui1 , Peter Stone1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
2
Sony AI
arrasy@cs.utexas.edu, cuijiaxun@utexas.edu, pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Robustly cooperating with unseen agents and human partners
presents significant challenges due to the diverse cooperative
conventions these partners may adopt. Existing Ad Hoc Teamwork (AHT) methods address this challenge by training an
agent with a population of diverse teammate policies obtained
through maximizing specific diversity metrics. However, prior
heuristic-based diversity metrics do not always maximize the
agent’s robustness in all cooperative problems. In this work,
we first propose that maximizing an AHT agent’s robustness
requires it to emulate policies in the minimum coverage set
(MCS), the set of best-response policies to any partner policies
in the environment. We then introduce the L-BRDiv algorithm
that generates a set of teammate policies that, when used for
AHT training, encourage agents to emulate policies from the
MCS. L-BRDiv works by solving a constrained optimization
problem to jointly train teammate policies for AHT training
and approximating AHT agent policies that are members of
the MCS. We empirically demonstrate that L-BRDiv produces
more robust AHT agents than state-of-the-art methods in a
broader range of two-player cooperative problems without the
need for extensive hyperparameter tuning for its objectives.
Our study shows that L-BRDiv outperforms the baseline methods by prioritizing discovering distinct members of the MCS
instead of repeatedly finding redundant policies.

1

Introduction

The Ad Hoc Teamwork (AHT) problem (Stone et al. 2010)
is concerned with learning ways to quickly cooperate with
previously unseen agents or humans (henceforth referred to
as “unseen” or “novel” teammates, or when unambiguous,
simply “teammates”). In problems with multiple ways to
coordinate, agents co-trained with a limited set of teammates
may settle on cooperation conventions that only work when
they collaborate with each other. Specialization towards these
conventions diminishes an agent’s ability to collaborate with
unseen partners that adopt other conventions (Hu et al. 2020).
Recent works address this problem by optimizing diversity
metrics to generate sets of teammate policies for AHT training (Lupu et al. 2021; Strouse et al. 2021; Xing et al. 2021;
Bakhtin et al. 2022). Through interaction with the generated
broadly representative teammate policies, an agent learns
a policy to interact with previously unseen partners based
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17523

on limited interactions. State-of-the-art methods optimize
adversarial diversity to generate incompatible teammate policies (Charakorn, Manoonpong, and Dilokthanakul 2023; Cui
et al. 2023a; Rahman et al. 2023). They seek sets of teammate
policies, each maximizing their returns when playing with a
designated AHT agent policy while minimizing returns with
other policies.
Such existing diversity metrics are heuristic in nature and
are not well-justified. It is unclear whether and how optimizing them can lead to improved robustness in general cooperative problems. We further demonstrate that optimizing
these diversity metrics can fail to discover teammate policies under certain conventions even in simple cooperative
games, specifically if following a convention yields high returns against the best-response policy to another generated
teammate policy. Optimizing adversarial diversity can also
generate teammates adopting self-sabotaging policies (Cui
et al. 2023a). Self-sabotage potentially increases the difficulty
of AHT training since the generated teammate policies can
undermine collaboration with the trained AHT agent.
In this work, we make three contributions that improve
existing teammate generation methods for training robust
AHT agents. First, we outline formal concepts describing an
ideal set of teammate policies for training robust AHT agents,
which can emulate the best-response policy to any teammate
during interaction (Chakraborty and Stone 2014). The importance of finding the best-response policies to design a robust
agent provides the motivation to estimate the minimum coverage set (MCS), which is the set of best-response policies
to any teammate policy in an environment, before interacting
with unknown teammates. Second, we use the concept of
MCS to propose the L-BRDiv algorithm1 that jointly estimates the MCS of an environment and utilizes it to generate
teammates for AHT training by solving a constrained optimization problem. L-BRDiv’s generated set of teammate
policies encourages AHT agents to emulate policies in the
MCS through AHT training. Third, we provide experiments
that empirically demonstrate that L-BRDiv produces more
robust AHT agents than state-of-the-art teammate generation
methods while requiring fewer hyperparameters to be tuned.
1

Implementation of L-BRDiv is available at https://github.com/
raharrasy/L-BRDiv. The appendix is also accessible through https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2308.09595.

