The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Disentangled Partial Label Learning
Wei-Xuan Bao1, 2 , Yong Rui3 , Min-Ling Zhang1, 2 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Lenovo Research, Lenovo Group Ltd., Beijing, China
baowx@seu.edu.cn, yongrui@lenovo.com, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

model training (Wei et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2022; Yang, Liu,
and Yin 2022). It is desirable to explore endowing modern
learning systems with the power to deal with imperfect supervision. This realistic topic is referred to as weakly supervised learning(Zhou 2018).
In this paper, we focus on a critical weakly supervised learning framework called partial label learning (PLL)
(Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Wu, Wang, and Zhang 2022).
Specifically, PLL aims to learn a multi-class classifier from
ambiguous examples where each instance is associated with
a set of candidate labels, among which only one is valid.
The problem of PLL naturally arises in many real-world application domains such as web mining (Luo and Orabona
2010), multimedia content analysis (Chen, Patel, and Chellappa 2017; Zeng et al. 2013) , ecoinformatics (Briggs, Fern,
and Raich 2012; Wang, Zhang, and Li 2022), natural language processing (Zhou et al. 2018), etc.
PLL has been extensively studied in past decades. A common thread that runs through the progress in this field is the
idea of disambiguating in instances’ candidate label sets.
Specifically, there are two main categories of disambiguation strategies, namely identification-based disambiguation
strategies and averaging-based disambiguation strategies.
Identification-based strategies (Jin and Ghahramani 2002;
Nguyen and Caruana 2008) treat the ground-truth label as
latent variable and assume certain parametric model to estimate the confidence of each candidate label. Averagingbased strategies (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Gong et al.
2018) treat all candidate labels equally in the training phase
and yield the final predictions via modifying their modeling outputs according to different averaging strategies. In
recent years, deep learning technologies have been dedicated to reinvigorating the research of PLL (Lv et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2022; Lyu, Wu, and Feng 2022). Deep partiallabel (PL) models’ powerful capability of data representation helps to set new state-of-the-art performance for PLL
algorithms. It has been empirically and theoretically proved
that learning favourable representation could promote exploring potential association between instances and labels
(Zhang, Wu, and Bao 2022; Bao, Hang, and Zhang 2021,
2022; Lv et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022), which is beneficial to recovering the groundtruth label from candidate label set.
Recently, disentangled representation learning has re-

Partial label learning (PLL) induces a multi-class classifier
from training examples each associated with a set of candidate labels, among which only one is valid. The formation
of real-world data typically arises from heterogeneous entanglement of series latent explanatory factors, which are considered intrinsic properties for discriminating between different patterns. Though learning disentangled representation is
expected to facilitate label disambiguation for partial-label
(PL) examples, few existing works were dedicated to addressing this issue. In this paper, we make the first attempt towards disentangled PLL and propose a novel approach named
T ERIAL, which makes predictions according to derived disentangled representation of instances and label embeddings.
The T ERIAL approach formulates the PL examples as an
undirected bipartite graph where instances are only connected
with their candidate labels, and employs a tailored neighborhood routing mechanism to yield disentangled representation of nodes in the graph. Specifically, the proposed routing mechanism progressively infers the explanatory factors
that contribute to the edge between adjacent nodes and augments the representation of the central node with factor-aware
embedding information propagated from specific neighbors
simultaneously via iteratively analyzing the promising subspace clusters formed by the node and its neighbors. The estimated labeling confidence matrix is also introduced to accommodate unreliable links owing to the inherent ambiguity of PLL. Moreover, we theoretically prove that the neighborhood routing mechanism will converge to the point estimate that maximizes the marginal likelihood of observed PL
training examples. Comprehensive experiments over various
datasets demonstrate that our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art counterparts.

Introduction
Data-driven deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton
2015) has achieved remarkable success in numerous application scenarios. Its superiority could be primarily attributed
to the accessibility of vast amount of supervised training
data. Nevertheless, constrained by expertise and efforts, extensive data annotation could inevitably induce ambiguity
and label noise, which might impose detrimental effects on
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11007

