The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improved Bandits in Many-to-One Matching Markets with Incentive Compatibility
Fang Kong, Shuai Li*
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{fangkong, shuaili8}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Two-sided matching markets have been widely studied in the
literature due to their rich applications. Since participants are
usually uncertain about their preferences, online algorithms
have recently been adopted to learn them through iterative interactions. An existing work initiates the study of this problem
in a many-to-one setting with responsiveness. However, their
results are far from optimal and lack guarantees of incentive
compatibility. We first extend an existing algorithm for the oneto-one setting to this more general setting and show it achieves
a near-optimal bound for player-optimal regret. Nevertheless,
due to the substantial requirement for collaboration, a single
player’s deviation could lead to a huge increase in its own
cumulative rewards and a linear regret for others. In this paper,
we aim to enhance the regret bound in many-to-one markets
while ensuring incentive compatibility. We first propose the
adaptively explore-then-deferred-acceptance (AETDA) algorithm for responsiveness setting and derive an upper bound for
player-optimal stable regret while demonstrating its guarantee
of incentive compatibility. This result is a significant improvement over existing works. And to the best of our knowledge,
it constitutes the first player-optimal guarantee in matching
markets that offers such robust assurances. We also consider
broader substitutable preferences, one of the most general conditions to ensure the existence of a stable matching and cover
responsiveness. We devise an online DA (ODA) algorithm and
establish an upper bound for the player-pessimal stable regret
for this setting.

Introduction
The problem of two-sided matching markets has been studied
for a long history due to its wide range of applications in real
life including the labor market and college admission (Gale
and Shapley 1962; Roth 1984a; Roth and Sotomayor 1992;
Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1999; Epple, Romano, and Sieg
2006; Fu 2014). There are two sides of market participants,
e.g., employers and workers in the labor market, and each side
has a preference ranking over the other side. The matching
reflects the bilateral nature of exchange in the market. For
example, a worker works for an employer and the employer
employs this worker. Stability is a key concept describing the
equilibrium of a matching, which ensures the current bilateral
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13256

exchange cannot be easily broken. A rich line of works study
how to find a stable matching in the market (Gale and Shapley
1962; Kelso Jr and Crawford 1982; Roth 1984a; Roth and
Sotomayor 1992; Erdil and Kumano 2019). However, all
of them assume the preferences of market participants are
known a priori, which may not be satisfied in practice. For
example in labor markets, workers usually have unknown
preferences over employers since they do not know whether
they like the task type or the employer. With the emergence of
online marketplaces such as online labor market Upwork and
crowdsourcing platform Amazon Mechanical Turk where
employers have numerous similar tasks to delegate, workers
are able to learn the uncertain preferences during the iterative
matching process with employers through these tasks.
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a core problem that characterizes the learning process during iterative interactions
when faced with uncertainty (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020). There are also
two sides of agents: a player on one side and K arms on the
other side. The player has unknown preferences over arms.
At each time, it selects an arm and receives a reward. The
player’s objective is to maximize the cumulative reward over
a specified horizon. To better measure the performance of the
player’s strategy, an equivalent objective of minimizing the
cumulative regret is widely studied, which is defined as the
cumulative difference between the reward of the optimal arm
and that of the selected arms.
Recently, a rich line of works study the bandit learning
problem in matching markets where more than one player
and arms exist. These works study the case where players
have unknown preferences over arms and arms can determine their preferences over players based on some known
utilities such as the profile of workers in online labor markets. To characterize the stability of the learned matching,
the objective of stable regret is adopted and studied (Das
and Kamenica 2005; Liu, Mania, and Jordan 2020; Liu et al.
2021; Sankararaman, Basu, and Sankararaman 2021; Basu,
Sankararaman, and Sankararaman 2021; Kong, Yin, and Li
2022; Zhang, Wang, and Fang 2022; Kong and Li 2023;
Wang et al. 2022). Previous works mainly focus on two types
of objectives: the player-optimal stable regret and the playerpessimal stable regret. The former is defined as the cumulative difference between the reward of the arm in the players’
most preferred stable matching and the accumulated reward

