The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Engineering an Exact Pseudo-Boolean Model Counter*
Suwei Yang1,2,3 , Kuldeep S. Meel3,4
1

GrabTaxi Holdings
Grab-NUS AI Lab
3
National University of Singapore
4
University of Toronto
2

The dominant representation format of Boolean formulas
is Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF), and accordingly, the
tools in the early days focused on CNF as the input format.
Over the past decade and a half, there has been considerable
effort in exploring other representation formats: one such
format that has gained significant interest from the community is Pseudo-Boolean (PB) formulas, which are expressed
as the conjunction of linear inequalities. PB formulas are
shown to be more succinct than CNF formulas and natural for problems such as Knapsack, sensor placement, binarized neural networks, and the like. Furthermore, PB formulas are able to express constraints more succinctly compared to Boolean formulas in CNF (Berre et al. 2018). As an
example, a single PB constraint is sufficient to express atmost-k and at-least-k types of cardinal constraints whereas
the equivalent in CNF would require a polynomial number of clauses (Sinz 2005). On a higher level, an arbitrary
CNF clause can be expressed with a single PB constraint
but the converse is not true (Berre et al. 2018). The past
decade has witnessed the development of satisfiability solving techniques based on the underlying proof systems naturally suited to PB constraints, and accordingly, the state-ofthe-art PB solvers, such as RoundingSat significantly outperform CNF solvers on problems that are naturally encoded
in PB (Elffers and Nordström 2018; Devriendt 2020; Devriendt et al. 2021).
In contrast to satisfiability, almost all the work in the context of model counting has focused on the representation of
Boolean formulas in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF), with
the sole exception of the development of an approximate
model counter for PB formulas (Yang and Meel 2021).
The primary contribution of this work is to address
the aforementioned gap through the development of a native scalable exact model counter, called PBCount, for PB
formulas. PBCount is based on the knowledge compilation paradigm, and in particular, compiles a given PB formula into algebraic decision diagrams (ADDs) (Bahar et al.
1993), which allows us to perform model counting. We
perform extensive empirical evaluations on benchmark instances arising from different applications, such as sensor placement, multi-dimension knapsack, and combinatorial auction benchmarks (Gens and Levner 1980; Blumrosen and Nisan 2007; Latour, Sen, and Meel 2023). Our
evaluations highlighted the efficacy of PBCount against ex-

Abstract
Model counting, a fundamental task in computer science, involves determining the number of satisfying assignments to a
Boolean formula, typically represented in conjunctive normal
form (CNF). While model counting for CNF formulas has received extensive attention with a broad range of applications,
the study of model counting for Pseudo-Boolean (PB) formulas has been relatively overlooked. Pseudo-Boolean formulas, being more succinct than propositional Boolean formulas, offer greater flexibility in representing real-world problems. Consequently, there is a crucial need to investigate efficient techniques for model counting for PB formulas.
In this work, we propose the first exact Pseudo-Boolean
model counter, PBCount, that relies on knowledge compilation approach via algebraic decision diagrams. Our extensive empirical evaluation shows that PBCount can compute
counts for 1513 instances while the current state-of-the-art
approach could only handle 1013 instances. Our work opens
up several avenues for future work in the context of model
counting for PB formulas, such as the development of preprocessing techniques and exploration of approaches other than
knowledge compilation.

1

Introduction

Propositional model counting involves computing the number of satisfying assignments to a Boolean formula. Model
counting is closely related to the Boolean satisfiability problem where the task is to determine if there exists an assignment of variables such that the Boolean formula evaluates
to true. Boolean satisfiability and model counting have been
extensively studied in the past decades and are the cornerstone of an extensive range of real-life applications such
as software design, explainable machine learning, planning,
and probabilistic reasoning (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi
2003; Narodytska et al. 2019; Jackson 2019; Fan, Miller,
and Mitra 2020). Owing to decades of research, there are numerous tools and techniques developed for various aspects
of Boolean satisfiability and model counting, from Boolean
formula preprocessors to SAT solvers and model counters.
* The
full version of the paper is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12341 and code is available at
https://github.com/grab/pbcount
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8200

