The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SentinelLMs: Encrypted Input Adaptation and Fine-Tuning of Language Models
for Private and Secure Inference
Abhijit Mishra, Mingda Li, Soham Deo
School of Information, University of Texas at Austin
{abhijitmishra, mingdali, soham.deo}@utexas.edu

Abstract

et al. 2022) involving text classification, sequence labeling
and text generation.
The widespread use of applications on server systems accessed through the internet has raised concerns about user
privacy. Pre-trained language models are powerful tools,
but their size and resource requirements make them challenging to use on personal devices. This leads to a situation where models are deployed on cloud-based servers and
users send their text inputs over networks that can potentially be intercepted. For instance, sending text from users
to servers using methods like HTTP GET/POST can expose
the data to attacks known as Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attacks (Callegati, Cerroni, and Ramilli 2009), where an attacker sneaks between the user and the server, gaining access to and potentially altering the data being sent. This can
result in data theft and misuse by malicious individuals. Another common worry related to using fine-tuned models on
servers is the risk of unauthorized logging and misuse of
users’ personal data the organizations deploying these models (O’Neill 2003; Jones, McCullough, and Richman 2005).
To deal with these problems, strong protective measures
like encrypting data and models can be undertaken, involving potent one-way string encryption techniques such as the
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) and passkey-based secure
hash algorithms like Blake (Fernandes et al. 2015). These
methods convert input data into fixed-length hash values,
which are incredibly difficult to reverse-engineer into the
original input. However, encrypting input text introduces
challenges for language models, typically trained and finetuned on plain text. This is due to two key reasons. Firstly,
models pre-trained and fine-tuned on plain text may not adequately recognize encrypted inputs and may interpret them
as out-of-vocabulary (OOV) terms. Secondly, encryption
hash algorithms provide enhanced security mostly by transforming text in a way that sacrifices a significant amount of
linguistic information. For instance, consider the words cat
and cats in plain text. They are closely related, sharing morphology and lexical semantics. However, their respective encrypted forms using a 256-bit SHA encryption, 77af778b
and d936608b (truncated for brevity), bear no clear relationship. This poses difficulties in suitably modeling language
tasks with encrypted inputs. Pre-trained language models
thrive on linguistic patterns in the input text, a task made
challenging by the transformation introduced during encryp-

This paper addresses the privacy and security concerns associated with deep neural language models, which serve
as crucial components in various modern AI-based applications. These models are often used after being pre-trained
and fine-tuned for specific tasks, with deployment on servers
accessed through the internet. However, this introduces two
fundamental risks: (a) the transmission of user inputs to the
server via the network gives rise to interception vulnerabilities, and (b) privacy concerns emerge as organizations
that deploy such models store user data with restricted context. To address this, we propose a novel method to adapt
and fine-tune transformer-based language models on passkeyencrypted user-specific text. The original pre-trained language model first undergoes a quick adaptation (without any
further pre-training) with a series of irreversible transformations applied to the tokenizer and token embeddings. This
enables the model to perform inference on encrypted inputs
while preventing reverse engineering of text from model parameters and intermediate outputs. After adaptation, models are fine-tuned on encrypted versions of existing training datasets. Experimental evaluation employing adapted versions of renowned models (e.g., BERT, RoBERTa) across established benchmark English and multilingual datasets for
text classification and sequence labeling shows that encrypted
models achieve performance parity with their original counterparts. This serves to safeguard performance, privacy, and
security cohesively.

Introduction
In today’s technology landscape, language models play a
crucial role in numerous text-based applications. The rise of
powerful pre-trained models like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), and GPT (Radford et al. 2018)
and their successors, followed by a massive outburst of generative large language models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al.
2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al. 2022), LLaMa (Touvron
et al. 2023) has led to a surge in innovative approaches and
designs for large-scale language model pre-training. Characterized by an initial phase of broad pre-training, followed
by targeted fine-tuning for specific contextual tasks, these
models have found widespread utility across a diverse spectrum of applications (Otter, Medina, and Kalita 2020; Li
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21403

