The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AT4CTR: Auxiliary Match Tasks for Enhancing Click-Through Rate Prediction
Qi Liu1 * , Xuyang Hou2 , Defu Lian1† , Zhe Wang2 , Haoran Jin1 , Jia Cheng2 , Jun Lei2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Meituan
{qiliu67,HaoranJin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu}@ustc.edu.cn
{houxuyang,wangzhe65,jia.cheng.sh,leijun}@meituan.com

Abstract

ods, like Logistic Regression (Richardson, Dominowska,
and Ragno 2007) and Factorization Machine (FM) (Rendle
2010), can only capture the low-order feature interactions.
Recently, deep learning has been exploited for CTR prediction. Methods, such as Wide&Deep (Cheng et al. 2016),
DeepFM (Guo et al. 2017), and DCN (Wang et al. 2017), focus on capturing the high-order feature interactions through
the neural network. On the other side, DIN (Zhou et al.
2018b), DIEN (Zhou et al. 2019), and DBPMaN (Dong et al.
2023) extract user interest from user behavior sequences like
click or conversion. Those methods all improve the performance of CTR prediction by a large margin.
The success of network architecture makes researchers
ignore another important problem of data sparsity which
means that positive samples take up only a small part of the
total samples. Especially in the industrial scenarios, negative
sample down-sampling which abandons each negative sample based on the Bernoulli distribution with certain probability is widely used to reduce the computing and storage cost
when training the CTR model. However, drastically abandoning negative samples will worsen the data sparsity issue
and degrade the performance. As there always exists abandoned hard negative samples which are important for the
CTR model’s updating. A few works devote efforts to solving the data sparsity issue. DeepMCP (Ouyang et al. 2019)
applies a matching subnet to strengthen the relevance between the user and the item, and a correlation subnet to improve item representation. But it introduces no extra training
signals. DMR (Lyu et al. 2020) designs an auxiliary network
to predict the last behavior based on previous behaviors. The
auxiliary losses used in DeepMCP and DMR are all negative
sampling (Mikolov et al. 2013) which is an approximation
of full softmax. It is not strong enough and implementation
unfriendly as the item has a large magnitude and changes
over time. CL4CTR (Wang et al. 2023) exploits an auxiliary
network to perform self-supervised contrastive learning but
triples the training cost.
To alleviate the data sparsity problem, we propose two
novel auxiliary match tasks to provide more helpful training signals. As shown in Figure 1, it contains two auxiliary
tasks. The ”click” action demonstrates the user’s strong preference for the clicked item. Intuitively, the representation of
positive samples between the user side and the item side
features should be highly relevant. The main binary clas-

Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is a vital task in industrial recommendation systems. Most existing methods focus
on the network architecture design of the CTR model for better accuracy and suffer from the data sparsity problem. Especially in industrial recommendation systems, the widely applied negative sample down-sampling technique due to resource limitation worsens the problem, resulting in a decline
in performance. In this paper, we propose Auxiliary Match
Tasks for enhancing Click-Through Rate (AT4CTR) prediction accuracy by alleviating the data sparsity problem. Specifically, we design two match tasks inspired by collaborative
filtering to enhance the relevance modeling between user and
item. As the ”click” action is a strong signal which indicates
the user’s preference towards the item directly, we make the
first match task aim at pulling closer the representation between the user and the item regarding the positive samples.
Since the user’s past click behaviors can also be treated as
the user him/herself, we apply the next item prediction as the
second match task. For both the match tasks, we choose the
InfoNCE as their loss function. The two match tasks can provide meaningful training signals to speed up the model’s convergence and alleviate the data sparsity. We conduct extensive
experiments on one public dataset and one large-scale industrial recommendation dataset. The result demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed auxiliary match tasks. AT4CTR
has been deployed in the real industrial advertising system
and has gained remarkable revenue.

Introduction
Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is crucial in industrial
web applications, e.g. recommendation systems and online
advertising. It estimates the probabilities of the user clicking
on items and displays the top-ranked items to the user. In online advertising, the platform can only charge the advertiser
once the ad is clicked by the user. Thus, accurate CTR estimation can maintain the user’s satisfaction and maximize
the revenue for both the platform and the advertiser.
Existing advance in CTR mainly focuses on network architecture and have gained huge success. Traditional meth* This work was done when the author Qi Liu was at Meituan

for intern.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8787

