The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Reproducible, Automated, and Scalable Anomaly Detection
Yue Zhao
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
yzhao010@usc.edu

Anomaly detection (AD), often termed outlier detection,
is a key machine learning (ML) task, aiming to identify uncommon yet crucial patterns in data. With the increasing
complexity of the modern world, the applications of AD
span wide—from NASA’s spacecraft monitoring to early patient prioritization at University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Technology giants like Google and Amazon also leverage AD for service disruption identification. Here, I will traverse my AD works with promising new directions, particularly emphasizing reproducible benchmarks (Part 1), automated algorithms (Part 2), and scalable systems (Part 3).
Part 1: Reproducible Benchmarks. The efficacy and characteristics of AD algorithms remain understudied due to
ad-hoc evaluations on small datasets, resulting in questionable advancements and conclusions. In my recent
works, I conducted extensive AD analyses on various data
types—tabular (ADBench (Han et al. 2022)), time-series
(Lai et al. 2021), graph data (BOND (Liu et al. 2022)),
and deep AD (ADGym (Jiang et al. 2023)). In ADBench,
we performed a comprehensive benchmark on 57 datasets
using 30 detection algorithms, encompassing various settings, and totaling 98,436 experiments. Our statistical analysis revealed that no unsupervised AD method stands out
statistically. These benchmarks offer critical insights into
AD, guiding the development of optimized algorithms. I will
briefly introduce two of my recent AD benchmarks, specifically for tabular and graph data: ADBench (Han et al. 2022)
and BOND (Liu et al. 2022). They identify two key challenges/needs in AD research: (1) automatic AD model selection for underlying applications (covered in Part 2), and
(2) fast and scalable AD systems (covered in Part 3).
Part II: Automated Algorithms. Despite the large number
of existing AD algorithms, the pressing question arises: how
do we automatically determine the optimal detector for various applications? Given the absence of ground truth in unsupervised AD, this challenge is important, where random
model selection may yield inadequate accuracy for crucial
tasks. In this part, I will introduce our progress in automating AD model selection and composition. Our spotlight will
be on MetaOD (Zhao, Rossi, and Akoglu 2021) and ADGym
(Jiang et al. 2023)—marking both the advent and the latest
innovations. The key of discussion will center around meta-

learning– leveraging insights from similar historical datasets
for fast model selection and more automated ML tasks.
Part III: Scalable Detection Systems. From a system perspective, applying AD algorithms in real-world scenarios
with large, high-dimensional data remains challenging. I
have designed scalable ML systems (MLSys) for various
AD types to mitigate this, integrating distributed learning,
approximation, and more. I will first cover the important
Python Outlier Detection (PyOD) (Zhao, Nasrullah, and Li
2019). It stands out for its comprehensive nature, housing
50+ methods, and unparalleled efficiency, with advanced
techniques such as JIT optimization. Our main focus, however, will be on demonstrating TOD (Zhao, Chen, and Jia
2022), the pioneering GPU system accommodating a broad
spectrum of AD algorithms. TOD can abstract complex
AD algorithms into simple tensor operations for multi-GPU
computation, offering an 11× speed improvement to PyOD.
Future Directions. We will discuss promising directions including the design principles for effective benchmarks, fully
automated AD pipelines from hardware to models, and an
open AD ecosystem to unify data modalities and usage.

References
Han, S.; Hu, X.; Huang, H.; Jiang, M.; and Zhao, Y. 2022.
ADBench: Anomaly detection benchmark. NeurIPS, 35:
32142–32159.
Jiang, M.; Hou, C.; Zheng, A.; Han, S.; Huang, H.; Wen, Q.;
Hu, X.; and Zhao, Y. 2023. ADGym: Design Choices for
Deep Anomaly Detection. NeurIPS.
Lai, K.-H.; Zha, D.; Xu, J.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, G.; and Hu, X.
2021. Revisiting time series outlier detection: Definitions
and benchmarks. In NeurIPS.
Liu, K.; Dou, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Ding, X.; Hu, X.; Zhang, R.;
Ding, K.; Chen, C.; Peng, H.; Shu, K.; et al. 2022. BOND:
Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection on static
attributed graphs. NeurIPS, 35: 27021–27035.
Zhao, Y.; Chen, G. H.; and Jia, Z. 2022.
TOD:
GPU-Accelerated Outlier Detection via Tensor Operations.
VLDB, 16(3): 546–560.
Zhao, Y.; Nasrullah, Z.; and Li, Z. 2019. PyOD: A Python
Toolbox for Scalable Outlier Detection. JMLR, 20: 1–7.
Zhao, Y.; Rossi, R.; and Akoglu, L. 2021. Automatic unsupervised outlier model selection. NeurIPS, 34: 4489–4502.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22687

