The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CoVR: Learning Composed Video Retrieval from Web Video Captions
Lucas Ventura1,2 , Antoine Yang2 , Cordelia Schmid2 , Gül Varol1
1

LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2
Inria, ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University, France
lucas.ventura@enpc.fr

Abstract

“during show”

Composed Image Retrieval (CoIR) has recently gained popularity as a task that considers both text and image queries
together, to search for relevant images in a database. Most
CoIR approaches require manually annotated datasets, comprising image-text-image triplets, where the text describes a
modification from the query image to the target image. However, manual curation of CoIR triplets is expensive and prevents scalability. In this work, we instead propose a scalable
automatic dataset creation methodology that generates triplets
given video-caption pairs, while also expanding the scope of
the task to include composed video retrieval (CoVR). To this
end, we mine paired videos with a similar caption from a large
database, and leverage a large language model to generate
the corresponding modification text. Applying this methodology to the extensive WebVid2M collection, we automatically
construct our WebVid-CoVR dataset, resulting in 1.6 million triplets. Moreover, we introduce a new benchmark for
CoVR with a manually annotated evaluation set, along with
baseline results. Our experiments further demonstrate that
training a CoVR model on our dataset effectively transfers
to CoIR, leading to improved state-of-the-art performance in
the zero-shot setup on both the CIRR and FashionIQ benchmarks. Our code, datasets, and models are publicly available
at https://imagine.enpc.fr/~ventural/covr.

1

“at night”

“with fireworks”

Figure 1: Task: Composed Video Retrieval (CoVR) seeks
to retrieve videos from a database by searching with both a
query image and a query text. The text typically specifies the
desired modification to the query image. In this example, a
traveller might wonder how the photographed place looks like
during a fountain show, by describing several modifications,
such as “during show at night, with fireworks”.

product, how-to videos of a tool for specific usages, live
events in specific locations, sports matches of specific players.
Similar to composed image retrieval (CoIR), CoVR is also
particularly useful when conveying a concept with a visual
is easier and/or more accurate than only using words (e.g.,
unknown location/object, a specific camera view, a specific
color).
Given the increased momentum in vision and language
research in the recent years (Li et al. 2022b; Radford et al.
2021), CoIR has emerged as a new task (Vo et al. 2019),
and since then witnessed improvements of both models and
benchmarks (Baldrati et al. 2023, 2022; Gu et al. 2023; Levy
et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021). However, to the
best of our knowledge, CoVR was not studied before. A key
challenge in building CoVR models is the difficulty of gathering suitable training data of video-text-video triplets. We overcome this limitation by developing an automatic approach
to generate triplets from existing video-caption collections.
Specifically, we mine video pairs whose corresponding captions slightly differ in text space. We automatically describe
this difference with a language model, which we train for a
modification-text generation task. In particular, we use manually annotated triplets, each containing: (a) source caption,
(b) target caption, (c) the modification text. We then finetune
a large language model (LLM) (Touvron et al. 2023) by inputting (a-b), and outputting (c). We assume the resulting
modification to describe the difference between the corresponding videos, thus obtaining video-text-video triplets (see
Figure 2 for an overview). When training our CoVR/CoIR

Introduction

Consider the scenario where a traveller takes a picture of a
landmark or scenic spot and wants to discover videos that
capture the essence of that location, by specifying certain
conditions via text. For example, the query image in Figure 1
(of a fountain in Barcelona), along with the text “during
show” should bring the video showcasing the fountain show.
Further refining the text query such as “during show at night”,
would allow the traveller to decide whether to wait for the
show until the night time. In this work, our goal is composed
video retrieval (CoVR), where the user performs such multimodal search, by querying an image of a particular visual
concept and a modification text, to find videos that exhibit the
similar visual characteristics with the desired modification,
in a dynamic context.
CoVR has many use cases, including but not limited to
searching online videos for finding reviews of a specific
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5270

