The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DALDet: Depth-Aware Learning Based Object Detection for Autonomous Driving
Ke Hu1,2 , Tongbo Cao2,3 , Yuan Li1,2 , Song Chen1,2∗ , Yi Kang1,2∗
2

1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
3
Anhui University, Hefei, China
{kehu, ly549826}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tbcao@stu.ahu.edu.cn, {songch, ykang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection achieves good detection performance in
autonomous driving. However, it requires substantial computational resources, which prevents its practical application. 2D object detection has less computational burden but
lacks spatial and geometric information embedded in depth.
Therefore, we present DALDet, an efficient depth-aware
learning based 2D detector, achieving high-performance object detection for autonomous driving. We design an efficient one-stage detection framework and seamlessly integrate
depth cues into convolutional neural network by introducing depth-aware convolution and depth-aware average pooling, which effectively improve the detector’s ability to perceive 3D space. Moreover, we propose a depth-guided loss
function for training DALDet, which effectively improves
the localization ability of the detector. Due to the use of
depth map, DALDet can also output the distance of the object, which is of great importance for driving applications
such as obstacle avoidance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority and efficiency of DALDet. In particular, our DALDet ranks 1st on both KITTI Car and Cyclist
2D detection test leaderboards among all 2D detectors with
high efficiency as well as yielding competitive performance
among many leading 3D detectors. Code will be available at
https://github.com/hukefy/DALDet.

Figure 1: Efficiency comparison with the state-of-the-art.
Our DALDet achieves top average precision (AP) on 2D
moderate car detection with higher speed and fewer parameters in the KITTI benchmark (more details are in Table 2).

LiDAR sensors usually have a high cost and are sensitive
to weather conditions, which limits their application. Moreover, the scanning of LiDAR in 3D space is uneven, resulting
in a significant distribution gap between nearby and distant
objects. Camera-based 3D detection (Li et al. 2023, 2022b)
is considerably more challenging due to the inherent lack
of depth cues. Furthermore, both LiDAR-based and camerabased 3D object detection methods require substantial computational resources, resulting in slower processing speeds.
Additionally, some 3D operators are not well-supported by
edge or embedded devices, making deployment challenging
in practical applications. These factors restrict the practical
application of 3D object detection in autonomous driving.
When it comes to 2D object detection, the aforementioned limitations of 3D methods have been alleviated due
to smaller computational requirements, lower sensor costs,
and accumulated deployment experience. In recent years,
significant progresses (Wang, Bochkovskiy, and Liao 2023;
Li and Wang 2022; Sun et al. 2021) have been made in the
field of 2D object detection. However, advanced 2D detectors (Wang, Bochkovskiy, and Liao 2023; Li et al. 2022a;
Jocher et al. 2022) are primarily developed for generic object detection and exhibit notable differences when applied
to autonomous driving scenarios, including object category,
object distance range, and sensor type. These differences

Introduction
In recent years, autonomous driving has attracted increasing
attention due to its promising applications in ensuring traffic
safety, reducing transportation costs, and improving vehicle
efficiency. Among the numerous tasks in autonomous driving, object detection plays a critical role. In general, object
detection can be divided into two main categories: 2D object
detection and 3D object detection. Both the 2D and 3D detection tasks aim to classify all instances of an object; however, they differ in terms of the localization dimensionality
(as illustrated in Fig. 2). The field of 3D object detection has
made significant progress with the development of numerous techniques (Wu et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2022a; Deng
et al. 2021). Among them, the state-of-the-art methods (Wu
et al. 2023b; Fan et al. 2023) heavily rely on expensive LiDAR sensors to provide sparse depth data as input. However,
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2229

