The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ImageCaptioner2 : Image Captioner for Image Captioning
Bias Amplification Assessment
Eslam Abdelrahman1 , Pengzhan Sun2 * , Li Erran Li3 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
National University of Singapore
3
AWS AI, Amazon

Abstract

"A man sitting in
front of a laptop
computer."

Most pre-trained learning systems are known to suffer from
bias, which typically emerges from the data, the model, or
both. Measuring and quantifying bias and its sources is a
challenging task and has been extensively studied in image
captioning. Despite the significant effort in this direction, we
observed that existing metrics lack consistency in the inclusion
of the visual signal. In this paper, we introduce a new bias
assessment metric, dubbed ImageCaptioner2 , for image captioning. Instead of measuring the absolute bias in the model
or the data, ImageCaptioner2 pay more attention to the bias
introduced by the model w.r.t the data bias, termed bias amplification. Unlike the existing methods, which only evaluate the image captioning algorithms based on the generated
captions only, ImageCaptioner2 incorporates the image while
measuring the bias. In addition, we design a formulation for
measuring the bias of generated captions as prompt-based
image captioning instead of using language classifiers. Finally, we apply our ImageCaptioner2 metric across 11 different image captioning architectures on three different datasets,
i.e., MS-COCO caption dataset, Artemis V1, and Artemis
V2, and on three different protected attributes, i.e., gender,
race, and emotions. Consequently, we verify the effectiveness of our ImageCaptioner2 metric by proposing AnonymousBench, which is a novel human evaluation paradigm for bias
metrics. Our metric shows significant superiority over the recent bias metric; LIC, in terms of human alignment, where
the correlation scores are 80% and 54% for our metric and
LIC, respectively. The code and more details are available at
https://eslambakr.github.io/imagecaptioner2.github.io/.

Text
Pre-processing
Image
Captioner

"Men working
on their
laptops"

PromptBased
Bias
Image
Captioner
PromptBased
Bias
Image
Captioner

Bias Image
Masking

Bd

Bias
Amplification

Bamp

Bm

Text Pre-Processing
Bias Text
Masking

"A [Mask] sitting
in front of a laptop
computer."

Prompt
Function

"A [Mask] sitting in front of a
laptop computer, therefore
the gender is ......"

Bias Text
Masking

"[Mask] working
on their laptops"

Prompt
Function

"[Mask] working on their
laptops, therefore the
gender is ....."

Figure 1: An abstract overview for our metric pipeline. The
GT stream is in green, and the prediction stream is in blue.
Given an input image, the associated GT-caption, and the
predicted caption, a text pre-processing module is utilized to
refine the captions before feeding them to the prompt-based
image captioners. The text pre-processing module performs
two main functionalities: 1) Masking the protected-attribute
indicative words. 2) Appending the prompt template to the
caption. Finally, bias-amplification module is utilized to measure the model bias Bm w.r.t the GT bias Bd .

Introduction
Most deep learning (DL) benchmarks (Deng et al. 2009) (Lin
et al. 2014) (Cireşan et al. 2011) (Kuznetsova et al. 2020)
(Liao, Xie, and Geiger 2022) are designed to rank different architectures based on accuracy, neglecting other aspects
such as fairness. Recently, measuring the bias and understanding its sources have attracted significant attention due to
models’ social impact (Alvi, Zisserman, and Nellåker 2018)
(De Vries et al. 2019) (Khan and Fu 2021) (Stock and Cisse
2018) (Thong and Snoek 2021) (Wang et al. 2022) (Yang
et al. 2020) (Du et al. 2022) (Schick, Udupa, and Schütze
* This work was done during internship in KAUST.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20902

2021). For instance, image captioners may learn shortcuts
based on correlation, which inevitably suffers from unreliable
associations between protected attributes, e.g., gender, and
visual or textual clues (Zhao et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019).
Recent efforts focus on estimating model bias, driven by
the fact that more than balanced data is needed to create unbiased models (Wang et al. 2019). Bias (Zhang et al. 2023;
Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan
2017) is characterized by the model’s representation of different subgroups when generating the supergroup, such as assessing whether it equally depicts men and women in images
of people. The primary cause of bias stems from spurious
correlations captured during training. we are interested in
the spurious correlation found within ordinary daily scenes,

