The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Temporal Adaptive RGBT Tracking with Modality Prompt
Hongyu Wang, Xiaotao Liu* , Yifan Li, Meng Sun, Dian Yuan, Jing Liu
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Guangzhou, China
22171214782@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xtliu@xidian.edu.cn, 18066899461@163.com, sun meng2002@163.com,
d1anskr@163.com, neouma@163.com

Abstract
Train

Template

RGBT tracking has been widely used in various fields such
as robotics, surveillance processing, and autonomous driving.
Existing RGBT trackers fully explore the spatial information
between the template and the search region and locate the target based on the appearance matching results. However, these
RGBT trackers have very limited exploitation of temporal information, either ignoring temporal information or exploiting
it through online sampling and training. The former struggles
to cope with the object state changes, while the latter neglects
the correlation between spatial and temporal information.
To alleviate these limitations, we propose a novel Temporal Adaptive RGBT Tracking framework, named as TATrack.
TATrack has a spatio-temporal two-stream structure and captures temporal information by an online updated template,
where the two-stream structure refers to the multi-modal feature extraction and cross-modal interaction for the initial template and the online update template respectively. TATrack
contributes to comprehensively exploit spatio-temporal information and multi-modal information for target localization.
In addition, we design a spatio-temporal interaction (STI)
mechanism that bridges two branches and enables crossmodal interaction to span longer time scales. Extensive experiments on three popular RGBT tracking benchmarks show
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, while
running at real-time speed.

Samples

RGB

···

Feature
Extraction
Cross-modal
Interaction

Search

Tracker

Result

TIR

(a)

Initial
Template

Feature Extraction
and
Cross-modal Interaction

Search

Spatio-Temporal
Interaction

Online
Template

Feature Extraction
and
Cross-modal Interaction

Feature
Extraction
(b)

Result

(c)

Figure 1: Differences between our RGBT tracking approach
and previous ones. (a) Sampling from tracking result and
training online. (b) Processing RGB and TIR images separately and performing cross-modal interaction through specialized networks. (c) Performing feature extraction and
cross-modal interaction simultaneously and capturing temporal information by online updated templates.

Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, visual object
tracking (VOT) aims at localizing a specified object in each
video frame given its initial state. Thanks to the efforts of
researchers, many excellent works (Bertinetto et al. 2016;
Bhat et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2022) have been
proposed. Despite the promising results, limited by imaging
mechanisms of visible images, RGB-based trackers struggle to achieve good performance in some complex scenarios, such as extreme illumination and bad weather. The thermal infrared images (TIR or T) are insensitive to these factors, which can provide complementary information to visible images (Zhang et al. 2020). As a result, RGBT tracking has become a popular research topic in recent years.
It has been successfully deployed in various applications

such as robotics (Chen et al. 2017), surveillance processing
(Alldieck, Bahnsen, and Moeslund 2016), and autonomous
driving (Dai, Yuan, and Wei 2021).
In RGBT tracking, both spatial and temporal information
are crucial for target localization. The former contains object appearance information and the latter contains the state
changes of objects among frames. The first consideration
for RGBT tracking is the fusion of complementary information from RGB and TIR modalities, which is mainly a
spatial interaction. Temporal information is easy to be neglected when designing high-performance modality fusion
tracking algorithms. However, without proper exploitation
of temporal information, the tracker can hardly cope with
some complex scenarios (e.g., aspect ratio changes, target
deformation, and fast movement,).
According to the exploitation way of temporal informa-

* Xiaotao Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5436

