The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discerning Temporal Difference Learning
Jianfei Ma
Northwestern Polytechnical University
School of Mathematics and Statistics
matrixfeeney@gmail.com

Abstract

more frequently, while less attention is given to less frequent or near-terminating states, such as goal states. This
phenomenon is especially prevalent in episodic tasks with
eligibility traces, where more frequent states are updated
each time a new state is encountered while states close to termination have shorter trace positions, resulting in fewer updates. In such cases, diverging update frequencies can lead to
imbalanced value estimations. Furthermore, the added complexity arising from noisy observations (Chelu et al. 2022)
or rewards (Wang, Liu, and Li 2020) exacerbates the estimation challenge. Injected noise can lead to erroneous predictions, propagating inaccuracies to other states. Moreover, in
reality, the most rewarding states are often rare occurrences,
particularly in situations where most states have sparse rewards. The fundamental idea is to emphasize less frequent
or more valuable states by increasing individual update magnitudes or reducing attention on states with adverse factors,
using a nonnegative emphasis function. While existing approaches (Sutton, Mahmood, and White 2016) (Anand and
Precup 2021) (Chelu et al. 2022) provide some insights, they
either lack a thorough investigation of emphasis functions
in diverse scenarios or overlook the mutual influence of the
emphasis between states.

Temporal difference learning (TD) is a foundational concept
in reinforcement learning (RL), aimed at efficiently assessing a policy’s value function. TD(λ), a potent variant, incorporates a memory trace to distribute the prediction error
into the historical context. However, this approach often neglects the significance of historical states and the relative importance of propagating the TD error, influenced by challenges such as visitation imbalance or outcome noise. To address this, we propose a novel TD algorithm named discerning TD learning (DTD), which allows flexible emphasis functions—predetermined or adapted during training—to allocate
efforts effectively across states. We establish the convergence
properties of our method within a specific class of emphasis
functions and showcase its promising potential for adaptation to deep RL contexts. Empirical results underscore that
employing a judicious emphasis function not only improves
value estimation but also expedites learning across diverse
scenarios.

Introduction
In reinforcement learning, efficiently predicting future rewards based on past experiences is a fundamental challenge.
TD(0) assigns credit using the difference between successive predictions (Sutton 1988), offering online and recursive
capabilities, but its scope is limited to the current observed
state. On the other hand, TD(λ) (Sutton and Barto 2018),
when combined with the eligibility trace, assigns credit to
all historical states, using a recency heuristic to propagate
credit. However, it lacks consideration for the relative importance of each state, that is, how much emphasis should
be given to each historical state to make better predictions?
Both approaches have found success in modern RL algorithms (Mnih et al. 2013) (Schulman et al. 2017), but they
uniformly weigh states, overlooking the potential benefits of
emphasis-aware credit assignment.
In various circumstances, the emphasis-awareness becomes crucial. The accurate estimation of a value function
often faces inherent challenges, including visitation imbalances and noisy outcomes, particularly in reward-seeking
tasks. Due to variations in initial state distributions or transition models, agents tend to update high-frequency states

In this paper, we introduce a novel class of TD learning methods based on a fundamental identity. This identity, when viewed forward, directly incorporates an emphasis function that prioritizes various multi-step return combinations, offering enhanced flexibility. We establish a connection to a computationally efficient backward view that updates online, with its structure revealing the emphasis function’s role. We provide theoretical analysis demonstrating
that for a specific class of emphasis functions, our method
converges to the optimal solution in the sense of an emphasized objective. Illustrative examples are presented to investigate emphasis choices in diverse scenarios. These examples reveal that our proposed approach, DTD, can enhance
value estimation and expedite learning, with particularly noticeable benefits from more compact choices like the absolute expected TD error. Moreover, the newly developed
type of return function holds promise for adaptation to DRL
scenarios, especially where accurate advantage estimation is
crucial (Schulman et al. 2016). Additionally, we establish a
connection to prioritized sampling (Schaul et al. 2016) in
cases where the data is Markovian. Lastly, we initiate a dis-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14238

