The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rectangle Search: An Anytime Beam Search
Sofia Lemons1, 2 , Wheeler Ruml1 , Rob Holte3 , Carlos Linares López4
1

University of New Hampshire
2
Earlham College
3
University of Alberta, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
4
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
sofia@snlemons.com, ruml@cs.unh.edu, rholte@ualberta.ca, carlos.linares@uc3m.es
Abstract

obvious that best-first search is the most appropriate choice
of algorithmic architecture.
In this paper, we propose an interruptible algorithm called
rectangle search that is inspired by beam search, which is
based on breadth-first search rather than best-first search.
Rectangle search is straightforward and simple to implement: the beam incrementally widens and deepens. We study
rectangle search’s performance experimentally on seven
popular heuristic search benchmarks. We find that, overall,
rectangle search outperforms previously-proposed anytime
search algorithms. Furthermore, it tends to find solutions of
comparable cost at similar times when compared to fixedwidth beam search, with the added benefit of reducing solution cost over time. We investigate when it performs well or
poorly, finding that it performs well in problems with large
local minima. Overall, rectangle search appears to mark a
new state of the art for anytime search, while also serving as
a replacement for fixed-width beam search.

Anytime heuristic search algorithms try to find a (potentially
suboptimal) solution as quickly as possible and then work to
find better and better solutions until an optimal solution is obtained or time is exhausted. The most widely-known anytime
search algorithms are based on best-first search. In this paper,
we propose a new algorithm, rectangle search, that is instead
based on beam search, a variant of breadth-first search. It repeatedly explores alternatives at all depth levels and is thus
best-suited to problems featuring deep local minima. Experiments using a variety of popular search benchmarks suggest
that rectangle search is competitive with fixed-width beam
search and often performs better than the previous best anytime search algorithms.

Introduction
It is often convenient to have a heuristic search algorithm that can flexibly make use of however much time
is available. The search can be terminated whenever desired and returns the best solution found so far. Dean and
Boddy (1988) termed these anytime algorithms. Russell and
Zilberstein (1991) further differentiated between interruptible algorithms, which quickly find a solution and then find
better solutions as time passes, eventually finding an optimal
plan if given sufficient time, and contract algorithms, which
are informed of the termination time in advance and thus
need only find a single solution before that time. Anytime
algorithms have been proposed as a useful tool for building
intelligent systems (Zilberstein 1996; Zilberstein and Russell 1996). While only a few contract search algorithms have
been proposed (Dionne, Thayer, and Ruml 2011), interruptible algorithms have been widely investigated and applied
(Likhachev and Ferguson 2009).
As we review below, the most well-known interruptible
anytime heuristic search algorithms are based on best-first
search. Best-first search is attractive as it is the basis for the
optimally-efficient optimal search algorithm A* (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) and it is relatively well understood.
However, because anytime algorithms are intended for use
cases in which the solutions found do not need to be proven
optimal, and are not even expected to be optimal, it is not

Background
Before presenting rectangle search, we first review relevant
prior work in anytime search and beam search.

Anytime Search
Most previous anytime algorithms are based on weighted
A* (Pohl 1973), which is a best-first search using f ′ (n) =
g(n) + w × h(n), where g(n) is the cost to reach n from
the start, h(n) is the estimated cost-to-go to the goal from n,
and w ≥ 1. For example, anytime weighted A* (AWA*)
(Hansen and Zhou 2007) runs weighted A* but retains a
current incumbent solution and continues searching for better solutions until there are no open nodes with f (n) =
g(n) + h(n) < g(incumbent), thus proving that the incumbent is optimal.
Anytime Repairing A* (ARA*) (Likhachev, Gordon, and
Thrun 2004) is similar, but applies a schedule of decreasing
weights ending with w = 1. When a solution is found, it
decreases the weight according to the schedule and reorders
the open list. It terminates after finding a solution with w =
1 or after exhausting all nodes with f (n) < g(incumbent).
Anytime EES (AEES) (Thayer, Benton, and Helmert
2012) requires no weighting parameter and explicitly works
to minimize the time between finding new solutions by using distance-to-go estimates d(n). d(n) is an estimate of the

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20751

