The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SocialStigmaQA: A Benchmark to Uncover Stigma Amplification in
Generative Language Models
Manish Nagireddy* , Lamogha Chiazor, Moninder Singh, Ioana Baldini
IBM Research

Abstract

scars, and more. The dataset is formulated as a question answering task in which questions refer to engaging with a person with a stigmatized condition in a context of a simple social situation. The goal of the question is to probe whether
the model generates text that expresses bias against the person with the stigmatized condition. Our experiments with
two large open generative models (Wei et al. 2022a; Tay
et al. 2023) show that 45%-59% of the questions, depending
on the prompting and decoding used, are answered unfavorably towards the person with the stigmatized condition. This
result showcases the risk of generative models amplifying
biases against people with stigmatized conditions, leading
to real harm, as explored by Pachankis et al. (2018a); Mei,
Fereidooni, and Caliskan (2023).
Table 1 shows an example from our dataset. All questions
are templated such that they can be filled in by the different
stigmas considered in this study. The question is preceded
by a short context that refers to a simple social situation
(e.g., job interview). The question usually asks whether to
engage within the social situation with a person that has a
stigmatized condition (e.g., hiring someone). To further analyze model behavior, we include two versions for the context: one which expresses an emphasis on how appropriate
the person is for the situation (positive bias, e.g., “the candidate who is perfect for the position”) and one in which the
person asking the question expresses some doubt or hesitation towards engaging with the person (doubt bias, e.g., “I
don’t know what to do.”). Both these versions are meant to
investigate if the bias in the generated text diminishes, increases or remains unchanged with the modified context. To
establish a baseline, we include a no-stigma version for each
template that does not refer to any stigma. These prompts are
useful to establish whether certain models have any propensity of answering one way or the other.
Our main contributions are:

Current datasets for unwanted social bias auditing are limited
to studying protected demographic features such as race and
gender. In this work, we introduce a comprehensive benchmark that is meant to capture the amplification of social bias,
via stigmas, in generative language models. Taking inspiration from social science research, we start with a documented
list of 93 US-centric stigmas and curate a question-answering
(QA) dataset which involves simple social situations. Our
benchmark, SocialStigmaQA, contains roughly 10K prompts,
with a variety of prompt styles, carefully constructed to systematically test for both social bias and model robustness.
We present results for SocialStigmaQA with two open source
generative language models and we find that the proportion of
socially biased output ranges from 45% to 59% across a variety of decoding strategies and prompting styles. We demonstrate that the deliberate design of the templates in our benchmark (e.g., adding biasing text to the prompt or using different verbs that change the answer that indicates bias) impacts the model tendencies to generate socially biased output.
Additionally, through manual evaluation, we discover problematic patterns in the generated chain-of-thought output that
range from subtle bias to lack of reasoning.
Warning: This paper contains examples of text which are
toxic, biased, and potentially harmful.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of generative language models and
their deployment (OpenAI 2022; Bommasani 2023; Nayak
2019; Perspective API 2021) has led to a higher level of
scrutiny of their behavior regarding unwanted social bias.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that generative models
exhibit undesirable behavior that amplifies social bias. Most
such studies focus on protected demographic attributes such
as gender or race (Baldini et al. 2022; Blodgett et al. 2020;
Parrish et al. 2022a; Akyürek et al. 2022). In this work, we
go beyond protected demographic attributes and introduce a
large dataset that focuses on a comprehensive list of documented US-centric stigmatized conditions (Pachankis et al.
2018a). Examples of stigmatized conditions include being
voluntarily childless, living in a trailer park, having facial

1. A social stigma bias benchmark for QA: Our benchmark is the first of its kind to holistically measure biases
against 93 social stigmas in a QA format. We include 37
different templates and four different styles of prompting, for a total of 10,360 prompts.
2. Emphasis on prompt styles: For each pattern in our
dataset, we include different prompt styles to nudge the
model towards unbiased or biased responses.

* Correspondence to manish.nagireddy@ibm.com
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21454

