The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Causal Abstractions
Kevin Xia, Elias Bareinboim
CausalAI Lab, Columbia University
{kevinmxia, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The ability of humans to understand the world in terms of
cause and effect relationships, as well as their ability to compress information into abstract concepts, are two hallmark
features of human intelligence. These two topics have been
studied in tandem under the theory of causal abstractions, but
it is an open problem how to best leverage abstraction theory
in real-world causal inference tasks, where the true model
is not known, and limited data is available in most practical
settings. In this paper, we focus on a family of causal abstractions constructed by clustering variables and their domains,
redefining abstractions to be amenable to individual causal
distributions. We show that such abstractions can be learned
in practice using Neural Causal Models, allowing us to utilize
the deep learning toolkit to solve causal tasks (identification,
estimation, sampling) at different levels of abstraction granularity. Finally, we show how representation learning can be
used to learn abstractions, which we apply in our experiments
to scale causal inferences to high dimensional settings such as
with image data.

1

Introduction

Humans understand the world around them through the use
of abstract notions. Biologists can study the function of the
liver without understanding the interactions between its subatomic particles studied by physicists. Economists find it
more practical to consider macro-level behavior through concepts like aggregate supply and demand rather than studying
the purchasing behavior of individuals. At home, we choose
to interpret the object in the television as a dog or a car as opposed to a collection of photons or pixels. Humans are highly
capable of learning through interacting with the environment
and understanding cause and effect between different concepts. Understanding causality is considered a hallmark of
human intelligence and allows humans to plan a course of
action, determine blame and responsibility, and generalize
across environments. It follows that the ability to abstract
concepts and study them causally is a key ability expected
from modern intelligent systems.
AI systems are built on a foundation of generative models,
which are representations of the underlying processes from
which data is collected. Standard generative models simply

model some joint density of a set of variables of interest,
while causal generative models further model distributions
involving causal interventions and counterfactual relations.
In this paper, we study the problem of learning a causal
generative model from data. One major challenge is that data
is often provided in complex low level forms (e.g., pixels),
while it would be more useful in applications to focus on
higher level concepts (e.g., dog or car). We would therefore
like to learn a more abstract causal generative model at a
higher level of granularity, while guaranteeing that the queries
from the coarser model match the ground truth.
To formalize this problem, we build on the semantics of
a class of generative models called structural causal models
(SCMs) (Pearl 2000). An SCM M∗ describes a collection of
mechanisms and distribution over unobserved factors. Each
SCM induces three qualitatively different sets of distributions
related to the human concepts of “seeing” (called observational), “doing” (interventional), and “imagining” (counterfactual), collectively known as the Ladder of Causation or the
Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH) (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018;
Bareinboim et al. 2022). The PCH is a containment hierarchy in which each of these distribution sets can be put into
increasingly refined layers, where observational distributions
go in layer 1 (L1 ), interventional in layer 2 (L2 ), and counterfactual in layer 3 (L3 ). In typical tasks of causal inference, the
goal is to obtain a quantity from a higher layer when given
data only from lower layers (e.g. inferring interventional
quantities from observational data). Still, it is understood
that this is generally impossible without additional assumptions since higher layers are underdetermined by lower layers
(Bareinboim et al. 2022; Ibeling and Icard 2020).
Generative models can often be implemented in practice as
neural networks. Deep learning models have achieved promising success in a variety of applications such as computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Graves and Jaitly 2014), and game playing (Mnih et al.
2013). Many of these successes are attributed to representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013), in which
the learned representation can be thought of as an abstraction
of the data. Further, there has also been growing interest in the
idea of incorporating causality into deep models1 . Our work
1
Many successful approaches have been developed to estimate
causal effects from observational data under backdoor or ignorability

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20585

