The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Accelerating Adversarially Robust Model Selection
for Deep Neural Networks via Racing
Matthias König1 , Holger H. Hoos1,2 , Jan. N. van Rijn1
1

LIACS, Leiden University, The Netherlands
Chair for AI Methodology, RWTH Aachen University, Germany
h.m.t.konig@liacs.leidenuniv.nl, hh@aim.rwth-aachen.de, jan.n.van.rijn@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
2

Abstract

the behaviour of a neural network. In this context, formal
verification methods have been developed that seek to assess the robustness of a trained neural network with respect
to various input perturbations under specific norms, such as
the commonly used l∞ -norm (Botoeva et al. 2020; Henriksen and Lomuscio 2020; Bunel et al. 2018; Dvijotham
et al. 2018; Gehr et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018a; Xiang,
Tran, and Johnson 2018; Ehlers 2017; Katz et al. 2017;
Tjeng, Xiao, and Tedrake 2019; Bastani et al. 2016; Papernot et al. 2016; Scheibler et al. 2015; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015). Notice that formal verification methods
can, in principle, verify a neural network model with respect
to any pre-defined property describing the input-output behaviour of the model. In this work, we focus exclusively on
verification with respect to adversarial input perturbations.
Generally, neural network verification is highly complex,
and even simple network properties have been shown to be
NP-complete problems (Katz et al. 2017). To solve these
problems, state-of-the-art verification algorithms rely on the
usage of sophisticated solvers, including mixed integer programming and satisfiability modulo theories solvers, and often demand several hours of running time to solve a single verification problem. This holds even for relatively small
networks, such as those trained on the MNIST dataset (see,
e.g., König, Hoos, and van Rijn 2022). Thus, much recent work has been concerned with the development of
more efficient verification algorithms, e.g., by employing
the branch-and-bound method for solving the verification
problem (De Palma et al. 2021; Bunel et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2018a; Bunel et al. 2018; Ehlers 2017) or by tightening bounds in the problem formulation using symbolic interval propagation (Botoeva et al. 2020; Henriksen and Lomuscio 2020; Wang et al. 2018b, 2021) and abstraction (Bak
et al. 2020; Singh et al. 2019b; Zhang et al. 2018; Gehr et al.
2018; Singh et al. 2018) techniques. However, even in light
of recent developments, neural network verification remains
a challenging and expensive computational task, especially
as network complexity and dataset size increase.
Neural network verification can be divided into local and
global verification (Sun et al. 2022). In this work, we focus on local robustness verification. Local robustness verification typically considers a trained neural network, along
with a set of inputs and a verification property specification. Similar to other performance metrics of a neural net-

Recent research has introduced several approaches to formally verify the robustness of neural network models against
perturbations in their inputs, such as the ones that occur in
adversarial attacks. At the same time, this particular verification task is known to be computationally challenging.
More specifically, assessing the robustness of a neural network against input perturbations can easily take several hours
of compute time per input vector, even when using state-ofthe-art verification approaches. In light of this, it becomes
challenging to select from a given set of neural network models the one that is best in terms of robust accuracy, i.e., the
fraction of instances for which the model is known to be robust against adversarial perturbations, especially when given
limited computing resources.
To tackle this problem, we propose a racing method specifically adapted to the domain of robustness verification. This
racing method utilises ∆-values, which can be seen as an efficiently computable proxy for the distance of a given input to
a neural network model to the decision boundary. We present
statistical evidence indicating significant differences in the
empirical cumulative distribution of ∆-values for robust and
non-robust instances. Using this information, we show that
it is possible to reliably expose vulnerabilities in the model
with relatively few input iterations. Overall, when applied to
selecting the most robust network from sets of 31 MNIST
and 27 CIFAR-10 networks, our proposed method achieves
speedups of a factor of 108 and 42, respectively, in terms of
cumulative running time compared to standard local robustness verification on the complete testing sets.

Introduction
Deep learning methods based on neural networks have
gained increasing prominence in safety-critical domains and
use contexts, such as unmanned mobile phone face recognition systems or aircraft manoeuvre advisory systems; see,
e.g., Julian, Kochenderfer, and Owen (2019). At the same
time, neural networks are well known to be susceptible to
adversarial attacks, where a slight modification of the input can lead to misclassification by the network (Szegedy
et al. 2014). These perturbations can be so subtle that they
remain imperceptible to human eyes, facilitating the need
for the development of methods to formally reason about
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21267

