The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Layer and Cross-Sample Feature Optimization Network for Few-Shot
Fine-Grained Image Classification
Zhen-Xiang Ma, Zhen-Duo Chen * , Li-Jun Zhao, Zi-Chao Zhang, Xin Luo, Xin-Shun Xu
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
{mazhenxiang0923, zhangzichao1008, lj zhao1028}@163.com, {chenzd.sdu, luoxin.lxin}@gmail.com,
xuxinshun@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, a number of Few-Shot Fine-Grained Image Classification (FS-FGIC) methods have been proposed, but they
primarily focus on better fine-grained feature extraction while
overlooking two important issues. The first one is how to
extract discriminative features for Fine-Grained Image Classification tasks while reducing trivial and non-generalizable
sample-level noise introduced in this procedure, to overcome
the over-fitting problem under the setting of Few-Shot Learning. The second one is how to achieve satisfying feature
matching between limited support and query samples with
variable spatial positions and angles. To address these issues,
we propose a novel Cross-layer and Cross-sample feature optimization Network for FS-FGIC, C2-Net for short. The proposed method consists of two main modules: Cross-Layer
Feature Refinement (CLFR) module and Cross-Sample Feature Adjustment (CSFA) module. The CLFR module further
refines the extracted features while integrating outputs from
multiple layers to suppress sample-level feature noise interference. Additionally, the CSFA module addresses the feature mismatch between query and support samples through
both channel activation and position matching operations.
Extensive experiments have been conducted on five finegrained benchmark datasets, and the results show that the
C2-Net outperforms other state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin in most cases. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/zenith0923/C2-Net.

Figure 1: Visualization results of features extracted by the
backbone on the CUB and Stanford-Dogs datasets. The first
row shows the raw images, the second row displays the visualization of features extracted from the last layer of the
backbone, and the third row shows the visualization of features extracted from the penultimate layer.

classes with extremely limited training (support) samples.
By combining the idea of FSL with the FGIC task, several
effective methods have been proposed recently for Few-Shot
Fine-Grained Image Classification (FS-FGIC), but there are
still several issues to be further addressed in this new task.
Generally speaking, feature learning is the most critical
point to fine-grained related tasks. However, there exists a
potential contradiction in the design of the feature learning module for the FS-FGIC task. Specifically, on the one
hand, the task of FGIC requires that the model can obtain sufficient detailed information to achieve adequate finegrained discriminating power. On the other hand, the FSL
task requires the model to effectively learn semantic concepts at the category level and identify inter-class differences from extremely limited training data. Although exploring and incorporating more detailed information can improve the fine-grained discrimination capability of models,
it inevitably leads to the expansion of the final feature space
and introduces more trivial and non-generalizable samplelevel noise, which will exacerbate the over-fitting problem
under the FSL setting. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, although combining feature maps from multiple layers is a
well-tested strategy for FGIC methods (Du et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2022a) because the features extracted from different
layers of the backbone are complementary, it also introduces

Introduction
With the ongoing advancement of deep learning (He et al.
2016; Du et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2022b), Fine-Grained
Image Classification (FGIC) (Fu, Zheng, and Mei 2017)
has made significant progress under the condition of having sufficient training samples. However, the cost of collecting large-scale label-rich fine-grained images is expensive, so many researchers have shifted their focus to FewShot Learning (FSL) (Munkhdalai et al. 2018; Vinyals et al.
2016) to avoid this issue. Built based on meta-learning, metric learning, and some other strategies, FSL methods aim to
learn task-transferable knowledge according to related base
classes, to reduce over-fitting and achieve satisfying classification results on testing (query) samples belonging to novel
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4136

