The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Contextual Cascading Bandits with Asynchronous Communication and
Heterogeneous Users
Hantao Yang1 , Xutong Liu2 * , Zhiyong Wang2 , Hong Xie1 , John C. S. Lui2 , Defu Lian1 , Enhong
Chen1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yanghantao@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liuxt@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, zywang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xiehong2018@foxmail.com,
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, liandefu@ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

ton et al. 2015a,b). In the CB framework, the learning agent
employs exploration-exploitation techniques to comprehend
user preferences over items through interactions. Specifically, in each round, the agent recommends an item list, observes click feedback, and receives a reward of 1 if the user
clicks on any item (otherwise, a reward of 0 is received).
The agent’s goal is to maximize cumulative rewards over T
rounds (or equivalently minimize the T -round regret).
Motivated by large-scale applications with a huge number of items, previous studies (Li et al. 2016; Zong et al.
2016) have proposed the contextual combinatorial cascading bandits (C3 B) to integrate contextual information. This
integration is achieved by adding a linear structure assumption, enhancing the scalability of CB. Later on, Li and Zhang
(2018) extends C3 B to accommodate the heterogeneity of
users’ preferences for items. By assuming that users can be
partitioned into J unknown user groups (i.e., clusters), they
introduce the CLUB-cascade algorithm, where agents adaptively cluster users into groups, and harness the collaborative
influence of these user groups to enhance the performance.
While the successes of C3 B in handling contextual information and user heterogeneity are noteworthy, prior investigations have primarily focused on either the singleagent paradigm (Li et al. 2016; Zong et al. 2016) or the
synchronous setting which requires simultaneous data synchronization among agents (Li and Zhang 2018). In realworld scenarios, however, there could be a large number of participating agents, ranging from powerful servers
to resource-constrained mobile devices. Furthermore, users
can be highly heterogeneous in terms of preferences and
arrival times. In this case, the feasibility of managing synchronous communication from all agents becomes questionable. This motivates us to study C3 B within an asynchronous
communication framework, which can accommodate a large
number of agents without requiring them to communicate at
the same time, and allow agents to serve users with varying
time of arrival and heterogenous preferences.
Our work introduces the first federated contextual combinatorial bandits (FedC3 B), a framework wherein a finite
set of users U are served by |U| learning agents. Each
agent is responsible for offering personalized recommendations to a specific user, and collaboration is facilitated
through a central server. Due to the stochastic nature of
user arrivals, communication between agents occurs asyn-

We study the problem of federated contextual combinatorial
cascading bandits, where |U | agents collaborate under the coordination of a central server to provide tailored recommendations to the |U | corresponding users. Existing works consider either a synchronous framework, necessitating full agent
participation and global synchronization, or assume user homogeneity with identical behaviors. We overcome these limitations by considering (1) federated agents operating in an
asynchronous communication paradigm, where no mandatory synchronization is required and all agents communicate independently with the server, (2) heterogeneous user
behaviors, where users can be stratified into J ≤ |U| latent user clusters, each exhibiting distinct preferences. For
this setting, we propose a UCB-type algorithm with delicate
communication protocols. Through theoretical analysis, we
give sub-linear regret bounds on par with those achieved in
the synchronous framework, while incurring only logarithmic
communication costs. Empirical evaluation on synthetic and
real-world datasets validates our algorithm’s superior performance in terms of regrets and communication costs.

Introduction
Contemporary recommendation systems commonly employ
ordered lists to present recommended items, which cover
applications in diverse domains like news, restaurants, and
movies recommendations, as well as search engines (Lian
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023). Recent attention has been directed towards the analysis of user interaction patterns and
feedback in such ordered lists, leading to the development
of a cascade model by Craswell et al. (2008). In this model,
users engage with a list of items sequentially, clicking on the
first satisfactory item encountered. Following a click, users
cease further examination of the list. Learning agent receives
feedback which indicates that the items before the clicked
one were examined and deemed unsatisfactory, while the
user’s preference of items after the clicked entry remains
unknown. Despite its apparent simplicity, cascade model has
demonstrated efficacy in capturing user behaviors, as highlighted by Chuklin, Markov, and Rijke (2015).
Our study focuses on an online learning variant of the
cascade model, referred to as cascading bandits (CB) (Kve* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20596

