The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VPDETR: End-to-End Vanishing Point DEtection TRansformers
Taiyan Chen, Xianghua Ying* , Jinfa Yang, Ruibin Wang, Ruohao Guo, Bowei Xing, Ji Shi
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
chenty@stu.pku.edu.cn, xhying@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022) have shown great potential in
this task. Some of the most recent state-of-the-art works suffer from some problems. NeurVPS (Zhou et al. 2019a) and
Lin et al. (Lin et al. 2022) need to sample a large number of
candidate points in the Gaussian sphere and classify whether
they are vanishing points which is slow during inference.
TLC (Tong et al. 2022) uses Transformer to classify straight
lines into four categories, requiring additional line category
annotations. Post-processing is also required to enhance performance. Although these works are capable of end-to-end
training, they still require additional post-processing steps
to produce the vanishing point as the final output. In other
words, they are not entirely end-to-end because the vanishing point is not directly predicted when an image is inputted.
DETR (Carion et al. 2020) is a highly influential work in
the field of object detection. It uses a transformer encoderdecoder architecture for end-to-end object detection. In
DETR, object queries are treated as learnable queries, allowing the model to make predictions in a parallel manner,
which improves the efficiency. It also uses a set loss function to handle the problem of object permutation, thus eliminates many hand-designed components such as NMS (NonMaximum Suppression). Some follow-up works such as Deformable DETR (Zhu et al. 2020) and DAB-DETR (Liu
et al. 2022) have been proposed to improve its convergence
and performance. There are also works on adapting DETR
for other applications (Xu et al. 2021; Misra, Girdhar, and
Joulin 2021; Prangemeier, Reich, and Koeppl 2020). Drawing inspiration from these studies, we modified DETR and
its variations to address the problem of vanishing point detection.
In this paper, we propose VPDETR, an end-to-end framework for vanishing point detection. Our modification focuses on the decoder part, utilizing anchor vanishing point
positional encoding as queries and updating point coordinates layer by layer. Our method is based on set prediction, therefore overcomes the limitations of the Manhattan
world assumption, i.e. there are three orthogonal vanishing points in each image, enabling it to predict vanishing
points for non-Manhattan world data as well. Specifically,
for Manhattan world data, we introduce cross-prediction
loss and orthogonal loss to improve the results. Moreover,
our method achieves fast inference speed of 16 FPS, outperforming state-of-the-art (SOTA) method (Zhou et al. 2019a)

In the field of vanishing point detection, previous works commonly relied on extracting and clustering straight lines or
classifying candidate points as vanishing points. This paper proposes a novel end-to-end framework, called VPDETR
(Vanishing Point DEtection TRansformer), that views vanishing point detection as a set prediction problem, applicable to both Manhattan and non-Manhattan world datasets. By
using the positional embedding of anchor points as queries
in Transformer decoders and dynamically updating them
layer by layer, our method is able to directly input images
and output their vanishing points without the need for explicit straight line extraction and candidate points sampling.
Additionally, we introduce an orthogonal loss and a crossprediction loss to improve accuracy on the Manhattan world
datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that VPDETR
achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-theart methods, without requiring post-processing.

Introduction
Vanishing points are intersection points of parallel lines in
the 3D world projected onto the 2D image under the pinhole camera model. Vanishing point detection is a fundamental problem in 3D vision. An accurate vanishing point
detection algorithm can benefit many tasks, such as camera
calibration (Cipolla, Drummond, and Robertson 1999; Antone and Teller 2000; Grammatikopoulos, Karras, and Petsa
2007), wireframe parsing (Zhou et al. 2019b; Zhou, Qi, and
Ma 2019), 3D reconstruction (Guillou et al. 2000), photo
forensics (O’brien and Farid 2012), object detection (Hoiem,
Efros, and Hebert 2008), autonomous driving (Lee et al.
2017), and visual SLAM (Davison et al. 2007; Li et al.
2019a).
As shown in Figure 1, traditional vanishing point detection methods (Kogecka and Zhang 2002; Tardif 2009) generally include three steps: line/contour detection, line clustering/classification, and vanishing point regression. In recent
years, deep learning approaches (Borji 2016; Zhai, Workman, and Jacobs 2016; Chang, Zhao, and Itti 2018; Zhang
et al. 2018; Zhai, Workman, and Jacobs 2016; Kluger et al.
2017; Zhou et al. 2019a; Liu, Zhou, and Zhao 2021; Tong
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1192

