The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generating Images of Rare Concepts Using Pre-trained Diffusion Models
Dvir Samuel1,2 * , Rami Ben-Ari2 , Simon Raviv1 , Nir Darshan2 , Gal Chechik1,3
1

Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
2
OriginAI, Tel-Aviv, Israel
3
NVIDIA Research, Tel-Aviv, Israel

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models can synthesize high quality
images, but they have various limitations. Here we highlight
a common failure mode of these models, namely, generating uncommon concepts and structured concepts like hand
palms. We show that their limitation is partly due to the longtail nature of their training data: web-crawled data sets are
strongly unbalanced, causing models to under-represent concepts from the tail of the distribution. We characterize the effect of unbalanced training data on text-to-image models and
offer a remedy. We show that rare concepts can be correctly
generated by carefully selecting suitable generation seeds in
the noise space, using a small reference set of images, a technique that we call SeedSelect. SeedSelect does not require
retraining or finetuning the diffusion model. We assess the
faithfulness, quality and diversity of SeedSelect in creating
rare objects and generating complex formations like hand images, and find it consistently achieves superior performance.
We further show the advantage of SeedSelect in semantic data
augmentation. Generating semantically appropriate images
can successfully improve performance in few-shot recognition benchmarks, for classes from the head and from the tail
of the training data of diffusion models.

1

Figure 1: Generating rare concepts. Current diffusion models fail when conditioned on phrases or classes that are in
the tail of their training distribution, like pay phone, or structurally complex classes like shaking hands. SeedSelect fixes
that using just a handful of additional references images,
without any fine-tuning.

Introduction

Diffusion models achieve unprecedented success in text-toimage generation. They map a noise vector sampled from a
high-dimensional Gaussian, conditioned on a text prompt, to
a corresponding image (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al.
2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Balaji et al. 2022). While successful, several failure modes of current models have been identified. Common failures range from omitting objects listed in
the prompt or confusing their attributes (Chefer et al. 2023;
Rassin et al. 2023), through ignoring spatial relations (Lian
et al. 2023) to generating deformed hands as illustrated in
Figure 1.
One failure mode received less attention so far: some concepts and object classes consistently fail to be drawn correctly. Figure 1 illustrates these failures for two concepts:
“pay phone” and “oxygen mask” in images generated with
StableDiffusion (Rombach et al. 2022). These failures occur

mostly with concepts that appear less frequently, but it is still
not well understood what causes these failures, and if at all
they can be corrected.
Here we study a major failure mode of text-to-image
diffusion models: generation of concepts that are underrepresented in the training data. We first quantify this effect in a public model (Stable Diffusion) trained with public
data (Schuhmann et al. 2022, Laion2B), and find that 25%
of ImageNet concepts are poorly generated (Figure 2). The
failing concepts are those that have fewer than 10K samples
in the training data of the diffusion model. This observation is somewhat puzzling. Intuitively, 10k samples should
be sufficient for learning the appearance of a concept, even
a complex one.
Why do diffusion models fail to generate images from
concepts with several thousand image samples? One possible answer raises from failures of deep models trained for
long-tail recognition (Zhang et al. 2021). There, common
concepts dominate the learned representation, washing out

* Correspondence to: Dvir Samuel <dvirsamuel@gmail.com>
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4695

