The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stronger and Transferable Node Injection Attacks
Samyak Jain and Tanima Dutta
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi
samyakjain.cse18@itbhu.ac.in, tanima.cse@itbhu.ac.in

Abstract
Despite the increasing popularity of graph neural networks
(GNNs), the security risks associated with their deployment
have not been well explored. Existing works follow the standard adversarial attacks to maximize cross-entropy loss within
an L-infinity norm bound. We analyze the robustness of GNNs
against node injection attacks (NIAs) in black-box settings
by allowing new nodes to be injected and attacked. In this
work, we propose to design stronger and transferable NIAs.
First, we propose margin aware attack (MAA) that uses a
maximum margin loss to generate NIAs. We then propose a
novel margin and direction aware attack (MDA) that diversifies the initial directions of MAA attack by minimizing the
cosine similarity of the injected nodes with respect to their
respective random initialization in addition to the maximization of max-margin loss. This makes the NIAs stronger. We
further observe that using L-infinity norm of gradients in the
attack step leads to an enhanced diversity amongst the node
features, thereby further enhancing the strength of the attack.
We incorporate transferability in NIAs by perturbing the surrogate model before generating the attack. An analysis of Eigen
Spectrum Density of the hessian of the loss emphasizes that
perturbing the weights of the surrogate model improves the
transferability. Our experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed resilient node injection attack (R-NIA) is significantly stronger and transferable than existing NIAs on graph
robustness benchmarks.

(a) PGD

(b) MAA

(c) CSM

(d) MDA

Figure 1: Visualization of loss contours for different models.
(a) Cross-Entropy loss maximization (like PGD) can move
along loss contour lines of class C3, which is suboptimal.
(b) MAA moves orthogonal to loss contours of class C2 due
to max-margin loss maximization. Maximizing max-margin
loss leads to traversal in the direction of the local smoothness
of the loss surface near the point of initialization. (c) Minimizing the cosine similarity (CSM) between attacked and
initial features of injected nodes ensures initial exploration
in C1. (d) MDA moves orthogonal to loss contour lines of
class C1 after exploring local space by using cosine similarity minimization. Thus, maximizing max-margin loss after
minimizing cosine similarity leads to a strong attack.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have gained success in performing learning and inference on graph-structured data
(Kipf and Welling 2017b; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017; Zhou et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2022) An increasing
amount of attention is being paid on node injection attacks
(NIAs) (Chen et al. 2022; Zou et al. 2021; Wang and Gong
2019; Sun et al. 2020) that aim to insert new nodes into
the graph without making changes in the existing nodes or
structure. An attacker can make new accounts in the social
networking graph and manipulate the attributes of those accounts in a way such that original nodes get fooled and suggest wrong recommendations to existing users. Similarly, in
the case of graphs on financial data where the transactions
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21179

between the customers and merchants are stored in a graph,
fooling the fraud detection system by making fake accounts
can lead to catastrophic results. Gradient-based optimization
can be done to perturb the node features and identify the
appropriate locations to inject new nodes. One of the popular
attacks, projected gradient descent (PGD) attack (Madry et al.
2018), proposes to maximize cross-entropy loss to generate
the attack. Carlini and Wagner (2017); Gowal et al. (2019)
show that max-margin loss can generate stronger attacks on
images as compared to PGD (Madry et al. 2018).
As shown in Figure 1 the white dot ball represents the
threat model in which the attack is constrained to remain.
Within the defined threat model, the attacker can fool the
model to classify class C3. Since PGD only minimizes the
probability of the true class and does not take the probability
of the true target class (class C3), as shown in Figure 1 (a), on
perturbing the node features using PGD, it can end up traversing along the loss contour lines of class C3. Thus, the loss
with respect to class C3 remains almost constant. However,
maximizing the max-margin loss leads to traversal in the
direction orthogonal to the loss contour lines (Figure 1 (b)).
Motivated by this, we propose to maximize max-margin loss
instead of cross-entropy. We term this attack as margin aware

