The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Equation as a Better Intermediate Meaning Representation for
Numerical Reasoning of Large Language Models
Dingzirui Wang1 , Longxu Dou1 , Wenbin Zhang2 , Junyu Zeng2 , Wanxiang Che1,*
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
Yunfu Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd.
{dzrwang, lxdou, car}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {zhangwenbin, zengjunyu}@yunfutech.com
2

Question
Alice has twice as much candy as Bob. David has 3 times of Bob if David takes 2. If David
takes two candies, he has 18. How much candy does alice have?

Abstract
Numerical reasoning is a vital capability for natural language
processing models to understand and process numerical information in real-world scenarios. Most current methods first
generate the Intermediate Meaning Representations (IMRs)
of questions and then generate answers. Current SOTA methods generate programs as IMRs with large language models (LLMs). Intuitively, equations have fewer restrictions and
closer semantics to the question than programs, leading to
higher generation accuracy. However, current LLMs generate
equations worse than programs, where we assume that the
equation data is rare in pre-training data compared to programs. So in this paper, we try to use equations as IMRs to
solve the numerical reasoning task by addressing two problems: (1) Theoretically, how to prove that the equation is an
IMR with higher generation accuracy than programs; (2) Empirically, how to improve the generation accuracy of equations with LLMs. For the first problem, we propose and
prove a proposition to theoretically compare the generation
accuracy of different IMRs. For the second problem, we
present a method called Boosting Numerical Reasoning by
Decomposing the Generation of Equations (B RIDGE), which
can improve the accuracy of LLMs in generating equations
as IMRs by reducing the tendency of generating constant
expressions and programs. Our method improves the performance by 2.2%, 0.9%, and 1.7% on GSM8K, SVAMP,
and Algebra datasets compared to the previous state-of-theart methods under the single reasoning path setting. Our
code and prompts are available at https://github.com/ziruiHIT/Bridge for Numerical Reasoning.

Alice has twice as much candy as Bob.
David has 3 times of Bob if David takes 2.
If David takes two candies, he has 18.

Constant Expression
ans = 2 ✕ (18 - 2 + 2) / 3

How much candy does alice have?
Program
Alice has twice as much candy as Bob.

david_candy = 18 - 2

David has 3 times of Bob if David takes 2.

bob_candy = (david_candy + 2) / 3

If David takes two candies, he has 18.

alice_candy = 2 ✕ bob_candy

How much candy does alice have?

ans = alice_candy
Equation

Alice has twice as much candy as Bob.

alice_candy = 2 ✕ bob_candy

David has 3 times of Bob if David takes 2.

david_candy + 2 = 3 ✕ bob_candy

If David takes two candies, he has 18.

david_candy + 2 = 18

How much candy does alice have?

ans = alice_candy

Figure 1: Examples of three types of IMRs. The dotted line
indicates the correspondence between the question and the
generated IMR. The more complex the correspondence is,
the more challenging it becomes to generate accurately.

most current methods first generate Intermediate Meaning
Representations (IMRs) of questions, then compute the
value results with external tools (e.g., algorithms, interpreters) (Huang et al. 2018; Wang, Zhang, and Wang 2023).
For example, the constant expression is a commonly used
IMR (Roy and Roth 2015; Koncel-Kedziorski et al. 2016).
The program is another common IMR used by the current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods (Chen et al. 2022; Gao
et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2023). Examples of these two types
of IMRs are shown in Figure 1. Current methods mainly use
large language models (LLMs) to generate IMRs because
LLMs can use few-shot inference to generate various IMRs
without training (Jin and Lu 2023; Xie et al. 2023).
In addition to the IMRs above, previous work has also
used systems of equations as IMRs (Roy, Upadhyay, and
Roth 2016; He-Yueya et al. 2023). From an intuitive view,
using equations as IMRs should be better than using programs because equations do not need to define variables before using them, leading to closer semantics to natural language questions. An intuitive example is shown in Figure 1.
However, the current method using equations as IMRs does
not have better performance than that of using programs
(He-Yueya et al. 2023). So in this paper, we try to use equa-

Introduction
Numerical reasoning is an essential ability of natural language processing (NLP) models to handle documents fulling
of numerical information, which is widely used in finance,
science, and other fields (Chen et al. 2021b, 2023; Lu et al.
2023). Generally, numerical reasoning is to generate a value
result based on the given question, which describes the values and relationships of quantities (Zhang et al. 2020).
Numerical calculations, by their inherent complexity,
make it a struggle to produce accurate value results directly (Thawani et al. 2021). To overcome this challenge,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19116

