The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAT-Based Tree Decomposition with Iterative Cascading Policy Selection
Hai Xia, Stefan Szeider
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
{hxia,sz}@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

researchers have developed new algorithmic frameworks
where SAT solvers are called multiple times, where each
call deals only with a small part of the combinatorial
instance. SAT-based Local Improvement (SLIM), a particular structure-driven form of Large Neighborhood Search
(LNS) (Pisinger and Ropke 2010), is such an algorithmic
framework where multiple local SAT calls improve a
global heuristic solution (Lodha, Ordyniak, and Szeider
2016; Fichte, Lodha, and Szeider 2017; Lodha, Ordyniak,
and Szeider 2017; Peruvemba Ramaswamy and Szeider
2021a,b; Schidler and Szeider 2021; Ramaswamy and Szeider 2022; Schidler 2022; Kulikov, Pechenev, and Slezkin
2022; Reichl, Slivovsky, and Szeider 2023).
However, the performance of algorithmic frameworks like
SLIM that rely on multiple SAT calls heavily depends on
several critical parameters: how large the selected local part
should be and how much time each individual SAT call
should have at its disposal. Moreover, since the instance
evolves and changes during the solving time, dynamic aspects must be considered, such as when to switch from one
configuration to another and in what order.
Although there is a large bulk of work on automated algorithm configuration and selection (see, e.g., Schede et
al.’s (2022) survey), there needs to be a rigorous study on
techniques to configure such a complex algorithmic framework like SLIM that involves multiple SAT calls and requires the consideration of dynamic aspects. In this paper,
we provide such a study, showcasing the widely studied
problem of finding a small-width tree decomposition of a
graph (M IN TW). We used the TW-SLIM approach for this
problem by Fichte, Lodha, and Szeider (2017), who followed the SLIM paradigm to compute small-width tree decompositions for large graphs based on repeated SAT calls.
We developed and compared a wide range of approaches
to configure TW-SLIM.
As a baseline, we develop approaches based purely on
offline learning on training data and purely on a real-time
configuration, respectively. These relatively standard approaches significantly improve performance over the handtuned default configuration of TW-SLIM.
Based on these encouraging preliminary results, we
propose the iterative cascading policy (ICP), a hybrid
approach that combines offline and real-time methods in
a new way. The iterative cascading policy uses a pool of

Solvers for propositional satisfiability (SAT) effectively
tackle hard optimization problems. However, translating to
SAT can cause a significant size increase, restricting its use
to smaller instances. To mitigate this, frameworks using multiple local SAT calls for gradually improving a heuristic solution have been proposed. The performance of such algorithmic frameworks heavily relies on critical parameters, including the size of selected local instances and the time allocated
per SAT call.
This paper examines the automated configuration of the
treewidth SAT-based local improvement method (TW-SLIM)
framework, which uses multiple SAT calls for computing tree
decompositions of small width, a fundamental problem in
combinatorial optimization. We explore various TW-SLIM
configuration methods, including offline learning and realtime adjustments, significantly outperforming default settings
in multi-SAT scenarios with changing problems.
Building upon insights gained from offline training and realtime configurations for TW-SLIM, we propose the iterative
cascading policy—a novel hybrid technique that uniquely
combines both. The iterative cascading policy employs a pool
of 30 configurations obtained through clustering-based offline methods, deploying them in dynamic cascades across
multiple rounds. In each round, the 30 configurations are
tested according to the cascading ordering, and the best tree
decomposition is retained for further improvement, with the
option to adjust the following ordering of cascades. This iterative approach significantly enhances the performance of TWSLIM beyond baseline results, even within varying global
timeouts. This highlights the effectiveness of the proposed
iterative cascading policy in enhancing the efficiency and efficacy of complex algorithmic frameworks like TW-SLIM.

Introduction
Over the last two decades, SAT-solver technology has made
tremendous progress; SAT instances with up to over a
million variables and clauses can be solved routinely (Fichte
et al. 2023). However, for many combinatorial optimization
problems, the encoding to SAT entails a significant blow-up
in size (cubic or worse), significantly limiting the feasible
instance size of the combinatorial problem. To make SAT
still applicable to large combinatorial problem instances,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8191

