The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Safe Abductive Learning in the Presence of Inaccurate Rules
Xiao-Wen Yang1 , Jie-Jing Shao1 , Wei-Wei Tu2 , Yu-Feng Li1 * , Wang-Zhou Dai1 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
2
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
{yangxw, shaojj, liyf, daiwz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tuww.cn@gmail.com

Abstract
Integrating complementary strengths of raw data and logical
rules to improve the learning generalization has been recently
shown promising and effective, e.g., abductive learning is one
generic framework that can learn the perception model from
data and reason between rules simultaneously. However, the
performance would be seriously decreased when inaccurate
logical rules appear, which may be even worse than baselines using only raw data. Efforts on this issue are highly desired while remain to be limited. This paper proposes a simple
and effective safe abductive learning method to alleviate the
harm caused by inaccurate rules. Unlike the existing methods which directly use all rules without correctness checks,
it utilizes them selectively by constructing a graphical model
with an adaptive reasoning process to prevent performance
hazards. Theoretically, we show that induction and abduction
are mutually beneficial, and can be rigorously justified from
a classical maximum likelihood estimation perspective. Experiments on diverse tasks show that our method can tolerate
at least twice as many inaccurate rules as accurate ones and
achieve highly competitive performance while other methods
can’t. Moreover, the proposal can refine inaccurate rules and
works well in extended weakly supervised scenarios.

Figure 1: An example of the complementary integration of
perception and reasoning for the Tic-Tac-Toe task. The input
is a snapshot of an endgame, and the goal is to judge whether
”x” wins. Experts provide rules of victory (i.e., when ”x” has
one of 8 possible ways to create a ”three-in-a-row”).

(Zhou 2019) is one recent generic and effective framework
that bridges any kind of machine learning algorithms and
logical reasoning by using inconsistency minimization to
construct pseudo-labels of the intermediate symbolic concepts. The coordination of these two modules makes use
of the powerful perception ability of learning models and
the logical reasoning ability of the knowledge base at the
same time, thus enhancing the interpretability and generalization of machine learning models. The description of
these ideas using intermediate symbolic concepts as bridges
is briefly shown in Figure 1. The performance has been reported that it achieves highly competitive performance to the
pure learning models. Algorithms include ABLSim(Huang
et al. 2021b), SS-ABL (Huang et al. 2020) and ABL-KG
(Huang et al. 2023), etc.
The positive results mentioned above, however, rely on
the fundamental assumption that the logical rules are consistently accurate. Such an assumption is difficult to hold in
many practical applications because the experts may make
mistakes or machine-generated rules may be inaccurate. For
example, in the text sentiment analysis task, sentiment lexicons are often built automatically (Lu et al. 2011) which
would unavoidably contain inaccurate information. In addition, many works (Chen, Jia, and Xiang 2020; Sadeghian
et al. 2019) use deep learning techniques to mine rules from
large knowledge graphs, and the uncertainty of neural net-

Introduction
Recently, in order to offer a better understanding of the
learning systems and improve the learning generalization,
complementary integration of raw data and symbolic rules
in a favorable way, has become an active branch and shown
to be promising (Raedt et al. 2020; Besold et al. 2021) .
Neural-symbolic learning (NeSy) (Garcez et al. 2019;
Sarker et al. 2021; Cunnington et al. 2022) focusing on integrating logical reasoning into the neural networks, has been
studied for decades. Deep neural networks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) serve as low-level perception models to translate raw inputs into symbolic concepts of practical meaning, while the knowledge base constrains both the
intermediate symbolic concepts and the final target using
logical rules. Algorithms include DeepProblog (Manhaeve
et al. 2018), NeurASP (Yang, Ishay, and Lee 2020), and LTN
(Badreddine et al. 2022), etc. Abductive learning (ABL)
* Yu-Feng Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16361

