The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MEPSI: An MDL-Based Ensemble Pruning Approach
with Structural Information
Xiao-Dong Bi1,2 , Shao-Qun Zhang1,3 * , Yuan Jiang1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
School of Intelligent Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou 215163, China
{bixd, zhangsq, jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Abstract

several groups and combines the representative prototype
learners in each group to make predictions (Giacinto, Roli,
and Fumera 2000; Lazarevic and Obradovic 2001). The
optimization-based method converts ensemble pruning tasks
into optimization problems, which can be solved by some
mature approaches, such as the relaxation techniques and
evolutionary algorithms (Wu et al. 2022; Zhou and Tang
2003; Zhou, Wu, and Tang 2002).
Previous studies often used empirical errors as the optimization objectives or the criteria for order, and all of
them only paid attention to the external behavior of learners
on the samples, which may lead to over-fitting. Intuitively,
the learner with both a lower empirical error and a simpler
structure tends to achieve better generalization performance.
Thus, we conjecture that the generalization performance of
an ensemble is not only related to its external behavior on
samples but also dependent on the internal structure of individual learners. In ensemble pruning, one can quantify the
structural information among individual learners to upper
bound the complexity of the combined learner. Nevertheless,
quantifying structural information is one of the three great
challenges for half-century-old computer science, summarized in the 50th year of Journal of the ACM by Brooks Jr
(2003). For decades, it still remains open about how to measure structural information. Thus, we bridge the learner’s
structure and generalization performance.
In this paper, we investigate the structural information
among individual learners by exploiting the Kolmogorov
complexity and the MDL principle. We propose the MDLbased Ensemble Pruning approach with Structural Information, equally MEPSI approach in short. MEPSI converts
the ensemble pruning task to the two-objective optimization
problem that minimizes the weighted sum of empirical errors and structural information of individual learners, which
is measured by the algorithmic mutual information. Thus,
MEPSI induces a general learning approach for ensemble
pruning by building the bridge between the learner’s structure and generalization. Besides, we provide a concrete implementation for MEPSI on decision trees, in which we implement the structural information term by the edit distance
of decision trees.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.

Ensemble pruning that combines a subset of individual learners generated in parallel to make predictions is an important
topic in ensemble learning. Past decades have developed a lot
of pruning algorithms that focus on the external behavior of
learners on samples, which may lead to over-fitting. In this
paper, we conjecture that the generalization performance of
an ensemble is not only related to its external behavior on
samples but also dependent on the internal structure of individual learners. We propose the general MEPSI approach
based on Kolmogorov complexity and the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle, which formulates the ensemble pruning task as the two-objective optimization problem
that comprises the empirical error and structural information among individual learners. We also provide a concrete
implementation of MEPSI on decision trees. The theoretical results provide generalization bounds for both the general
MEPSI approach and tree-based implementation. The comparative experiments conducted on multiple real-world data
sets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Ensemble learning is a powerful learning paradigm that
trains and combines multiple learners to solve a single learning problem (Dietterich 2000; Zhou 2012), and has already
achieved state-of-the-art results in real-world tasks, such
as gradient boosting (Chen and Guestrin 2016; Dorogush,
Ershov, and Gulin 2018; Friedman 2001), voting (Zhou
2012), and stacking (Breiman 1996; Wolpert 1992). Ensemble pruning is a key topic in ensemble learning, which selects a subset of individual learners generated in parallel
to make predictions. It is observed that ensemble pruning
not only reduces storage and computation costs but also
achieves better performance than an ensemble of all individual learners. Conventional ensemble pruning methods can
be roughly categorized into three classes: the order-based
method, the clustering-based method, and the optimizationbased method. The order-based method generates a priority for each learner according to a certain criterion and only
selects learners with a high priority (Martı́nez-Muñoz and
Suárez 2006). The clustering-based method employs clustering techniques to partition the individual learners into
* Shao-Qun Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a general ensemble pruning approach
MEPSI based on the theory of Kolmogorov complex-

11078

