The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bilateral Gradual Semantics for Weighted Argumentation
Zongshun Wang, Yuping Shen
Institute of Logic and Cognition,
Department of Philosophy,
Sun Yat-sen University, P.R. China
wangzsh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, shyping@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

the notion of acceptability degree to describe argument
strength. It generally assigns each argument a numerical
value as its acceptability degree that satisfies a set of desirable properties.
In this paper, we aim to enhance gradual semantics by
non-reciprocally incorporating the notion of rejectability degree. Such a setting offers a bilateral perspective on argument strength, in which positive and negative strength
are described separately and non-interchangeably. Bilateral
evaluative processes that are non-reciprocal extensively exist in societal phenomena. Evidence in Cognitive Science
suggests that in such situations, strength of positivity and
negativity should be conceptualized and measured separately (Cacioppo and Berntson 1994; Cacioppo, Gardner, and
Berntson 1997).
In the literature, gradual semantics assigns each argument
an acceptability degree by aggregating a basic weight together with the acceptability degrees of its attackers. Our
bilateral gradual semantics non-reciprocally introduces rejectability degree in the sense that on the one hand it additionally influences the acceptability degree of an argument,
on the other hand it is solely determined by the acceptability
degree of attackers. This is illustrated in Table 1.

Abstract argumentation is a reasoning model for evaluating
arguments. Recently, gradual semantics has received considerable attention in weighted argumentation, which assigns
an acceptability degree to each argument as its strength. In
this paper, we aim to enhance gradual semantics by nonreciprocally incorporating the notion of rejectability degree.
Such a setting offers a bilateral perspective on argument
strength, enabling more comprehensive argument evaluations
in practical situations. To this end, we first provide a set of
principles for our semantics, taking both the acceptability and
rejectability degrees into account, and propose three novel semantics conforming to the above principles. These semantics
are defined as the limits of iterative sequences that always
converge in any given weighted argumentation system, making them preferable for real-world applications.

Introduction
Abstract argumentation framework (AF) is a well-studied
model for reasoning and decision-making in conflict situations (Dung 1995; Amgoud and Prade 2009; Bench-Capon
and Dunne 2007). An AF is a directed graph whose nodes
represent arguments and arrows represent attacks between
arguments. Evaluating arguments is a central topic in abstract argumentation and commonly achieved through various semantics. For instance, the original extension semantics
(Dung 1995) looks for sets of arguments that are jointly acceptable, and the justification status of arguments is classified as sceptically/credulously accepted and rejected (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011). Similarly, the labelling
semantics (Caminada and Gabbay 2009) assigns each argument a label from {accepted, rejected, undecided}. However, such qualitative settings may not always be sufficient
in practical applications (Leite and Martins 2011; Polberg
and Hunter 2018; Amgoud, Doder, and Vesic 2022), as an
argument may have quantitative properties.
In recent years, the gradual semantics has emerged as
a prominent approach for evaluating arguments (Amgoud
et al. 2017; Amgoud and Doder 2018; Amgoud and David
2021; Amgoud, Doder, and Vesic 2022; Baroni, Rago, and
Toni 2018; Oren et al. 2022; Prakken 2021). This method
provides a fine-grained evaluation scheme which introduces

Degree

Source of Stength

acceptability

• basic weight
• acceptability degree of attackers
• rejectability degree of attackers

rejectability

• acceptability degree of attackers

Table 1: Non-reciprocity of Bilateral Gradual Semantics
Simply speaking, we also assume acceptability degree
and rejectablility degree are generally antagonistic, but not
simply polar opposites. To see why non-reciprocal effects in
evaluating arguments do exist, one may imagine scenarios
in which safer arguments (i.e., with minor criticisms/lower
rejectability degree) are preferred, even if other arguments
have higher acceptability degree. For instance, a policy may
be abandoned after polling if a threshold for the number of
people who are against this policy is reached.
Consider the following policy polling example:

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10732

