The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causal Discovery from Poisson Branching Structural Causal Model Using
High-Order Cumulant with Path Analysis
1

1

1

Jie Qiao * , Yu Xiang * , Zhengming Chen , Ruichu Cai

1,2†

, Zhifeng Hao

3

1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
{qiaojie.chn, thexiang2000, chenzhengming1103, cairuichu}@gmail.com, haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn
Abstract
Count data naturally arise in many fields, such as finance, neuroscience, and epidemiology, and discovering causal structure
among count data is a crucial task in various scientific and
industrial scenarios. One of the most common characteristics
of count data is the inherent branching structure described by
a binomial thinning operator and an independent Poisson distribution that captures both branching and noise. For instance,
in a population count scenario, mortality and immigration
contribute to the count, where survival follows a Bernoulli
distribution, and immigration follows a Poisson distribution.
However, causal discovery from such data is challenging due
to the non-identifiability issue: a single causal pair is Markov
equivalent, i.e., X → Y and Y → X are distributed equivalent. Fortunately, in this work, we found that the causal order
from X to its child Y is identifiable if X is a root vertex
and has at least two directed paths to Y , or the ancestor of
X with the most directed path to X has a directed path to Y
without passing X. Specifically, we propose a Poisson Branching Structure Causal Model (PB-SCM) and perform a path
analysis on PB-SCM using high-order cumulants. Theoretical
results establish the connection between the path and cumulant and demonstrate that the path information can be obtained
from the cumulant. With the path information, causal order is
identifiable under some graphical conditions. A practical algorithm for learning causal structure under PB-SCM is proposed
and the experiments demonstrate and verify the effectiveness
of the proposed method.

(a) Branching Structure

(b) Causal Graph

Figure 1: Illustration of branching structure causal modeling.

Introduction
Causal discovery from observational data especially for count
data is a crucial task that arises in numerous applications in
biology (Wiuf and Stumpf 2006), economic (Weiß and Kim
2014), network operation maintenance (Qiao et al. 2023; Cai
et al. 2022), etc. In online services, for instance, the reason
for the number of product purchases is of particular interest,
while finding the underlying causal structure among user
behavior from purely observational data is appealing and
pivotal for online operation.
Much effort has been made to address the identification of
causal structure from observational data (Spirtes, Glymour,
*

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

20524

and Scheines 2000; Zhang et al. 2018; Glymour, Zhang, and
Spirtes 2019; Cai et al. 2018). In particular, constraint-based
methods (Pearl 2009; Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 1995),
score-based methods (Chickering 2002; Tsamardinos, Brown,
and Aliferis 2006) identify the causal structure by exploring
the conditional independence relation among variables, but
these methods only focus on the category domain and can
only identify up to the Markov equivalent class (Pearl 2009).
Thus, proper count data modeling is required to further identify the causal structure beyond the equivalence class. Recent work by (Park and Raskutti 2015) introduces a Poisson
Bayesian network to model the count data and shows that it
is identifiable using the overdispersion properties of Poisson
BNs. Subsequently, it has been extended by accommodating
a broader spectrum of distributions (Park and Raskutti 2017).
In addition, the modeling of the zero-inflated Poisson data
(Choi, Chapkin, and Ni 2020) and the ordinal relation data
(Ni and Mallick 2022) and its identifiability of causal structure are investigated. However, the majority of these methods
model the count data using Bayesian network ignoring the
inherent branching structure among the counting relationship
which is frequently encountered (Weiß 2018).
Take Figure 1 as an example, the cause of the purchasing
event can be inherited from some of the searching events,
the pop-up ads event, or exogenously occurs. As a result,
the causal relationship among counts constitutes a branching structure that can be modeled by a binomial thinning
operator ‘◦’ (Steutel and van Harn 1979) with an additive
independent Poisson distribution for innovation. That is, the
purchasing count (Y ) is affected by the pop-up ads count
(X2 ) and the searching count (X1 ) which can be modeled by
X
(a)
Y = a1 ◦ X1 + a2 ◦ X2 + ϵ where a ◦ X ≔ ∑n=1 ξn , and

