The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding Likelihood of Normalizing Flow and Image Complexity
through the Lens of Out-of-Distribution Detection
Genki Osada1 , Tsubasa Takahashi1 , Takashi Nishide2
1

LINE Corporation*
University of Tsukuba
{genki.osada, tsubasa.takahashi}@lycorp.co.jp, nishide@risk.tsukuba.ac.jp
2

Abstract

to train detection models, and the performance of OOD
detection is independent of the number of classification
classes (Huang and Li 2021). However, most of the recent
progress in this field has been based on another prevailing approach, the classifier-based method (Yang et al. 2022,
2021). The primary factor hindering the progress of DGMbased methods may be the observation presented by (Nalisnick et al. 2019; Choi, Jang, and Alemi 2018): DGMs were
expected to assign a higher likelihood, i.e., probabilistic density, to In-Dist inputs than to OOD inputs, but it turned out
that this is not the case in some particular cases. We refer to this phenomenon as the failure of likelihood. When
an OOD detection method is deployed to real-world applications with no control over its inputs, this unreliability is
unacceptable. Above all, correctly estimating the likelihood
is a fundamental feature that DGMs are expected to fulfill.
Hence, research on DGM-based methods has focused on addressing this issue before enhancing detection performance
and tackling more challenging tasks.
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain this
phenomenon. One argues that image complexity has some
influence on the likelihood (Nalisnick et al. 2019; Serrà et al.
2020), while another suggests the need to account for the
notion of the typical set (Choi, Jang, and Alemi 2018; Nalisnick et al. 2020). However, these methods still fail in specific
cases, as we will show later, and the mechanism behind the
failure of likelihood remains unclear.
In this paper, we address the cause of the failure of likelihood. We focus on Normalizing Flows due to their analytical
tractability. The contributions of this work are as follows:

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial to safetycritical machine learning applications and has been extensively studied. While recent studies have predominantly focused on classifier-based methods, research on deep generative model (DGM)-based methods have lagged relatively.
This disparity may be attributed to a perplexing phenomenon:
DGMs often assign higher likelihoods to unknown OOD inputs than to their known training data. This paper focuses on
explaining the underlying mechanism of this phenomenon.
We propose a hypothesis that less complex images concentrate in high-density regions in the latent space, resulting in a
higher likelihood assignment in the Normalizing Flow (NF).
We experimentally demonstrate its validity for five NF architectures, concluding that their likelihood is untrustworthy.
Additionally, we show that this problem can be alleviated
by treating image complexity as an independent variable. Finally, we provide evidence of the potential applicability of
our hypothesis in another DGM, PixelCNN++.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network (DNN) models deployed in real-world
systems often encounter out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs
— samples from a different distribution of the training set.
DNN models often make incorrect predictions with high
confidence for OOD inputs (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune
2015), making it crucial to distinguish OOD inputs from indistribution (In-Dist) ones at test time, especially for safetycritical applications such as autonomous driving (Du et al.
2022) and medical diagnosis (Linmans, van der Laak, and
Litjens 2020). Numerous methods have been proposed to
improve empirical performance (Yang et al. 2022, 2021),
and analytical approaches have also been studied (Morteza
and Li 2022; Liu et al. 2020).
One major approach to OOD detection is using deep generative models (DGMs). Particularly, Normalizing Flows
(NFs) and Autoregressive (AR) models are the two most
commonly selected DGMs due to their ability to compute
exact model likelihoods. The DGM-based approach is attractive for its strengths: it does not require labeled data

• We present a hypothesis that explains how image complexity can arbitrarily control the likelihood of NFs
and how the density concentration in latent distribution
causes this phenomenon.
• Our hypothesis provides a unified explanation for two
separate questions: why images with less complexity are
assigned high likelihood and why OOD inputs are regarded as the typical set samples in some cases.
• We experimentally verify our argument with five different NF architectures and conclude that OOD detections
based on the likelihood of NFs are untrustworthy.

* The company name was changed to LY Corporation after submission.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The relationship between the likelihood and image complexity that we explain in this paper finds implicit support

21492

