The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AVSegFormer: Audio-Visual Segmentation with Transformer
Shengyi Gao1 , Zhe Chen1 , Guo Chen1 , Wenhai Wang2 , Tong Lu1 *
1

State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
lutong@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) aims to locate and segment
the sounding objects in a given video, which demands audiodriven pixel-level scene understanding. The existing methods
cannot fully process the fine-grained correlations between audio and visual cues across various situations dynamically.
They also face challenges in adapting to complex scenarios,
such as evolving audio, the coexistence of multiple objects,
and more. In this paper, we propose AVSegFormer, a novel
framework for AVS that leverages the transformer architecture. Specifically, It comprises a dense audio-visual mixer,
which can dynamically adjust interested visual features, and a
sparse audio-visual decoder, which implicitly separates audio
sources and automatically matches optimal visual features.
Combining both components provides a more robust bidirectional conditional multi-modal representation, improving the
segmentation performance in different scenarios. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that AVSegFormer achieves stateof-the-art results on the AVS benchmark. The code is available at https://github.com/vvvb-github/AVSegFormer.

guitar
(a) Single Sound Source Segmentation (S4)

guitar

sing
(b) Multiple Sound Source Segmentation (MS3)

guitar

sing
(c) Audio-Visual Semantic Segmentation (AVSS)

Figure 1: Illustration of audio-visual segmentation (AVS).
AVS aims to segment sounding objects from video frames
according to the given audio. In the S4 sub-task, the input
audio only contains one sound source, while in MS3 the input audio has multiple sound sources. Besides, S4 and MS3
only require binary segmentation, whereas AVSS requires
more difficult multiple-category semantic segmentation.

Introduction
Just as humans effortlessly establish meaningful connections between audio and visual signals, capturing the rich
information they convey, the intertwined modalities of audio and vision play pivotal roles in observing and comprehending the real world. Based on this insight, a wide range
of audio-visual understanding tasks, such as audio-visual
correspondence (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017, 2018),
audio-visual event localization (Lin, Li, and Wang 2019; Lin
and Wang 2020), audio-visual video parsing (Tian, Li, and
Xu 2020; Wu and Yang 2021), and sound source localization (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017, 2018) have been
proposed and actively explored in recent research.
Unlike these coarse-grained tasks, audio-visual segmentation (AVS) (Zhou et al. 2023) proposes more fine-grained
perceptive goals, aiming to locate the audible frames and
delineate the shape of the sounding objects (Zhou et al.
2022, 2023). To be more specific, this task involves three
sub-tasks: single sound source segmentation (S4), multiple
sound source segmentation (MS3), and audio-visual semantic segmentation (AVSS). Figure 1 illustrates the objectives

of the three sub-tasks. Their fine-grained perceptual goal demands the model to possess the capability to discern the intricate relationship between each image pixel and audio information. However, the existing methods (Chen et al. 2021;
Qian et al. 2020; Mahadevan et al. 2020) developed for other
audio-visual tasks face challenges when directly applied in
this context.
AVSBench (Zhou et al. 2023) first proposes the finegrained perceptive method for AVS tasks that achieves
state-of-the-art audio-visual segmentation performance. Figure 2(a) illustrates its network architecture, which incorporates a modality fusion module before Semantic FPN (Kirillov et al. 2019) to enable audio-visual segmentation. This
method is simple and effective yet falls short of fully mining the fine-grained correlations between audio and visual
cues across various situations. First, a series of targets sound
simultaneously in scenes of multiple sound sources. The
mixed audio signal with higher information density is difficult to attend to the visual signal adaptively. Second, the
simple-fusion model may make it difficult to extract au-

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12155

