The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Model Counting and Sampling via Semiring Extensions
Andreas Goral, Joachim Giesen, Mark Blacher, Christoph Staudt, Julien Klaus
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
{andreas.goral,joachim.giesen,mark.blacher,christoph.staudt,julien.klaus}@uni-jena.de

where x|J is the projection of px1 , . . . , xn q onto its elements
indexed by J Ă rns “ t1, . . . , nu. The marginal of p on the
index set I is given by the following sum over a product of
functions,

Abstract
Many decision and optimization problems have natural extensions as counting problems. The best known example is the
Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT), where we want to count
the satisfying assignments of truth values to the variables,
which is known as the #SAT problem. Likewise, for discrete optimization problems, we want to count the states on
which the objective function attains the optimal value. Both
SAT and discrete optimization can be formulated as selective
marginalize a product function (MPF) queries. Here, we show
how general selective MPF queries can be extended for model
counting. MPF queries are encoded as tensor hypernetworks
over suitable semirings that can be solved by generic tensor
hypernetwork contraction algorithms. Our model counting
extension is again an MPF query, on an extended semiring,
that can be solved by the same contraction algorithms. Model
counting is required for uniform model sampling. We show
how the counting extension can be further extended for model
sampling by constructing yet another semiring. We have implemented the model counting and sampling extensions. Experiments show that our generic approach is competitive with
the state of the art in model counting and model sampling.

pI px|I q “

max
x

j“1

x1 :x1|I “x|I j“1

` ˘
qj x1|J .

m
ź
j“1

qj px|J q,

which, as it turns out, is also an MPF query, when we replace additions by maximizations. In the MPF abstraction,
computations are on semirings pS, ‘, bq, which generalize
the standard sum-product semiring pR, `, ¨q. Here, the standard sum-product semiring is used for computing marginals,
and
query is using the Viterbi semiring
` the maximization
˘
r0, 1s, max, ¨ .
There are, however, problems that can not be directly
solved by MPF queries. For instance, the maximization
query for Markov random fields is often not the query we are
most interested in. Instead of the maximum value we typically want to get a model, that is, an element x from the sample space that maximizes the function. Therefore, we want
to answer the query

The marginalize a product function (MPF) framework was
formally introduced by Aji and McEliece (2000) who had
observed that surprisingly many applications in signal processing (Kalman 1960; Viterbi 1967; Kschischang and Frey
1998; Aji 2000), probabilistic and causal inference (Baum
1972; Pearl 1993), and natural language processing (Sutton
and McCallum 2012) fall within the same algorithmic message passing framework. The MPF framework is also known
as algebraic model counting (Kimmig, Van den Broeck, and
De Raedt 2017).
The prototypical MPF query is computing marginals of
discrete Markov random fields. A Markov random field is a
multivariate probability distribution p on a discrete sample
space that factors as
m
ź

m
ź

A different, but closely related type of inference query asks
for the probability of a most likely element in the sample
space, that is,

Introduction

ppx1 , . . . , xn q “

ÿ

argmaxx

m
ź
j“1

qj px|J q,

which is not an MPF query. For solving this query, the algorithms for answering MPF queries need to be adapted. The
adaptions exploit the fact that the max-operation is selective,
that is, it always returns one of its arguments.
Here, we show that adapting the algorithms can be
avoided. We present a general framework for lifting MPF
queries over selective semirings into MPF queries for model
counting and model sampling. The framework is sketched
in Figure 1. It builds on a construction scheme for semiring
extensions that combines a selective semiring on which we
want to serve an MPF query with a second semiring that

qj px|J q,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20395

