The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discriminative Forests Improve Generative Diversity for Generative Adversarial
Networks
Junjie Chen1* , Jiahao Li1 , Chen Song2 , Bin Li2 , Qingcai Chen1 , Hongchang Gao2 ,
Wendy Hui Wang3 , Zenglin Xu1 , Xinghua Shi2*
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China;
2
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA;
3
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA.
junjiechen@hit.edu.cn, lijiahao@stu.hit.edu.cn, {chen.song,bin.li}@temple.edu, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn,
hongchang.gao@temple.edu, hui.wang@stevens.edu, xuzenglin@hit.edu.cn, mindyshi@temple.edu
Abstract

Many remarkable variations of GANs (Gui et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2023) have been proposed to generate more realistic
samples. Several recent works investigated the generalization of GANs under multiple adversaries settings. GMAN
(Durugkar et al. 2017) is the first endeavor to extend GANs
to multiple discriminators. Dropout-GAN (Mordido et al.
2018) integrates adversarial feedback dropout in GMAN,
forcing the generator to appease and learn from a dynamic
ensemble of discriminators. D2GAN (Nguyen et al. 2017)
theoretically analyzed that two discriminators can effectively avoid the mode collapsing problem. PAR-GAN (Chen
et al. 2021) extended D2GAN by using disjoint partitions
of input data for multiple discriminators. MCL-GAN (Choi
and Han 2022) employs a Multiple Choice Learning (MCL)
framework to learn multiple discriminators and update the
generator via a set of expert discriminators. Generally speaking, a GAN with multiple discriminators studies the ensemble strategies of discriminators, including the sampling of
training data and the aggregation of multiple discriminators. However, for ensemble learning, Random Forest (RF)
(Breiman 2001) has been theoretically and practically shown
to be robust with a generalization error bound by aggregating a number of randomly built decision trees. Inspired by
the RF, we wonder if we construct a set of discriminators
as a discriminative forest instead of the one to compete with
the generator, could this discriminative forest provide high
capacity and robustness to improve the generative diversity?

Improving the diversity of Artificial Intelligence Generated
Content (AIGC) is one of the fundamental problems in the
theory of generative models such as generative adversarial
networks (GANs). Previous studies have demonstrated that
the discriminator in GANs should have high capacity and robustness to achieve the diversity of generated data. However,
a discriminator with high capacity tends to overfit and guide
the generator toward collapsed equilibrium. In this study, we
propose a novel discriminative forest GAN, named ForestGAN, that replaces the discriminator to improve the capacity and robustness for modeling statistics in real-world data
distribution. A discriminative forest is composed of multiple
independent discriminators built on bootstrapped data. We
prove that a discriminative forest has a generalization error
bound, which is determined by the strength of individual discriminators and the correlations among them. Hence, a discriminative forest can provide very large capacity without any
risk of overfitting, which subsequently improves the generative diversity. With the discriminative forest framework, we
significantly improved the performance of AutoGAN with a
new record FID of 19.27 from 30.71 on STL10 and improved
the performance of StyleGAN2-ADA with a new record FID
of 6.87 from 9.22 on LSUN-cat.

Introduction
Generating high diversity samples in Artificial Intelligence
Generated Content (AIGC) (Cao et al. 2023; Zhong et al.
2023) inherently requires being able to capture and model
complex statistics in real-world data distribution. Generative
adversarial networks (GANs) have been widely investigated
in the field of AIGC research. In GANs, only the discriminator touches real data, and thus its capacity and robustness
have a critical effect on generative diversity. Previous studies (Arora, Risteski, and Zhang 2018) showed that the number of modes in the generator’s distribution grows linearly
with the capacity of the discriminator. However, a discriminator with high capacity tends to overfit and guide the generator toward collapsed equilibrium (Thanh-Tung, Tran, and
Venkatesh 2019). Thus, improving the capacity while keeping robustness of the discriminator is the primary obstacle to
ensure that the generator produces data with high diversity.

Therefore, in this study, we propose a discriminative forest GAN (Forest-GAN) that consists of a number of discriminators built upon bootstrapping datasets (Figure 1). The predictive results of multiple discriminators are aggregated by
an aggregation function. Our contributions are in both theoretical results and the experimental improvement of stateof-the-art on real-world image generation. For the theoretical contributions: (1) We found the global optimality of
Forest-GAN approximates to a mixture distribution of bootstrapping datasets. This result indicates that the generator in
Forest-GAN has a natural character to defend against overfitting of the original data. (2) We proved the discriminative
forest is robust with an upper bound of generalization determined by the strength of individual discriminators as well
as the correlation between them. Such a proof provides the
foundation of understanding the relationship between dis-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11338

