The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards the Robustness of Differentially Private Federated Learning
Tao Qi1 * , Huili Wang1 , Yongfeng Huang1, 2
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100094, China
taoqi.qt@gmail.com, whl21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yfhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

model training converges. Unfortunately, the learning process of FL systems is exposed to an open environment, and
faces serious risks in privacy protection and model robustness (Lyu et al. 2022; Fang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021).
In fact, federated learning cannot guarantee the security
of user privacy (Geiping et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019).
Many existing works demonstrate that although the privacysensitive training data are locally kept by clients, the corresponding user private information can be still recovered
from the exchanged local gradients (Zhu, Liu, and Han
2019; Sun et al. 2021). Thus, it is potential for an adversary
to filch user privacy from their shared local gradients, which
seriously damages the trustworthiness of the FL systems.
Differential privacy is a representative privacy protection
technique, which is widely used in many real-world privacysensitive applications (Kenny et al. 2021). Its core idea is to
perturb the exposed data that are relevant to the user privacy
via random noise. Therefore, many existing works utilize the
differential privacy technique to secure data privacy in federated learning (Wei et al. 2020; Girgis et al. 2021; Geyer,
Klein, and Nabi 2017; Truex et al. 2020; Sun, Qian, and
Chen 2021). For example, Truex et al. (2020) perturb the local model gradients via Gaussian noise before sharing them
with the server. Generally speaking, these differentially private federated learning frameworks (DP-FL) can effectively
address the privacy concerns on federated learning.
Besides data privacy, the model robustness of federated learning is also threatened by underlying attacks (Shejwalkar and Houmansadr 2021; Baruch, Baruch, and Goldberg 2019). Since the local model training is invisible for the
central server, an adversary can easily poison the local gradients (e.g. injecting backdoors) before sending them to the
server. The global model is further poisoned due to its integration with the uploaded poisoned gradients. Intuitively,
identifying the poisoned gradients before the model aggregation can defend against such attacks. Therefore, most existing robust FL methods follow a similar assumption that
poisoned gradients are usually outliers in the gradient distribution (Awan, Luo, and Li 2021; Yin et al. 2018). Furthermore, these methods only aggregate the local gradients
which are in the center of the gradient distribution to avoid
the integration of poisoned gradients. For example, Yin et al.
(2018) proposed to update the global model based on the
element-wise median of local gradients. However, most of

Robustness and privacy protection are two important factors
of trustworthy federated learning (FL). Existing FL works
usually secure data privacy by perturbing local model gradients via the differential privacy (DP) technique, or defend
against poisoning attacks by filtering the local gradients in the
outlier of the gradient distribution before aggregation. However, these two issues are often addressed independently in
existing works, and how to secure federated learning in both
privacy and robustness still needs further exploration. In this
paper, we unveil that although DP noisy perturbation can improve the learning robustness, DP-FL frameworks are not inherently robust and are vulnerable to a carefully-designed attack method. Furthermore, we reveal that it is challenging for
existing robust FL methods to defend against attacks on DPFL. This can be attributed to the fact that the local gradients
of DP-FL are perturbed by random noise, and the selected
central gradients inevitably incorporate a higher proportion
of poisoned gradients compared to conventional FL. To address this problem, we further propose a new defense method
for DP-FL (named Robust-DPFL), which can effectively distinguish poisoned and clean local gradients in DP-FL and robustly update the global model. Experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that baseline methods cannot ensure task accuracy, data privacy, and robustness simultaneously, while Robust-DPFL can effectively enhance the privacy protection and robustness of federated learning meanwhile maintain the task performance.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a widely used privacy-preserving
machine learning paradigm that can train model parameters
without accessing raw data (Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020).
Existing FL methods are typically based on a decentralized learning framework, where local clients keep their own
privacy-sensitive training data and a central several keeps
a machine learning model that needs to be trained (McMahan et al. 2017; Lalitha et al. 2018). The clients first employ
their local data to train the model parameters, and the global
model is further updated by collecting and aggregating local
gradients. Then this process is iteratively executed until the
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19911

