The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Job Recommendation through
LLM-Based Generative Adversarial Networks
Yingpeng Du1,4 * † , Di Luo2 * , Rui Yan2 , Xiaopei Wang3† , Hongzhi Liu4† ,
Hengshu Zhu5 , Yang Song6† , Jie Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
School of Languages and Communication Studies, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
4
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Career Science Lab, BOSS Zhipin, Beijing, China
6
NLP Center, BOSS Zhipin, Beijing, China
dyp1993@pku.edu.cn,di luo@ruc.edu.cn,ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn,wangxp@bjtu.edu.cn,liuhz@pku.edu.cn,
zhuhengshu@kanzhun.com,songyang@kanzhun.com,zhangj@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

2022) have achieved considerable success in recent years,
they still face significant challenges, such as the low quality
of user resumes and interference from the few-shot problem (Gope and Jain 2017), hindering their practical accuracy and efficiency. For example, some users may not invest
sufficient effort in crafting their resumes or lack comprehensive self-awareness, resulting in incomplete and low-quality
descriptions of their skills and job preferences. Inspired by
the recent remarkable capabilities and rapid development of
large language models (LLMs), it is intuitive to utilize their
extensive knowledge, powerful text comprehension, and reasoning abilities to improve and rectify low-quality resumes.
However, simply leveraging LLMs (Touvron et al. 2023;
Brown et al. 2020) to enhance user resumes is not a onesize-fits-all solution for job recommendation. Due to the
widespread fabrications and hallucinations within LLMs
(Zhang et al. 2023), it is difficult to generate high-quality resumes without users’ reliable interactive information. Fig.1
(A) illustrates the resume generation process for a user using simple completion with a well-known LLM, ChatGPT.
It underscores that the generated results often contain excessive unrelated and fabricated information, rendering them
unsuitable for recommendation. To alleviate this fabricated
generation, we propose exploring users’ interactive behaviors with recommender systems to mine their relevance to
users’ abilities and preferences, thereby assisting the LLMs
in better profiling users for resume completion. Specifically,
users generally possess particular job skills, residential addresses, and educational backgrounds, which make them interact with jobs that contain corresponding responsibilities,
locations, and levels. As a result, we propose inferring users’
implicit characteristics (e.g., skills, preferences) from their
interaction behaviors to help LLMs profile users and generate high-quality resumes.
Although exploring users’ interactive behaviors can help
LLMs better profile users, they may still suffer from the
few-shot problem, limiting the quality of resume completion for certain users. Specifically, users with few interaction
records (aka the long-tail effect) still face challenges with

Recommending suitable jobs to users is a critical task in
online recruitment platforms. Existing job recommendation
methods often encounter challenges such as the low quality
of users’ resumes, which hampers their accuracy and practical
effectiveness. With the rapid development of large language
models (LLMs), utilizing the rich knowledge encapsulated
within them, as well as their powerful reasoning capabilities,
offers a promising avenue for enhancing resume completeness to achieve more accurate recommendations. However,
directly leveraging LLMs is not a one-size-fits-all solution,
as it may suffer from issues like fabricated generation and
few-shot problem, both of which can degrade the quality of
resume completion. In this paper, we propose a novel LLMbased GANs Interactive Recommendation (LGIR) approach
for job recommendation. To alleviate the limitation of fabricated generation, we not only extract users’ explicit properties (e.g., skills, interests) from their self-description but also
infer users’ implicit characteristics from their behaviors for
more accurate and meaningful resume completion. Nevertheless, some users still suffer from the few-shot problem, which
arises due to scarce interaction records, leading to limited
guidance for high-quality resume generation. To address this
issue, we propose aligning unpaired low-quality resumes with
high-quality generated counterparts using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), which can refine resume representations for better recommendation results. Extensive experiments on three large real-world recruitment datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Job recommendation is an essential task in today’s online
recruitment platforms, significantly improving recruitment
efficiency by accurately matching job seekers (aka users)
with suitable positions. Although existing job recommendation methods (Le et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2020; Hou et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8363

