The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learn the Force We Can:
Enabling Sparse Motion Control in Multi-Object Video Generation
Aram Davtyan, Paolo Favaro
Computer Vision Group, Institute of Informatics, University of Bern, Switzerland
aram.davtyan@unibe.ch, paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

Abstract

Since we do not use annotations, it is quite difficult to obtain an explicit scene decomposition into objects. Therefore,
we opt for representing the controls as 2D shifts at pixels
and let the model implicitly learn the extents of the objects during training by observing correlated motion of the
pixels in real videos. Thus, the control inputs we consider
correspond instead to sentences of this form: “Move this
pixel (and the corresponding underlying object) at this location”. The model is fed with the current frame, context
frames (a subset of the past frames to enable memory), and
a set of control inputs. The output is a generated subsequent
frame that shows how the input frame would change under
the specified motion. We train our model without specifying what objects are (i.e., we do not use information about
object categories), or where they are (i.e., we do not rely on
bounding boxes, landmarks/point annotations or segmentation masks), or how they interact (i.e., we do not make use
of information on object relationships or action categories or
textural descriptions of the scenes). Given two subsequent
frames (the current and following one) from a video in our
training data, we obtain the motion control input by sampling the estimated optical flow at a few (typically 5) locations. To generate frames we use flow matching (Lipman
et al. 2022; Liu, Gong, and Liu 2022; Albergo and VandenEijnden 2022), where the model is conditioned on the current and past frames (Davtyan, Sameni, and Favaro 2023),
and feed the motion control input through cross-attention
layers in a transformer architecture.

We propose a novel unsupervised method to autoregressively
generate videos from a single frame and a sparse motion input. Our trained model can generate unseen realistic objectto-object interactions. Although our model has never been
given the explicit segmentation and motion of each object in
the scene during training, it is able to implicitly separate their
dynamics and extents. Key components in our method are the
randomized conditioning scheme, the encoding of the input
motion control, and the randomized and sparse sampling to
enable generalization to out of distribution but realistic correlations. Our model, which we call YODA, has therefore
the ability to move objects without physically touching them.
Through extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations on
several datasets, we show that YODA is on par with or better
than state of the art video generation prior work in terms of
both controllability and video quality. 1

Introduction
Imagining the potential outcomes of own and others’ actions
is considered the most powerful among the three levels of
cognitive abilities that an intelligent system must master according to (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). Imagining is particularly valuable. It allows organisms to understand and analyse possible futures, which enables them to plan ahead and
significantly increases their chances of survival. Thus, including the capability of imagining seems a natural choice
for the design of intelligent systems.
In this work, we aim at building models for video generation that learn to imagine the outcome of sparse control inputs in multi-object scenes. Learning is allowed only
through the passive observation of a video dataset, i.e., without the ability to explicitly interact with the scene, and without any manual annotation. We aim to build a model that
can show some degree of generalization from the training
data, i.e., that can generate data that was not observed before, that is directly related to the control input, and that
is plausible, as shown in Figure 1. One possible choice of
controls expressed in natural language could take the form
“Move this object at this location”. However, such controls assume that the objects in an image are already known.

As shown in Figure 1, an emerging property of our proposed approach is that the model learns the physical extent
of objects in the scene without ever requiring explicit supervision for it. For example, although the control is applied
to the handle of the brush in the second row, the motion
is applied correctly to the whole brush, and to the whole
brush only. A second learned property can be observed on
the first row: When the robot arm is driven towards other
objects, it interacts with them realistically. In the second
row, we can observe a third remarkable capability that the
model has learned. The generated video shows that we can
directly rotate a single object, without using the robot arm
to do so. This is a video that has never been observed in
the dataset (all objects are moved directly by the arm or indirectly via other objects). Because of this ability of moving
objects without touching them, we call our approach YODA.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Project website: https://araachie.github.io/yoda/

11722

