The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Convolutional Spectral Kernel Learning with Generalization Guarantees
(Abstract Reprint)
Jian Li1 , Yong Liu2 , Weiping Wang1
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, China

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Li, Liu, and Wang (2022).

Abstract
Kernel methods are powerful tools to capture nonlinear patterns behind given data but often lead to poor performance
on complicated tasks compared to convolutional neural networks. The reason is that kernel methods are still shallow
and fully connected models, failing to reveal hierarchical
features and local interdependencies. In this paper, to acquire hierarchical and local knowledge, we incorporate kernel methods with deep architectures and convolutional operators in a spectral kernel learning framework. Based on
the inverse Fourier transform and Rademacher complexity
theory, we provide the generalization error bounds for the
proposed model and prove that under suitable initialization,
deeper networks lead to tighter error bounds. Inspired by
theoretical findings, we finally completed the convolutional
spectral kernel network (CSKN) with two additional regularizers and an initialization strategy. Extensive ablation
results validate the effectiveness of non-stationary spectral
kernel, multiple layers, additional regularizers, and the convolutional filters, which coincide with our theoretical findings. We further devise a VGG-type 8-layers CSKN, and it
outperforms the existing kernel-based networks and popular CNN models on the medium-sized image classification
tasks.

References
Li, J.; Liu, Y.; and Wang, W. 2022. Convolutional spectral
kernel learning with generalization guarantees. Artificial Intelligence, 313: 103803.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22704

