The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HGE: Embedding Temporal Knowledge Graphs in a Product Space of
Heterogeneous Geometric Subspaces
Jiaxin Pan1 , Mojtaba Nayyeri1 , Yinan Li1 , Steffen Staab1,2
1

University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom
jiaxin.pan@ki.uni-stuttgart.de, mojtaba.nayyeri@ki.uni-stuttgart.de,
yinan9721@gmail.com, steffen.staab@ki.uni-stuttgart.de
2

Abstract
Temporal knowledge graphs represent temporal facts
(s, p, o, τ ) relating a subject s and an object o via a relation
label p at time τ , where τ could be a time point or time interval. Temporal knowledge graphs may exhibit static temporal patterns at distinct points in time and dynamic temporal patterns between different timestamps. In order to learn
a rich set of static and dynamic temporal patterns and apply them for inference, several embedding approaches have
been suggested in the literature. However, as most of them
resort to single underlying embedding spaces, their capability to model all kinds of temporal patterns was severely limited by having to adhere to the geometric property of their
one embedding space. We lift this limitation by an embedding approach that maps temporal facts into a product space
of several heterogeneous geometric subspaces with distinct
geometric properties, i.e. Complex, Dual, and Split-complex
spaces. In addition, we propose a temporal-geometric attention mechanism to integrate information from different geometric subspaces conveniently according to the captured relational and temporal information. Experimental results on
standard temporal benchmark datasets favorably evaluate our
approach against state-of-the-art models.

Euclidean Unit Circle

Minkowskian Unit Circle

Galilean Unit Circle

Symmetric Structure

Hierarchy Structure

Star Structure

marriedWith
2005

marriedWith
2005

hasChild
hasChild
1926
1930
hasGrandChild,
1961
hasChild hasChild hasChild hasChild
1948
1964
1961 1950

Visit
1970
Visit
1968

Visit
1980
Visit
1978

Figure 1: Unit spheres in their corresponding spaces. All
points on the orange hyperplanes have the same distance to
their origin. Different spaces favor different temporal patterns: Left: Unit circle represented in Complex space (top)
is suitable for representing periodicities and for inferencing with ‘periodic’ logical temporal patterns, e.g. symmetry
(bottom). Middle: Minkowskian unit circle in Split-complex
space (top) is suitable for representing a temporal hierarchy
formed by Make statement. Right: Galilean unit circle represented in Dual space (top) is suitable for representing temporal star patterns (bottom).

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) (Hogan et al. 2021) model facts
in real-world applications as directed edge-labeled graphs.
Temporal KGs (TKGs) include timestamps to their facts in
order to model the temporal validity of facts. Depending on
the representational model, timestamps may represent time
points or time intervals. For instance, a quadruple (Boris
Johnson, IsPrimeministerOf, UK, [2019, 2022]) in a TKG
represents the fact that Boris Johnson is the prime minister
of UK between 2019 and 2022.
Relations in temporal knowledge graphs may exhibit various structural temporal patterns. In the left part of Figure
1, (Charles III, marriedWith, Camilla, 2005) and (Camilla,
marriedWith, Charles III, 2005) forms a symmetrical structure in time. In the middle part, at first (Elizabeth BowesLyon, hasChild, Elizabeth II, 1926) and then (Elizabeth II,
hasChild, Charles III, 1948). The transition of hasChild relation through Elizabeth II forms a hierarchy structure in

TKGs. In the right part, Charles III, Visit Malta, France,
Belgium, USA etc at different timestamps, forming a star
structure over time. Moreover, as Charles III shows, the
structures which entities are involved in temporal knowledge graphs may evolve over time. How to preserve different relational structural patterns and how to capture evolving
temporal patterns for entities is a fundamental challenge in
TKGEs.
Existing embedding approaches such as TeRO, RotateQVS, and TLT-KGE(Xu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022) resorted to single underlying embedding spaces,
such as Complex space or Quaternion space to model symmetric patterns by the rotations on a unit hypersphere. Other
works (Chami et al. 2020; Balazevic, Allen, and Hospedales
2019; Montella, Barahona, and Heinecke 2021; Han et al.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8913

