The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Step Denoising Scheduled Sampling:
Towards Alleviating Exposure Bias for Diffusion Models
Zhiyao Ren1 , Yibing Zhan2 , Liang Ding2 , Gaoang Wang3 , Chaoyue Wang1 , Zhongyi Fan2 ,
Dacheng Tao1
1

The University of Sydney, Australia,
2
JD Explore Academy, China,
3
Zhejiang University, China
zren0130@uni.sydney.edu.au, zhanyibing@jd.com, liangding.liam@gmail.com, gaoangwang@intl.zju.edu.cn,
chaoyue.wang@outlook.com, zyfanzy@foxmail.com, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) have
achieved significant success in generation tasks. Nevertheless, the exposure bias issue, i.e., the natural discrepancy between the training (the output of each step is calculated individually by a given input) and inference (the output of each
step is calculated based on the input iteratively obtained based
on the model), harms the performance of DDPMs. To our
knowledge, few works have tried to tackle this issue by modifying the training process for DDPMs, but they still perform
unsatisfactorily due to 1) partially modeling the discrepancy
and 2) ignoring the prediction error accumulation. To address
the above issues, in this paper, we propose a multi-step denoising scheduled sampling (MDSS) strategy to alleviate the
exposure bias for DDPMs. Analyzing the formulations of the
training and inference of DDPMs, MDSS 1) comprehensively
considers the discrepancy influence of prediction errors on
the output of the model (the Gaussian noise) and the output
of the step (the calculated input signal of the next step), and 2)
efficiently models the prediction error accumulation by using
multiple iterations of a mathematical formulation initialized
from one-step prediction error obtained from the model. The
experimental results, compared with previous works, demonstrate that our approach is more effective in mitigating exposure bias in DDPM, DDIM, and DPM-solver. In particular,
MDSS achieves an FID score of 3.86 in 100 sample steps of
DDIM on the CIFAR-10 dataset, whereas the second best obtains 4.78. The code will be available on GitHub.

Figure 1: The discrepancy between training and inference
process. In the training process, the input at time step t is
derived from the forward diffusion process of x0 . Contrarily,
in the inference process, the input at time step t is obtained
from the output of the previous step.

have been primarily focused on augmenting the classical
method (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) in three key areas: efficient sampling (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021; Kong and
Ping 2021; Lu et al. 2022; Salimans and Ho 2022), improved
likelihood estimation (Nichol and Dhariwal 2021; Bao et al.
2022; Kingma et al. 2021), and handling multi-modal tasks
(Nichol et al. 2022; Mittal et al. 2021). Nevertheless, the exposure bias issue of DDPMs has been generally overlooked.
The exposure bias problem is a prevalent issue, leading
to suboptimal performance, in the domain of recurrent processes, such as autoregressive text generation (Ranzato et al.
2016), arising from the disparity between the training and
inference processes (Bengio et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2019;
Schmidt 2019). As shown in Fig. 1, in the training process
of DDPMs, a real sample x0 is corrupted by introducing
Gaussian noise as a Markov chain. The input to the model
at step t during training is obtained based on the real sample
x0 , noise schedule αt , and a √random standard Gaussian
noise ϵ: q (xt | x0 ) = N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt ) I). In contrast, in the inference process, the input to the model comes
from the output of the previous steps pθ (xt | xt+1 ) =
N (xt ; µθ (xt+1 , t + 1) , Σθ (xt+1 , t + 1)). The training
process sources its input directly from the ground truth,
while the inference process derives its input from model
predictions with potential errors. The discrepancy between
the training and inference, i.e., the exposure bias issue,
harms the performance of DDPMs (Deng, Kojima, and

Introduction
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) are generative models, which first destruct data by progressively
adding noise and then learn the reverse process for sample
generation (Yang et al. 2022). Due to the advantage of unrestricted model structure and stable training, DDPMs have
swiftly gained substantial attention and become state-of-theart approaches in generative tasks, including image generation (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021), text-to-image generation
(Nichol et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022),
text-to-video generation (Singer et al. 2022), and audio generation (Mittal et al. 2021). Recent researches on DDPMs
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4667

