The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Implications of Distance over Redistricting Maps: Central and Outlier Maps⇤
Seyed A. Esmaeili 1 , Darshan Chakrabarti2 , Hayley Grape3 , Brian Brubach3
1

University of Chicago Data Science Institute
2
Columbia University
3
Wellesley College
esmaeili@uchicago.edu, darshan.chakrabarti@columbia.edu, hg3@wellesley.edu, bb100@wellesley.edu

Abstract

representatives elected from one political party in the case
of partisan gerrymandering). In addition, the ability to draw
gerrymandered districts has improved greatly with the aid of
computers since the historic salamander-shaped district approved by Massachusetts Governor Elbridge Gerry in 1812.
For example, assuming voting consistent with the 2016 election, the state of North Carolina with 13 representatives can
be redistricted to elect either 3 Democrats and 10 republicans or 10 Democrats and 3 Republicans.
However, despite this obvious threat to functioning
democracy, partisan gerrymandering has often eluded regulation partly because it has been difficult to measure. In response, a recent line of impactful research introduced sampling techniques to randomly generate a large collection of
redistricting maps1 (Chikina, Frieze, and Pegden 2017; DeFord, Duchin, and Solomon 2019; Herschlag et al. 2020) and
calculate statistics such as a histogram of the number of seats
won by each party using this collection. This can show that a
proposed or enacted map is an outlier in terms of its election
outcome with respect to the sample. In fact, these techniques
were used as a key argument in a recent U.S. Supreme Court
case on partisan gerrymandering (Rucho v. Common Cause
No. 18-422, 588 U.S. 2019) and have supported successful
efforts to change redistricting maps in state supreme court
cases (LWV vs Commonwealth of Pennsylvania No. 159
MM 2018). More importantly for the present work, at least
two states, Michigan and Wisconsin, have used such a sampling tool (DeFord, Duchin, and Solomon 2019) in the recent redistricting process in response to the 2020 U.S. Census (Chen 2021). Recent papers have even extended these
methods to locate which regions in a state are most unfairly
impacted by a given map (Lin et al. 2022; Ko et al. 2022).
Despite this progress, all of these methods rely on election outcomes to detect any possible gerrymandering. This
is a problem in instances where citizens, courts, and/or legislative bodies request methods which do not take partisanship into account. However, there has not been an effective
method for detecting gerrymandering by identifying outliers
according to a non-partisan metric. Abrishami et al. (2020)
make progress toward this goal, but has limitations such a

In representative democracy, a redistricting map is chosen to
partition an electorate into districts which each elects a representative. A valid redistricting map must satisfy a collection of constraints such as being compact, contiguous, and
of almost-equal population. However, these constraints are
loose enough to enable an enormous ensemble of valid redistricting maps. This enables a partisan legislature to gerrymander by choosing a map which unfairly favors it. In this paper,
we introduce an interpretable and tractable distance measure
over redistricting maps which does not use election results
and study its implications over the ensemble of redistricting
maps. Specifically, we define a central map which may be
considered ”most typical” and give a rigorous justification for
it by showing that it mirrors the Kemeny ranking in a scenario where we have a committee voting over a collection
of redistricting maps to be drawn. We include running time
and sample complexity analysis for our algorithms, including
some negative results which hold using any algorithm. We
further study outlier detection based on this distance measure
and show that our framework can detect some gerrymandered
maps. More precisely, we show some maps that are widely
considered to be gerrymandered that lie very far away from
our central maps in comparison to a large ensemble of valid
redistricting maps. Since our distance measure does not rely
on election results, this gives a significant advantage in gerrymandering detection which is lacking in all previous methods.

1

Introduction

Redistricting is the process of dividing an electorate into districts which each elect a representative. In the United States,
this process is used for both federal and state-level representation, and we will use the U.S. House of Representatives
as a running example. Subject to both state and federal law,
the division of states into congressional districts is not arbitrary and must satisfy a collection of properties such as
contiguity and near-equal population. Despite these regulations, redistricting is vulnerable to strategic manipulation in
the form of gerrymandering. The body in charge can easily create a map within the legal constraints that leads to
election results which favor a particular outcome (e.g., more
⇤
Readers are encouraged to see the arxiv version with more results: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.00872
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

These are not the truly uniform random samples from the immense and ill-defined space of all possible maps that we ideally
want, but they are generally treated as such in courts.

9679

