The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TIKP: Text-to-Image Knowledge Preservation for Continual Semantic
Segmentation
Zhidong Yu1 , Wei Yang1,2* , Xike Xie1,3* , Zhenbo Shi1,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
2
Hefei National Laboratory, Hefei 230088, China
3
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China
qubit@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Text-to-Image

Continual Semantic Segmentation (CSS) is an emerging
trend, where catastrophic forgetting has been a perplexing
problem. In this paper, we propose a Text-to-Image Knowledge Preservation (TIKP) framework to address this issue.
TIKP applies Text-to-Image techniques to CSS by automatically generating prompts and content adaptation. It extracts
associations between the labels of seen data and constructs
text-level prompts based on these associations, which are preserved and maintained at each incremental step. During training, these prompts generate correlated images to mitigate the
catastrophic forgetting. Particularly, as the generated images
may have different distributions from the original data, TIKP
transfers the knowledge by a content adaption loss, which determines the role played by the generated images in incremental training based on the similarity. In addition, for the
classifier, we use the previous model from a different perspective: misclassifying new classes into old objects instead of the
background. We propose a knowledge distillation loss based
on wrong labels, enabling us to attribute varying weights to
individual objects during the distillation process. Extensive
experiments conducted in the same setting show that TIKP
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on
benchmark datasets.

Heuristic
images
Content
adaption loss

photographs of bus with car
...
photographs of person with car

New
images

Text prompts

Figure 1: Overview of heuristic images-based CSS. In continual training, these heuristic images provide old knowledge to the model by content adaptation loss combined with
added data.

et al. 2022; Shang et al. 2023) consider other properties of
this task in distilling the knowledge of the old model to the
new one to obtain better results. For example, MiB (Cermelli et al. 2020) takes into account the problem of background bias in CSS and models it to mitigate the forgetting
of old knowledge. Some approaches (Maracani et al. 2021;
Zhu et al. 2023) use replay-based methods to improve the
performance. In addition, there are works (Cha et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2023) that utilize other techniques to retain the knowledge acquired.
In real life, when learning new knowledge, humans often recall old knowledge through key information, which
strengthens their memory of it. Inspired by this phenomenon, we propose using Text-to-Image technology to
heuristically generate images and assist in incremental training, thus avoiding catastrophic forgetting, as shown in Fig.
1. Text-to-Image technology can generate relevant images
from text prompts that contain specific categories. Based on
this, we extract prompts and their corresponding categories
from all seen images and maintain a set of prompts between
seen categories, which is inexpensive. During the incremental training process, we use these maintained prompts to generate images with similar labels to the old data and protect
the old knowledge. Compared with GAN-based methods,
images generated based on prompts have a higher quality
and stronger heuristic ability.
The heuristic images (or generated images) can assist
the model in retaining the old knowledge through two approaches: pseudo-label and knowledge distillation. Note that

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task that is widely used in various real-world scenarios. Recently, numerous models (Chen et al. 2017, 2018; Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Xie et al. 2021; Xiao et al.
2018) have been designed to solve this problem with promising results. Nevertheless, these deep models face a considerable challenge of catastrophic forgetting (Michieli and
Zanuttigh 2019) in the scenario of continual semantic segmentation (CSS), which means that the network forgets the
categories it has already acquired while learning new ones.
Michieli et al. (Michieli and Zanuttigh 2019) first proposed the CSS task and pointed out that the task suffers
from catastrophic forgetting. After that, a number of methods have been proposed to solve this task with promising
results. Distillation-based methods (Cermelli et al. 2020;
Douillard et al. 2021; Michieli and Zanuttigh 2021a,b; Phan
*Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16596

