The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SoundCount: Sound Counting from Raw Audio with
Dyadic Decomposition Neural Network
Yuhang He1 , Zhuangzhuang Dai2 , Niki Trigoni1 , Long Chen3,4 * , Andrew Markham 1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK. yuhang.he@cs.ox.ac.uk
2
Department of Applied AI and Robotics, Aston University. UK
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
4
WAYTOUS Ltd., China.
Abstract

ages (Zhang et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019), video (Li, Zhang,
and Chen 2018) or joint audio-visual (Hu et al. 2020).
We conjecture the lack of exploration stems from three
main factors. First, sound counting has long been treated
as an over-solved problem by sound event detection (SED)
methods (Mesaros et al. 2021; Cakir et al. 2017; Adavanne,
Pertilä, and Virtanen 2017; He, Trigoni, and Markham
2021), in which SED goes further to identify each sound
event’s (e.g. a bird call) start time, end time and semantic
identity. Sound counting number then becomes easily accessible by simply adding up all detected events. Secondly,
current SED only tags whether a class of sound event is
present within a window, regardless of the number of concurrent sound sources of the same class like a series of baby
crying or multiple bird calls (Phan et al. 2022). Thirdly, labelling acoustic data is technically-harder and more timeconsuming than labelling images, due to the overlap of concurrent and diverse sources. The lack of well-labelled sound
data in crowded sound scenes naturally hampers research
progress. Existing SED sound datasets (Adavanne, Pertilä,
and Virtanen 2017; Heittola et al. 2010) capture simple
acoustic scenarios with low polyphony and where the event
variance is small. The simplified acoustic scenario in turn
makes sound counting task by SED methods tackleable. But
when the sound scene becomes more complex with highly
concurrent sound events, SED methods soon lose their capability in discriminating different sound events (Pankajakshan, Bear, and Benetos 2019; Cakir et al. 2017). In the
meantime, some researchers think sound counting is equivalent to sound source separation task (Neumann et al. 2020;
Turpault et al. 2021; Tzinis, Wang, and Smaragdis 2022;
Subakan et al. 2022; Tzinis et al. 2020), in which the sound
is counted as the source number by isolating individual
sound from sound mixture and assigning it to corresponding sound source. However, our proposed sound counting
is different from source number counting, it directly counts
the overlapping events number, regardless of if these events
come from the same sound source. Therefore, a study specific for sound counting problem is desirable and overdue.
In this paper, we study the general sound counting problem under highly polyphonic, cluttered and concurrent situations. Whilst the challenges of image-based crowd counting
mainly lie in spatial density, occlusion and view perspective distortion, the sound counting challenges are two-fold.

In this paper, we study an underexplored, yet important and
challenging problem: counting the number of distinct sounds
in raw audio characterized by a high degree of polyphonicity. We do so by systematically proposing a novel end-to-end
trainable neural network (which we call DyDecNet, consisting of a dyadic decomposition front-end and backbone network), and quantifying the difficulty level of counting depending on sound polyphonicity. The dyadic decomposition
front-end progressively decomposes the raw waveform dyadically along the frequency axis to obtain time-frequency representation in multi-stage, coarse-to-fine manner. Each intermediate waveform convolved by a parent filter is further processed by a pair of child filters that evenly split the parent
filter’s carried frequency response, with the higher-half child
filter encoding the detail and lower-half child filter encoding
the approximation. We further introduce an energy gain normalization to normalize sound loudness variance and spectrum overlap, and apply it to each intermediate parent waveform before feeding it to the two child filters. To better quantify sound counting difficulty level, we further design three
polyphony-aware metrics: polyphony ratio, max polyphony
and mean polyphony. We test DyDecNet on various datasets
to show its superiority.

Introduction
Suppose you went to the seaside and heard a cacophony of
seagulls, squawking and squabbling. An interesting question
that naturally arises is whether you can tell the number of
seagulls flocking around you from the sound you heard? Although a trivial example, this sound “crowd counting” problem has a number of important applications. For example,
passive acoustic monitoring is widely used to record sounds
in natural habitats, which provides measures of ecosystem
diversity and density (Aguiar et al. 2021; Dohi et al. 2021;
Chronister et al. 2021). Sound counting helps to quantify
and map sound pollution by counting the number of individual polluting events (Bello, Mydlarz, and Salamon 2018). It
can also be used in music content analysis (J. Humphrey,
Durand, and McFee 2018). Despite its importance, research
on sound counting has far lagged behind than its wellestablished crowd counting counterparts from either im* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12421

