The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Expand-and-Quantize: Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Using High-Dimensional Space and Product Quantization
Jiyoung Kim, Kyuhong Shim, Insu Lee, Byonghyo Shim
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea
{jykim, khshim, islee, bshim}@islab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract

(A) Information Compression

Unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS) aims to discover
and recognize meaningful categories without any labels. For
a successful USS, two key abilities are required: 1) information compression and 2) clustering capability. Previous
methods have relied on feature dimension reduction for information compression, however, this approach may hinder
the process of clustering. In this paper, we propose a novel
USS framework called Expand-and-Quantize Unsupervised
Semantic Segmentation (EQUSS), which combines the benefits of high-dimensional spaces for better clustering and
product quantization for effective information compression.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that EQUSS achieves
state-of-the-art results on three standard benchmarks. In addition, we analyze the entropy of USS features, which is the
first step towards understanding USS from the perspective of
information theory.

1

(B) Clustering
<

Car

Better
Clustering

dim↓

dim↑

(a) Key factors for successful USS
+(A) −(B)
Feature Dim.
Reduction
Bottleneck
Architecture

class

(b) Conventional USS

Introduction

+(B)

+(A)

Feature Dim.
Expansion

Product
Quantization

Transform to linearly- Information compression
by discretization
separable space

class

(c) Proposed USS

Figure 1: To achieve success in USS, two key factors should
be considered: (A) Information Compression and (B) Clustering. The conventional model typically employs feature dimension reduction for (A), but it can be counterproductive
for (B). In contrast, our proposed model takes advantage of
both by employing feature dimension expansion for (B) and
product quantization for (A).

Semantic segmentation, a task to classify every pixel to the
proper category, has numerous applications including autonomous driving (Feng et al. 2020; Siam et al. 2018), scene
understanding (Meletis 2022; Kim, Park, and Shim 2023),
and medical diagnostics (Asgari Taghanaki et al. 2021;
Hatamizadeh et al. 2022). Despite its significance, dissemination of supervised semantic segmentation is a bit slow,
in particular for real-world applications due to the difficulty
and cost of the pixel-wise annotations. As a surrogate, unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS) has received much
attention recently since it can save the time and effort to label the dataset (Seong et al. 2023; Hamilton et al. 2022; Cho
et al. 2021).
In most USS models, a pre-trained ‘backbone’ module is
employed to extract rich features from the input image. The
output of the backbone is a high-dimensional feature vector
containing both class-relevant and class-irrelevant information (Ji, Henriques, and Vedaldi 2019; Kim, Shim, and Shim
2022). In the absence of meaningful guidance, a USS model
cannot efficiently judge which pixels are semantically similar. To handle the issue, a USS ‘head’ module should refine
the feature such that the class-relevant information is preserved while class-irrelevant information is discarded. In the

information-theoretic perspective, this process can be considered as a form of lossy information compression (Damerau 1964). For instance, if there are 27 classes (Caesar,
Uijlings, and Ferrari 2018), a perfect classification can be
achieved with 5 bits, which is far smaller than the amount
of information contained in the 384-dim feature vector (384
elements × 32-bit floating point = 12,288 bits). After the
information compression, USS model clusters the outputs
using k-means such that pixels in the same group are aggregated to the same class.
So far, the primary goal of USS frameworks is to compress information while preserving as much class-relevant
information as possible. Popularly used method to achieve
the goal is feature dimension reduction (e.g., 384-dim to
70-dim) for information compression, followed by training
to retain class-relevant information in the compressed feature (Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020; Ji, Henriques, and

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2768

