The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Structure-Aware Multimodal Sequential Learning for Visual Dialog
Young-Jin Kim1 * , Min-Jun Kim1 * , Kyunghwan An2 , Jinwoo Ahn1 ,
Jaeseok Kim3 , Yu-Jung Heo3 , Du-Seong Chang3 , Eun-Sol Kim1,2,4
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence Application, Hanyang University, South Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University, South Korea
3
KT Corporation
4
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
eunsolkim@hanyang.ac.kr
Abstract

With the ability to collect vast amounts of image and natural language data from the web, there has been a remarkable advancement in Large-scale Language Models (LLMs).
This progress has led to the emergence of chatbots and dialogue systems capable of fluent conversations with humans.
As the variety of devices enabling interactions between humans and agents expands, and the performance of text-based
dialogue systems improves, there has been recently proposed
research on visual dialog. However, visual dialog requires
understanding sequences of pairs consisting of images and
sentences, making it challenging to gather sufficient data for
training large-scale models from the web. In this paper, we
propose a new multimodal learning method leveraging existing large-scale models designed for each modality, to enable model training for visual dialog with small visual dialog datasets. The key ideas of our approach are: 1) storing
the history or context during the progression of visual dialog in the form of spatiotemporal graphs, and 2) introducing
small modulation blocks between modality-specific models
and the graphs to align the semantic spaces. For implementation, we introduce a novel structure-aware cross-attention
method, which retrieves relevant image and text knowledge
for utterance generation from the pretrained models. For experiments, we achieved a new state-of-the-art performance on
three visual dialog datasets, including the most challenging
one COMET.

Figure 1: High-level concept of our structure-aware alignment. In the multimodal context, memories having multimodal information compose a structure. By considering this
spatiotemporal-hierarchical structure, representations from
multimodal context can be aligned and relevent informations
for each turn can be retrieved.

Introduction
With the emergence of large-scale language and vision models such as GPT-X (Radford et al. 2018, 2019; Brown
et al. 2020), LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023), ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), pretraining and zero-shot transfer learning paradigm has been proposed where models are trained
on massive datasets containing a plethora of parameters and
tested across various downstream tasks without additional
finetuning. By virtue of the huge number of datasets encompassing diverse topics and concepts collected from the
web, large-scale language and vision models have acquired
the generalization ability to show remarkable performances
on numerous tasks, even unseen problems. Compared to

modality-specific large-scale training (i.e. image-only and
text-only), it is challenging to gather massive amounts of
data for well-aligned image-text pairs, and there is a disadvantage of noise in such data, making the learning process difficult. In this paper, we aim to develop a large-scale
vision-language multimodal model where image-text pair
data are scarce, such as visual dialog tasks. In particular,
we propose a new multimodal learning method leveraging
existing image-only and text-only models.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13193

