The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Advancing Spatial Reasoning in Large Language Models: An In-Depth Evaluation
and Enhancement Using the StepGame Benchmark
Fangjun Li1 , David C. Hogg1 , Anthony G. Cohn1,2
1

School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
2
Alan Turing Institute, UK
scfli@leeds.ac.uk, d.c.hogg@leeds.ac.uk, a.g.cohn@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

ities. However, despite their impressive abilities, LLMs encounter challenges in many logical reasoning aspects crucial for human communication, particularly spatial reasoning (Bang et al. 2023; Cohn and Hernandez-Orallo 2023).
One approach to evaluating spatial reasoning in an AI system is to use synthetic benchmarks such as StepGame (Shi,
Zhang, and Lipani 2022) and SpartQA (Mirzaee and Rajaby
2021). Unfortunately, models like ChatGPT have shown unsatisfactory performance on these benchmarks. Improving
the spatial reasoning capabilities of LLMs remains a primary
focus to enhance their overall performance and understanding of complex environments.
Whilst examining the StepGame benchmark we discovered that it contains template errors that distort model performance evaluations. These errors were previously overlooked, leading to studies conducted on a flawed benchmark,
inaccurately assessing the capabilities of the LLMs (Bang
et al. 2023; Yang, Ishay, and Lee 2023). To rectify this issue, we present a more accurate version of the StepGame
dataset for model evaluation, ensuring precise assessments
of the models’ true capabilities and limitations1 .
We then conducted evaluation tests on the rectified benchmark across various test subsets, few-shot sets, and models. We observed that larger GPT models demonstrate proficiency in mapping natural language text to spatial relations.
However, they struggle with multi-hop spatial reasoning.
Our goal is not merely to critique, but also to propose potential improvements. To this end, we provide a flawless solution to the benchmark, and explore different approaches to
enhance the spatial reasoning ability of LLMs.
The solution we propose for the benchmark entails combining template-based sentence-to-relation mapping with
logic-based spatial reasoning. The logical reasoner used in
this approach comes from (Yang, Ishay, and Lee 2023),
where they integrated GPT-3 for the task. GPT-3 was employed to parse spatial descriptions into symbolic spatial relation representations, which were then passed to the logical program for spatial reasoning. This fusion resulted in
significant improvement in StepGame, achieving state-ofthe-art (SOTA) but not perfect results: around 90% accu-

Artificial intelligence (AI) has made remarkable progress
across various domains, with large language models like
ChatGPT gaining substantial attention for their human-like
text-generation capabilities. Despite these achievements, spatial reasoning remains a significant challenge for these models. Benchmarks like StepGame evaluate AI spatial reasoning, where ChatGPT has shown unsatisfactory performance.
However, the presence of template errors in the benchmark
has an impact on the evaluation results. Thus there is potential for ChatGPT to perform better if these template errors are addressed, leading to more accurate assessments of
its spatial reasoning capabilities. In this study, we refine the
StepGame benchmark, providing a more accurate dataset for
model evaluation. We analyze GPT’s spatial reasoning performance on the rectified benchmark, identifying proficiency
in mapping natural language text to spatial relations but limitations in multi-hop reasoning. We provide a flawless solution
to the benchmark by combining template-to-relation mapping
with logic-based reasoning. This combination demonstrates
proficiency in performing qualitative reasoning on StepGame
without encountering any errors. We then address the limitations of GPT models in spatial reasoning. We deploy Chainof-thought and Tree-of-thoughts prompting strategies, offering insights into GPT’s “cognitive process”, and achieving
remarkable improvements in accuracy. Our investigation not
only sheds light on model deficiencies but also proposes enhancements, contributing to the advancement of AI with more
robust spatial reasoning capabilities.

Introduction
Spatial reasoning, the ability to understand and navigate relationships in physical space, is a fundamental aspect of human cognition that significantly influences interactions with
the environment. Enhancing spatial reasoning in AI models has the potential to enrich their comprehension of their
surroundings and response to user interactions, leading to
more advanced and immersive user experiences (Alomari
et al. 2022). In recent years, AI has revolutionized numerous domains, from healthcare to finance to entertainment.
Notably, OpenAI’s large language models (LLMs), such as
ChatGPT and GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023), have gained significant attention for their human-like text generation capabil-

1
The data associated with this paper are openly available
from the University of Leeds Data Repository. https://doi.org/10.
5518/1468. All code is available at https://github.com/FangjunLi/SpatialLM-StepGame.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18500

