The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

s-ID: Causal Effect Identification in a Sub-Population
Amir Mohammad Abouei* 1 , Ehsan Mokhtarian* 1 , Negar Kiyavash1,2
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
College of Management of Technology, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{amir.abouei, ehsan.mokhtarian, negar.kiyavash}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Causal inference in a sub-population involves identifying the
causal effect of an intervention on a specific subgroup, which
is distinguished from the whole population through the influence of systematic biases in the sampling process. However,
ignoring the subtleties introduced by sub-populations can either lead to erroneous inference or limit the applicability of
existing methods. We introduce and advocate for a causal inference problem in sub-populations (henceforth called S-ID),
in which we merely have access to observational data of the
targeted sub-population (as opposed to the entire population).
Existing inference problems in sub-populations operate on the
premise that the given data distributions originate from the
entire population, thus, cannot tackle the S-ID problem. To
address this gap, we provide necessary and sufficient conditions that must hold in the causal graph for a causal effect
in a sub-population to be identifiable from the observational
distribution of that sub-population. Given these conditions, we
present a sound and complete algorithm for the S-ID problem.

Introduction
In machine learning, variable(s) Y are commonly predicted
from observed variable(s) X by estimating the conditional
probability distribution P (Y|X) (Bishop and Nasrabadi
2006). This approach is effective for understanding correlations or associations in the data, but it falls short when we
seek to understand how changes in X would affect Y. Such
an understanding requires a different methodology, known as
causal inference (in population), which involves estimating
the interventional distributions (or causal effect), denoted
by PX (Y). PX (Y) represents the probability of an outcome
Y if we were to intervene or change the values of the input
variable(s) X (Pearl 2000, 2009; Hernán and Robins 2010).1
The gold standard for estimating a causal effect is to perform experiments/interventions in the environment, for instance, by using techniques such as randomized controlled
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We utilize Judea Pearl’s framework for causal inference to
present our findings. Within this framework, alternative notations for
interventional distributions include P (Y|do(X)) and Pdo(X) (Y),
which employ the do() operator to denote an intervention. Nevertheless, for the sake of simplicity in notation, we adopt the latter
representation and drop the do().

20302

trials (RCTs) (Fisher 1936). However, these methods often
require real-world experiments, which can be prohibitively
expensive, unethical, or simply infeasible in many scenarios.
Alternatively, researchers can turn to observational methods, utilizing the causal graph of the environment and available data to estimate interventional distributions (Pearl 2009;
Spirtes et al. 2000). The causal graph, a graphical representation that depicts the causal relationships between variables,
plays a central role in this methodology. This observational
approach avoids the need for costly or impractical experiments but comes with its own challenges. In particular, computing interventional distributions uniquely may not always
be feasible.
Identifiablity in population. Identifiability refers to the
ability to uniquely compute a distribution from the available
data. When all variables in the system are observable and
the causal graph is known, all interventional distributions
are identifiable using the so-called back-door adjustment
sets, meaning all causal effects are identifiable (Pearl 1993).
However, only a subset of causal effects can be identified in
the presence of unobserved variables or hidden confounders
(Pearl 1995). Selection bias can also make some causal effects unidentifiable (Shpitser and Pearl 2006a). This bias,
which is similar to distribution mismatch in learning theory
(Masiha et al. 2021), often arises from conditioning on selection variables. The problem of causal effect identification
in population pertains to whether, given the causal graph, an
interventional distribution can be uniquely computed from
the available data. Various forms of available data lead to
different problems in causal inference in population, the most
well-known of which is the ID problem (Pearl 1995; Tian
and Pearl 2003). This problem arises when the available data
is from the joint distribution of the observed variables. A
summary of these problems is provided in Table 1, and a
more comprehensive discussion can be found in the Related
Work section.
Conditional causal effects represent the conditional distributions that capture the impact of a treatment on the outcome
within specific contexts or sub-populations. This concept allows for targeted interventions and tailored policies, offering
valuable insights for practical applications (Qian and Murphy 2011). Shpitser and Pearl (2006a) considered the c-ID
problem, which pertains to identifying a conditional interventional distribution PX (Y|Z) from the joint distribution

