The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bad Actor, Good Advisor:
Exploring the Role of Large Language Models in Fake News Detection
Beizhe Hu1,2 , Qiang Sheng1 , Juan Cao1,2 , Yuhui Shi1,2 , Yang Li1,2 , Danding Wang1 , Peng Qi3
1

Small
CAS Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute
of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy
REALof Sciences
[News]
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Language Model
3
National University of Singapore
{hubeizhe21s, shengqiang18z, caojuan, shiyuhui22s, liyang23s, wangdanding}@ict.ac.cn, pengqi.qp@gmail.com

Abstract

[Label: FAKE] Detailed photos of Xiang Liu's tendon surgery exposed. Stop
complaints and please show sympathy and blessings!

Detecting fake news requires both a delicate sense of diverse clues and a profound understanding of the real-world
background, which remains challenging for detectors based
on small language models (SLMs) due to their knowledge
and capability limitations. Recent advances in large language
models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance in various tasks, but whether and how LLMs could help with fake
news detection remains underexplored. In this paper, we investigate the potential of LLMs in fake news detection. First,
we conduct an empirical study and find that a sophisticated
LLM such as GPT 3.5 could generally expose fake news and
provide desirable multi-perspective rationales but still underperforms the basic SLM, fine-tuned BERT. Our subsequent
analysis attributes such a gap to the LLM’s inability to select
and integrate rationales properly to conclude. Based on these
findings, we propose that current LLMs may not substitute
fine-tuned SLMs in fake news detection but can be a good
advisor for SLMs by providing multi-perspective instructive
rationales. To instantiate this proposal, we design an adaptive
rationale guidance network for fake news detection (ARG),
in which SLMs selectively acquire insights on news analysis
from the LLMs’ rationales. We further derive a rationale-free
version of ARG by distillation, namely ARG-D, which services cost-sensitive scenarios without querying LLMs. Experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate that ARG
and ARG-D outperform three types of baseline methods, including SLM-based, LLM-based, and combinations of small
and large language models.

(a)

[News]
+ [Prompting]

Large
Language Model

The answer is real.

[News]
+ [Perspectivespecific
Prompting]

Large
Language Model

- Commonsense: Real surgery
generally won’t be exposed…
- Textual Description: The
language is emotional and
tries to attract audience…

[News]

Small
Language Model

Prediction: FAKE

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of the role of large language models
(LLMs) in fake news detection. In this case, (a) the LLM
fails to output correct judgment of news veracity but (b)
helps the small language model (SLM) judge correctly by
providing informative rationales.
the news-faking process: Fake news creators might manipulate any part of the news, using diverse writing strategies
and being driven by inscrutable underlying aims. Therefore,
to maintain both effectiveness and universality for fake news
detection, an ideal method is required to have: 1) a delicate
sense of diverse clues (e.g., style, facts, commonsense); and
2) a profound understanding of the real-world background.
Recent methods (Zhang et al. 2021; Kaliyar, Goswami,
and Narang 2021; Mosallanezhad et al. 2022; Hu et al.
2023) generally exploit pre-trained small language models
(SLMs)1 like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu
et al. 2019) to understand news content and provide fundamental representation, plus optional social contexts (Shu
et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2022), knowledge bases (Popat et al.
2018; Hu et al. 2022b), or news environment (Sheng et al.
2022) as supplements. SLMs do bring improvements, but
their knowledge and capability limitations also compromise
further enhancement of fake news detectors. For example,
BERT was pre-trained on text corpus like Wikipedia (Devlin et al. 2019) and thus struggled to handle news items
that require knowledge not included (Sheng et al. 2021).

Introduction
The wide and fast spread of fake news online has posed realworld threats in critical domains like politics (Fisher, Cox,
and Hermann 2016), economy (CHEQ 2019), and public
health (Naeem and Bhatti 2020). Among the countermeasures to combat this issue, automatic fake news detection,
which aims at distinguishing inaccurate and intentionally
misleading news items from others automatically, has been a
promising solution in practice (Shu et al. 2017; Roth 2022).
Though much progress has been made (Hu et al. 2022a),
understanding and characterizing fake news is still challenging for current models. This is caused by the complexity of

1
The academia lacks a consensus regarding the size boundary
between small and large language models at present, but it is widely
accepted that BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and GPT-3 family (Brown
et al. 2020) are respectively small and large ones (Zhao et al. 2023).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22105

