The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MIND: Multi-Task Incremental Network Distillation
Jacopo Bonato* 1 , Francesco Pelosin* 1 2 , Luigi Sabetta* 1 , Alessandro Nicolosi 1
1
Leonardo Labs, Rome, Italy
Covision Lab, Brixen - South-Tyrol, Italy
jacopo.bonato.ext@leonardo.com, francesco.pelosin@covisionlab.com, luigi.sabetta.ext@leonardo.com,
alessandro.nicolosi@leonardo.com
2

Abstract

to future scenarios automatically. In response, numerous approaches have been proposed. Some methods employ replay
buffers to approximate the old data while training on new
data (Prabhu, Torr, and Dokania 2020; Rolnick et al. 2019;
Aljundi et al. 2019). In contrast, others instantiate new parameters as new tasks emerge (Rusu et al. 2016; Douillard
et al. 2022). Additional approaches leverage regularization
techniques in the parameter space to address this issue (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Zenke, Poole, and Ganguli 2017).
Recently, the deep learning research community has emphasized the importance of exploring compositional approaches in learning systems. The compositional nature of
networks has been identified as a crucial aspect of intelligent systems, wherein each sub-module can be selectively
accessed to solve specific tasks. For example, the research on
LLMs demonstrates through multimodal pipelines how such
approaches are effective and efficient: sub-modules are tailored for a particular task characterized by different modalities (i.e. LLAVA (Liu et al. 2023) LENS (Berrios et al.
2023) and Flamingo (Alayrac et al. 2022)). For this reason, systems that exhibit compositionality offer the advantage of being compact, enabling them to address multiple
tasks within a single architecture while minimizing memory
requirements. In particular, this modular structure of intelligent systems is aligned with some neuroscientific theories
like the complementary learning system (CLS) theory (McClelland 1995) which describes how the brain employs two
distinct and specialized systems for learning and memory.
Among this research stream, the continual learning community proposed several architectures characterized by a slowand a fast-learner coupled to tackle incremental learning
tasks(Arani, Sarfraz, and Zonooz 2022).
Along this research line, we propose a new method called
MIND that belongs to the category of parameter isolation approaches (Masana et al. 2023), where sub-regions
of the network, called sub-networks, are allocated for tackling individual tasks. However, these sub-regions are not
completely disjoint between each other and share a fraction of parameters facilitating the transfer of previously acquired knowledge for future task-solving. In this context,
MIND exploits a distillation procedure (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015) to encapsulate and compress the knowledge from a new model trained for each new task into
a sub-network fragment. Furthermore, we propose a vari-

The recent surge of pervasive devices that generate dynamic
data streams has underscored the necessity for learning systems to adapt continually to data distributional shifts. To
tackle this challenge, the research community has put forth
a spectrum of methodologies, including the demanding pursuit of class-incremental learning without replay data. In
this study, we present MIND, a parameter isolation method
that aims to significantly enhance the performance of replayfree solutions and achieve state-of-the-art results on several
widely studied datasets. Our approach introduces two main
contributions: two alternative distillation procedures that significantly improve the efficiency of MIND increasing the accumulated knowledge of each sub-network, and the optimization of the BachNorm layers across tasks inside the subnetworks. Overall, MIND outperforms all the state-of-the-art
methods for rehearsal-free Class-Incremental learning (with
an increment in classification accuracy of approx. +6% on
CIFAR-100/10 and +10% on TinyImageNet/10) reaching up
to approx. +40% accuracy in Domain-Incremental scenarios.
Moreover, we ablated each contribution to demonstrate its
impact on performance improvement. Our results showcase
the superior performance of MIND indicating its potential
for addressing the challenges posed by Class-incremental and
Domain-Incremental learning in resource-constrained environments.

Introduction
Despite the remarkable achievements witnessed in deep
learning in recent years, a fundamental challenge that remains unresolved pertains to enabling lifelong learning in
deep neural networks. Learning continually would unlock
the ability of artificial networks to learn new tasks sequentially by adapting to distributional shifts and overcoming
the so-called catastrophic forgetting. This issue arises because the network’s parameters adapted to the incoming
task become ill-suited for the old data, resulting in performance degradation over time. Mitigating catastrophic forgetting typically involves retraining the system from scratch
using both old and new data (Zhou et al. 2023; Masana et al.
2023), which is not only expensive but also fails to adapt
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11105

