The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Approximation Algorithms for Preference Aggregation Using CP-Nets
Abu Mohammad Hammad Ali, Boting Yang, Sandra Zilles
University of Regina
hammad@uregina.ca, boting.yang@uregina.ca, sandra.zilles@uregina.ca

Abstract

resources needed for explicitly listing preferences between
pairs of outcomes with various values in V1 through V3 . In
this example, V4 is called a parent of V5 ; in general, an attribute can have more than one parent.
In this paper, we study the problem of aggregating multiple CP-nets N1 , . . . , Nt (without cyclic dependencies between attributes) into a single CP-net N which forms the
best possible consensus of N1 , . . . , Nt in terms of the associated outcome rankings. One objective might be to minimize the total number of outcome pairs that are ordered differently by N and Ns , summed up over all s ∈ {1, . . . , t}.
However, feasible solutions to this problem are unlikely to
be found, partly because even determining how a given CPnet orders a given outcome pair is NP-hard (Boutilier et al.
2004). For this and other reasons, Ali et al. (2021) propose
to focus on an objective function that counts only swaps that
are ordered differently by N and Ns . A swap is a pair of
outcomes that differ only in the value of a single attribute;
deciding how a CP-net orders any given swap can be done
in polynomial time (Boutilier et al. 2004).
We adopt the objective function proposed by Ali et al.
(2021).1 However, they showed that this function cannot be
optimized in polynomial time; in particular, sometimes the
size of the only optimal solution is exponential in the size
of the input. In a preliminary result, we show that only the
number of input CP-nets (not the number of attributes) contribute to the hardness of optimal aggregation. Motivated by
these results, we study efficient approximation algorithms
for Ali et al.’s objective function.
A first (trivial) approximation algorithm simply outputs
an input that obtains the smallest value of the objective function among all inputs. It is a well-known fact that this trivial algorithm guarantees a 2-approximation, but Endriss and
Grandi (2014) showed that the bound of 2 cannot be improved. Our first main result states that the trivial algorithm
obtains an approximation ratio of 4/3 in case the inputs satisfy a natural (yet limiting) symmetry condition.
We then propose an improved algorithm that, given an attribute Vn , considers the parent sets for Vn in the input CPnets N1 , . . . Nt . For each such parent set P , the algorithm

This paper studies the design and analysis of approximation algorithms for aggregating preferences over combinatorial domains, represented using Conditional Preference Networks (CP-nets). Its focus is on aggregating preferences over
so-called swaps, for which optimal solutions in general are already known to be of exponential size. We first analyze a trivial 2-approximation algorithm that simply outputs the best of
the given input preferences, and establish a structural condition under which the approximation ratio of this algorithm is
improved to 4/3. We then propose a polynomial-time approximation algorithm whose outputs are provably no worse than
those of the trivial algorithm, but often substantially better. A
family of problem instances is presented for which our improved algorithm produces optimal solutions, while, for any
ε, the trivial algorithm cannot attain a (2 − ε)-approximation.
These results may lead to the first polynomial-time approximation algorithm that solves the CP-net aggregation problem for swaps with an approximation ratio substantially better than 2.

Introduction
The goal of preference aggregation is to find, given a set of
individual rankings over objects called outcomes, either the
best collective outcome or the best collective ranking over
the outcomes. Preference aggregation has applications in the
domain of recommender systems, multi-criteria object selection, and meta-search engines (Dwork et al. 2001). In this
paper, we study preference aggregation over combinatorial
domains, using so-called Conditional Preference Networks
(CP-nets, (Boutilier et al. 2004)) as a compact representation model for outcome rankings. A combinatorial domain
defines outcomes as vectors of attribute-value pairs. By expressing conditional dependencies between attributes, a CPnet represents the preferences over a large number of outcome pairs using compact statements. For example, given
five attributes V1 through V5 , such a statement might be
“Given value 1 in attribute V4 , I prefer value 0 over value
1 in attribute V5 .” This statement means that all outcomes
with value assignment (1, 0) for attributes (V4 , V5 ) are preferred over those with value assignment (1, 1), irrespective
of their values in the attributes V1 through V3 . This saves the

1
Technically, we limit this objective function to only swaps in
which the two outcomes differ in a fixed attribute Vn , since it is
sufficient to reduce the CP-net aggregation problem to an attributewise aggregation problem. Technical details will follow.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10433

