The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Moderating Effect of Instant Runoff Voting
Kiran Tomlinson1 , Johan Ugander2 , Jon Kleinberg1
1

Cornell University
Stanford University
kt@cs.cornell.edu, jugander@stanford.edu, kleinberg@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

traction to address issues with plurality voting (Wang et al.
2021), with three states (Maine, Alaska, and Nevada) voting to adopt IRV for federal elections in the last decade. IRV
has also seen increasing adoption in local elections and/or
primaries, for instance in San Francisco (since 2004), Minneapolis (since 2009), and New York City (since 2021).
Proponents of IRV claim that it encourages moderation,
compromise, and civility, since candidates are incentivized
to be ranked highly by as many voters as possible, including
by those who do not rank them first (Dean 2016; Diamond
2016). Analyses of campaign communication materials and
voter surveys have supported the theory that IRV increases
campaign civility (Donovan, Tolbert, and Gracey 2016; John
and Douglas 2017; Kropf 2021), with extensive debate about
whether this greater civility translates into winners who are
also more moderate in their positions (Fraenkel and Grofman 2006a,b; Horowitz 2006, 2007). Analyses of potential
moderating effects of IRV have primarily been based on case
studies (Fraenkel and Grofman 2004; Mitchell 2014; Reilly
2018) and simulation (Chamberlin and Cohen 1978; Merrill 1984; McGann, Grofman, and Koetzle 2002), as well
as empirical evidence for a moderating effect in a related
voting system, two-round runoff (Bordignon, Nannicini, and
Tabellini 2016). In contrast, there has been almost no theoretical work on the subject; most social choice theory has
focused on problems other than moderation, such as minimizing metric distortion and ensuring fairness or representation (Halpern et al. 2023; Aziz et al. 2017; Boutilier
et al. 2012; Brill et al. 2022; Ebadian et al. 2022; Gkatzelis,
Halpern, and Shah 2020; Kahng, Latifian, and Shah 2023).
Two interesting specific exceptions can be found in the
works of Grofman and Feld (2004) and Dellis, GauthierBelzile, and Oak (2017). Grofman and Feld (2004) show that
for single-peaked preferences and four or fewer candidates,
IRV is at least as likely as plurality to elect the median candidate. Dellis, Gauthier-Belzile, and Oak (2017) show that in
a citizen-candidate model, if the voter distribution is asymmetric then two-party equilibria under plurality can be more
extreme than under IRV.
There is clear value in mathematical analyses that identify
more general moderating tendencies. At present—beyond
the noted exceptions—the arguments for IRV’s moderating
effects summarized above have tended to point to institutional or behavioral properties of the way candidates run

Instant runoff voting (IRV) has recently gained popularity as
an alternative to plurality voting for political elections, with
advocates claiming a range of advantages, including that it
produces more moderate winners than plurality and could
thus help address polarization. However, there is little theoretical backing for this claim, with existing evidence focused
on case studies and simulations. In this work, we prove that
IRV has a moderating effect relative to plurality voting in a
precise sense, developed in a 1-dimensional Euclidean model
of voter preferences. We develop a theory of exclusion zones,
derived from properties of the voter distribution, which serve
to show how moderate and extreme candidates interact during IRV vote tabulation. The theory allows us to prove that
if voters are symmetrically distributed and not too concentrated at the extremes, IRV cannot elect an extreme candidate
over a moderate. In contrast, we show plurality can and validate our results computationally. Our methods provide new
frameworks for the analysis of voting systems, deriving exact
winner distributions geometrically and establishing a connection between plurality voting and stick-breaking processes.

Introduction
Instant runoff voting (IRV) elections ask voters to rank candidates in order of preference and use a sequence of “instant
runoffs” to determine a winner.1 IRV selects a winner by repeatedly eliminating the candidate with the fewest first-place
votes, redistributing those votes to the next-ranked candidate on each ballot, and removing the eliminated candidate
from all ballots. The final remaining candidate is declared
the winner (equivalently, one can terminate when a majority
of the remaining ballots list the winner first). By comparison, in a plurality election the winner is simply the candidate with the most first-place votes. While plurality has historically been the predominant single-winner voting system,
IRV is among the most popular alternatives; for instance,
Australia and Ireland have used IRV since the early 20th
century. In the United States, IRV has recently been gaining
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
IRV is also called ranked choice voting in the United States.
Other names for IRV include alternative vote, preferential voting,
and the Hare method. Multi-winner IRV is also called single transferrable vote. Plurality is also called first-past-the-post.

9909

