The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TDeLTA: A Light-Weight and Robust Table Detection Method Based on Learning
Text Arrangement
Yang Fan1 , Xiangping Wu1, 2 * , Qingcai Chen1, 3 * , Heng Li1
Yan Huang4 , Zhixiang Cai4 , Qitian Wu4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
China Mobile Information Technology Co.,Ltd.
yfan@stu.hit.edu.cn, wxpleduole@gmail.com, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn, hengli.lh@outlook.com
Abstract
The diversity of tables makes table detection a great challenge, leading to existing models becoming more tedious
and complex. Despite achieving high performance, they often overfit to the table style in training set, and suffer from
significant performance degradation when encountering outof-distribution tables in other domains. To tackle this problem, we start from the essence of the table, which is a set of
text arranged in rows and columns. Based on this, we propose
a novel, light-weighted and robust Table Detection method
based on Learning Text Arrangement, namely TDeLTA.
TDeLTA takes the text blocks as input, and then models the
arrangement of them with a sequential encoder and an attention module. To locate the tables precisely, we design a
text-classification task, classifying the text blocks into 4 categories according to their semantic roles in the tables. Experiments are conducted on both the text blocks parsed from PDF
and extracted by open-source OCR tools, respectively. Compared to several state-of-the-art methods, TDeLTA achieves
competitive results with only 3.1M model parameters on the
large-scale public datasets. Moreover, when faced with the
cross-domain data under the 0-shot setting, TDeLTA outperforms baselines by a large margin of nearly 7%, which
shows the strong robustness and transferability of the proposed model.

Figure 1: Tables in different styles and their text arrangement. The three images above show three tables in different
styles, and the ones below show their text blocks with blue
rectangles. The orange boxes denote the location of tables.
Research on table detection tasks began in the last century. Early researchers used mostly heuristic-based methods (Gatos et al. 2005; Tupaj, Shi, and Chang 1996; Wang,
Haralick, and Phillips 2001), which tend to require a lot of
manual work and can hardly generalized on tables in different styles. Recently, with the great success of deep learning
technology in computer vision applications (Tian et al. 2019,
2023; Zhang et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2023), many researchers
perceive table detection task as a special object-detection
problem, taking an document image as input and detecting
bounding boxes of tables. These methods only treat tables
as visual patterns, overlooking the fact that tables are a form
of structured data, containing important information in their
content organization. As visual models become larger and
more complex, this not only increases the inference time and
memory usage, limiting the practicality of this technique in
many scenarios, such as mobile applications and large-scale
data processing, but also makes the model more sensitive
to changes in table visual styles. Although these methods

Introduction
As a popular means of storing and displaying structured
data, tables are widely used in various documents including financial reports, scientific articles, invoices, etc. With
the rapid growth of the number of digital documents on the
Internet, how to teach machines to understand the tables and
utilize massive valuable information in them, has become
the focus of researchers. Table detection task aims to detect the boundaries of tables in documents. It can be a difficult problem due to the diversity of table styles. For example, some tables have complete borders between the cells of
each row and column, while others may have only partial
borders, such as the three-line tables in scientific articles.
What’s more, the diversity of table contents further complicates this issue.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1670

