The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HAGO-Net: Hierarchical Geometric Massage Passing
for Molecular Representation Learning
Hongbin Pei1 , Taile Chen1 , Chen A1 , Huiqi Deng2 , Jing Tao1 * , Pinghui Wang1 , Xiaohong Guan1
1

MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
peihongbin@xjtu.edu.cn, stardust@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Nonetheless, a substantial obstacle in successfully applying molecular representation learning is the difficulty
of effectively and completely characterizing and learning
molecular geometry. Overcoming this challenge is essential because molecular geometry—the spatial arrangement
of atoms within a molecule—has a strong direct relevance on
molecular properties and dynamics from the perspective of
quantum chemistry (Butler et al. 2018). To address this challenge, many powerful models have been proposed, such as
DimeNet (Gasteiger, Gross, and Günnemann 2020), GemNet (Gasteiger, Becker, and Günnemann 2021), SphereNet
(Liu et al. 2022), Equiformer (Liao and Smidt 2022). Although considerable progress has been made, the challenge
has not been well addressed to date.
In order to effectively and completely learn molecular geometry, we present a novel framework, as illustrated in Fig.
1. The framework consists of two key steps: (1) Complete
characterization, the framework features a novel geometric graph namely, the HAGO-Graph, to completely characterizes molecular geometry in a hierarchical manner; (2)
Effective representation learning, the framework employs
HAGO-Net, a specifically designed graph learning model,
to effectively learn the invariant representation of HAGOGraph, which serve as molecular representation. In addition,
the derivative function of HAGO-Net, denoted as DHAGONet, is employed to learn equivariant representation. Finally,
the obtained representations can be applied to molecular
property and dynamics predictions, both of which are crucial in drug design and materials discovery.
Firstly, this framework is featured by its foundation,
a novel HierArchical GeOmetric Graph (HAGO-Graph),
which hierarchically characterizes molecular geometry.
Adopting a hierarchical manner is motivated by the observation that molecular geometry is exhibited as patterns at
multiple spatial scales. As shown in Fig 2B, interatomic distances are exhibited at the atom scale, bond angles are observed at the atomic pair scale, dihedral angles are formed at
the triplet scale, chirality is identified at the quintuplet scale,
and higher-order geometry, e.g., folding patterns (Moore
et al. 2022) and curvature (Pei et al. 2020a), is displayed
at larger spatial scales. In this way, any scale can be represented as one layer of the HAGO-Graph, i.e., a subgraph,
which is very flexible and have the capacity to achieve a
complete characterization of molecular geometry.

Molecular representation learning has emerged as a gamechanger at the intersection of AI and chemistry, with great
potential in applications such as drug design and materials discovery. A substantial obstacle in successfully applying molecular representation learning is the difficulty of effectively and completely characterizing and learning molecular geometry, which has not been well addressed to date.
To overcome this challenge, we propose a novel framework
that features a novel geometric graph, termed HAGO-Graph,
and a specifically designed geometric graph learning model,
HAGO-Net. In the framework, the foundation is HAGOGraph, which enables a complete characterization of molecular geometry in a hierarchical manner. Specifically, we leverage the concept of n-body in physics to characterize geometric patterns at multiple spatial scales. We then specifically design a message passing scheme, HAGO-MPS, and
implement the scheme as a geometric graph neural network,
HAGO-Net, to effectively learn the representation of HAGOGraph by horizontal and vertical aggregation. We further
prove DHAGO-Net, the derivative function of HAGO-Net,
is an equivariant model. The proposed models are validated
by extensive comparisons on four challenging benchmarks.
Notably, the models exhibited state-of-the-art performance
in molecular chirality identification and property prediction,
achieving state-of-the-art performance on five properties of
QM9 dataset. The models also achieved competitive results
on molecular dynamics prediction task.

Introduction
“Will AI redefine the future of chemistry?”— Science magazine raised this question in 125 cutting-edge scientific questions in 2021 (Sanders 2021). At an intersection of AI and
chemistry, molecular representation learning has emerged
as a game-changer, significantly reducing calculation time
by five orders of magnitude compared to classical quantum
methods, with an acceptable loss of accuracy (Gilmer et al.
2017). This remarkable improvement shows significant potential for various applications, including drug design and
material discovery, drawing great attention from both computer science and chemistry (Bogojeski et al. 2020).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14572

