The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Learn in Interactive Constraint Acquisition
Dimos Tsouros, Senne Berden, Tias Guns
KU Leuven, Belgium
dimos.tsouros@kuleuven.be, senne.berden@kuleuven.be, tias.guns@kuleuven.be

Abstract

Constraint Programming (CP) is considered one of the foremost paradigms for solving combinatorial problems in artificial intelligence. In CP, the user declaratively states the
constraints over a set of decision variables, defining the feasible solutions to their problem, and then a solver is used to
solve it. Although CP has many successful applications on
combinatorial problems from various domains, the modeling process is not always trivial and is limiting non-experts
from using CP on complex problems. This is considered a
major bottleneck for the wider adoption of CP (Freuder and
O’Sullivan 2014; Freuder 2018).
Motivated by the need to overcome this obstacle, assisting the user in modeling is regarded as an important re-

search topic (Kolb 2016; De Raedt, Passerini, and Teso
2018; Freuder 2018; Lombardi and Milano 2018). In Constraint Acquisition (CA), which is an area where CP meets
Machine Learning (ML), the model of a constraint problem
is learned from a set of examples (i.e., assignments to the
variables) of solutions, and possibly non-solutions.
In passive CA, a set of pre-existing examples is given to
the system, and using these examples a set of constraints is
returned (Bessiere et al. 2004, 2005; Lallouet et al. 2010;
Beldiceanu and Simonis 2012; Bessiere et al. 2017; Kumar,
Kolb, and Guns 2022; Berden et al. 2022).
On the other hand, active or interactive acquisition systems interact with the user to learn a target set of constraints,
which represent the problem the user has in mind (Freuder
and Wallace 1998; Bessiere et al. 2007, 2017). In the
early days, most methods only made use of membership
queries (is this a solution or not?) (Angluin 1988; Bessiere
et al. 2007), while a more recent family of algorithms
also makes use of partial membership queries (Arcangioli, Bessiere, and Lazaar 2016; Bessiere et al. 2013; Lazaar
2021; Tsouros and Stergiou 2020, 2021; Tsouros, Stergiou,
and Bessiere 2019, 2020; Tsouros, Stergiou, and Sarigiannidis 2018). Such (partial) queries ask the user to classify
(partial) assignments to the variables as (non-)solution. Recently, a way to guide the top-level query generation was
introduced (Tsouros, Berden, and Guns 2023), based on
counting-based probabilistic estimates of whether candidate
expressions are constraints of the problem or not. Using
this method, the number of queries required to converge decreased significantly.
Despite the recent advancements in active CA, there are
still significant drawbacks to overcome. One of the most important drawbacks is the large number of queries still required in order to find all constraints. We believe this is due
to the search-based learning being mostly uninformed. During learning it is not aware of patterns that may appear in the
constraints acquired so far, which can guide the rest of the
process. An exception is the A NALAYZE &L EARN (Tsouros,
Stergiou, and Bessiere 2019) function, which tries to detect
potential cliques in the constraint network learned.
In this work, we focus on this major limitation and contribute the following elements to alleviate it:

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We show how probabilistic classification can be used to
predict whether a candidate expression is a constraint of

Constraint Programming (CP) has been successfully used to
model and solve complex combinatorial problems. However,
modeling is often not trivial and requires expertise, which
is a bottleneck to wider adoption. In Constraint Acquisition
(CA), the goal is to assist the user by automatically learning
the model. In (inter)active CA, this is done by interactively
posting queries to the user, e.g., asking whether a partial solution satisfies their (unspecified) constraints or not. While
interactive CA methods learn the constraints, the learning is
related to symbolic concept learning, as the goal is to learn
an exact representation. However, a large number of queries
is required to learn the model, which is a major limitation. In
this paper, we aim to alleviate this limitation by tightening the
connection of CA and Machine Learning (ML), by, for the
first time in interactive CA, exploiting statistical ML methods. We propose to use probabilistic classification models to
guide interactive CA to generate more promising queries. We
discuss how to train classifiers to predict whether a candidate expression from the bias is a constraint of the problem
or not, using both relation-based and scope-based features.
We then show how the predictions can be used in all layers of
interactive CA: the query generation, the scope finding, and
the lowest-level constraint finding. We experimentally evaluate our proposed methods using different classifiers and show
that our methods greatly outperform the state of the art, decreasing the number of queries needed to converge by up to
72%.

Introduction

8154

