The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Principal-Agent Reward Shaping in MDPs
Omer Ben-Porat1 , Yishay Mansour2, 3 , Michal Moshkovitz4 , Boaz Taitler1
1

Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
2
Tel Aviv University, Israel
3
Google Research
4
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
omerbp@technion.ac.il, mansour.yishay@gmail.com, michal.moshkovitz@mail.huji.ac.il, boaztaitler@campus.technion.ac.il
Abstract

the fastest route to their destination, it also has internal objectives that may not align with those of its users. For example, the app may incentivize users to explore less frequently
used roads or to drive near locations that have paid for advertising. Additionally, the app relies on user reports to identify incidents on roads, but users can be reluctant to report.
In this scenario, the navigation app is the principal, and it
can incentivize users to act in ways that align with its objectives through gamification or by offering coupons for advertisers’ stores, among other strategies. The transition of the
agent in the space and therefore the principal-agent interaction can be modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP).
While some works consider principal-agent problems over
MDPs (Zhang and Parkes 2008; Yu and Ho 2022; Zhang,
Cheng, and Conitzer 2022a,b), the setting remains underexplored. The fundamental question of mitigating misalignment in MDP environments warrants additional research.
In this paper, we contribute to the study of this challenging setting. Specifically, we model this setting as a Stackelberg game between two players, Principal and Agent,1
over a joint MDP. Principal and Agent each have a unique
reward function, denoted RP and RA , respectively, which
maps states and actions to instantaneous rewards. Principal
receives rewards based on Agent’s decision-making policy,
and thus she seeks to incentivize Agent using a bonus reward
function we denote RB . We assume that Principal has a limited budget, modeled as a constraint on the norm of RB .
Agent is self-interested and seeks a policy that maximizes
his own utility, which is the sum of his reward function RA
and the bonus reward function RB offered by Principal. By
offering bonus rewards to Agent, Principal motivates Agent
to adopt a policy that aligns better with her (Principal’s) objectives. The technical question we ask is how should Principal structure the bonus function RB to maximize her own
utility given budget constraints?

Principal-agent problems arise when one party acts on behalf of another, leading to conflicts of interest. The economic
literature has extensively studied principal-agent problems,
and recent work has extended this to more complex scenarios such as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). In this paper, we further explore this line of research by investigating
how reward shaping under budget constraints can improve the
principal’s utility. We study a two-player Stackelberg game
where the principal and the agent have different reward functions, and the agent chooses an MDP policy for both players.
The principal offers an additional reward to the agent, and the
agent picks their policy selfishly to maximize their reward,
which is the sum of the original and the offered reward. Our
results establish the NP-hardness of the problem and offer
polynomial approximation algorithms for two classes of instances: Stochastic trees and deterministic decision processes
with a finite horizon.

1

Introduction

The situation in which one party makes decisions on behalf of another party is common. For instance, in the context of investment management, an investor may hire a portfolio manager to manage their investment portfolio with
the objective of maximizing returns. However, the portfolio manager may also have their own preferences or incentives, such as seeking to minimize risk or maximizing their
own compensation, which may not align with the investor’s
goals. This conflict is a classic example of principal-agent
problems, extensively investigated by economists since the
1970s (see, e.g., (Holmström 1979; Laffont 2003). The fundamental question in this line of work is how the principal
should act to mitigate incentive misalignment and achieve
their objectives (Zhang and Zenios 2008; Gan et al. 2022;
Ross 1973; Zhuang and Hadfield-Menell 2020; HadfieldMenell and Hadfield 2019; Xiao et al. 2020; Ho, Slivkins,
and Vaughan 2014).
While the literature on principal-agent problems is vast,
modern applications present new challenges in which recommendation systems are principals and their users are
agents. To illustrate, consider a navigation app like Waze.
While the app’s primary function is to provide users with

Our Contribution This paper is the first to propose efficient, near-optimal algorithms for the principal-agent reward shaping problem. This problem is considered in prior
works and has shown to be NP-hard (see elaborated discussion in Subsection 1.1). Prior works therefore propose solutions ranging from mixed integer linear programming to
1
For ease of exposition, third-person singular pronouns are
“she” for Principal and “he” for Agent.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9502

