The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Provable Robustness against a Union of ℓ0 Adversarial Attacks
Zayd Hammoudeh1,2 * , Daniel Lowd1
1

University of Oregon
2
Qualtrics, Inc.
{zayd, lowd}@cs.uoregon.edu

Abstract

can be limiting. For example, consider a distributed sensor
network where each (tabular) feature is independently measured by a different sensor. Under this type of vertical partitioning where features are sourced from multiple parties, an
attacker that controls a single feature (i.e., sensor) can partially perturb every instance – training and test – up to 100%
poisoning rate (Li, Dowsley, and De Cock 2021; Wei et al.
2022). Existing ℓ0 evasion defenses do not certify robustness
over any training perturbation rendering them moot under
such an attack. Moreover, existing ℓ0 defenses could not be
combined with instance-wise poisoning defenses here since,
typically, the latter are only provably robust under small poisoning rates, e.g., ≤1% (Rezaei et al. 2023).
To address these limitations, we propose feature partition
aggregation (FPA) – a certified sparse defense jointly robust against both training and test feature perturbations. FPA
uses a model ensemble approach, where each submodel is
trained on a disjoint feature set, meaning any adversarially
perturbed feature – training or test – affects at most one submodel prediction. Hence, FPA guarantees robustness over
the union of ℓ0 evasion, backdoor, and poisoning attacks – a
strictly stronger guarantee than existing ℓ0 methods (Levine
and Feizi 2020b). In our empirical evaluation, FPA’s certified median guarantees are up to 4× larger than state-ofthe-art ℓ0 defenses (Jia et al. 2022b) with little to no decrease in classification accuracy; FPA is also up to 3,000×
faster. In other words, FPA provided additional dimensions
of ℓ0 robustness essentially for free. Our primary contributions are summarized below; additional theoretical analysis
and all proofs are in the supplement.
• We define a new robustness paradigm we term certified
feature robustness that generalizes ℓ0 (sparse) robustness
to encompass training set feature perturbations.

Sparse or ℓ0 adversarial attacks arbitrarily perturb an unknown subset of the features. ℓ0 robustness analysis is particularly well-suited for heterogeneous (tabular) data where
features have different types or scales. State-of-the-art ℓ0 certified defenses are based on randomized smoothing and apply to evasion attacks only. This paper proposes feature partition aggregation (FPA) – a certified defense against the
union of ℓ0 evasion, backdoor, and poisoning attacks. FPA
generates its stronger robustness guarantees via an ensemble
whose submodels are trained on disjoint feature sets. Compared to state-of-the-art ℓ0 defenses, FPA is up to 3,000×
faster and provides larger median robustness guarantees (e.g.,
median certificates of 13 pixels over 10 for CIFAR10, 12 pixels over 10 for MNIST, 4 features over 1 for Weather, and
3 features over 1 for Ames), meaning FPA provides the additional dimensions of robustness essentially for free.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are vulnerable to numerous types
of adversarial attacks, including (1) evasion attacks which
manipulate a model by perturbing test instances (Szegedy
et al. 2014), (2) poisoning attacks which manipulate predictions by perturbing a model’s training set (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012), (3) backdoor attacks which combine
training and test perturbations (Li et al. 2022), and (4) patch
attacks – a specialized evasion attack where the adversarial
perturbation is restricted to a specific shape (Brown et al.
2017). Certified defenses provide provable guarantees of a
prediction’s robustness against adversarial attack.
This work focuses on ℓ0 or sparse attacks, where an
adversary controls an unknown subset of the features. By
certifying robustness w.r.t. the number of perturbed features, ℓ0 analysis is particularly well-suited to heterogeneous (tabular) data where the features have different types
(e.g., numerical, categorical) or scales. Moreover, ℓ0 defenses provide provable robustness against real-world patch
attacks (Levine and Feizi 2020a). Several certified ℓ0 defenses have been proposed (Lee et al. 2019; Levine and Feizi
2020b; Calzavara et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2022b; Levine and
Feizi 2022), but these methods apply to evasion only, which

• We propose feature partition aggregation, a certified
feature defense that uses an ensemble of submodels
trained on disjoint feature sets. We detail two certification schemes – a simple one based on plurality voting
and the other based on multi-round elections.
• We empirically evaluate FPA on two classification and
two regression datasets. FPA provided simultaneously
larger and stronger median guarantees than the state-ofthe-art certified ℓ0 defenses while also being 2 to 3 orders
of magnitude faster.

* Work primarily done while at the University of Oregon.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21134

