The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Omni-Kernel Network for Image Restoration
Yuning Cui1 , Wenqi Ren2 * , Alois Knoll1
1

Technical University of Munich
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{yuning.cui, knoll}@in.tum.de, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

40

Image restoration aims to reconstruct a high-quality image
from a degraded low-quality observation. Recently, Transformer models have achieved promising performance on image restoration tasks due to their powerful ability to model
long-range dependencies. However, the quadratically growing complexity with respect to the input size makes them
inapplicable to practical applications. In this paper, we develop an efficient convolutional network for image restoration by enhancing multi-scale representation learning. To
this end, we propose an omni-kernel module that consists
of three branches, i.e., global, large, and local branches,
to learn global-to-local feature representations efficiently.
Specifically, the global branch achieves a global perceptive
field via the dual-domain channel attention and frequencygated mechanism. Furthermore, to provide multi-grained receptive fields, the large branch is formulated via different
shapes of depth-wise convolutions with unusually large kernel sizes. Moreover, we complement local information using
a point-wise depth-wise convolution. Finally, the proposed
network, dubbed OKNet, is established by inserting the omnikernel module into the bottleneck position for efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our network achieves
state-of-the-art performance on 11 benchmark datasets for
three representative image restoration tasks, including image
dehazing, image desnowing, and image defocus deblurring.
The code is available at https://github.com/c-yn/OKNet.

OKNet
OKNet-S PMNet

PSNR (dB)

38 Ours
36
34

LaKDNet

Ours

DehazeFormer-L

ECCV22

Fourmer
ICML23

DeHamer

TIP23

MAXIM-2S
CVPR22

CVPR22

FFA-Net

AAAI20

MSBDN
CVPR20

100

CVPR22

DRBNet

25.5
25.0

CVPR22

MDP

IFAN

WACV22

CVPR21

24.5

PFDN

ECCV20

50

arXiv23
26.0 OKNet
Restormer
Ours

PSNR (dB)

Abstract

150 200
GFLOPs

(a)

250

300

DPDNet
10

ECCV20

20
30
Parameters (M)

40

(b)

Figure 1: (a) FLOPs vs. PSNR on the SOTS-Indoor (Li et al.
2018) dataset for image dehazing. (b) The number of parameters vs. PSNR on the DPDD (Abuolaim and Brown
2020) dataset for image defocus deblurring. Our network
achieves a better trade-off between performance and computation overhead over other state-of-the-art algorithms.

for image restoration, such as the encoder-decoder architecture (Cho et al. 2021), residual connection (Mao et al.
2021), and attention mechanisms (Cui et al. 2023c). More
recently, Transformer models have been introduced into image restoration and significantly advanced the state-of-theart performance (Zamir et al. 2022). Nonetheless, the complexity of the core component, self-attention, grows quadratically with respect to the input size, making these methods
unsuitable for practical applications.
In contrast to the convolution operator that has limited receptive fields, Transformer models conduct global or large
window-based self-attention, enabling networks to obtain
large receptive fields. Inspired by this mechanism, a few
recent works on CNNs strike back by designing efficient
CNN frameworks with large kernels, such as 31 × 31 in RepLKNet (Ding et al. 2022) and 51 × 51 in SLaK (Liu et al.
2023). In the context of image restoration, LKDNet (Luo
et al. 2022) decomposes a 21×21 convolution into a smaller
depth-wise convolution and a depth-wise dilated convolution for image dehazing. LaKDNet (Ruan et al. 2023) leverages large kernel size convolutions (e.g., 9 × 9) followed
by point-wise convolutions to obtain large effective receptive fields for image deblurring. MAN (Wang et al. 2022b)
decomposes a large kernel size convolution into three components, i.e., a depth-wise convolution, a depth-wise dilated

Introduction
Image restoration aims to restore a sharp image from its lowquality counterpart, which suffers from degradations such
as haze, snowflakes, and blur. To deal with this longstanding ill-posed problem, conventional approaches utilized various hand-crafted features and assumptions to restrict solution spaces. However, these methods are not applicable to
more challenging real-world scenarios (Zhang et al. 2022).
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved superior performance over traditional algorithms on image restoration tasks by learning generalizable
priors from collected large-scale datasets (Chen et al. 2019).
To further improve performance, many advanced functional
units have been developed or borrowed from other domains
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1426

