The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ZOOM: Learning Video Mirror Detection with Extremely-Weak Supervision
Ke Xu* , Tsun Wai Siu* , Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Mirror detection is an active research topic in computer vision. However, all existing mirror detectors learn mirror representations from large-scale pixel-wise datasets, which are
tedious and expensive to obtain. Although weakly-supervised
learning has been widely explored in related topics, we note
that popular weak supervision signals (e.g., bounding boxes,
scribbles, points) still require some efforts from the user to
locate the target objects, with a strong assumption that the images to annotate always contain the target objects. Such an assumption may result in the over-segmentation of mirrors. Our
key idea of this work is that the existence of mirrors over a
time period may serve as a weak supervision to train a mirror
detector, for two reasons. First, if a network can predict the
existence of mirrors, it can essentially locate the mirrors. Second, we observe that the reflected contents of a mirror tend to
be similar to those in adjacent frames, but exhibit considerable contrast to regions in far-away frames (e.g., non-mirror
frames). In this paper, we propose ZOOM, the first method to
learn robust mirror representations from extremely weak annotations of per-frame ZerO-One Mirror indicators in videos.
The key insight of ZOOM is to model the similarity and contrast (between the mirror and non-mirror regions) in temporal
variations to locate and segment the mirrors. To this end, we
propose a novel fusion strategy to leverage temporal consistency information for mirror localization and a novel temporal similarity-contrast modeling module for mirror segmentation. We construct a new video mirror dataset for training
and evaluation. Experimental results under new and standard
metrics show that ZOOM performs favorably against existing
fully-supervised mirror detection methods.

Input

SATNet

HetNet VMDNet

Ours

GT

Figure 1: We propose ZOOM, which learns to detect mirrors with extremely weak supervision, i.e., the zero-one mirror indicators. ZOOM learns the similarity (blue arrow) and
contrast (red arrows) in temporal variations and achieves
promising results against fully supervised mirror detectors.

In recent years, a few deep methods are proposed to train
mirror detectors in a fully-supervised manner with a large
amount of mirror images and annotations. Yang et al. (2019)
propose the first deep network to learn contextual contrasted
features for detecting mirrors in single RGB images. Two
other methods (Mei et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2021) extend
the modeling of contrasted features by incorporating depth
information. Other methods exploit appearance correspondences (Lin, Wang, and Lau 2020; Lin, Tan, and Lau 2023),
semantic relationships (Guan, Lin, and Lau 2022), visual
chiral discrepancy (Tan et al. 2023), coarse symmetry relations (Huang et al. 2023), and intensity-based low-level
and semantics-based high-level features (He, Lin, and Lau
2023), for distinguishing the real and reflected contents. Despite the success, these methods typically require tedious
pixel-level labeling of large amounts of training data. They
may also suffer from the over-detection limitation, as their
fully-supervised learning schemes implicitly assume that
test images always contain mirrors (e.g., Figure 1 first row).
Weakly supervised learning is a straightforward and possible solution to reduce labeling efforts. We note that there

Introduction
Mirrors are made to reflect objects in the surroundings for
different purposes (e.g., monitoring traffic situations, checking dressings, and decorating rooms). However, such reflected contents of mirrors may fail existing computer vision
models in various tasks, e.g., depth estimation (Tan et al.
2021), lane detection (Feng et al. 2022), and scene parsing (Zhou et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2023). Hence, it is essential
to design effective and robust mirror detectors.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Rynson Lau is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6315

