The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Make Prompts Adaptable: Bayesian Modeling
for Vision-Language Prompt Learning with Data-Dependent Prior
Youngjae Cho1 , HeeSun Bae1 , Seungjae Shin 1 ,Yeo Dong Youn 2 , Weonyoung Joo 3 , Il-Chul Moon 1
1

KAIST
Seoul National University
3
Ewha Womans University
{genius.cho, cat2507, tmdwo0910}@kaist.ac.kr, dbsduehd95@snu.ac.kr, weonyoungjoo@ewha.ac.kr, icmoon@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

the inferred value of context vector becomes a static single
context defined for the given downstream task.
Whereas improving parameter-frozen VLP models by additional input context vector is a feasible solution, it can potentially overfit to a dense area of image features in few-shot
learning. Since text features are hard to capture the multimodes of image features in MLE training, it could fail to
infer the minor area of image features, eventually degrading the performance. In addition, MLE training undermines
the generalization capability of VLP models especially when
there is a distribution shift between the training and testing (Zhou et al. 2022a). Although several input-conditioned
prompt learning (Zhou et al. 2022a; Derakhshani et al. 2023)
tried to generalize unseen datasets, it inevitably undermines
the performance of seen datasets.
To alleviate the impact of uncertainty arising from
a few-shot learning scenario, our paper proposes Adaptive Particle-based Prompt Learning (APP), which utilizes
a Bayesian inference for prompt learning with a datadependent prior as shown in Figure 1. Through regularization using this data-dependent prior, the context vector is
directed toward capturing the diverse modes in image features among the seen data instances. Additionally, we approximate the posterior distribution via Wasserstein Gradient Flow to enhance the flexibility of our text features to
infer the complex image features. Furthermore, we extend
the modeling of the data-dependent prior to unseen test instances to adapt the distribution shift. This adaptation of the
context vector to the unseen instances enhances the model’s
resilience in the face of distribution shifts, providing robustness to these variations.
We summarize our contributions in two aspects.

Recent Vision-Language Pretrained (VLP) models have become the backbone for many downstream tasks, but they
are utilized as frozen model without learning. Prompt learning is a method to improve the pre-trained VLP model by
adding a learnable context vector to the inputs of the text
encoder. In a few-shot learning scenario of the downstream
task, MLE training can lead the context vector to over-fit
dominant image features in the training data. This overfitting can potentially harm the generalization ability, especially
in the presence of a distribution shift between the training
and test dataset. This paper presents a Bayesian-based framework of prompt learning, which could alleviate the overfitting issues on few-shot learning application and increase
the adaptability of prompts on unseen instances. Specifically,
modeling data-dependent prior enhances the adaptability of
text features for both seen and unseen image features without the trade-off of performance between them. Based on
the Bayesian framework, we utilize the Wasserstein Gradient Flow in the estimation of our target posterior distribution, which enables our prompt to be flexible in capturing the
complex modes of image features. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on benchmark datasets for several experiments by showing statistically significant improvements
on performance compared to existing methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/youngjae-cho/APP.

Introduction
Recently, Vision-Language Pretrained models (VLP) (Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021) have been used as backbones for various downstream tasks (Shen et al. 2022; Ruan,
Dubois, and Maddison 2022), and the pre-trained models
have shown successful adaptation. Since these pre-trained
models are used as-is in downstream tasks, prompt learning
adds a context vector to the input of pre-trained model, so
the context vector becomes the learnable parameter to improve the representation from the pre-trained model (Zhou
et al. 2022b) for the downstream task. For instance, a text
input is concatenated to a context vector, and the new text
input could be fed to the text encoder. The learning of context vector comes from the back-propagation after the feedforward of the concatenated text input. Since there is only
a single context vector without being conditioned by inputs,

1. Enhancing Flexibility of Prompt: By approximating
prompt posterior with Wasserstein Gradient Flow, our
context vectors can be more flexibly utilized to infer the
complex image feature spaces.
2. Enhancing Adaptability of Prompt: By modeling datadependent prior based on the image feature information,
text features capture the multi-modes of seen image features and adapt to unseen image features, which leads to
the improved performances of seen and unseen datasets
without trade-off.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11552

