The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CGMGM: A Cross-Gaussian Mixture Generative Model for Few-Shot Semantic
Segmentation
Junao Shen1 , Kun Kuang2 , Jiaheng Wang1 , Xinyu Wang1 , Tian Feng1 * , Wei Zhang1, 3
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Innovation Center of Yangtze River Delta, Zhejiang University
{jashen, kunkuang, jiahengwang, xinyu.w, t.feng, cstzhangwei}@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) aims to segment unseen objects in a query image using a few pixel-wise annotated support images, thus expanding the capabilities of
semantic segmentation. The main challenge lies in extracting sufficient information from the limited support images to
guide the segmentation process. Conventional methods typically address this problem by generating single or multiple
prototypes from the support images and calculating their cosine similarity to the query image. However, these methods
often fail to capture meaningful information for modeling
the de facto joint distribution of pixel and category. Consequently, they result in incomplete segmentation of foreground
objects and mis-segmentation of the complex background. To
overcome this issue, we propose the Cross Gaussian Mixture Generative Model (CGMGM), a novel Gaussian Mixture
Models (GMMs)-based FSS method, which establishes the
joint distribution of pixel and category in both the support and
query images. Specifically, our method initially matches the
feature representations of the query image with those of the
support images to generate and refine an initial segmentation
mask. It then employs GMMs to accurately model the joint
distribution of foreground and background using the support
masks and the initial segmentation mask. Subsequently, a
parametric decoder utilizes the posterior probability of pixels in the query image, by applying the Bayesian theorem, to
the joint distribution, to generate the final segmentation mask.
Experimental results on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets
demonstrate our CGMGM’s effectiveness and superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

(a) Query

(b) GT

(c) CS

(d) GP

Figure 1: Examples of cosine similarity (CS) and GMMs
posterior (GP), compared to Ground Truth (GT), on Pascal5i (Shaban et al. 2017) under 1-shot setting.

data, the performances of these method may degrade notably. To address this challenge, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) (Shaban et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2021), which
aims to segment the objects of a novel category in a query
image with a few annotated support images for training, has
emerged as a noteworthy subfield of semantic segmentation.
The setting of FSS is closer than that of the general semantic segmentation to the way humans recognize unseen objects in the real word with limited supporting information or
knowledge. Obviously, the key difficulty of FSS is to extract
adequate guidance information from the support images.
Existent FSS methods (Lang et al. 2022a; Tian et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2019) counteract the abovementioned difficulty via extracting semantic-level prototypes from the feature representations of the support images
and adopting a metric learning pipeline between these prototypes and the feature representation of the query image
for guidance information. Among these methods, the prototypical ones (Lang et al. 2022a; Li et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2019, 2021) have achieved the state-of-the-art performance,
while they undergo specific limitations. First, the conventional process can be summarized as guiding the feature representation of the query image using prototypes, no matter
category-wise (Zhang et al. 2019; Lang et al. 2022a), clusterwise (Li et al. 2021) or pixel-wise (Zhang et al. 2021), and
then adopting simplistic cosine similarity for measurement.
As shown in Figure 1, calculating cosine similarity relies

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in the field of
computer vision and can formulated as a pixel-wise classification problem. Recent significant improvements have
occurred to semantic segmentation given the considerable
development of deep neural networks (DNNs) (Chen et al.
2018; Huang et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2017; Yuan et al.
2019; Xie et al. 2021). Conventional methods for semantic segmentation rely heavily on large amount annotated datasets (Everingham et al. 2010; Nguyen and Todorovic 2019), whereas collecting high-quality data is timeconsuming and laborious. In the case of extremely limited
* Corresponding author (t.feng@zju.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4784

