The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Automated Chinese Ancient Character Restoration:
A Diffusion-Based Method with a New Dataset
Haolong Li1 , Chenghao Du1 , Ziheng Jiang1 , Yifan Zhang1 , Jiawei Ma1 , Chen Ye1, 2, *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
The Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing, Ministry of Education, Tongji University
{furlongli322, zyf20020730, jiavve1.10}@gmail.com, {2133034, jiangzh, yechen}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

Real

Uneroded

Erosionfication

Eroded

Restoration

Restored

Automated Chinese ancient character restoration (ACACR)
remains a challenging task due to its historical significance
and aesthetic complexity. Existing methods are constrained
by non-professional masks and even overfitting when training on small-scale datasets, which hinder their interdisciplinary application to traditional fields. In this paper, we
are proud to introduce the Chinese Ancient Rubbing and
Manuscript Character Dataset (ARMCD), which consists of
15,553 real-world ancient single-character images with 42
rubbings and manuscripts, covering the works of over 200
calligraphy artists spanning from 200 to 1,800 AD. We are
also dedicated to providing professional synthetic masks by
extracting localized erosion from real eroded images. Moreover, we propose DiffACR (Diffusion model for automated
Chinese Ancient Character Restoration), a diffusion-based
method for the ACACR task. Specifically, we regard the synthesis of eroded images as a special form of cold diffusion
on uneroded ones and extract the prior mask directly from
the eroded images. Our experiments demonstrate that our
method comprehensively outperforms most existing methods
on the proposed ARMCD. Dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/lhl322001/DiffACR.

Introduction
Ancient character restoration has traditionally been a specialized skill reserved for restoration experts. With their indepth knowledge in various disciplines, such as archaeology
and art, restoration experts often dedicate days, months, or
even years to meticulously restoring an artifact or even a single character (Tétreault 2013). In particular, the restoration
of Chinese ancient characters has garnered widespread attention due to their distinctiveness and severe erosion. As
empires rose and fell, the complex structures and strokes of
various ancient Chinese characters, especially those on the
inscriptions, have been significantly eroded, making their
restoration increasingly challenging. Fortunately, with the
development of computer technologies, automated Chinese
ancient character restoration (ACACR) has become a viable
solution.

Figure 1: Examples of automated Chinese ancient character
restoration through our erosionfication and restoration processes.

ACACR is essentially a cross-disciplinary visual inpainting task aimed at automatically reconstructing ancient Chinese character images with domain-specific knowledge. Existing methods mostly focus on handwriting (Zhong et al.
2017; Song, Li, and Wang 2020; Wang et al. 2021) or stylized (Li et al. 2021) forms. The former usually use specific
handwriting datasets (Wang et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2011),
while the latter typically employ fonts in standardized formats (e.g. TrueType format) to generate datasets. However,
these large-scale datasets differ significantly from Chinese

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3073

