The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeS3: Adaptive Attention-Driven Self and Soft Shadow Removal
Using ViT Similarity
Yeying Jin1 , Wei Ye2 , Wenhan Yang3 , Yuan Yuan2 , Robby T. Tan 1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
e0178303@u.nus.edu, yewei10@huawei.com, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, yuanyuan10@huawei.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Removing soft and self shadows that lack clear boundaries
from a single image is still challenging. Self shadows are
shadows that are cast on the object itself. Most existing methods rely on binary shadow masks, without considering the
ambiguous boundaries of soft and self shadows. In this paper, we present DeS3, a method that removes hard, soft and
self shadows based on adaptive attention and ViT similarity. Our novel ViT similarity loss utilizes features extracted
from a pre-trained Vision Transformer. This loss helps guide
the reverse sampling towards recovering scene structures. Our
adaptive attention is able to differentiate shadow regions from
the underlying objects, as well as shadow regions from the
object casting the shadow. This capability enables DeS3 to
better recover the structures of objects even when they are
partially occluded by shadows. Different from existing methods that rely on constraints during the training phase, we incorporate the ViT similarity during the sampling stage. Our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the SRD,
AISTD, LRSS, USR and UIUC datasets, removing hard, soft,
and self shadows robustly. Specifically, our method outperforms the SOTA method by 16% of the RMSE of the whole
image on the LRSS dataset.

Figure 1: The results of SOTA supervised method (Wan et al.
2022) and weakly-supervised method (Liu et al. 2021b) in
removing (a) self shadow, (b) soft shadow, and (c) hard
shadow. Our DeS3 can preserve meaningful objects (duck,
paper, bollard, etc.) during the reverse sampling, and achieve
better shadow removal results.

problematic to acquire, particularly for soft and self shadows as shown in Fig. 3. Moreover, current shadow removal
methods fail to handle self shadow images since obtaining
the ground truth for outdoor self shadows is intractable.
The weakly-supervised methods (Le and Samaras 2020;
Liu et al. 2021b) require binary shadow masks to distinguish shadow and shadow-free patches. These patches from
the same images can reduce the domain gap of shadow and
shadow-free domains. However, cropping patches is timeconsuming (Liu et al. 2021b) and synthesizing shadows on
the shadow-free regions cannot represent real-world shadow
images. Moreover, these weakly-supervised methods require
shadows to be homogeneous, which is often not the case,
particularly for self shadows and soft shadows.
Existing unsupervised methods (Hu et al. 2019b; Liu et al.
2021a; Jin, Sharma, and Tan 2021) are GAN-based (Zhu
et al. 2017), which require unpaired shadow and shadowfree images for training. They largely rely on the statistical similarity between images from the two domains (Le
and Samaras 2020) (shadow and shadow-free domains). Unfortunately, once the two domains are statistically different, these methods produce hallucination/fake contents (Zhu
et al. 2018) and suffer from unstable training.

Introduction
Shadows can be categorized into hard shadows, soft shadows, and self shadows (Salvador, Cavallaro, and Ebrahimi
2004; Huang and Chen 2009). When an object blocks beams
of light, shadows are formed on surfaces or nearby objects,
which are referred to as hard and soft shadows. Hard shadows have sharp boundaries, while soft shadows gradually
transition from shadow to non-shadow regions without any
distinct boundaries. Self shadows occur when a portion of
an object obstructs beams of light, resulting in shadows being cast on the object itself. Removing all types of shadows
is intractable due to ambiguities between shadow and nonshadow regions. Soft and self shadows are particularly challenging to identify and remove compared to hard shadows.
To remove shadows, most of the methods use an off-theshelf shadow detection method (Zhu et al. 2018) or user interaction (Gryka, Terry, and Brostow 2015) to obtain binary
shadow masks. However, these binary shadow masks are
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2634

