The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Aligning Geometric Spatial Layout in Cross-View Geo-Localization
via Feature Recombination
Qingwang Zhang, Yingying Zhu*
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
zhangqingwang2022@email.szu.edu.cn, zhuyy@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-view geo-localization holds significant potential for
various applications, but drastic differences in viewpoints
and visual appearances between cross-view images make this
task extremely challenging. Recent works have made notable
progress in cross-view geo-localization. However, existing
methods either ignore the correspondence between geometric
spatial layout in cross-view images or require high costs or
strict constraints to achieve such alignment. In response to
these challenges, we propose a Feature Recombination Module (FRM) that explicitly establishes the geometric spatial layout correspondences between two views. Unlike existing methods, FRM aligns geometric spatial layout by directly recombining features, avoiding image preprocessing, and introducing
no additional computational and parameter costs. This effectively reduces ambiguities caused by geometric misalignments
between ground-level and aerial-level images. Furthermore, it
is not sensitive to frameworks and applies to both CNN-based
and Transformer-based architectures. Additionally, as part of
the training procedure, we also introduce a novel weighted
(B +1)-tuple loss (WBL) as optimization objective. Compared
to the widely used weighted soft margin ranking loss, this innovative loss enhances convergence speed and final performance.
Based on the two core components (FRM and WBL), we develop an end-to-end network architecture (FRGeo) to address
these limitations from a different perspective. Extensive experiments show that our proposed FRGeo not only achieves
state-of-the-art performance on cross-view geo-localization
benchmarks, including CVUSA, CVACT, and VIGOR, but
also is significantly superior or competitive in terms of computational complexity and trainable parameters. Our project
homepage is at https://zqwlearning.github.io/FRGeo.

Figure 1: Performance comparison on CVUSA R@1. Bubble
size indicates the number of trainable parameters. Ours♣
indicates the integration of FRM and WBL into the TransGeo
1-stage, which is a pure Transformer-based method. Ours
(FRGeo) achieves the highest R@1 while enjoying significantly less number of trainable parameters and GFLOPs.

as predictive result. This task offers an alternative means
for geo-localization in real scenarios, particularly crucial in
environments where GPS signals are obstructed or perturbed
by noise. The potential applications of this task are extensive,
encompassing areas such as autonomous driving (Häne et al.
2017; Kim and Walter 2017), robotic navigation (McManus
et al. 2014), and 3D reconstruction (Middelberg et al. 2014).
Despite the enticing potential for application, the task
of cross-view matching presents substantial challenges due
to the dramatic changes in viewpoints and visual appearances between ground and aerial images. Consequently, it
is paramount to understand and correspond both image content (appearances and semantics) and geometric spatial layout
across views. Considering that the correspondence of geometric spatial layout can be implicitly modeled by models
autonomously or guided by external priors, existing methods (Shi et al. 2019, 2020) for aligning the geometric spatial layout between different views achieve alignment by
warping aerial images to match ground images. This help

Introduction
The goal of cross-view geo-localization is to determine the
geographical location of a ground image (known as a query
image) from geo-tagged aerial images (known as reference
images) without relying on GPS or other positioning devices.
Existing methods to cross-view geo-localization commonly
frame the problem as a retrieval task. In practical deployment,
the task involves retrieving the reference image that is most
similar to the query image and utilizing its location label
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7251

