The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressive Feature Self-Reinforcement for
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Jingxuan He1 , Lechao Cheng1 * , Chaowei Fang2 , Zunlei Feng3 , Tingting Mu4 , Mingli Song3
1

Zhejiang Lab,
Xidian University,
3
Zhejiang University,
4
University of Manchester
22021025@zju.edu.cn, chenglc@zhejianglab.com, chaoweifang@outlook.com, zunleifeng@zju.edu.cn,
tingting.mu@manchester.ac.uk, brooksong@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Compared to conventional semantic segmentation with pixellevel supervision, weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) with image-level labels poses the challenge that it
commonly focuses on the most discriminative regions, resulting in a disparity between weakly and fully supervision
scenarios. A typical manifestation is the diminished precision on object boundaries, leading to deteriorated accuracy of
WSSS. To alleviate this issue, we propose to adaptively partition the image content into certain regions (e.g., confident
foreground and background) and uncertain regions (e.g., object boundaries and misclassified categories) for separate processing. For uncertain cues, we propose an adaptive masking
strategy and seek to recover the local information with selfdistilled knowledge. We further assume that confident regions
should be robust enough to preserve the global semantics, and
introduce a complementary self-distillation method that constrains semantic consistency between confident regions and
an augmented view with the same class labels. Extensive experiments conducted on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO
2014 demonstrate that our proposed single-stage approach for
WSSS not only outperforms state-of-the-art counterparts but
also surpasses multi-stage methods that trade complexity for
accuracy.

Image & GT

CAM

uncertain regions

confident regions

Regions with low confidence
activation value is moderate
• boundaries between
objects and background
• boundaries within objects
Reinforce by
recovering local information
Regions with high confidence
activation value is high
• person
• chair
activation value is low
• background
Reinforce by
constraining global information

Figure 1: Visualization of our main idea. The flawed CAM
only identifies discriminative regions. To address this, we
propose to partition the image into uncertain regions (e.g.,
object boundaries) and confident regions (e.g., the main
body of an object) and reinforce features of these regions
in a complementary manner.

be used as the ground truth for supervising a segmentation
network. These steps can either be implemented as separate
stages or as a single collaborative stage, and single-stage
frameworks are usually more efficient as they streamline
the training pipeline. In general, high-quality pseudo labels
lead to superior semantic segmentation performance. In this
work, we focus on developing an effective single-stage approach to generate more accurate pseudo labels from imagelevel class labels.
Unfortunately, CAMs are essentially flawed because they
are intended for classification, i.e., they strive to identify
the most discriminative regions of an object aiming at improved classification accuracy. To tackle this, one can improve the initial seeds (Lee et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020)
or refine pseudo labels (Ahn, Cho, and Kwak 2019; Chen
et al. 2020), by expanding activations or labels to semantically consistent pixels in the neighborhood. Recent studies have found that the restricted receptive field of convolution negatively affects the recognition of integral objects (Ru
et al. 2022, 2023) and use vision transformer (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2020) to model the global relationships for improve-

Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) reduces
the cost of annotating “strong” pixel-level labels by using
“weak” labels such as bounding boxes (Dai, He, and Sun
2015; Song et al. 2019), scribbles (Lin et al. 2016; Vernaza
and Chandraker 2017), points (Bearman et al. 2016; Su et al.
2022) and image-level class labels (Araslanov and Roth
2020; Ru et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023; Ru et al. 2023). Among
these, image-level class labels are the most affordable, but
challenging to exploit. A commonly used WSSS approach
based on image-level class labels typically includes the following steps: (1) to train a neural network for image classification; (2) to use the network to generate class activation maps (CAMs) (Zhou et al. 2016) as seed regions; (3)
to refine the CAMs to pseudo segmentation labels that will
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2085

