The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Kumaraswamy Wavelet for Heterophilic Scene Graph Generation
Lianggangxu Chen1 , Youqi Song1 , Shaohui Lin1 , Changbo Wang1∗ , Gaoqi He1, 2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Precision Optics, Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
{lgxchen, youqisong}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {shlin, cbwang, gqhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

based strategies designed for homophily, as shown in Figure 1(c), to selectively aggregate neighborhood information
(Tang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2022),
and (2) Attention mechanism driven strategies designed for
heterophily, as shown in Figure 1(d), to correlate different
neighbors (Li et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2020, 2022).
Unfortunately, existing spatial GNNs in SGG suffer from
the over smoothing issue in the heterophilic scene graphs.
Over smoothing in GNN will manifest as: the features of
all nodes within the same connected component tend to be
consistent. In general, GNNs update node representations by
aggregating information from neighbors, which can be seen
as a special form of low-pass filter (Bo et al. 2021). The
low-pass filter in GNNs mainly retains the commonalities
of node features. This mechanism works well for homogeneous graphs (Zhang et al. 2022), i.e., similar nodes tend
to connect with each other. However, in heterophilic scene
graphs, nodes of different classes are often adjacent, which
also means that fine-grained predicates are always connected
to the coarse-grained predicates. Employing a low-pass filter
to force the representation of connected predicates to be similar would prevent its applicability in heterogeneous scenes.
Specifically, the above over smoothing leads to inaccurate recognition of fine-grained predicates in the heterophilic
scene graphs. For example, as shown in Figure 1(c) and Figure 1(d), existing variant models of GNNs (Tang et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2022) misclassify
fine-grained predicates. The fine-grained predicates standing on/parked on/part of are over smoothed to the coarsegrained predicate on. Figure 2(a) shows the misclassification
ratio of fine-grained predicates by HL-Net (Lin et al. 2022).
As shown in Figure 2(a), many fine-grained predicates have
prediction error rates of up to about 10%.
To further support the previous analysis of over smoothing issue, scene graph features are decomposed into spectral features in Figure 2(b). We find one important phenomenon: when the heterophily on the graph increases, the
spectral energy gradually shifts towards the high-frequency
part. That is, frequency is positively associated with heterophily. Meanwhile, we observed that the features of different frequency bands contribute differently to the prediction accuracy of scene graphs with different heterophily ratios. This suggests that it is necessary to employ both highpass filters to capture the differences between neighboring

Graph neural networks (GNNs) has demonstrated its capabilities in the field of scene graph generation (SGG) by updating node representations from neighboring nodes. Actually it
can be viewed as a form of low-pass filter in the spatial domain, which smooths node feature representation and retains
commonalities among nodes. However, spatial GNNs does
not work well in the case of heterophilic SGG in which finegrained predicates are always connected to a large number
of coarse-grained predicates. Blind smoothing undermines
the discriminative information of the fine-grained predicates,
resulting in failure to predict them accurately. To address
the heterophily, our key idea is to design tailored filters by
wavelet transform from the spectral domain. First, we prove
rigorously that when the heterophily on the scene graph increases, the spectral energy gradually shifts towards the highfrequency part. Inspired by this observation, we subsequently
propose the Kumaraswamy Wavelet Graph Neural Network
(KWGNN). KWGNN leverages complementary multi-group
Kumaraswamy wavelets to cover all frequency bands. Finally,
KWGNN adaptively generates band-pass filters and then integrates the filtering results to better accommodate varying
levels of smoothness on the graph. Comprehensive experiments on the Visual Genome and Open Images datasets show
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to generate a structured
representation of a scene by detecting objects and expressing their relationships through predicates in images (Cong,
Yang, and Rosenhahn 2023). Therefore, SGG plays a big
role in subsequent scene understanding tasks, including visual question answering (Lei et al. 2023) and image captioning (Yang, Liu, and Wang 2022).
Existing SGG methods typically use graph neural networks (GNNs) in the spatial domain (Li et al. 2018) to
successively pass visual features for obtaining reliable context clues. Specifically, according to the trend of predicate
nodes on a graph having consistent or different (homophily
or heterophily) classes as their neighbors, GNNs used in
SGG can be categorized into two classes : (1) Resampling
* Changbo Wang and Gaoqi He are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1138

