The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dual-View Whitening on Pre-trained Text Embeddings for Sequential
Recommendation
Lingzi Zhang1,2 , Xin Zhou2 * , Zhiwei Zeng1 , Zhiqi Shen1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
lingzi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {xin.zhou, zhiwei.zeng, zqshen}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

efficiency over conventional ID-based methods since it obviates the necessity for substantial tensor storage and computational resources, negating the need for a large, continually updated ID embedding matrix. Lastly, in contrast to the
non-transferable nature of ID embeddings, text embeddings
maintain versatility across various platforms and domains.
Despite these benefits, there exists a noticeable gap in research dedicated to pure TextSRec.
Most existing sequential recommendation models (Hou
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022b; Yuan et al. 2023) usually utilize text embeddings directly from pre-trained language models, such as BERT (Vaswani et al. 2017). Recent research (Yuan et al. 2023) posits that superior performance from TextSRec is achieved exclusively with advanced pre-trained language models. We contend that these
models do not optimally harness pre-trained text embeddings for sequential recommendation. This suboptimal use
is, in part, due to the representation degeneration issue inherent in BERT embeddings. Recent studies in NLP indicate
that BERT sentence embeddings experience this problem,
which leads to anisotropy in the vector space, limiting their
efficacy in downstream tasks (Li et al. 2020; Su et al. 2021).
To mitigate the anisotropy in pre-trained text embeddings,
we adopt a whitening transformation (Kessy, Lewin, and
Strimmer 2018) for sequential recommendation. This transformation refines the distribution of the pre-trained text embeddings into an isotropic Gaussian distribution, eliminating
correlations among the axes. Our rigorous evaluation has unequivocally demonstrated that sequential models incorporating whitened text features consistently and substantially outperform those utilizing ID embeddings or text embeddings.
While whitening is advantageous for recommendations,
over-whitening might adversely affect the manifold of items
with analogous textual semantics. As a result, a more nuanced approach could involve partially decorrelating dimensions. This method maintains a higher degree of original
textual semantics, albeit at the cost of embedding uniformity (Weng et al. 2022). Although preserving text semantics
might seem beneficial for recommendations, our empirical
result indicates that complete whitening produces best results compared to varying levels of partial whitening.
To reap the benefits of full whitening while preserving
the partial semantics in original text features, we propose a
novel Dual-view Whitening method on pre-trained text em-

Recent advances in sequential recommendation models have
demonstrated the efficacy of integrating pre-trained text embeddings with item ID embeddings to achieve superior performance. However, our study takes a unique perspective by
exclusively focusing on the untapped potential of text embeddings, obviating the need for ID embeddings. We begin
by implementing a pre-processing strategy known as whitening, which effectively transforms the anisotropic semantic
space of pre-trained text embeddings into an isotropic Gaussian distribution. Comprehensive experiments reveal that applying whitening to pre-trained text embeddings in sequential
recommendation models significantly enhances performance.
Yet, a full whitening operation might break the potential
manifold of items with similar text semantics. To retain the
original semantics while benefiting from the isotropy of the
whitened text features, we propose a Dual-view Whitening
method for Sequential Recommendation (DWSRec), which
leverages both fully whitened and relaxed whitened item representations as dual views for effective recommendations. We
further examine the advantages of our approach through both
empirical and theoretical analyses. Experiments on three public benchmark datasets show that DWSRec outperforms stateof-the-art methods for sequential recommendation.

Introduction
The sequential recommendation aims to provide personalized item recommendations to users over time (Zhou et al.
2020; Lei et al. 2021; Hou et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023).
Recently, there has been an upsurge of interest in developing
sequential recommendation methods that incorporate textual information about items, such as product attributes (Xie,
Zhou, and Kim 2022), descriptions (Hou et al. 2022; Zhou
et al. 2023a), and reviews (Shuai et al. 2022). These approaches typically meld textual features with ID embeddings, underscoring the pivotal role of ID embeddings in
the recommendation process. However, there are three primary benefits in exploring sequential recommendation relying exclusively on textual features (denoted as TextSRec):
Firstly, it bolsters performance in cold-start scenarios, circumventing the pitfalls of random ID embeddings initialization for new products. Secondly, TextSRec offers superior
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9332

