The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Novel Energy Based Model Mechanism for Multi-Modal Aspect-Based
Sentiment Analysis
Tianshuo Peng1,† , Zuchao Li1,†, * , Ping Wang3,4 , Lefei Zhang1,2 , and Hai Zhao5
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China,
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China,
3
Center for the Studies of Information Resources, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
4
School of Information Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{pengts,zcli-charlie,wangping,zhanglefei}@whu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Introduction

Abstract

As one of the most important tasks that examines a model’s
semantic comprehension and sentiment perception, Multimodal Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis (MABSA) is an
challenging and fine-grained task in the Sentiment Analysis field and has attracted increasing attention. The MABSA
task consists of three main tasks: given an image-text pair,
Multi-modal Aspect Term Extraction (MATE) focuses on
extracting all aspect terms with sentiment polarity in the
sentence (Zhao et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2018; Wu et al.
2020a), Multi-modal Aspect-oriented Sentiment Classification (MASC) aims to determine the sentiment polarity of
each given aspect (Xu, Mao, and Chen 2019; Yu and Jiang
2019; Yu, Jiang, and Xia 2020), Joint Multi-modal AspectSentiment Analysis (JMASA), on the other hand, requires
the model to extract aspect-sentiment pairs jointly (Ju et al.
2021; Ling, Yu, and Xia 2022; Zhou et al. 2023). Among
all the methods of previous work, the span-based extraction methods, such as FSUIE (Peng et al. 2023), demonstrate strong performance in sentiment analysis due to their
joint modeling of input sequences and target labels. Besides,
it avoids complex structures for sequence labelling or sequence generation with a more concise structure.
In this scenario of fine-grained MABSA task, three main
challenges are worth emphasizing: First, image contains a
large amount of semantic information, and there is a difference in the focus of visual information between different analysis targets. Take figure 1 as an example: (1) The
focus of visual information is different between MATE and
MASC tasks: the MATE task should focus on all the potential entities across the image while MASC concentrates
on the details of specific aspect which is fine-grained. (2) In
the MASC task, different image regions may imply different sentimental tendencies, resulting the difference of focus
among aspects. Previous work only focused on the general
information in image features, while the visual information
representing positive emotions, such as the person ponder-

Multi-modal aspect-based sentiment analysis (MABSA) has
recently attracted increasing attention. The span-based extraction methods, such as FSUIE, demonstrate strong performance in sentiment analysis due to their joint modeling of input sequences and target labels. However, previous methods
still have certain limitations: (i) They ignore the difference
in the focus of visual information between different analysis
targets (aspect or sentiment). (ii) Combining features from
uni-modal encoders directly may not be sufficient to eliminate the modal gap and can cause difficulties in capturing
the image-text pairwise relevance. (iii) Existing span-based
methods for MABSA ignore the pairwise relevance of target span boundaries. To tackle these limitations, we propose
a novel framework called DQPSA. Specifically, our model
contains a Prompt as Dual Query (PDQ) module that uses the
prompt as both a visual query and a language query to extract
prompt-aware visual information and strengthen the pairwise
relevance between visual information and the analysis target.
Additionally, we introduce an Energy-based Pairwise Expert
(EPE) module that models the boundaries pairing of the analysis target from the perspective of an Energy-based Model.
This expert predicts aspect or sentiment span based on pairwise stability. Experiments on three widely used benchmarks
demonstrate that DQPSA outperforms previous approaches
and achieves a new state-of-the-art performance. The code
will be released at https://github.com/pengts/DQPSA.

Corresponding author. † Equal contribution. This work was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 62306216), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province
of China (No. 2023AFB816), the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities (No. 2042023kf0133), the Special Fund of
Hubei Luojia Laboratory (No. 220100014), National Natural Science Foundation of China [No. 72074171] [No. 72374161].
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*

18869

