The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Architecture Multi-Expert Diffusion Models
Yunsung Lee2 * , JinYoung Kim3 * , Hyojun Go3 * ,
Myeongho Jeong4 , Shinhyeok Oh1 , Seungtaek Choi4
1

Riiid AI Research
Wrtn Technologies
3
Twelvelabs
4
Yanolja
sung@wrtn.io, seago0828@gmail.com, gohyojun15@gmail.com
myeongho.jeong@yanolja.com, shinhyeok.oh@riiid.co seungtaek.choi@yanolja.com
2

Abstract
In this paper, we address the performance degradation of efficient diffusion models by introducing Multi-architecturE
Multi-Expert diffusion models (MEME). We identify the need
for tailored operations at different time-steps in diffusion processes and leverage this insight to create compact yet highperforming models. MEME assigns distinct architectures to
different time-step intervals, balancing convolution and selfattention operations based on observed frequency characteristics. We also introduce a soft interval assignment strategy
for comprehensive training. Empirically, MEME operates 3.3
times faster than baselines while improving image generation quality (FID scores) by 0.62 (FFHQ) and 0.37 (CelebA).
Though we validate the effectiveness of assigning more optimal architecture per time-step, where efficient models outperform the larger models, we argue that MEME opens a new
design choice for diffusion models that can be easily applied
in other scenarios, such as large multi-expert models.

Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Song and Ermon 2019; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) are a promising approach for generative modeling, and they are likely to play
an increasingly important role in diverse domains, including
image (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Rombach et al. 2022;
Balaji et al. 2022), audio (Kong et al. 2021; Kim, Kim, and
Yoon 2022), video (Ho et al. 2022b,a; Zhou et al. 2022), and
3D generation (Poole et al. 2022; Seo et al. 2023). However, despite their impressive performance, diffusion models
suffer from high computation costs, which stem from the
following two orthogonal factors: (i) the lengthy iterative denoising process, and (ii) the cumbersome denoiser networks.
Though there have been several efforts to overcome such limitations (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021; Bao et al. 2022; Lu
et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022; Song et al. 2023), most of these
efforts have focused only on resolving the first factor, such
that the cumbersome denoisers still limit their applicability
to real-world scenarios. A few efforts reduce the size of the
denoisers based on post-training low-bit quantization (Shang
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13427

et al. 2022) and distillation (Yang et al. 2022), as we illustrated in Fig. 1b, but they usually achieve such efficiency by
compromising on accuracy.
In this paper, we thus aim to build a diffusion model that is
compact yet comparable in performance to the large models.
For this purpose, we first ask a research question “why the
traditional diffusion models require such massive parameters?”. (Choi et al. 2022; Go et al. 2023) suggests that the
difficulty of learning diffusion models is that they have to
learn all the different tasks at many different time-steps. One
step further, from a frequency perspective, (Yang et al. 2022)
theoretical explains that diffusion models should learn too
many different features in varying time-steps, where diffusion models tend to initially form low-frequency components
(e.g., overall image contour) and subsequently fill in highfrequency components (e.g., detailed textures). However, as
they assume the denoiser network to be a linear filter, which
is not practical, we aim to investigate empirical evidence
to support this claim. Specifically, we analyze the per-layer
Fourier spectrum for the input xt at each diffusion time-step
t, finding that there are significant and consistent variations in
the relative log amplitudes of the Fourier-transformed feature
maps as t progresses. This finding indicates that the costly
training of large models indeed involves learning to adapt to
the different frequency characteristics at each time-step t.
One way to leverage this finding is to assign distinct timestep intervals to multiple diffusion models (Go et al. 2022;
Balaji et al. 2022), referred to as the multi-expert strategy, in
order for models to be specialized in the assigned time-step
intervals as shown in Fig. 1c. However, since (Go et al. 2022)
utilized the multi-expert strategy for the conditioned generation with guidance and (Balaji et al. 2022) focused on high
performance, the architecture efficiency is not considered.
Most importantly, to the best of our knowledge, previous
works have constructed diffusion models with a single architecture, missing the possibility of optimal architectures that
better solve the task at each time-step of diffusion.
To this end, we propose to assign different models with
different architectures for each different time-step interval, whose base operations vary according to their respective frequency ranges, which we dub Multi-architecturE
Multi-Expert diffusion models (MEME) (Fig. 1d). Specifi-

