The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

KGTS: Contrastive Trajectory Similarity Learning over Prompt Knowledge
Graph Embedding
Zhen Chen1 , Dalin Zhang2 , Shanshan Feng3, 4 , Kaixuan Chen2 , Lisi Chen1 ,
Peng Han1* , Shuo Shang1 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Aalborg University, Denmark
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
4
Institute of High-Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
{chenzhen059, jedi.shang}@gmail.com, {dalinz, kchen}@cs.aau.dk,
{victor fengss, penghan study}@foxmail.com, lchen012@e.ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Various trajectory similarity computation approaches
have been investigated such as dynamic time warping
(DTW) (Yi, Jagadish, and Faloutsos 1998), edit distance
on real sequences (EDR) (Chen, Özsu, and Oria 2005),
and Hausdorff distance (Atev, Miller, and Papanikolopoulos
2010). Despite some success, they suffer from a common
deficiency of high computation complexity (Li et al. 2018).
Specifically, since two trajectories need to be aligned point
by point, the computation complexity attains a quadratic
form O(l2 ), where l is the mean length of the trajectories.
This flaw hinders their practical applications to long trajectories and large datasets.
Although previous methods have achieved good description about similarity, there are still some problems in certain
aspects. First, existing deep learning similarity computation
work requires heavy preprocessing. Specifically, these studies generally rely on supervised learning, which requires the
similarity measure of each pair of trajectories as the supervision label (Yang et al. 2021; Han et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2022b). However, the similarity measures are not directly
available in the raw dataset and thus have to be calculated
during the dataset preprocessing, requiring extensive computation. Assuming there are q trajectories in the dataset,
each of which has l points, the complexity of computing
the similarities of all trajectory pairs is thus quadratic as
O(q 2 l2 ). Therefore, it is costly to achieve a ready-to-use
dataset when the raw dataset has numerous long trajectories.
Second, a realistic dataset cannot contain trajectory patterns exhaustively. The supervision based methods find positive samples in the dataset, however, there are still some
trajectories whose positive samples are not really similar to
themselves. In addition, distance of location is considered
more than similarity of structure in previous methods, and
having high similarity of structure is in a same paragraph.
Therefore, a large dataset with diverse trajectory relationships is essential to a model with high generality. However,
it is unrealistic to handle a real-world dataset with exhaustive relationships of trajectories.
In addition to the limitations, there is still room to improve
the performance of existing solutions. Some studies (Li et al.
2018; Yao et al. 2019) do not use dedicated modules to embed three sorts of information of a trajectory, namely loca-

Trajectory similarity computation serves as a fundamental
functionality of various spatial information applications. Although existing deep learning similarity computation methods offer better efficiency and accuracy than non-learning solutions, they are still immature in trajectory embedding and
suffer from poor generality and heavy preprocessing for training. Targeting these limitations, we propose a novel framework named KGTS based on knowledge graph grid embedding, prompt trajectory embedding, and unsupervised contrastive learning for improved trajectory similarity computation. Specifically, we first embed map grids with a GRot
embedding method to vigorously grasp the neighbouring relations of grids. Then, a prompt trajectory embedding network incorporates the resulting grid embedding and extracts
trajectory structure and point order information. It is trained
by unsupervised contrastive learning, which not only alleviates the heavy preprocessing burden but also provides exceptional generality with creatively designed strategies for positive sample generation. The prompt trajectory embedding
adopts a customized prompt paradigm to mitigate the gap
between the grid embedding and the trajectory embedding.
Extensive experiments on two real-world trajectory datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of KGTS over stateof-the-art methods.

Introduction
GPS sensors emit continued points of location data, the sequence of which assembles a trajectory that describes the
spatial path of a moving object over time. The similarity
between two trajectories of different objects or different
time segments of the same object is a fundamental measure
for many real-world applications, such as animal migration
analysis (Li et al. 2011), transportation optimization (Song
et al. 2014), route retrieval (Ranu et al. 2015), and traffic prediction (Li et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023; Chang et al. 2023).
Therefore, the trajectory similarity computation has always
been a research hotspot for decades (Yang et al. 2021; Yao
et al. 2019; Evans et al. 2013; van Kreveld and Luo 2007).
* Shuo Shang and Peng Han are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8311

