The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Strategyproof Mechanisms for Group-Fair Obnoxious Facility Location Problems
Jiaqian Li1 , Minming Li1 * , Hau Chan2
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, HKSAR China
2
School of Computing, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
jiaqian.li@my.cityu.edu.hk, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, hchan3@unl.edu

Abstract

anism design perspective where the facility location preferences of the agents are private (Chan et al. 2021). The primary goal of these studies aims to design (strategyproof )
mechanisms that elicit agent location truthfully and determine a facility location to (approximately) optimize certain
objectives (Moulin 1980; Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013).
While the majority of the related mechanism design studies consider facilities that are pleasant for the agents, a few
studies (Cheng, Yu, and Zhang 2013; Ibara and Nagamochi
2012; Ye, Mei, and Zhang 2015) consider locating obnoxious facilities which are undesirable for agents. Indeed, facilities such as nuclear power reactors, landfill sites, and chemical plants are often unpleasant and do not provide service
directly to the agents. For instance, landfill sites are unpleasant for the nearby agents because of the potential exposure
to odors/gases/chemicals (e.g., lead, ammonia, and hydrogen sulfide) and other health risks (e.g., cancers and developmental disabilities). Similarly, exposure to radiation from
nuclear power plants can cause cancer and leukemia. As a
result, agents have preferences on the undesirable locations
of the obnoxious facility. Therefore, existing studies design
mechanisms to locate the facility far away from the agents’
undesirable location preferences.

We study the group-fair obnoxious facility location problems
from the mechanism design perspective where agents belong
to different groups and have private location preferences on
the undesirable locations of the facility. Our main goal is to
design strategyproof mechanisms that elicit the true location
preferences from the agents and determine a facility location that approximately optimizes several group-fair objectives. We first consider the maximum total and average group
cost (group-fair) objectives. For these objectives, we propose
deterministic mechanisms that achieve 3-approximation ratios and provide matching lower bounds. We then provide
the characterization of 2-candidate strategyproof randomized
mechanisms. Leveraging the characterization, we design randomized mechanisms with improved approximation ratios of
2 for both objectives. We also provide randomized lower
bounds of 5/4 for both objectives. Moreover, we investigate intergroup and intragroup fairness (IIF) objectives, addressing fairness between groups and within each group. We
present a mechanism that achieves a 4-approximation for the
IIF objectives and provide tight lower bounds.

Introduction
In recent decades, facility location problems have received
considerable attention in operations research, computer science, and economic communities due to their applicability to
address real-world challenges and theoretical interests (see,
e.g., (Hakimi 1964; Church and ReVelle 1976; Jain et al.
2003)). In a typical facility location problem, a social planner is tasked with identifying a suitable geographical location for a facility to best serve the targeted agent population
according to a given optimization objective, defined based
on the distances of agents’ locations or preferences to the facility location (Hakimi 1964). These problems can be used
to address locating a public school to provide education to
students living in the surrounding area, locating a public
park to provide recreational space for local residents, and
locating a hospital to provide health services to citizens in
the communities.
In artificial intelligence and economics, the studies of facility location problems have largely focused on the mech-

Group Fairness and Obnoxious Facilities. In real-world
situations, it is well-documented that groups of agents (e.g.,
environmental and community activists) fight to advocate
for the location of an undesirable facility (e.g., a coal ash
landfill, nuclear plant, or petrochemical plant) through public and legal channels. Moreover, when locating obnoxious
facilities, unfairness can unexpectedly occur for groups of
agents. For instance, for any obnoxious facility location, we
can create a problem instance that is good for one group of
agents and bad for another group of agents who dislike locations near the obnoxious facility. Therefore, obnoxious facility location problems should carefully consider groups of
agents and the potential unfairness incurred by these groups.
While recent studies propose to enforce fairness in facility location by designing strategyproof mechanisms subject
to group fairness objectives (Zhou, Li, and Chan 2022) or
criteria/constraints (Aziz et al. 2022a,b, 2023), no previous
studies consider group fairness for obnoxious facility location problems. Therefore, following the work of Zhou, Li,
and Chan (2022), our focus is to consider natural group-fair

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9832

