The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Full Bayesian Significance Testing for Neural Networks
Zehua Liu1 , Zimeng Li1 , Jingyuan Wang1,2,3 * , Yue He4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Management (Beihang University),
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Abstract

1997). However, simple assumptions can hardly fit the real
situation, while complex assumptions make it hard to derive
the theoretical distribution of the testing statistic. Recently,
(Horel and Giesecke 2020) provides a provable solution of
significance testing in nonlinear cases, but it suffers from
the computational difficulty in statistics, only addressing a
limited function space. There is still a gap to be solved for
significance testing in the general correlations.
Existing significance testing methods only focus on
global propositions. However, some propositions that are invalid globally can still hold on and contribute to a certain
sub-population. For example, clinical trials have shown that
a drug is effective in treating cancer, but not in some individuals. For a better justification in nonlinear cases, a significance testing approach should verify the correctness of
a proposition in population distribution and sub-population
distribution respectively.
To deal with the complicated real data in wide applications(He et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2018, 2020a, 2023), we
introduce deep neural networks into the significance testing
to capture the nonlinear correlations. To overcome the barrier of computing statistics under the complex fitting functions, we solve the significance testing problem from the
Bayesian perspective (Kass and Raftery 1995), and propose
a novel approach that conducts the Full Bayesian Significance Testing for neural networks, abbreviated as nFBST
(neural FBST). Given the testing statistics, nFBST can test
the correctness of a proposition for both population-level
or sub-population-level problems, by comparing the posterior probabilities of it and its opposite. In addition, nFBST
is a general framework that can be extended based on different testing statistics, such as Grad-nFBST, LRP-nFBST,
DeepLIFT-nFBST, LIME-nFBST, and so on. A range of experiments on both simulated and real data are conducted to
show the advantages of our method. The main contributions
can be summarized as follows:
• We are the first to introduce deep neural networks
into significance testing. Our approach replaces complicated theoretical derivation by fitting distributions in a
Bayesian way, and the neural network serves as a good
estimator of f0 without assuming specific forms.
• We design a complete procedure using Full Bayesian
Significance Testing for Neural Networks, namely
nFBST. It is a general framework that can be extended

Significance testing aims to determine whether a proposition about the population distribution is the truth or not
given observations. However, traditional significance testing
often needs to derive the distribution of the testing statistic, failing to deal with complex nonlinear relationships. In
this paper, we propose to conduct Full Bayesian Significance Testing for neural networks, called nFBST, to overcome the limitation in relationship characterization of traditional approaches. A Bayesian neural network is utilized
to fit the nonlinear and multi-dimensional relationships with
small errors and avoid hard theoretical derivation by computing the evidence value. Besides, nFBST can test not only
global significance but also local and instance-wise significance, which previous testing methods don’t focus on. Moreover, nFBST is a general framework that can be extended
based on the measures selected, such as Grad-nFBST, LRPnFBST, DeepLIFT-nFBST, LIME-nFBST. A range of experiments on both simulated and real data are conducted to show
the advantages of our method.

Introduction
Significance testing aims to determine whether a proposition about the population distribution1 is true or false given
observations, which is widely used in many scientific fields,
such as social sciences(Orlitzky 2012; Ortega and Navarrete
2017) and medical research(Matthews et al. 1990; Rutledge
and Loh 2004). For example, it is often used to evaluate the
efficacy of new treatments or drugs. First, clinical trials are
performed to compare the response of patients treated with a
new therapy against a control group. Then, significance testing is used as an analytical tool to determine whether the
observed improvement in the treatment group is significant,
which provides evidence that the new therapy is effective.
To attain a proper testing result, a golden standard is to
recover the true data generation model f0 behind the population distribution, then justify the proposition according
to f0 directly. For this purpose, a number of significance
testing approaches are proposed under different assumptions
about f0 (Gozalo 1993; Lavergne and Vuong 1996; Racine
* Corresponding author (jywang@buaa.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat462/node/249/

8841

