The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UMIE: Unified Multimodal Information Extraction with Instruction Tuning
Lin Sun1 * , Kai Zhang2∗ , Qingyuan Li3∗ , Renze Lou4
1
Department of Computer Science, Hangzhou City University, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, USA
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, USA
sunl@hzcu.edu.cn, liqingyuan@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multimodal information extraction (MIE) gains significant
attention as the popularity of multimedia content increases.
However, current MIE methods often resort to using taskspecific model structures, which results in limited generalizability across tasks and underutilizes shared knowledge
across MIE tasks. To address these issues, we propose UMIE,
a unified multimodal information extractor to unify three
MIE tasks as a generation problem using instruction tuning, being able to effectively extract both textual and visual mentions. Extensive experiments show that our single
UMIE outperforms various state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods
across six MIE datasets on three tasks. Furthermore, indepth analysis demonstrates UMIE’s strong generalization
in the zero-shot setting, robustness to instruction variants,
and interpretability. Our research serves as an initial step
towards a unified MIE model and initiates the exploration
into both instruction tuning and large language models within
the MIE domain. Our code, data, and model are available at
https://github.com/ZUCC-AI/UMIE.

Figure 1: Unifying three key MIE tasks in a single multimodal model. Given a task instructor, UMIE performs the
corresponding task by extracting textual and visual mentions
(MNER and MEE) or inferring the relationship between two
given mentions (MRE). O1 , O2 , and O3 are visual objects.

Introduction
Information extraction (IE), a task aiming to derive structured information from unstructured texts, plays a crucial role in the domain of natural language processing.
As the popularity of multimedia content continues to increase (Zhu et al. 2022), multimodal information extraction (MIE) has drawn significant attention from the research
community (Zhang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2022; Li et al.
2022). MIE aims to deliver structured information of interest from multiple media sources such as textual, visual, and
potentially more. It is considered a challenging task due to
the inherent complexity of media formats and the necessity
to bridge cross-modal gaps, where traditional text-based IE
methods often struggle.
MIE includes multimodal named entity recognition
(MNER) (Moon, Neves, and Carvalho 2018; Zhang et al.
2018; Sun et al. 2021), multimodal relation extraction
(MRE) (Zheng et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2022a), and multimodal event extraction (MEE) (Li et al. 2020, 2022). Current methods for usually focus on a specific task mentioned

above, which mostly uses a task-specific model structure
with dataset-specific tuning for the task at hand. Such a
paradigm leads to a few limitations: Firstly, it results in a
lack of generalizability as they often overfit the patterns of
a specific task or even dataset. Secondly, the need to design,
train, and maintain a separate model for each task is timeconsuming, impeding the progress of deploying practical
multimodal systems at scale. Lastly, due to their independent
training nature, these methods fail to effectively leverage the
shared knowledge across different MIE tasks, undermining
the performance of each task.
To address these challenges, in this work, we propose a
unified multimodal information extractor (UMIE), a single
model that unifies different MIE tasks as generation problems with instruction tuning (Ouyang et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022d). As shown in Figure 1, given the same text and image, UMIE can perform various MIE tasks following different task instructors and generate corresponding structured
outputs. In particular, UMIE enables both extraction of textual span and visual objects (e.g., MEE), which is rarely considered by previous MNER and MRE works.
Specifically, we repurpose all MIE datasets and train a

* These three authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19062

