The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Automated Design of Affine Maximizer Mechanisms in Dynamic Settings
Michael Curry* 1, 2, 4 , Vinzenz Thoma* 3, 4 , Darshan Chakrabarti5 , Stephen McAleer6 ,
Christian Kroer5 , Tuomas Sandholm6, 7 , Niao He3 , Sven Seuken2, 4
1

Harvard University
University of Zurich
3
ETH Zurich
4
ETH AI Center
5
Columbia University
6
Carnegie Mellon University, Computer Science Department
7
Optimized Markets, Strategy Robot, Strategic Machine
curry@ifi.uzh.ch, vinzenz.thoma@ai.ethz.ch
2

Abstract

Nazerzadeh 2013; Hajiaghayi, Kleinberg, and Parkes 2004;
Hajiaghayi, Kleinberg, and Sandholm 2007) but needs to
make restrictive assumptions about the space of agent types.
Work on dynamic mechanism design, for general goals and
for broad spaces of agent types, is much more limited.
Dynamic mechanism design includes as a special case
static mechanism design, and here the situation is similar.
To maximize welfare while ensuring strategyproofness, one
can use the celebrated and well-understood Vickrey-ClarkeGroves (VCG) mechanism (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971;
Groves 1973). For optimizing revenue, Myerson (1981)
completely settles the question under the restrictive assumption that agents’ types are single-dimensional (essentially,
that there is only one type of item up for sale); beyond this
there has been little progress except for very specific problem instances (Yao 2017). But for static settings, automated
mechanism design (AMD) (Conitzer and Sandholm 2002;
Sandholm 2003; Curry, Sandholm, and Dickerson 2023) has
been used: this is a data-driven search through some class
of mechanisms in order to find one that performs well while
satisfying the constraints of strategyproofness and individual
rationality. Automated mechanism design has in some cases
found the highest-performing mechanisms known so far, and
can recover optimal mechanisms in special cases where they
are known (Duetting et al. 2019; Ivanov et al. 2022; Shen,
Tang, and Zuo 2019).
Given the successes of automated mechanism design for
static problems, it is surprising that its use for dynamic problems is relatively underexplored.

Dynamic mechanism design is a challenging extension to ordinary mechanism design in which the mechanism designer
must make a sequence of decisions over time in the face of
possibly untruthful reports of participating agents. Optimizing dynamic mechanisms for welfare is relatively well understood. However, there has been less work on optimizing
for other goals (e.g. revenue), and without restrictive assumptions on valuations, it is remarkably challenging to characterize good mechanisms. Instead, we turn to automated mechanism design to find mechanisms with good performance in
specific problem instances. We extend the class of affine maximizer mechanisms to MDPs where agents may untruthfully
report their rewards. This extension results in a challenging bilevel optimization problem in which the upper problem involves choosing optimal mechanism parameters, and
the lower problem involves solving the resulting MDP. Our
approach can find truthful dynamic mechanisms that achieve
strong performance on goals other than welfare, and can be
applied to essentially any problem setting—without restrictions on valuations—for which RL can learn optimal policies.

1

Introduction

Dynamic mechanism design studies sequential decisionmaking problems, where decisions are based on the selfreported preferences of agents. A typical model is that the
environment consists of a Markov decision process (MDP),
and the mechanism controls the process given reported utilities by the agents. This has important applications, such as
ad auctions or more generally online pricing (e.g. Bergemann and Välimäki 2019) but also problems of decentralised decision making in RL (e.g. Chang et al. 2020).
Much work in dynamic mechanism design has focused
on maximizing welfare (Athey and Segal 2013; Nisan et al.
2007a; Lyu et al. 2022b) subject to strategyproofness (there
should be no incentive for untruthful reports by agents).
Some other work considers different goals, notably revenue (Bergemann and Välimäki 2010; Kakade, Lobel, and

Our Contributions
Our present paper develops automated dynamic mechanism
design techniques which can be applied to a very broad
range of problems. In particular, we consider mechanism design on general MDPs. Our model works with many loss
functions (including revenue but also other domain-specific
loss functions), not just the easier goal of welfare, and we do
not assume one-dimensional agent types. Our assumptions
are sufficiently general to capture essentially all of static

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9626

