The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

3D Visibility-Aware Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields for Interacting Hands
Xuan Huang1 * , Hanhui Li1 * , Zejun Yang2 , Zhisheng Wang2 , Xiaodan Liang1, 3†
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent, Shenzhen, China
3
DarkMatter AI Research, Guangzhou, China
lihh77@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract

and hours of per-scene optimization. Although several methods (Müller et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022a) have been proposed to reduce the computational cost, it is still expensive
and difficult to apply NeRFs in real-life applications where
only single-view inputs are available.
Generalizable NeRFs (Mihajlovic et al. 2022; Kwon et al.
2021) that represent geometry and textures separately seem
to be a potential solution for the above issues. Nevertheless,
these methods are designed for human bodies and cannot
be applied to interacting hands directly. This is because,
unlike single-subject human avatars, interacting hands involve challenging factors like severe self/inter-hand occlusions and large view variations (Park et al. 2022; Deng et al.
2022b). These factors make it difficult to exploit reliable features and cause artifacts that cannot be ignored.
Therefore, to fulfill application needs and tackle the above
challenging factors, this paper aims to design a single-image
generalizable NeRF model for interacting hands. In our early
exploration, we find that (Mihajlovic et al. 2022) retains textures and details well but is sensitive to view variations and
occlusions, since it adopts the pixel-aligned feature representation (Saito et al. 2019). (Kwon et al. 2021) uses a global
feature representation that maintains the overall hand structures but is hard to generate fine-grained textures. This indicates that self-adaptive and robust features are the key to
constructing feasible NeRFs for interacting hands.
Particularly, we propose a visibility-aware NeRF framework (denoted as VA-NeRF), of which the core is to leverage
the visibility of 3D points. Such an idea is natural, because if
a 3D point is visible, then its corresponding feature is more
reliable. Otherwise, we should select other related points or
global features for reference and information complement.
Formally, the proposed method achieves this via a visibilityaware feature fusion module that determines the feature of a
3D query point not only by its visibility, but also by vertices
selected from hand meshes and by global features. In this
way, we can overcome the limitations of feature representation in previous methods.
Moreover, we also propose a visibility-guided adversarial
learning strategy to further enhance the synthesized images
of VA-NeRF. This is motivated by our observation that the
quality of invisible areas in synthesized images is usually
worse than that of visible areas. Hence, we propose to encourage the NeRF model to refine invisible areas. However,

Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) are promising 3D representations for scenes, objects, and humans. However, most existing methods require multi-view inputs and per-scene training, which limits their real-life applications. Moreover, current methods focus on single-subject cases, leaving scenes
of interacting hands that involve severe inter-hand occlusions
and challenging view variations remain unsolved. To tackle
these issues, this paper proposes a generalizable visibilityaware NeRF (VA-NeRF) framework for interacting hands.
Specifically, given an image of interacting hands as input, our
VA-NeRF first obtains a mesh-based representation of hands
and extracts their corresponding geometric and textural features. Subsequently, a feature fusion module that exploits the
visibility of query points and mesh vertices is introduced to
adaptively merge features of both hands, enabling the recovery of features in unseen areas. Additionally, our VA-NeRF is
optimized together with a novel discriminator within an adversarial learning paradigm. In contrast to conventional discriminators that predict a single real/fake label for the synthesized image, the proposed discriminator generates a pixelwise visibility map, providing fine-grained supervision for
unseen areas and encouraging the VA-NeRF to improve the
visual quality of synthesized images. Experiments on the
Interhand2.6M dataset demonstrate that our proposed VANeRF outperforms conventional NeRFs significantly. Project
Page: https://github.com/XuanHuang0/VANeRF.

Introduction
Recent progress in neural radiance fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022b; Niemeyer et al. 2022;
Johari, Lepoittevin, and Fleuret 2022a) is promising, as the
continuous implicit representation of NeRFs can be disentangled with spatial volume resolution and generate highfidelity results. This facilitates interesting research such as
human avatars (Jiang et al. 2022), text-to-3d generation
(Poole et al. 2022), and large-scale 3D urban scene modeling (Turki, Ramanan, and Satyanarayanan 2022).
However, to synthesize high-quality images, current
NeRFs require dozens of well-calibrated multi-view images
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Xiandan Liang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2400

