The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Computing Nash Equilibria in Potential Games with Private Uncoupled Constraints
Nikolas Patris,1,2 Stelios Stavroulakis,1 Fivos Kalogiannis,1,2 Rose Zhang,1 Ioannis Panageas,1
1

University of California, Irvine,
2
Archimedes Research Unit
{npatris, sstavrou, fkalogia, rwzhang}@uci.edu, ipanagea@ics.uci.edu

Abstract

and moreover each agent does not have an incentive to unilaterally deviate among the approximately feasible strategies
of their constraints and decrease their cost.
A common sufficient condition that guarantees existence
of Nash equilibria in constrained games is Slater’s condition (Bertsekas 1997). Slater’s condition is a constraint
qualification (CQ) stating that for every strategy profile
x := (xi , x−i ) of the agents (feasible or infeasible), each
agent i can deviate and create a strategy profile (x′i , x−i )
that is strictly feasible (see Assumption 3.3) for their own
constraints.
In this paper, our primary focus is on the computation of
Nash equilibria in potential games, as defined in Section 2,
with private constraints, specifically in the context of normalform games. The constraints we consider in this study are
assumed to be convex. The necessity of this assumption to
establish arguments regarding approximate Nash equilibria
is thoroughly examined in Section 3. While the constraints
themselves are assumed to be convex, it is important to note
that the potential is non-convex. This non-convexity poses a
significant technical challenge that has yet to be addressed in
the existing literature. However, in this paper, we tackle this
challenge effectively.

We consider the problem of computing Nash equilibria in potential games where each player’s strategy set is subject to
private uncoupled constraints. This scenario is frequently encountered in real-world applications like road network congestion games where individual drivers adhere to personal budget
and fuel limitations. Despite the plethora of algorithms that
efficiently compute Nash equilibria (NE) in potential games,
the domain of constrained potential games remains largely
unexplored. We introduce an algorithm that leverages the Lagrangian formulation of NE. The algorithm is implemented
independently by each player and runs in polynomial time
with respect to the approximation error, the sum of the size of
the action-spaces, and the game’s inherent parameters.

1

Introduction

The modeling and studying of games with constraints has
received a lot of attention in various areas including control (Hsiao and Lazar 1991), transportation and routing in
traffic networks ((Jeff) Ban et al. 2019; Larsson and Patriksson 1998), telecommunications (Pang et al. 2008), (Zhu
2008a), markets (Arrow and Debreu 1954), cloud computing
(Ardagna, Panicucci, and Passacantando 2011), multi-agent
RL (Chen, Ma, and Zhou 2022), even in managing environmental pollution (Breton, Zaccour, and Zahaf 2006). There
are two main models in the literature: settings in which each
agent has their own private constraints (also called orthogonal constraints) and settings in which the constraints are the
same for all agents (common couple constraints). It is worth
noting that having arbitrary constraints might lead to nonexistence of a Nash equilibrium, i.e., John Nash’s theorem
(Nash 1951) is not applicable, even for two player zero-sum
games (Altman and Solan 2009). A Nash equilibrium in constrained games, also known as Generalized Nash Equilibrium,
is defined to be a feasible strategy profile so that each agent
does not have an incentive to unilaterally, feasibly deviate
and decrease their cost. In case of ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium, we borrow the definition used in (Jordan, Lin, and
Zampetakis 2023). Specifically, an ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile that is approximately feasible
(inequality constraints are violated by at most an additive ϵ)

Our contributions Our paper focuses on the problem of
computing approximate Nash equilibrium in normal form
potential games with private convex constraints. We present
Algorithm IGDλ that uses projected gradient descent on a
carefully constructed Lagrange function that reaches an ϵapproximate Nash equilibrium after O(1/ϵ6 ) iterations. We
note that our algorithm is implemented in a distributed manner in the sense that each agent performs projected gradient
on their own cost function and uses information about their
own constraints.
Technical overview We present a concise roadmap of the
main contributions. In Section 4, we outline the steps taken
to prove Theorem 4.12. Following the standard procedure for
constraint optimization, we formulate a Lagrangian problem
that incorporates the constraints. Our objective is to identify
a stationary point of the Lagrangian. However, a challenge
arises when dealing with multipliers λ in bounded domains,
as the commonly used first-order methods are designed for
unbounded domains. Consequently, there is uncertainty regarding whether the first-order stationary points obtained

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9874

