The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

End-to-End Verification for Subgraph Solving
Stephan Gocht1,2 , Ciaran McCreesh3 , Magnus O. Myreen4 , Jakob Nordström2,1 ,
Andy Oertel1,2 , Yong Kiam Tan5
1
Lund University, Lund, Sweden
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
3
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland
4
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
5
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
gochtstephan@gmail.com, Ciaran.McCreesh@glasgow.ac.uk, myreen@chalmers.se, jn@di.ku.dk,
andy.oertel@cs.lth.se, tanyk1@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract

Graph File(s)

Modern subgraph-finding algorithm implementations consist
of thousands of lines of highly optimized code, and this complexity raises questions about their trustworthiness. Recently,
some state-of-the-art subgraph solvers have been enhanced
to output machine-verifiable proofs that their results are correct. While this significantly improves reliability, it is not a
fully satisfactory solution, since end-users have to trust both
the proof checking algorithms and the translation of the highlevel graph problem into a low-level 0–1 integer linear program (ILP) used for the proofs.
In this work, we present the first formally verified toolchain
capable of full end-to-end verification for subgraph solving,
which closes both of these trust gaps. We have built encoder
frontends for various graph problems together with a 0–1 ILP
(a.k.a. pseudo-Boolean) proof checker, all implemented and
formally verified in the C AKE ML ecosystem. This toolchain
is flexible and extensible, and we use it to build verified proof
checkers for both decision and optimization graph problems,
namely, subgraph isomorphism, maximum clique, and maximum common (connected) induced subgraph. Our experimental evaluation shows that end-to-end formal verification
is now feasible for a wide range of hard graph problems.

Graph Solver
Untrusted
Encoding

C AKE PBG RAPH

Augmented
Proof

Verified
Encoder

Checker

Elaborator

Verified
Encoding

✓?

Kernel Proof

Verified
Checker

C AKE PB

V ERI PB

This paper

✓ Trusted
Conclusion

Figure 1: The full verification workflow. Without verified
proof checking, only the left-hand part of the diagram is
used. Our current work enables the additional shaded parts,
where the thick dashed box is the formally verified program
and thick arrows show its key input-output interfaces.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization algorithms have improved immensely since the turn of the millennium, and are now routinely used to solve large-scale real-world problems, through
both general-purpose solving paradigms (Biere et al. 2021;
Bixby and Rothberg 2007; Garcia de la Banda et al. 2014)
and dedicated algorithms for more specialised problems
such as subgraph finding (McCreesh, Prosser, and Trimble
2020). Since these combinatorial solvers are used for an increasingly wide range of applications, it becomes crucial
that the results they compute can be trusted. Sadly, this is
currently not the case (Cook et al. 2013; Akgün et al. 2018;
Gillard, Schaus, and Deville 2019; Bogaerts, McCreesh, and
Nordström 2022). Extensive testing, though beneficial, has
not been able to resolve the problem of solvers occasionally
producing faulty answers, and attempts to build correct-byconstruction software using formal verification run into the

obstacle that current techniques cannot scale to the level of
complexity of modern solvers.
Instead, the most promising way to achieve verifiably
correct combinatorial solving seems to be proof logging,
meaning that solvers produce efficiently verifiable certificates of correctness that can be corroborated by an independent proof checking program (McConnell et al. 2011). This
approach has been successfully used in the SAT community
(Heule, Hunt Jr., and Wetzler 2013a,b; Wetzler, Heule, and
Hunt Jr. 2014), which raises the question of whether similar techniques could be employed in other settings such
as subgraph finding. For this it would seem that the proof
checker would need to understand graph concepts such as
vertices, edges, neighbourhoods, et cetera. Surprisingly, this
turns out not to be the case—instead, the solver can encode the graph problem using 0–1 linear inequalities (also
referred to as pseudo-Boolean constraints), and then justify

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8038

