The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improved Graph Contrastive Learning for Short Text Classification
Yonghao Liu1 , Lan Huang1 , Fausto Giunchiglia2 , Xiaoyue Feng1 * , Renchu Guan1∗
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of the Ministry
of Education, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
University of Trento
yonghao20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {huanglan, fengxy, guanrenchu}@jlu.edu.cn,
fausto.giunchiglia@unitn.it
Abstract

difficulty of understanding their meaning correctly (Phan,
Nguyen, and Horiguchi 2008). Moreover, the rise of the internet has led to an exponential increase in the volume of
short texts. Unlabeled short text data has become significantly more abundant compared to labeled data (Hu et al.
2019). Therefore, short text classification (STC), as a highly
challenging task that attracts tremendous attention from researchers, has a wide range of practical applications, such
as news classification (Chen et al. 2019), sentiment analysis
(Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019), and social media analysis (Liu
et al. 2021, 2023a,b). Recently, some studies (Su et al. 2022)
have attempted to integrate graph neural networks (GNNs)
with contrastive learning (CL) for solving STC tasks, with
promising results. In these approaches, a corpus-level graph
is constructed, incorporating latent topics, words, or entities
as nodes. GNNs are then performed to explicitly model the
semantic relationships between nodes, enriching the original short text information with such auxiliary knowledge.
Meanwhile, CL has the ability to extract self-supervised signals from sufficient unlabeled data to facilitate the model to
learn superior representations.
Despite their effectiveness, some limitations still remain.
First, when generating augmented views for CL, there are
two types of approaches. On the one hand, they use traditional text augmentation methods such as random word
deletion or random noise injection. However, these methods may lead to irreversible semantic distortion and information loss (Zhang et al. 2021). For example, removing the
word “not” from the movie review sentence “this film is not
funny” would completely change its meaning, leading to a
misleading label. On the other hand, they perform edge/node perturbation on the built text graph for graph augmentation operations, which inevitably results in noise (Yu et al.
2022). For example, removing an essential semantic edge
could considerably change the sentence’s meaning and enable the augmented graph to share little learnable invariance
with the original graph, thus misleading the model’s whole
learning process.
Second, they follow the classical instance discrimination
CL paradigm, which maximizes the mutual information between positive sentence pairs from the same source while
pushing negative counterparts from other instances away
(Chen et al. 2020). However, this paradigm could lead to
many generated negative pairs sharing similar semantics but

Text classification occupies an important role in natural language processing and has many applications in real life. Short
text classification, as one of its subtopics, has attracted increasing interest from researchers since it is more challenging due to its semantic sparsity and insufficient labeled data.
Recent studies attempt to combine graph learning and contrastive learning to alleviate the above problems in short
text classification. Despite their fruitful success, there are
still several inherent limitations. First, the generation of augmented views may disrupt the semantic structure within the
text and introduce negative effects due to noise permutation. Second, they ignore the clustering-friendly features in
unlabeled data and fail to further utilize the prior information in few valuable labeled data. To this end, we propose a
novel model that utilizes improved Graph contrastIve learning for short text classiFicaTion (GIFT). Specifically, we
construct a heterogeneous graph containing several component graphs by mining from an internal corpus and introducing an external knowledge graph. Then, we use singular
value decomposition to generate augmented views for graph
contrastive learning. Moreover, we employ constrained kmeans on labeled texts to learn clustering-friendly features,
which facilitate cluster-oriented contrastive learning and assist in obtaining better category boundaries. Extensive experimental results show that GIFT significantly outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods. Our code can be found in
https://github.com/KEAML-JLU/GIFT.

Introduction
Text classification aims to assign texts to predefined categories, which is a classic problem in natural language processing (Minaee et al. 2021). Most models are designed
for regular texts, which include rich contextual information and sufficient labeled training data. However, short texts
are ubiquitous in our daily life, such as tweets, news seeds,
and search snippets. When these models are directly applied
to short texts, they generally obtain unsatisfactory performance, suffering from limited contextual information and
severe label scarcity problems (Wang et al. 2021). Compared to regular texts, the length of short texts is small, often containing only one or few words, which increases the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18716

