The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Question Calibration and Multi-Hop Modeling for Temporal Question Answering
Chao Xue* 1 , Di Liang* 2 , Pengfei Wang3 , Jing Zhang1†
1
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Software, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{xuechao, zhang jing}@buaa.edu.cn, liangd17@fudan.edu.cn, wangpf@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Who was Lasha Talakhadze previous Olympic weightlifting world record?
Lasha Talakhadze previous Olympic world record was 220 kg in the snatch and 257 kg
in the clean and jerk, ...

Many models that leverage knowledge graphs (KGs) have recently demonstrated remarkable success in question answering (QA) tasks. In the real world, many facts contained in
KGs are time-constrained thus temporal KGQA has received
increasing attention. Despite the fruitful efforts of previous
models in temporal KGQA, they still have several limitations. (I) They adopt pre-trained language models (PLMs)
to obtain question representations, while PLMs tend to focus on entity information and ignore entity transfer caused
by temporal constraints, and finally fail to learn specific temporal representations of entities. (II) They neither emphasize
the graph structure between entities nor explicitly model the
multi-hop relationship in the graph, which will make it difficult to solve complex multi-hop question answering. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel Question Calibration
and Multi-Hop Modeling (QC-MHM) approach. Specifically, We first calibrate the question representation by fusing
the question and the time-constrained concepts in KG. Then,
we construct the GNN layer to complete multi-hop message passing. Finally, the question representation is combined
with the embedding output by the GNN to generate the final
prediction. Empirical results verify that the proposed model
achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art models
in the benchmark dataset. Notably, the Hits@1 and Hits@10
results of QC-MHM on the CronQuestions dataset’s complex
questions are absolutely improved by 5.1% and 1.2% compared to the best-performing baseline. Moreover, QC-MHM
can generate interpretable and trustworthy predictions.

Who was Lasha Talakhadze previous
News

Images

Videos

Books

Shopping

Maps

Flights

Finance

About 31,000 results(0.45 seconds)

Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org › wiki › Lasha_Talakhadze

Lasha Talakhadze
lasha Talakhadze is a Georgian weightlifter, holding the all-time world records regardless of
weight category in the snatch (225 kg, 496 lb), the clean and ...

Who is the mayor of Budapest during 25th Olympic Games?
As the 25th Olympic Games took place in Barcelona in 1992. The current mayor
of Budapest is GergelyKarácsony,

Who is the mayor of Budapest during
News

Images

Videos

Books

Shopping

Maps

Flights

Finance

About 9,330,000 results(0.34 seconds)

Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org › wiki › Zsolt_Borkai

Zsolt Borkai
Zsolt Borkai (born August 31, 1965) is a Hungarian Olympic gymnast champion and politician,
who served as the mayor of Gyor from 1 Octorboer 2006 to 8 ...

Figure 1: Examples of complex queries in both Google
Search and ChatGPT yield incorrect results.

Introduction

the traditional KGs constructed based on the tuple of (subject, predicate, object)1 , temporal KGs are attached with additional timestamps. In other words, the tuple of temporal
KGs is (subject, predicate, object, time duration). (II) Temporal KGQA is expected to generate answers with more diverse types. Different from regular KGQA whose answers
are always entities, the answer of temporal KGQA can either
be an entity or a timestamp. The above differences make the
temporal KGQA more challenging.
To solve the above problem, the limited literature either decomposes the given question into non-temporal and
temporal sub-question to answer (Jia et al. 2018; Kingma

Knowledge graph question answering (KGQA) is a core
technique in many NLP applications, such as search and
recommendation (Huang et al. 2019; Xian et al. 2019;
Guan et al. 2021). Among several branches of KGQA,
temporal KGQA is a recently emerging direction and has
shown great potential in real-world practices. There are critical differences between traditional KGQA and temporal
KGQA tasks, which are summarized as follows: (I) Temporal KGQA has more complex semantic information, unlike
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Some researchers refer to predicates as relations. The two are
equivalent.

19332

