The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AutoLTS: Automating Cycling Stress Assessment via Contrastive Learning and
Spatial Post-processing
Bo Lin1 , Shoshanna Saxe2 , Timothy C. Y. Chan1
1

Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Department of Civil and Mineral Engineering, University of Toronto
{blin, tcychan}@mie.utoronto.ca, s.saxe@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Cycling stress assessment, which quantifies cyclists’ perceived stress imposed by the built environment and motor
traffics, increasingly informs cycling infrastructure planning
and cycling route recommendation. However, currently calculating cycling stress is slow and data-intensive, which hinders its broader application. In this paper, We propose a deep
learning framework to support accurate, fast, and large-scale
cycling stress assessments for urban road networks based
on street-view images. Our framework features i) a contrastive learning approach that leverages the ordinal relationship among cycling stress labels, and ii) a post-processing
technique that enforces spatial smoothness into our predictions. On a dataset of 39,153 road segments collected in
Toronto, Canada, our results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our deep learning framework and the value of using image data for cycling stress assessment in the absence of highquality road geometry and motor traffic data.

(a) LTS 1

(b) LTS 2

(c) LTS 3

(d) LTS 4

Introduction
Safety and comfort concerns have been repeatedly identified as major factors that inhibit cycling uptake in cities
around the world. A range of metrics, such as the level of
traffic stress (LTS) (Furth, Mekuria, and Nixon 2016; Huertas et al. 2020) and bicycle level of service index (Callister
and Lowry 2013), have been proposed to quantify cyclists’
perceived stress imposed by the built environment and motor traffic. These metrics are predictive of cycling behaviors (Imani, Miller, and Saxe 2019; Wang et al. 2020) and
accidents (Chen et al. 2017), and thus have been applied
to support cycling infrastructure planning (Lowry, Furth,
and Hadden-Loh 2016; Gehrke et al. 2020; Chan, Lin, and
Saxe 2022) and route recommendation (Chen et al. 2017;
Castells-Graells, Salahub, and Pournaras 2020). However,
calculating these metrics typically requires high-resolution
road network data, such as motor traffic speed, the locations
of on-street parking, and the presence/type of cycling infrastructure on each road segment. The practical challenge of
collecting accurate and up-to-date data hinders the broader
application of cycling stress assessment and tools built on it.
To tackle this challenge, we propose AutoLTS, a deep
learning framework for assessing cycling stress of urban

Figure 1: Example images with the four LTS labels: LTS 1
roads are safe for all cyclists including children, LTS 2 roads
are for most adults, LTS 3 and LTS 4 are for “enthused and
confident” and “strong and fearless” cyclists, respectively.

road networks based on street-view images. AutoLTS can
facilitate timely, accurate, and large-scale assessments of cycling stress because up-to-date street-view images are easy
to access via the Google StreetView API. Using a dataset of
39,153 road segments collected in Toronto, Canada, we focus on automating the calculation of the LTS metric. Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, road segments are classified into
four classes, i.e., LTS 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Dill and McNeil 2016),
corresponding to the cycling suitability of four types of cyclists, where LTS 1 is the least stressful road and LTS 4 is
the most stressful. This metric has been applied to investigate the connectivity (Lowry, Furth, and Hadden-Loh 2016;
Kent and Karner 2019) and equity (Tucker and Manaugh
2018) of urban cycling networks and to evaluate cycling interventions during the COVID-19 pandemic (Lin, Chan, and

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22222

