The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pareto Front-Diverse Batch Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization
Alaleh Ahmadianshalchi* 1 , Syrine Belakaria* 2 , Janardhan Rao Doppa1
1

School of EECS, Washington State University
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
a.ahmadianshalchi@wsu.edu, syrineb@stanford.edu, jana.doppa@wsu.edu
2

Abstract
We consider the problem of multi-objective optimization
(MOO) of expensive black-box functions with the goal of discovering high-quality and diverse Pareto fronts where we are
allowed to evaluate a batch of inputs. This problem arises in
many real-world applications including penicillin production
where diversity of solutions is critical. We solve this problem
in the framework of Bayesian optimization (BO) and propose
a novel approach referred to as Pareto front-Diverse Batch
Multi-Objective BO (PDBO). PDBO tackles two important
challenges: 1) How to automatically select the best acquisition function in each BO iteration, and 2) How to select a
diverse batch of inputs by considering multiple objectives. We
propose principled solutions to address these two challenges.
First, PDBO employs a multi-armed bandit approach to select
one acquisition function from a given library. We solve a cheap
MOO problem by assigning the selected acquisition function
for each expensive objective function to obtain a candidate
set of inputs for evaluation. Second, it utilizes Determinantal
Point Processes (DPPs) to choose a Pareto-front-diverse batch
of inputs for evaluation from the candidate set obtained from
the first step. The key parameters for the methods behind these
two steps are updated after each round of function evaluations.
Experiments on multiple MOO benchmarks demonstrate that
PDBO outperforms prior methods in terms of both the quality
and diversity of Pareto solutions.

1

Introduction

A wide range of science and engineering applications, including materials design (Ashby 2000), biological sequence
design (Taneda 2015), and drug/vaccine design (Nicolaou
and Brown 2013) involves optimizing multiple expensiveto-evaluate objective functions. For example, in nanoporous
materials design (Deshwal, Simon, and Doppa 2021), the
goal is to optimize the adsorption property and cost of synthesis guided by physical lab experiments. Since the experiments
are expensive in terms of the consumed resources, our goal is
to approximate the optimal Pareto set of solutions. In many
of the aforementioned applications, there are two important
considerations. First, we can perform multiple parallel experiments which should be leveraged to accelerate the discovery
of high-quality solutions. Second, practitioners care about
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10784

diversity in solutions and their outcomes. For example, in
penicillin production application, diverse solutions for objectives including penicillin production, the time to ferment, and
the CO2 byproduct (Birol, Ündey, and Cinar 2002).
We consider the problem of multi-objective optimization
(MOO) over expensive-to-evaluate functions to find highquality and diverse Pareto fronts when we are allowed to
perform a batch of experiments. We solve this problem using
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2015) which
has been shown to be highly effective for such problems.
The key idea behind BO is to learn a surrogate model (e.g.,
Gaussian process)from past experiments and use it to intelligently select the sequence of experiments guided by an
acquisition function (e.g., expected improvement). There is
prior BO work on selecting a batch of experiments to find
diverse high-performing solutions for single-objective optimization. However, there is very limited work on batch BO
for MOO problems and to produce diverse MOO solutions.
A key drawback of the existing BO methods for MOO is that
they evaluate diversity in terms of input space, which is not
appropriate for MOO (diversity in input space ⇏ diversity in
output space). To overcome this drawback and to measure the
diversity of MOO solution in the output space, we define a
new metric referred to as Diversity of the Pareto Front (DPF).
We propose a novel approach referred to as Pareto frontDiverse Batch Multi-Objective BO (PDBO). PDBO selects a
batch B of inputs for evaluations in each iteration using two
main steps. First, it employs a principled multi-arm bandit
strategy to dynamically select one acquisition function (AF)
from a given library of AFs within the single-objective BO
literature. A cheap MOO problem is solved by assigning the
selected AF for each expensive objective function to obtain a
Pareto set. Second, a principled configuration of determinantal point processes (DPPs) (Borodin 2009; Kulesza, Taskar
et al. 2012) for multiple objectives is used to select B inputs for evaluation from the Pareto set of the first step to
improve the diversity of the uncovered Pareto front. PDBO
updates the key parameters of the algorithms for these two
steps (dynamic selection of AF and selecting B Pareto-front
diverse inputs from a candidate Pareto set) after obtaining the
objective function evaluations. Our experiments on multiple
benchmarks with varying input dimensions and number of objective functions demonstrate that PDBO outperforms prior
methods in finding high-quality and diverse Pareto fronts.

