The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Meta-Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Mean Field Games via Probabilistic
Context Variables
Yang Chen1,2 , Xiao Lin3 , Bo Yan3 , Libo Zhang2 , Jiamou Liu2 , Neset Özkan Tan1,2 , Michael
Witbrock1,2

1
NAOInstitute, University of Auckland, New Zealand
School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, New Zealand
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{yang.chen,jiamou.liu,neset.tan,m.witbrock}@auckland.ac.nz, lzha797@aucklanduni.ac.nz, linxiao zj@foxmail.com,
yanbo@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

MFG-based approaches have demonstrated compelling outcomes across diverse large-scale multi-agent tasks. Applications include modelling and predicting social media population behaviour (Yang et al. 2018a), product pricing in expansive markets, virus propagation modelling and explaining emerging social norms (Chen et al. 2022, 2023).
While appealing, these existing methods typically rely on
the theoretically powerful yet practically unideal assumption
in MFGs: all agents are homogeneous, i.e., they are identical in the reward function, state-action space and dynamics.
Real-world scenarios, however, frequently involve demonstrated behaviour with distinct and unknown rewards. For
example, in spatial pricing for taxi rides, drivers may have
different preferences based on factors such as distance, origins, and passenger destinations (Ata, Barjesteh, and Kumar
2019). To address this issue, efforts have been made to generalise mean-field approximation by introducing additional
type variables for each agent to differentiate reward functions (Subramanian and Mahajan 2019; Ganapathi Subramanian et al. 2020; Ghosh and Aggarwal 2020). However, this
approach requires prior knowledge of these variables, making it unsuitable for handling agents with unknown types or
contexts, as observed in taxi trajectories.
Additionally, incorporating types into mean-field approximation makes the model more complex, necessitating the
reevaluation of important theoretical properties, such as the
existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium (Ghosh and Aggarwal 2020), to ensure a well-defined corresponding IRL
problem. Although such generalisations are theoretically
valued, from a machine learning viewpoint, simpler models
with fewer theoretical restrictions are often preferred. Given
the considerations above, the question arises: can we enable
IRL to handle numerous agents with unknown reward functions without altering the mean-field approximation?
On the other hand, an emerging branch of IRL called
meta-IRL (Seyed Ghasemipour, Gu, and Zemel 2019; Yu
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019) combines IRL and meta-learning
to address similar reward structures among demonstrations
from different tasks. It introduces a latent probabilistic context variable that influences the reward function and performs context-conditioned reward inference without prior
knowledge of the contexts. Although currently limited only
to single-agent scenarios, this approach inspires the idea

Designing suitable reward functions for numerous interacting
intelligent agents is challenging in real-world applications.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) in mean field games
(MFGs) offers a practical framework to infer reward functions from expert demonstrations. While promising, the assumption of agent homogeneity limits the capability of existing methods to handle demonstrations with heterogeneous
and unknown objectives, which are common in practice. To
this end, we propose a deep latent variable MFG model and
an associated IRL method. Critically, our method can infer
rewards from different yet structurally similar tasks without
prior knowledge about underlying contexts or modifying the
MFG model itself. Our experiments, conducted on simulated
scenarios and a real-world spatial taxi-ride pricing problem,
demonstrate the superiority of our approach over state-of-theart IRL methods in MFGs.

Introduction
Understanding incentives among interacting agents in realworld decision-making and control tasks is a fundamental challenge in multi-agent systems. Inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) (Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999; Ng and Russell 2000) addresses this issue by inferring reward functions
from expert demonstrations, offering a succinct representation of tasks. IRL in multi-agent systems serves two primary
purposes. First, it aids in comprehending and predicting the
objectives of interacting agents, such as determining the destinations of autonomous vehicles (You et al. 2019). Second,
it enables the design of agent environments with known reward signals to guide their behaviour as desired, akin to
mechanism design (Fu et al. 2021).
A prominent challenge with IRL is the “curse of the agent
number”, i.e., an increase in agent number leads to exponential interaction complexities, resulting in impractical time
and memory expenses. Fortunately, recent advancements in
IRL within mean field games (MFGs) (Yang et al. 2018a;
Chen et al. 2022, 2023) offer a solution. By leveraging
mean-field approximation, these methods simplify interactions among many agents to only two agents (individualpopulation), mitigating the computational burden. These
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11407

