The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressive High-Frequency Reconstruction for Pan-Sharpening with Implicit
Neural Representation
Ge Meng1 , Jingjia Huang1 , Yingying Wang2 , Zhenqi Fu1 , Xinghao Ding1, 2 * , Yue Huang1, 2
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China
{mengg, huangjj, wangyingying7, fuzhenqi}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {dxh, yhuang2010}@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Pan-sharpening aims to leverage the high-frequency signal of
the panchromatic (PAN) image to enhance the resolution of
its corresponding multi-spectral (MS) image. However, deep
neural networks (DNNs) tend to prioritize learning the lowfrequency components during the training process, which
limits the restoration of high-frequency edge details in MS
images. To overcome this limitation, we treat pan-sharpening
as a coarse-to-fine high-frequency restoration problem and
propose a novel method for achieving high-quality restoration of edge information in MS images. Specifically, to effectively obtain fine-grained multi-scale contextual features, we
design a Band-limited Multi-scale High-frequency Generator
(BMHG) that generates high-frequency signals from the PAN
image within different bandwidths. During training, higherfrequency signals are progressively injected into the MS image, and corresponding residual blocks are introduced into
the network simultaneously. This design enables gradients to
flow from later to earlier blocks smoothly, encouraging intermediate blocks to concentrate on missing details. Furthermore, to address the issue of pixel position misalignment arising from multi-scale features fusion, we propose a Spatialspectral Implicit Image Function (SIIF) that employs implicit
neural representation to effectively represent and fuse spatial
and spectral features in the continuous domain. Extensive experiments on different datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms existing approaches in terms of quantitative and
visual measurements for high-frequency detail recovery.

Figure 1: Injecting high-frequency signals into MS image
progressively. The residual map between the predicted result
and ground truth shows that as the training stage progresses,
finer edge details are reconstructed.

The high-quality restoration of high-frequency information in MS images is the core task of pan-sharpening.
However, during the training process, deep neural networks
(DNNs) often learn to fit target functions from low to high
frequencies (Xu et al. 2019; Xu, Zhang, and Xiao 2019),
which is referred to as spectral bias (Rahaman et al. 2019).
This tendency can restrict the network’s ability to capture
fine edge details. Training models in a meaningful order may
enhance their effectiveness in tackling challenging tasks
(Dai et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2020; Karras
et al. 2017; Soviany et al. 2022; Zhou, Wang, and Bilmes
2021). Therefore, we regard pan-sharpening as a coarse-tofine high-frequency reconstruction problem. Figure 1 displays the fusion results of HRMS images at different training stages. It could be observed that as the training stage
progresses, finer edge details are reconstructed.
To effectively obtain multi-scale contextual features,
some approaches (Khan et al. 2008; Otazu et al. 2005;
Ranchin and Wald 2000; Aiazzi et al. 2006) attempt to decompose the PAN and LRMS images by using multiresolution tools, such as wavelets and Laplacian pyramids. Subsequently, they fuse the generated features to achieve a com-

Introduction
Compared with single-channel or RGB images, multispectral (MS) images contain richer spectral information. Therefore, MS imaging has been widely used in environmental monitoring, agriculture, mapping services and so on.
Nevertheless, the physical constraints of satellites impede
the direct capture of high-resolution multispectral (HRMS)
images via sensors. As a substitute, they can only obtain high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) images along with
their corresponding low-resolution multispectral (LRMS)
images. Pan-sharpening is a technique that injects the highresolution information from the PAN image into its corresponding LRMS image to generate the HRMS image.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4189

