The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Class Support Vector Machine with Maximizing Minimum Margin
Feiping Nie1,2 * , Zhezheng Hao1,2 , Rong Wang2
1

2

School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China

Abstract

multi-class SVM can be summarized into two main categories, the first of which are One versus the Rest (OvR)
(Vapnik 1999) and One versus One (OvO) techniques (Hsu
and Lin 2002). For a c-class classification, OvR utilizes c binary SVMs to separate each class from the rest, while OvO
utilizes c(c−1)
binary SVMs to separate each pair of classes.
2
A critical shortcoming of OvR arises from the unbalancedness of each subproblem. Besides, treating the rest of the
classes as a single class may lead to potential inseparability
(Pisner and Schnyer 2020). The drawback of OvO lies in the
high time overhead of testing. OvO needs O(c2 d) for each
test sample, which is time-consuming when c is large. Since
OvR and OvO involve multiple independent binary subproblems, they fail to achieve a complete partition of the feature
space and results in certain regions with constant tied votes.
The second major method is multi-class SVM with unified formulation (Weston and Watkins 1998; Crammer and
Singer 2001; Guermeur 2002). While these multi-class
methods achieve sound performance on well-structured
data, they may be less effective for datasets with ambiguous
class boundaries. Moreover, many of these multi-class SVM
methods deviate from the fundamental principle of margin,
thus impacting generalization capabilities.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel
method called Multi-class Support Vector Machines with
Maximizing Minimum Margin (M3 SVM) to overcome the
limitations of existing methods. The main contributions of
this paper are summarized as follows:

Support Vector Machine (SVM) stands out as a prominent
machine learning technique widely applied in practical pattern recognition tasks. It achieves binary classification by
maximizing the ”margin”, which represents the minimum
distance between instances and the decision boundary. Although many efforts have been dedicated to expanding SVM
to multi-class case through strategies such as one versus one
and one versus the rest, satisfactory solutions remain to be
developed. In this paper, we propose a novel method for
multi-class SVM that incorporates pairwise class loss considerations and maximizes the minimum margin. Adhering
to this concept, we derive a formulation through a new multiobjective optimization strategy. Furthermore, the correlations
between the proposed method and multiple forms of multiclass SVM are analyzed. Empirical evaluations demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed method
over existing multi-classification methods. Complete version
is available at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.06578.pdf. Code is
available at https://github.com/zz-haooo/M3SVM.

Introduction
Support vector machine (SVM), a fundamental machine
learning technique, initially emerged as a binary linear classifier (Boser, Guyon, and Vapnik 1992). Rooted in the theory
of VC-dimension, SVM achieves structural risk minimization by maximizing the margin between two class. Its mathematical rigor and notable performance in practical applications have garnered significant attention. SVM-based classification methods have found extensive application in diverse machine learning tasks, including image classification
(Wei and Hoai 2016), text classification (Nie et al. 2014),
etc. Diverse SVM variants have emerged over time, such as
Twin SVM (Khemchandani, Chandra et al. 2007), Optimal
Margin Distribution Machine (Zhang and Zhou 2019),Decision Tree SVM (Nie, Zhu, and Li 2020), etc. Furthermore,
SVM has been extended to encompass various scenarios
and guides advanced methodologies and models (Tarzanagh
et al. 2023; Xu and Schuurmans 2005; Amer, Goldstein, and
Abdennadher 2013).
Despite its outstanding performance in binary classification tasks, multi-class SVM progresses sluggishly. Existing

• In this paper, we propose a concise yet effective multiclass SVM method that computes classification loss between each class pair. More importantly, we derive a
novel regularizer that enlarges the lower bound of the
margin by introducing a parameter p.
• The proposed method bases on a strategy for multiobjective optimization and offers a lucid geometric interpretation. We theoretically analyze the association of
M3 SVM with the previous methods. It also functions as
a plug-and-play improvement over the softmax in neural
networks. Besides, the proposed regularizer can be interpreted in the context of minimizing structural risk.
• Through exhaustive experiments on realistic datasets, our
proposed method demonstrates a marked enhancement in
classification performance.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14466

