The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PointCVaR: Risk-Optimized Outlier Removal for Robust 3D Point Cloud
Classification
Xinke Li1, , Junchi Lu2 , Henghui Ding2 , Changsheng Sun1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou3, 4 , Yeow Meng Chee1
1

National University of Singapore,
Nanyang Technological University,
3
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), A*STAR,
4
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR
{xinke.li, cssun}@u.nus.edu, luju0008@e.ntu.edu.sg, henghui.ding@gmail.com,
zhouty@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, ymchee@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
With the growth of 3D sensing technology, the deep learning system for 3D point clouds has become increasingly important, especially in applications such as autonomous vehicles where safety is a primary concern. However, there are
growing concerns about the reliability of these systems when
they encounter noisy point clouds, either occurring naturally
or introduced with malicious intent. This paper highlights
the challenges of point cloud classification posed by various forms of noise, from simple background noise to malicious adversarial/backdoor attacks that can intentionally skew
model predictions. While there’s an urgent need for optimized point cloud denoising, current point outlier removal
approaches, an essential step for denoising, rely heavily on
handcrafted strategies and are not adapted for higher-level
tasks, such as classification. To address this issue, we introduce an innovative point outlier removal method that harnesses the power of downstream classification models. Using gradient-based attribution analysis, we define a novel concept: point risk. Drawing inspiration from tail risk minimization in finance, we recast the outlier removal process as an
optimization problem, named PointCVaR. Extensive experiments show that our proposed technique not only robustly filters diverse point cloud outliers but also consistently and significantly enhances existing robust methods for point cloud
classification. A notable feature of our approach is its effectiveness in defending against the latest threat of backdoor attacks in point clouds.

Figure 1: Visualizing point risks for point clouds with various types of outliers. It shows that the noise points often
pose high risks compared to the clean points.

models obviously. For instance, background points resulting from inaccurate sensors or incomplete processing can
severely disrupt the predictions of point cloud classifiers, as
revealed by (Ren, Pan, and Liu 2022). Moreover, some artificial modifications to the points can be disguised as noise
and intentionally manipulate the output of classifiers. On one
hand, delicately designed adversarial noise, such as outliers
or slight perturbations, has been shown to significantly decrease the classification accuracy in various studies (Xiang,
Qi, and Li 2019; Wicker and Kwiatkowska 2019). On the
other hand, a new form of attack, called a backdoor attack,
has emerged as a severe threat. This attack involves implanting malicious functionality into a deep model by modifying
the training data. During the inference of this model, if the
input point cloud contains specific outliers named backdoor
triggers, such as a small sphere, the model will output an
incorrect target label (Li et al. 2021). Thus, developing robust point cloud denoising pipelines becomes imperative to
ensure the safety and reliability of 3D deep learning.
Despite the pressing need for point cloud denoising towards reliable deep learning, outlier removal, an essential
processing step in a point cloud denoising pipeline, has not
been specifically designed or optimized for deep learning
yet. In current practice, the objective of outlier removal is
eliminating points in the point cloud that do not conform
to the geometrical characteristics of the local points. It is
utilized to remove noise points directly or to pave the way
for further filtering. Traditional methods, such as statistical outlier removal (Rusu 2010), have been demonstrated

Introduction
The accessibility of 3D sensing technology has led to the
popularity of deep learning on 3D point clouds in various
industrial applications, including safety-critical ones such as
autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2017). However, concerns
over the safety of 3D deep learning have been substantiated by recent studies that have demonstrated the negative
impact of natural or artificial noisy points on point cloud
deep model performance (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019; Sun et al.
2022). Consequently, the reliability of 3D deep visual systems in industry is now overshadowed.
Indeed, it is proposed that even some common types of
point cloud noise could degrade the performance of deep
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21340

