The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TransGOP: Transformer-Based Gaze Object Prediction
Binglu Wang1, 2 , Chenxi Guo1 , Yang Jin1 , Haisheng Xia3 , Nian Liu4 *
1

Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{wbl921129, guochenxix, jin91999}@gmail.com, hsxia@ustc.edu.cn, liunian228@gmail.com

（a）Detection results
of GaTector

Abstract

（b）Detection
results of TransGOP

Gaze object prediction aims to predict the location and category of the object that is watched by a human. Previous gaze object prediction works use CNN-based object detectors to predict the object’s location. However, we find
that Transformer-based object detectors can predict more
accurate object location for dense objects in retail scenarios. Moreover, the long-distance modeling capability of the
Transformer can help to build relationships between the human head and the gaze object, which is important for the
GOP task. To this end, this paper introduces Transformer
into the fields of gaze object prediction and proposes an
end-to-end Transformer-based gaze object prediction method
named TransGOP. Specifically, TransGOP uses an off-theshelf Transformer-based object detector to detect the location of objects and designs a Transformer-based gaze autoencoder in the gaze regressor to establish long-distance gaze relationships. Moreover, to improve gaze heatmap regression,
we propose an object-to-gaze cross-attention mechanism to
let the queries of the gaze autoencoder learn the globalmemory position knowledge from the object detector. Finally,
to make the whole framework end-to-end trained, we propose
a Gaze Box loss to jointly optimize the object detector and
gaze regressor by enhancing the gaze heatmap energy in the
box of the gaze object. Extensive experiments on the GOOSynth and GOO-Real datasets demonstrate that our TransGOP achieves state-of-the-art performance on all tracks, i.e.,
object detection, gaze estimation, and gaze object prediction. Our code will be available at https://github.com/chenxiGuo/TransGOP.git.

Figure 1: Object Detection results of GaTector (Wang et al.
2022a) (a) and our TransGOP (b) when IoU threshold is
0.75. TransGOP predicts the object location more accurately
than the GaTector, especially for the objects that are close to
human or goods shelves.

heatmaps or points showing the location of human gaze objects. However, GE models fall short of identifying the exact location and category of the gaze object. Since the gaze
object is closely linked to human behavior, it is important
to identify the object due to its significant practical implications. Tomas et al. (Tomas et al. 2021) proposed the
gaze object prediction (GOP) task, which aims to predict
both the location and category of the human gaze object.
To facilitate research in the GOP task, they introduced the
first dataset, the GOO dataset, which consists of images of
people looking at different objects in retail scenarios. Compared to GE, the GOP task is more challenging as it requires richer information for model predictions. Wang et al.
(Wang et al. 2022a) proposed GaTector, the first model for
the GOP task, which combines a CNN-based object detector (YOLOv4 (Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020)) with a
CNN-based gaze prediction branch (Chong et al. 2020). GaTector was trained and evaluated on the GOO dataset and
achieved state-of-the-art performance on the GOP task.
The GOP task is highly related to the object detection
task, as both tasks aim to accurately localize objects in

Introduction
Predicting where a person is looking at a screen or an object
has important applications in the real world, such as detecting goods of interest to people in retail scenarios, and fatigue
detection is possible in autonomous driving, and in the medical field, it can help some patients with mobility or speech
impairment to express their intentions (Kleinke 1986; Land
and Tatler 2009; Yu et al. 2022; de Belen et al. 2023).
Previous research on gaze-related topics has primarily focused on gaze estimation (GE) task, which predicts
* Nian Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10180

