The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EarnHFT: Efficient Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for
High Frequency Trading
Molei Qin* , Shuo Sun* , Wentao Zhang, Haochong Xia,
Xinrun Wang† , Bo An†
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{molei001,shuo003,haochong001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {wentao.zhang,xinrun.wang,boan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

has been widely used in Cryptocurrency (Crypto) market
due to Crypto’s 24/7 non-stop trading time, which prevents
Crypto holders from overnight risk, and dramatic price fluctuations, which provides more profitable trading opportunities for HFT. Although reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms (Sun et al. 2022; Théate and Ernst 2021; Cumming,
Alrajeh, and Dickens 2015) have achieved outstanding results in low-frequency trading in traditional financial markets like stock or futures, few maintain robust performance
under the setting of HFT due to two challenges:

High-frequency trading (HFT) uses computer algorithms to
make trading decisions in short time scales (e.g., secondlevel), which is widely used in the Cryptocurrency (Crypto)
market (e.g., Bitcoin). Reinforcement learning (RL) in financial research has shown stellar performance on many quantitative trading tasks. However, most methods focus on lowfrequency trading, e.g., day-level, which cannot be directly
applied to HFT because of two challenges. First, RL for
HFT involves dealing with extremely long trajectories (e.g.,
2.4 million steps per month), which is hard to optimize and
evaluate. Second, the dramatic price fluctuations and market trend changes of Crypto make existing algorithms fail
to maintain satisfactory performance. To tackle these challenges, we propose an Efficient hieArchical Reinforcement
learNing method for High Frequency Trading (EarnHFT),
a novel three-stage hierarchical RL framework for HFT. In
stage I, we compute a Q-teacher, i.e., the optimal action-value
based on dynamic programming, for enhancing the performance and training efficiency of second-level RL agents. In
stage II, we construct a pool of diverse RL agents for different
market trends, distinguished by return rates, where hundreds
of RL agents are trained with different preferences of return
rates and only a tiny fraction of them will be selected into
the pool based on their profitability. In stage III, we train a
minute-level router which dynamically picks a second-level
agent from the pool to achieve stable performance across
different markets. Through extensive experiments in various
market trends on Crypto markets in a high-fidelity simulation
trading environment, we demonstrate that EarnHFT significantly outperforms 6 state-of-art baselines in 3 popular financial criteria, exceeding the runner-up by 30% in profitability.

• An extremely large time horizon induces low data efficiency for RL training. Compared with Atari games
where the time horizon is 6000 (Mnih et al. 2013), the
time horizon of HFT is around 1 million, because secondlevel agents need to be evaluated in dozens of days. Large
time horizons need more data to converge (Zhang et al.
2023a), demanding more computational resources.
• The dramatic market changes cause agents trained on history data to fail in maintaining performance over long
periods. In a traditional RL setting, the training and testing environments remain consistent. However, changes
in the crypto market trend cause a significant difference
between the training and testing environments. An agent
trained on one market trend tends to cause tremendous
losses once the trend changes dramatically in the market.
To tackle the challenges, we propose an Efficient
hieArchical Reinforcement learNing method for High
Frequency Trading (EarnHFT) as shown in Figure 1. In
stage I, we build a Q-teacher indicating the optimal action
value based on dynamic programming and future price information, which is used as a regularizer to train RL agents
delivering a target position every second for better performance and faster training speed. In stage II, we first train
hundreds of second-level RL agents following the stage I
process under different market trend preferences, where buy
and hold (Shiryaev 2008) return rates are used as the preference indicators. We further label each market based on
DTW (Muda, Begam, and Elamvazuthi 2010) as different
categories and use the profitability performance under each
market category to select a tiny fraction of trained secondlevel RL agents to construct a strategy pool. In stage III,
we train a router which dynamically picks a second-level
agent from the pool per minute to achieve stable perfor-

Introduction
High-frequency trading (HFT), taking up more than 73%
volume in the fincial market, refers to leveraging complicated computer algorithms or mathematical models to place
or cancel orders at incredibly short time scales (Almeida
and Gonçalves 2023). A good HFT strategy enables investors to make more profit than a low-frequency strategy and is therefore pursued by many radical traders. It
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14669

