The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Benchmarking Large Language Models in Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Jiawei Chen1,3 , Hongyu Lin1, * , Xianpei Han1,2, * , Le Sun1,2
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{jiawei2020,hongyu,xianpei,sunle}@iscas.ac.cn

2

Noise Robustness

Abstract
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a promising approach for mitigating the hallucination of large language
models (LLMs). However, existing research lacks rigorous
evaluation of the impact of retrieval-augmented generation
on different large language models, which make it challenging to identify the potential bottlenecks in the capabilities
of RAG for different LLMs. In this paper, we systematically investigate the impact of Retrieval-Augmented Generation on large language models. We analyze the performance
of different large language models in 4 fundamental abilities required for RAG, including noise robustness, negative
rejection, information integration, and counterfactual robustness. To this end, we establish Retrieval-Augmented Generation Benchmark (RGB), a new corpus for RAG evaluation in
both English and Chinese. RGB divides the instances within
the benchmark into 4 separate testbeds based on the aforementioned fundamental abilities required to resolve the case.
Then we evaluate 6 representative LLMs on RGB to diagnose the challenges of current LLMs when applying RAG.
Evaluation reveals that while LLMs exhibit a certain degree
of noise robustness, they still struggle significantly in terms of
negative rejection, information integration, and dealing with
false information. The aforementioned assessment outcomes
indicate that there is still a considerable journey ahead to effectively apply RAG to LLMs.

Negative Rejection

Question

Question

Who was awarded the 2022
Nobel prize in literature?

Who was awarded the 2022
Nobel prize in literature?

External documents contain noises

External documents are all noises

… French author Annie Ernaux

… in Literature for 2021 is…

… in Literature for 2021 is…

The 2020 Nobel Laureate …

Retrieval Augmented
Generation
Annie Ernaux

Retrieval Augmented
Generation
I can not answer the question …

Information Integration

Counterfactual Robustness

Question

Question

When were the ChatGPT app for
iOS and api launched?

Which city hosted the Olympic
games in 2004?

External documents contain all answers

Counterfactual external documents

On May 18th, 2023, OpenAI…

2004 Olympic …to New York,

That changed on March 1, …
Retrieval Augmented
Generation
May 18 and March 1.

New York easily defeated …
Retrieval Augmented
Generation
There are factual errors in the…

Figure 1: Illustration of 4 kinds of abilities required for
retrieval-augmented generation of LLMs.

2022; Izacard et al. 2022). With the help of external knowledge, LLMs can generate more accurate and reliable responses. The most common method is to use a search engine
as a retriever such as New Bing. Due to the vast amount of
information available on the Internet, using a search engine
can provide more real-time information.
However, Retrieval-Augmented Generation brings not
only positive effects to LLMs (Liu, Zhang, and Liang 2023;
Maynez et al. 2020). On one hand, there is a significant
amount of noise information even fake news in the content
available on the Internet, which poses challenges for search
engines in accurately retrieving desirable knowledge. On the
other hand, LLMs suffer from unreliable generation challenge. LLMs can be misled by incorrect information contained in the context (Bian et al. 2023) and also suffer from
hallucination during the generation (Adlakha et al. 2023),
resulting in generating content that goes beyond external information. These challenges result in LLMs being unable to
consistently generate reliable and accurate responses. Un-

Introduction
Recently, there have been impressive advancements in large
language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) and
ChatGLM (THUDM 2023a). Although these models have
shown remarkable general abilities (Bang et al. 2023; Guo
et al. 2023), they still suffer severely from challenges including factual hallucination (Cao et al. 2020; Raunak, Menezes,
and Junczys-Dowmunt 2021; Ji et al. 2023), knowledge outdating (He, Zhang, and Roth 2022), and the lack of domainspecific expertise (Li et al. 2023c; Shen et al. 2023).
Incorporating external knowledge via information retrieval, i.e., Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), has
been regarded as a promising way to resolve the above challenges. (Guu et al. 2020; Lewis et al. 2020; Borgeaud et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17754

