The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressively Knowledge Distillation via
Re-parameterizing Diffusion Reverse Process
Xufeng Yao, Fanbin Lu, Yuechen Zhang, Xinyun Zhang, Wenqian Zhao, Bei Yu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xfyao,fblu21,yczhang21,xyzhang21,wqzhao,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

xn

p(x0 |xn )

student feature
teacher feature
transfer path

x0

(a) Classical KD

Knowledge distillation aims at transferring knowledge from
the teacher model to the student one by aligning their distributions. Feature-level distillation often uses L2 distance
or its variants as the loss function, based on the assumption
that outputs follow normal distributions. This poses a significant challenge when distribution gaps are substantial since
this loss function ignores the variance term. To address the
problem, we propose to decompose the transfer objective into
small parts and optimize it progressively. This process is inspired by diffusion models from which the noise distribution
is mapped to the target distribution step by step. However, directly employing diffusion models is impractical in the distillation scenario due to its heavy reverse process. To overcome
this challenge, we adopt the structural re-parameterization
technique to generate multiple student features to approximate the teacher features sequentially. The multiple student
features are combined linearly in inference time without extra
cost. We present extensive experiments performed on various
transfer scenarios, such as CNN-to-CNN and Transformer-toCNN, that validate the effectiveness of our approach.

p(xn−1 |xn ) p(xt |xt+1 ) · · · p(x1 |x2 ) p(x0 |x1 )

xn

· · · xt+1

xt

(b) Diffusion KD

xt−1 · · ·

x1

x0

Figure 1: (a) Conventional feature-level distillation directly
predicts teacher by student. (b) Our proposed diffusion KD
decouples the objective into multiple timesteps and transfer
step by step.
and Isola 2020) utilizes a contrastive objective for distillation by maximizing mutual information between representations. Other approaches such as multi-level feature distillation (Ahn et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021b) have also demonstrated promising results when applied to similar architectures (e.g., CNN-to-CNN) in recent studies.
Our New Finding. However, it is observed that the distillation performance may be disrupted in the presence of
significant distribution gaps. As outlined in Table 1, some
conventional feature-level distillation techniques, such as
CRD (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020), exhibit inferior performance when confronted with the difficult Transformerto-CNN scenario. Such methods yield only marginal distillation improvement, and may even introduce negative transfer
effects.
Feature-level KD mainly uses L2 distance as the loss
function. From the perspective of maximum likelihood estimation, this loss function is based on the assumption
that the outputs conform to the normal distribution, and
the objective is to predict the corresponding µ̂ and σ̂.
We can construct the density function as p(xT |xS ) =
T
2
√1
exp (− 12 (x σ̂−2µ̂) ). The loss function can, therefore,
2π σ̂
be expressed as follows:

Introduction
The revolutionary advancement of Deep Neural Network
(DNN) models has exhibited immense success in various
domains of computer vision. However, their remarkable triumph comes at the cost of significant computation and memory consumption, presenting a formidable challenge in deploying these models in resource-limited industrial applications. To address this, recent research suggests Knowledge
Distillation as a promising resolution wherein knowledge
from a large model (i.e., teacher) can be efficiently transferred to a lightweight model (i.e., student).
In the seminal work by Hinton et al. (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015), the concept of Knowledge Distillation (KD)
was introduced and the transfer objective was achieved by
minimizing the KL-Divergence (Kullback and Leibler 1951)
between softened outputs (logits) of the teacher and student.
On the other hand, many efforts have focused on enhancing
the effectiveness of feature-level distillation. For instance,
FitNet (Romero et al. 2014) leverages intermediate features
to facilitate knowledge transfer, while CRD (Tian, Krishnan,

Ltrans = − log p(xT |xS ) ∝ log σ̂ +

(xT − µ̂)2
.
2σˆ2

(1)

In the standard L2 loss paradigm, variance is treated as a
constant value. This assumption may pose a significant challenge when confronting large distribution gaps. Also, since

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16425

