The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Not All Tasks Are Equally Difficult:
Multi-Task Deep Reinforcement Learning with Dynamic Depth Routing
Jinmin He1,2 , Kai Li1,2 * , Yifan Zang1,2 , Haobo Fu6 , Qiang Fu6 , Junliang Xing5 * , Jian Cheng1,3,4
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
AiRiA
5
Tsinghua University
6
Tencent AI Lab
{hejinmin2021, kai.li, zangyifan2019, jian.cheng}@ia.ac.cn, {haobofu, leonfu}@tencent.com, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multi-task reinforcement learning endeavors to accomplish a
set of different tasks with a single policy. To enhance data efficiency by sharing parameters across multiple tasks, a common practice segments the network into distinct modules and
trains a routing network to recombine these modules into
task-specific policies. However, existing routing approaches
employ a fixed number of modules for all tasks, neglecting
that tasks with varying difficulties commonly require varying
amounts of knowledge. This work presents a Dynamic Depth
Routing (D2R) framework, which learns strategic skipping of
certain intermediate modules, thereby flexibly choosing different numbers of modules for each task. Under this framework, we further introduce a ResRouting method to address
the issue of disparate routing paths between behavior and target policies during off-policy training. In addition, we design
an automatic route-balancing mechanism to encourage continued routing exploration for unmastered tasks without disturbing the routing of mastered ones. We conduct extensive
experiments on various robotics manipulation tasks in the
Meta-World benchmark, where D2R achieves state-of-the-art
performance with significantly improved learning efficiency.

Figure 1: The easy task drawer-close can be solved by simply pushing at any position of the drawer, so D2R learns to
use only 6 modules. However, when tackling the difficult
task drawer-open, which involves first grasping the handle
and then pulling outward, D2R adapts to utilize 10 modules.

task separately (Yang et al. 2020). However, even within the
same domain, the variability between tasks still exists, making it challenging to determine what knowledge should be
shared between tasks and how to share it appropriately.
To tackle this problem, a class of approaches based on
modularization and routing has been proposed (Fernando
et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022). These approaches usually consist of two networks: a base module
network, which divides all parameters into separate modules
to learn different knowledge, and a routing network, which
determines how these modules are combined. These two networks are jointly optimized over multiple tasks.
Although these existing approaches are promising, their
routing networks always use the same number of modules
for all tasks. It could result in unnecessary parameter optimization because not all tasks are equally difficult. Different
tasks demand varying amounts of knowledge, with easier
tasks typically requiring fewer modules than difficult ones.
Based on this consideration, we introduce a Dynamic Depth
Routing (D2R) framework that combines a diverse number
of modules with flexible adaptation to task difficulty (Fig.1).
Specifically, the modules within D2R’s base module network are arranged in a predetermined topological sequence.
For each task, each module establishes routing connections
with selected preceding modules. Thus a module is skipped
in case any of its following modules does not select it. In
this way, D2R automatically determines which modules to
use and the number of modules required for each task.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has witnessed remarkable advancements in the past decade, demonstrating successful applications in diverse domains, including game
playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Ye et al. 2020) and robotic control (Lillicrap et al. 2016; Levine et al. 2016). However, despite the current capabilities of deep RL methods to learn
individual policies for specific tasks, training a single policy that can generalize across multiple tasks remains highly
challenging (Teh et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2020b).
Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning (MTRL) aims to acquire an effective policy capable of accomplishing a diverse
range of tasks. Given the potential similarities among the
joint learning tasks, training a multi-task policy allows for
sharing and reusing knowledge across related tasks, resulting in enhanced sample efficiency compared to training each
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12376

