The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarial Fairness Network
Taeuk Jang1 , Xiaoqian Wang1 , Heng Huang2
1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, USA
{jang141, joywang}@purdue.edu, heng@umd.edu

Abstract

A model with merely good prediction performance is not
convincing enough when we harness the power of machine
learning. It is critical to guarantee that the prediction is based
on appropriate information, and is not biased towards certain groups of the population characterized by sensitive features like race and gender. To improve model fairness, recent works propose strategies from different perspectives.
For example, there are efforts on eliminating data bias by
reweighing the samples (Kamiran and Calders 2012; Nam
et al. 2020; Jang and Wang 2023; Chai and Wang 2022),
generating fair data (Jang, Zheng, and Wang 2021; Sattigeri
et al. 2019), or removing the disparity among groups (Feldman et al. 2015). While in-processing methods train a fair
model by constraining the prediction not to base on sensitive information (Zhang, Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018; Mary,
Calauzenes, and El Karoui 2019; Baharlouei et al. 2019;
Cho, Hwang, and Suh 2020; Wang, Wang, and Liu 2022;
Balunović, Ruoss, and Vechev 2022). Adel et al. (Adel et al.
2019) also propose an adversarial network that minimizes
the influence of sensitive features on the prediction by characterizing the relevance between the latent data representation and the sensitive feature.
Fairness in machine learning is categorized based on different perspectives: group fairness and individual fairness.
Group fairness (Li et al. 2021; Celis et al. 2021) guarantees
that different groups of the population have equalized opportunity of achieving a favorable prediction result. Whereas
for individual fairness (Dwork et al. 2012; Friedler, Scheidegger, and Venkatasubramanian 2016), the goal is to guarantee that similar individuals get similar prediction output.
Following the mainstream of the literature, we here focus on
mitigating bias in terms of group fairness in this work.
To improve fairness, previous works usually take either
the data perspective or model perspective, i.e., modifying
input to reduce data bias or optimizing model to reduce prediction bias. These strategies may not guarantee the learned
input to be optimal for the model or the designed model to be
optimal for the data, such that a fairness constraint usually
introduces deterioration in prediction performance.
In contrast, we propose a novel adversarial network to
reduce the bias simultaneously from both the data and the
model perspective to improve fairness while maintaining
the predictive performance. Specifically, we train a selector
module to sample input features that do not propagate bias

Fairness is becoming a rising concern in machine learning.
Recent research has discovered that state-of-the-art models
are amplifying social bias by making biased prediction towards some population groups (characterized by sensitive
features like race or gender). Such unfair prediction among
groups renders trust issues and ethical concerns in machine
learning, especially for sensitive fields such as employment,
criminal justice, and trust score assessment. In this paper,
we introduce a new framework to improve machine learning fairness. The goal of our model is to minimize the influence of sensitive feature from the perspectives of both data
input and predictive model. To achieve this goal, we reformulate the data input by eliminating the sensitive information
and strengthen model fairness by minimizing the marginal
contribution of the sensitive feature. We propose to learn the
sensitive-irrelevant input via sampling among features and
design an adversarial network to minimize the dependence
between the reformulated input and the sensitive information.
Empirical results validate that our model achieves comparable or better results than related state-of-the-art methods w.r.t.
both fairness metrics and prediction performance.

Introduction
In recent years, machine learning has achieved unparalleled
success in various fields, from image classification, speech
recognition, to autonomous driving. Despite the rapid development, the discrimination and bias that exist in machine
learning models are attracting increasing attention. Recent
models have been found to be biased towards some population groups. Hendricks et al. (Hendricks et al. 2018) identified prediction bias towards gender in image captioning
model, where the generation of caption is actually based on
contextual information (e.g., location and scenes) but not
the visual evidence related with the person in the image.
In addition, ProPublica (J. Angwin and Kirchner 2016) analyzed a widely used criminal risk assessment tool for future crime prediction and discovered discrimination among
different races. For defendants that do not commit a future
crime, Black people are more likely to be mistaken by the
model as potential future criminals than white people (i.e., a
higher false positive rate in Black people than white people).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22159

