The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combinatorial CNN-Transformer Learning with Manifold Constraints for
Semi-supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Huimin Huang1 , Yawen Huang2 † , Shiao Xie1 , Lanfen Lin1* , Ruofeng Tong1,3 , Yen-Wei Chen4* ,
Yuexiang Li5 , Yefeng Zheng2
1
Zhejiang University
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab
3
Zhejiang Lab
4
Ritsumeikan University
5
Medical AI Research Group, Guangxi Medical University
2

Abstract

Specifically, CNN-based SSL methods fail to model the explicit long-range relations beyond local regions (shown in
Fig. 1 (c) and (d)), since the receptive field of a network’s
units is severely limited. To increase model diversity, previous approaches focused on different perturbations (French
et al. 2019), varying network structures (Luo et al. 2021a),
or various initializations (Ke et al. 2019). However, capturing complementary information is arduous in the later stage
of training, as an indirect result of counterproductive decoupling two feature extractors (Zheng et al. 2022). In addition, the existing SSL methods directly leverage pixel-wise
predictions from CNNs, which ignore rich class-level dependencies, resulting in very limited capability for accurate
segmentation, especially for organs with similar contextual
information or/and surrounding position, e.g., a part of pancreas is incorrectly segmented as liver in Fig. 1 (f) and (g).
Recently, Transformers have made remarkable achievements toward establishing long-range dependencies alternative to CNNs and achieving excellent performance in multifarious visual tasks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). Although
global relations can be well captured by Transformers, the
lack of inductive biases and the receptive field of convolutional kernels all lead to less effective learning, let alone the
quadratic computational complexity. Fortunately, the above
problems can be solved by combining CNNs and Transformers for fully associating local features with global cues. Enlightened by the success of joint learning, in this paper, we
explore the essence of CNNs and Transformers for building
both local invariant translation and global long-range dependency in semi-supervised medical image segmentation.
Plenty of works have been presented to learn features in
general Euclidean space, yet seldom considering the topological structures of data, which is crucial on manifold. In
fact, directly operating in Euclidean space is challenging,
considering: (i) Intra-student problem: Both CNNs and
Transformers face the difficulty of inconsistency in the same
category and the confused semantics among categories,
which all lead to inseparable representations. (ii) Interstudent problem: the inner feature and output paradigm of
Transformers is heterogeneous from CNNs, which leads to
different class distributions. How to learn the complementarity of two-style features and train the Transformer with
few annotations remains an open question.

Semi-supervised learning (SSL), as one of the dominant
methods, aims at leveraging the unlabeled data to deal with
the annotation dilemma of supervised learning, which has attracted much attentions in the medical image segmentation.
Most of the existing approaches leverage a unitary network
by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with compulsory
consistency of the predictions through small perturbations applied to inputs or models. The penalties of such a learning
paradigm are that (1) CNN-based models place severe limitations on global learning; (2) rich and diverse class-level distributions are inhibited. In this paper, we present a novel CNNTransformer learning framework in the manifold space for
semi-supervised medical image segmentation. First, at intrastudent level, we propose a novel class-wise consistency loss
to facilitate the learning of both discriminative and compact
target feature representations. Then, at inter-student level, we
align the CNN and Transformer features using a prototypebased optimal transport method. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods on three public medical image segmentation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Medical image segmentation, in the pursuit of integrating
boundary detection, region formation and agglomeration for
analyzing tissue structures, is a long-standing fundamental
task. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Zhou et al. 2019b) have
achieved remarkable success benefiting from the large-scale
annotated dataset. However, collecting pixel-level annotations is expensive and time-consuming, especially for medical images. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) attracts high attention by using both labeled data and large amount of unlabeled data to relieve the pressure of sufficient labeling.
Learning such a paradigm also remains being exposed to
ongoing adverse representational conditions, for example,
the lack of global attention makes imprecise performance.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding Authors: Lanfen Lin (llf@zju.edu.cn), Yen-Wei
Chen (chen@is.ritsumei.ac.jp).
†Huimin Huang and Yawen Huang are co-first authors, and this
work is done during the internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.

2330

