The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SparseGNV: Generating Novel Views of Indoor Scenes with Sparse RGB-D Images
Weihao Cheng, Yan-Pei Cao, Ying Shan
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
whcheng@tencent.com, caoyanpei@gmail.com, yingsshan@tencent.com

Abstract
We study to generate novel views of indoor scenes given
sparse input views. The challenge is to achieve both photorealism and view consistency. We present SparseGNV: a learning framework that incorporates 3D structures and image generative models to generate novel views with three modules.
The first module builds a neural point cloud as underlying
geometry, providing scene context and guidance for the target
novel view. The second module utilizes a transformer-based
network to map the scene context and the guidance into a
shared latent space and autoregressively decodes the target
view in the form of discrete image tokens. The third module reconstructs the tokens back to the image of the target
view. SparseGNV is trained across a large-scale indoor scene
dataset to learn generalizable priors. Once trained, it can efficiently generate novel views of an unseen indoor scene in a
feed-forward manner. We evaluate SparseGNV on real-world
indoor scenes and demonstrate that it outperforms state-ofthe-art methods based on either neural radiance fields or conditional image generation.

Observed Images (only 4)

Ground Truth

Generated

Figure 1: The proposed SparseGNV generates novel view
images of unseen indoor scenes based on 4 observed views.

Synthesizing high-quality novel views of 3D indoor scenes
is a long-standing and challenging task in computer vision
(Hedman et al. 2016; Philip et al. 2021; Lei, Tang, and Jia
2022). Typically, this task requires dense scans from various
viewpoints as input. However, indoor scenes are often spatially complex, and capturing every region of a scene can be
expensive and even intractable. To overcome this challenge,
we aim to synthesize novel views with sparse input observations, which reduces the data capture burden. An ideal approach should be capable of generating views by reasonably
filling unobserved regions with view consistency.
Sparse-view synthesis methods have gained significant attention recently, particularly those based on neural radiance
fields (NeRFs) (Niemeyer et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2022;
Roessle et al. 2022), which require inputs with a certain level
of view coverage. Due to lack of image generation ability,
the above methods are intractable for filling largely unobserved areas. Several methods (Sajjadi et al. 2022; Kulhánek
et al. 2022) use transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) to learn

latent scene representations from 2D observations and conditionally generate images given new viewpoints. However,
due to lack of explicit 3D representation, it is challenging for
these methods to synthesize visual details from unstructured
latent space. Another line of work (Gkioxari et al. 2019;
Rockwell, Fouhey, and Johnson 2021; Ren et al. 2022) focuses on generating novel views or long-term videos starting from a single image, using generative networks to paint
the “outside” of a view autoregressively, but they face limitations in synthesizing consistent views between multiple
frames. This leads to the core motivation of our approach:
marrying explicit 3D scene structures with image generative
models for a joint capability of generating views with limited visual clues and maintaining scene consistency.
We propose SparseGNV: a framework that learns generalizable scene priors to generate novel views conditioned on
sparse RGB-D input views. SparseGNV is first trained on
a large indoor scene dataset to obtain priors that are generalizable across scenes. Once trained, SparseGNV can efficiently generate novel views through forward passing given
observed views of a new scene and target viewpoints, without the need for per-scene optimization. To generate 2D
novel views grounded in 3D scene structures, we design
SparseGNV with three modules: a neural geometry mod-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The ArXiv version of this paper is available at:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07024

Introduction

1308

