The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Homography Estimation for Visual Place Recognition
Feng Lu1,2 , Shuting Dong1,2 , Lijun Zhang3 , Bingxi Liu2,4 , Xiangyuan Lan2* , Dongmei Jiang2 ,
Chun Yuan1,2 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Southern University of Science and Technology
{lf22@mails, dst21@mails, yuanc@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhanglijun@cigit.ac.cn, {liubx, lanxy, jiangdm}@pcl.ac.cn
Abstract
Visual place recognition (VPR) is a fundamental task for
many applications such as robot localization and augmented
reality. Recently, the hierarchical VPR methods have received considerable attention due to the trade-off between
accuracy and efficiency. They usually first use global features to retrieve the candidate images, then verify the spatial
consistency of matched local features for re-ranking. However, the latter typically relies on the RANSAC algorithm
for fitting homography, which is time-consuming and nondifferentiable. This makes existing methods compromise to
train the network only in global feature extraction. Here,
we propose a transformer-based deep homography estimation
(DHE) network that takes the dense feature map extracted by
a backbone network as input and fits homography for fast and
learnable geometric verification. Moreover, we design a reprojection error of inliers loss to train the DHE network without additional homography labels, which can also be jointly
trained with the backbone network to help it extract the features that are more suitable for local matching. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that our method can
outperform several state-of-the-art methods. And it is more
than one order of magnitude faster than the mainstream hierarchical VPR methods using RANSAC. The code is released
at https://github.com/Lu-Feng/DHE-VPR.

Iq

backbone

GeM
pooling

Global
feature
retrieval

...
Ic1

Ic2

Ick

Cross-matching
local features
...
Iq

Ic1

Iq

Ic2

Iq

Ick

DHE Hqc1, Hqc2 ... Hqck Geometric
Verification
(Feature maps Network

of query
and candidates)

Counting inliers
for re-ranking
...

...
Iq

Ick

Iq

Ic2

Iq

Ic1

Figure 1: The two-stage place retrieval with the proposed architecture. The backbone is applied to extract feature maps.
The top branch yields global features for retrieving top-k
candidate images. The bottom branch employs the local features for cross-matching and the DHE network for geometric
verification via regressing homography. We count inliers as
image similarity for re-ranking candidates.

Cao et al. 2020), with global or/and local features to represent place images. The global features can also be got by aggregating local features into compact feature vectors (Jégou
et al. 2010), which are robust to viewpoint change and applicable for large-scale VPR. However, methods only using
such features are prone to suffer from perceptual aliasing,
because it neglects the spatial information of aggregated local features. This issue can be solved by matching local features with geometric verification, but it is time-consuming.
A compromise pipeline (Hausler et al. 2021), called hierarchical or two-stage VPR, first retrieves top-k candidate
places using global features, then re-ranks them via local
feature matching between the query and candidate images.
However, in the re-ranking stage of hierarchical VPR,
the matched local feature pairs based on similarity searching commonly contain some incorrect pairs (i.e., outliers).
The RANSAC algorithm (Fischler and Bolles 1981) is typically used to fit the homography and remove outliers. The
process of RANSAC is to iteratively sample four matched
pairs at random to solve corresponding homography transformations and find the one that meets the most inliers. It
is time-consuming and non-differentiable. Although there

Introduction
Visual place recognition (VPR), also known as visual geolocalization (Berton et al. 2022) or image localization (Liu,
Li, and Dai 2019), is one of the research hotspots in robotics
and computer vision communities. VPR aims to coarsely estimate the location of the query image (i.e. the current location of the mobile robot), which is commonly achieved
using image retrieval methods on a database of geo-tagged
images. When designing a robust VPR method, there are two
challenging problems to consider: 1) Due to condition (e.g.,
light, weather, and season) and viewpoint variations, images
captured at the same place may change significantly over
time. 2) Images captured at different places can be similar,
which may lead to perceptual aliasing (Lowry et al. 2016).
The VPR implementation process typically involves image retrieval and feature matching (Arandjelovic et al. 2016;
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10341

