The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data-Driven Knowledge-Aware Inference of Private Information
in Continuous Double Auctions
Lvye Cui, Haoran Yu∗
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
cui lvye@outlook.com, yhrhawk@gmail.com

Abstract

cesses, compute their payoffs, and quantify the efficiency
and equity of the designed mechanisms or policies.
The main inference idea is first obtaining humans’ behavior functions (which map public information and humans’ private information to their decisions), and then inferring private information based on the behavior functions
and the observed decisions. Prior studies obtained behavior functions mainly by assuming that humans possess sufficient rationality and knowledge to make decisions according to equilibria (Athey and Nekipelov 2010; Ling, Fang,
and Kolter 2019; Wu et al. 2022). This inference approach
heavily relies on assumptions regarding humans’ rationality and knowledge about each other (Nisan and Noti 2017;
Kagel and Roth 2020), and can hardly be applied to complex
strategic environments where deriving equilibria is infeasible and information about human rationality and knowledge
is unavailable. To address this problem, some recent studies proposed a machine learning-based inference approach
(Cui and Yu 2023), which applies machine learning models
to learn behavior functions from data.

Inferring the private information of humans from their strategic behavioral data is crucial and challenging. The main approach is first obtaining human behavior functions (which
map public information and human private information to
behavior), enabling subsequent inference of private information from observed behavior. Most existing studies rely on
strong equilibrium assumptions to obtain behavior functions.
Our work focuses on continuous double auctions, where multiple traders with heterogeneous rationalities and beliefs dynamically trade commodities and deriving equilibria is generally intractable. We develop a knowledge-aware machine
learning-based framework to infer each trader’s private cost
vectors for producing different units of its commodity. Our
key idea is to learn behavior functions by incorporating the
statistical knowledge about private costs given the observed
trader asking behavior across the population. Specifically,
we first use a neural network to characterize each trader’s
behavior function. Second, we leverage the statistical knowledge to derive the posterior distribution of each trader’s private costs given its observed asks. Third, through designing
a novel loss function, we utilize the knowledge-based posterior distributions to guide the learning of the neural network. We conduct extensive experiments on a large experimental dataset, and demonstrate the superior performance of
our framework over baselines in inferring the private information of humans.

1

Knowledge-Aware Information Inference The key challenge of applying the machine learning-based inference approach lies in accurately learning behavior functions. Because the private information of each individual human is
typically unobservable and not recorded in the data, learning
behavior functions from the data (which only record public
information and human decisions) cannot be accomplished
using standard supervised learning techniques. In this work,
we propose a novel knowledge-aware method for learning
behavior functions to achieve accurate inference. Specifically, although the private information of each individual
human is unknown, the statistical knowledge about private
information given observed decisions across the population
may be obtained in many applications. We study how to derive this statistical knowledge and incorporate it into behavior function learning.
We focus on inferring private information in continuous
double auctions (CDAs). In a CDA, multiple sellers and buyers engage in trading multiple units of a commodity. They
can submit asks or bids at any time throughout the trading period, and transactions take place as soon as asks and
bids are matched. For ease of exposition, we study inferring the private cost vectors of sellers for producing differ-

Introduction

Many recent studies in economics and applied machine
learning have explored the inference of humans’ private
information (e.g., a seller’s private cost of producing its
product) based on their observed decisions in strategic environments. These environments encompass a wide range
of applications, such as normal-form games (Ling, Fang,
and Kolter 2018; Noti 2021), Stackelberg games (Wu
et al. 2022), alternating-offer bargaining (Larsen and Zhang
2018; Cui and Yu 2023), and sponsored-search auctions
(Nekipelov, Syrgkanis, and Tardos 2015; Noti and Syrgkanis
2021). Accurate private information inference enables designers to better understand humans’ decision-making pro∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10012

