The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Robust Image Stitching: An Adaptive Resistance Learning
against Compatible Attacks
Zhiying Jiang1 , Xingyuan Li1 , Jinyuan Liu2 , Xin Fan1 , Risheng Liu1 *
1

Shool of Software Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
School of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
{zyjiang0630, icinesi.li}@gmail.com, atlantis918@hotmail.com, {xin.fan, rsliu}@dlut.edu.cn
2

Benign Image Pair

Abstract
Image stitching seamlessly integrates images captured from
varying perspectives into a single wide field-of-view image.
Such integration not only broadens the captured scene but
also augments holistic perception in computer vision applications. Given a pair of captured images, subtle perturbations
and distortions which go unnoticed by the human visual system tend to attack the correspondence matching, impairing
the performance of image stitching algorithms. In light of
this challenge, this paper presents the first attempt to improve
the robustness of image stitching against adversarial attacks.
Specifically, we introduce a stitching-oriented attack (SoA),
tailored to amplify the alignment loss within overlapping regions, thereby targeting the feature matching procedure. To
establish an attack resistant model, we delve into the robustness of stitching architecture and develop an adaptive adversarial training (AAT) to balance attack resistance with stitching precision. In this way, we relieve the gap between the
routine adversarial training and benign models, ensuring resilience without quality compromise. Comprehensive evaluation across real-world and synthetic datasets validate the deterioration of SoA on stitching performance. Furthermore, AAT
emerges as a more robust solution against adversarial perturbations, delivering superior stitching results. Code is available at: https://github.com/Jzy2017/TRIS.

Adversarial Perturbations

Stitching on Benign Images

EN

SF

SD

AG

SIQE

BR

Stitching on attacked Images

Vulnerable

(a) RSFI

Attacked Image Pair

Performance Drop Robust &Reliable

(b) RSFI w/o Retrain (c) RSFI with Retrain

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. (a) presents the reference performance of prolific RSFI (Nie et al. 2021) on
benign images. (b) reveals the vulnerability of RSFI under
adversarial perturbations. Upon routine adversarial training,
the robustness of RSFI improves, yet there remains a notable performance decline, as depicted in (c). In contrast, the
proposed method in (d) not only exhibits resilience against
perturbations but also delivers a performance surpassing that
observed in the benign scenarios.

et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2022b). These methods harness the
rich feature representations offered by deep learning, enabling more precise multi-view alignments. As a result, they
yield superior results characterized by minimal ghosting and
more trustworthy reconstructions.
While deep learning based image stitching works have
achieved significant advancements, their robustness against
adversarial attacks remains a concern. Despite their imperceptibility to the human vision, subtle perturbations can
drastically modify the predicted results (Liu et al. 2023d).
Given the complexity and diversity of real-world scenes,
the imperceptible perturbations can easily blend into the detailed content. However, at the feature level, these perturbations cause marked deviations, severely compromising the
accuracy of feature matching in the stitching process. Thus,
addressing the vulnerability of image stitching methods to
adversarial attacks becomes a critical challenge in ensuring
the reliability of the stitched results.
This paper presents the first endeavor to enhance the robustness of learning based image stitching against adversarial attacks. Specifically, we develop a stitching-oriented at-

Introduction
Image stitching aims to relieve the limitations of camera
field-of-view (FOV) by integrating images from different
viewpoints to reconstruct wide FOV scenes. The primary
challenge in this task is managing planar transformations in
multi-view scenes, especially when aligning a target image
with its reference counterpart on a shared plane, achieved
through feature matching in overlapping regions.
Early approaches predominantly rely on feature detection,
utilizing descriptors such as SIFT (Lowe 2004), SURF (Bay,
Tuytelaars, and Van Gool 2006), and ORB (Rublee et al.
2011), and established correspondence matching grounded
in neighborhood measurements. However, they fall short in
cases of the complicated scenarios and often mismatch the
detected points. In contrast, the advent of deep learning have
ushered in notable advancements in the image stitching (Nie
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2589

