The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Measuring Self-Supervised Representation Quality for Downstream Classification
Using Discriminative Features
Neha Kalibhat1 , Kanika Narang2 , Hamed Firooz2 , Maziar Sanjabi2 , Soheil Feizi1
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Meta AI
nehamk@umd.edu

Abstract

modes (Jing et al. 2022; Huang, Yi, and Zhao 2021; Ericsson, Gouk, and Hospedales 2021).
In this paper, our goal is to study the representation space
of pre-trained self-supervised encoders (SSL) such as SimCLR (Chen et al. 2020a), SwaV (Caron et al. 2020), MoCo
(Chen et al. 2020b), BYOL (Grill et al. 2020), SimSiam
(Chen and He 2021), DINO (Caron et al. 2021), VICReg
(Bardes, Ponce, and LeCun 2021) and Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al. 2021) and discover their informative features in an
unsupervised manner. We observe that representations are
mostly sparse, containing a small number of highly activating features. These features can strongly activate a small,
moderate or large number of samples in the population. We
refer to the moderate category of features as discriminative
features.
We observe some intriguing properties of discriminative
features: (i) Although discovered without any class label information, they can be strongly correlated to a particular
class or group of classes (See Figure 1); (ii) They highlight
informative concepts in the activating samples which are often related to the ground truth of those samples; (iii) They
activate strongly in correctly classified representations rather
than mis-classified representations (as shown in Figure 3)
and finally, iv) Representations can be compressed by up to
40% using discriminative features without significantly affecting linear evaluation performance.
Building on these observations, we propose an unsupervised, sample-wise Self-Supervised Representation Quality Score (Q-Score). A high Q-Score for a sample implies
that its representation contains highly activating discriminative coordinates which is a favorable representation property. We empirically observe that Q-Score can be used as a
zero-shot predictor in distinguishing between correct and incorrect classifications for any SSL model achieving AUPRC
of 91.45 on ImageNet-100 and 78.78 AUPRC on ImageNet1K.
We next apply Q-Score as a regularizer and further-train
pre-trained SSL models at a low rate to improve low-quality
representations. This improves the linear probing performance across all our baselines, highest on BYOL (5.8% on
ImageNet-100 and 3.7% on ImageNet-1K). The representations, after regularization, show increased activation for
discriminative features (Figure 3) due to which several previously mis-classified samples get correctly classified with

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has shown impressive results
in downstream classification tasks. However, there is limited
work in understanding their failure modes and interpreting
their learned representations. In this paper, we study the representation space of state-of-the-art self-supervised models
including SimCLR, SwaV, MoCo, BYOL, DINO, SimSiam,
VICReg and Barlow Twins. Without the use of class label
information, we discover discriminative features that correspond to unique physical attributes in images, present mostly
in correctly-classified representations. Using these features,
we can compress the representation space by up to 40% without significantly affecting linear classification performance.
We then propose Self-Supervised Representation Quality
Score (or Q-Score), an unsupervised score that can reliably
predict if a given sample is likely to be mis-classified during
linear evaluation, achieving AUPRC of 91.45 on ImageNet100 and 78.78 on ImageNet-1K. Q-Score can also be used as
a regularization term on pre-trained encoders to remedy lowquality representations. Fine-tuning with Q-Score regularization can boost the linear probing accuracy of SSL models
by up to 5.8% on ImageNet-100 and 3.7% on ImageNet-1K
compared to their baselines. Finally, using gradient heatmaps
and Salient ImageNet masks, we define a metric to quantify
the interpretability of each representation. We show that discriminative features are strongly correlated to core attributes
and, enhancing these features through Q-score regularization
makes SSL representations more interpretable.

Introduction
Self-supervised models (Chen et al. 2020a; Caron et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020b; Grill et al. 2020; Chen and He
2021; Caron et al. 2018a; Khosla et al. 2020; Caron et al.
2021; Bardes, Ponce, and LeCun 2021; Zbontar et al. 2021)
learn to extract useful representations from data without relying on human supervision, and perform comparably to
supervised models in downstream classification tasks. Pretraining these models can be highly resource-intensive and
time-consuming. It is therefore crucial that the learned representations are of high quality such that they are explainable and generalizable. However, in practice, these representations are often quite noisy and un-interpretable, causing difficulties in understanding and debugging their failure
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13031

