The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Makespan in a Minute Timespan!
A Scalable Multi-Robot Goal Assignment Algorithm for Minimizing Mission Time
Aakash and Indranil Saha
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
{aakashp, isaha}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
We study a variant of the multi-robot goal assignment
problem where a unique goal to each robot needs to be
assigned while minimizing the largest cost of movement
among the robots, called makespan. A significant step in
solving this problem is to find the cost associated with
the robot-goal pairs, which requires solving a complex
path planning problem. We present OM, a scalable optimal
algorithm that solves the multi-robot goal assignment
problem by computing the paths for a significantly less
number of robot-goal pairs compared to the state-of-the-art
algorithms, leading to a computationally superior mechanism
to solve the problem. We extensively evaluate our algorithm
for hundreds of robots on randomly generated and standard
workspaces. Our experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm achieves a noticeable speedup over two
state-of-the-art baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Several multi-robot applications, such as warehouse
management (Li et al. 2021; Das, Nath, and Saha
2021), disaster response (Tian et al. 2009), precision
agriculture (Gonzalez-de-Santos et al. 2017), mail and
goods delivery (Grippa et al. 2019), etc., require the robots
to visit specific goal locations in the workspace to perform
some designated tasks. These applications lead to the
fundamental goal assignment problem for multi-robot
systems: Given the initial locations of a set of robots and
a set of goal locations, assign each robot to a goal such
that the largest cost of movement (makespan) for the robots
to reach their assigned goal locations is minimized. The
problem is a variant of the Anonymous Multi-Agent Path
Finding (AMAPF) problem (Stern et al. 2019), where we
decide the one-to-one robot-goal assignment and find the
corresponding collision-free paths to optimize the makespan.
The AMAPF problem for optimizing makespan has been
addressed in a number of recent works. We can organize the
literature into two categories. The papers in the first category
compute the robot-goal assignment and the corresponding
collision-free paths concurrently. These are mainly the
flow-based approaches (Yu and LaValle 2013; Ma and
Koenig 2016) that lack scalability due to the extensive size
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10280

of the flow network, which renders them ineffective for a
problem with more than a few robots.
The papers in the second category start with finding
an initial robot-goal assignment by solving the so-called
linear bottleneck assignment (LBA) problem (Fulkerson,
Glicksberg, and Gross 1953; Gross 1959), and then find the
collision-free paths for this assignment. Among these works,
SCRAM (MacAlpine, Price, and Stone 2015) employs
a graph-theoretic algorithm that is built upon unrealistic
assumptions that the environment is obstacle-free and that
a robot travels from its initial location to its goal location
along a straight-line path. To solve the LBA problem in
realistic settings where the environment has obstacles, either
the costs of all robot-goal pairs are computed by finding the
path for each pair (Turpin et al. 2013; Turpin, Michael, and
Kumar 2013; Turpin et al. 2014), or they are computed in a
lazy manner (Okumura and Défago 2022). These decoupled
approaches cannot ensure the optimality of the solution but
have the potential to provide more scalability compared to
the algorithms solving the goal assignment and the path
planning problems concurrently. However, they still have
computational limitations in solving the underlying LBA
problem, which prevent them from scaling up to large
workspaces and large number of robots.
In this paper, our aim is to solve the goal assignment
problem for a large multi-robot system with hundreds of
robots within a short duration. We do not attempt to solve
the AMAPF problem optimally as eliminating collisions
statically without compromising optimality for such large
multi-robot systems is computationally infeasible. We
instead aim to solve the multi-robot goal assignment
problem efficiently to get an optimal assignment based
on the independent optimal path for each robot-goal pair.
An efficient goal assignment algorithm enables the robots
to embark on their individual optimal paths towards their
respective goals quickly and deal with the collisions with
other robots and any dynamic obstacles using their local
collision avoidance mechanism (Alonso-Mora et al. 2010;
Snape et al. 2010; van den Berg et al. 2011; Hennes et al.
2012; Chen et al. 2017). Also, an efficient goal assignment
algorithm, when plugged into the algorithms presented
in (Turpin et al. 2013; Turpin, Michael, and Kumar 2013;
Turpin et al. 2014; Okumura and Défago 2022), provides a
more efficient solution to the AMAPF problem.

