The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Triple Feature Disentanglement for One-Stage Adaptive Object Detection
Haoan Wang1 , Shilong Jia1 , Tieyong Zeng2 , Guixu Zhang1 , Zhi Li1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Department of Mathematics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
{haw, 51255901119}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zeng@math.cuhk.edu.hk, {gxzhang, zli}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In recent advancements concerning Domain Adaptive Object
Detection (DAOD), unsupervised domain adaptation techniques have proven instrumental. These methods enable enhanced detection capabilities within unlabeled target domains
by mitigating distribution differences between source and target domains. A subset of DAOD methods employs disentangled learning to segregate Domain-Specific Representations (DSR) and Domain-Invariant Representations (DIR),
with ultimate predictions relying on the latter. Current practices in disentanglement, however, often lead to DIR containing residual domain-specific information. To address this, we
introduce the Multi-level Disentanglement Module (MDM)
that progressively disentangles DIR, enhancing comprehensive disentanglement. Additionally, our proposed Cyclic Disentanglement Module (CDM) facilitates DSR separation. To
refine the process further, we employ the Categorical Features
Disentanglement Module (CFDM) to isolate DIR and DSR,
coupled with category alignment across scales for improved
source-target domain alignment. Given its practical suitability, our model is constructed upon the foundational framework of the Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD), which is a
one-stage object detection approach. Experimental validation
highlights the effectiveness of our method, demonstrating its
state-of-the-art performance across three benchmark datasets.

TD-DIR

TFD-DIR

GT

TD-DIR

TFD-DIR

GT

Figure 1: Comparisons of feature maps extracted by Traditional Disentanglement (TD) and our Triple Feature Disentanglement (TFD). The extracted DIR from TD and TFD are
represented as ‘TD-DIR’ and ‘TFD-DIR’, respectively. The
DIR obtained through our TFD contains much less domainspecific information, thereby enabling more emphasis on the
objects of interest.

for object detection (Yao et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022c). Therefore, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is applied to
the field of object detection (Zhang et al. 2021a; Liu et al.
2021a; Jin et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022) and a novel task
called Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) (Chen
et al. 2018) is proposed to narrow the domain shift between
two domains. Existing methods (Vs et al. 2021; Zhao and
Wang 2022; Xu et al. 2022a) use Gradient Reversal Layers
(GRL) (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015) and domain discriminators for this purpose. In this way, the detector is able to
achieve acceptable detection performance on the unlabeled
target domain. However, the above methods may ignore the
influence of domain-private information (Peng et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2022). The inherent instability of the adversarial
learning process contributes to the inaccuracy of prediction
results in these methods (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou
2017). Furthermore, the features extracted in conventional
adversarial learning-based UDA approaches fail to achieve
domain-invariant and inevitably retain domain-private factors. When optimizing UDA models using these entangled
features, the bias towards the source domain further amplifies the degradation of performance in the target domain (Liu
et al. 2022).
For DAOD tasks, it is important to obtain DomainInvariant Representations (DIR), which can lessen the effect of domain shift (Wu et al. 2021). Hence, traditional ap-

Introduction
Due to the availability of numerous annotated datasets, object detection techniques based on deep learning have made
significant advancements (Zhu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021b;
He et al. 2022). Lately, models that rely on full supervision
have been criticized for their apparent deficiency in terms
of generalization ability (Liu et al. 2022). Firstly, performance drops significantly when applying the detector to a
new domain. Besides, on unlabeled datasets, detectors generally hard to yield satisfactory results. Furthermore, the task
of labeling datasets requires a significant amount of time and
resources.
To address these problems, developing an algorithm that
can transfer the knowledge learned from a labeled source
domain to another unlabeled target domain becomes critical
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5401

