The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Automatic Boundary Detection for Human-AI Collaborative Hybrid
Essay in Education
Zijie Zeng, Lele Sha, Yuheng Li, Kaixun Yang, Dragan Gašević and Guanliang Chen∗
Centre for Learning Analytics, Monash University, Australia
{Zijie.Zeng, Lele.Sha1, Yuheng.Li, Kaixun.Yang1, Dragan.Gasevic, Guanliang.Chen}@monash.edu

1

Abstract

Introduction

The recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have enabled them to generate human-like and fluent responses when provided with specific instructions. However,
the growing generative abilities of LLM have arguably been
a sword with two blades. As pointed out by Ma, Liu, and Yi
(2023); Zellers et al. (2019), LLMs can potentially be used
to generate seemingly correct but unverifiable texts that may
be maliciously used to sway public opinion in a variety of
ways, e.g., fake news (Zellers et al. 2019), fake app reviews
(Martens and Maalej 2019), fake social media posts (Fagni
et al. 2021), and others (Weidinger et al. 2021; Abid, Farooqi, and Zou 2021; Gehman et al. 2020). Particularly, concerns have been raised among educators that students may
be tempted to leverage the powerful generative capability
of LLMs to complete their writing assessments (e.g., essay
writing (Choi et al. 2023) and reflective writings (Li et al.
2023)), thereby wasting the valuable learning activities that
were purposefully designed for developing students’ analytical and critical thinking skills (Ma, Liu, and Yi 2023; Dugan
et al. 2023; Mitchell et al. 2023). At the same time, teachers also wasted their effort in grading and providing feedback to artificially generated answers. Driven by the above
concerns, many studies focused on differentiating humanwritten content from AI-generated content have been conducted (Mitchell et al. 2023; Ma, Liu, and Yi 2023; Zellers
et al. 2019; Uchendu et al. 2020; Fagni et al. 2021; Ippolito
et al. 2020). For example, to advance the techniques for detecting AI-generated content on social media (e.g., Twitter
and Facebook), Fagni et al. (2021) constructed the TweepFake dataset, based on which they evaluated thirteen widely
known detection methods.
While most existing studies (Ma, Liu, and Yi 2023; Clark
et al. 2021; Mitchell et al. 2023; Jawahar, Abdul-Mageed,
and Laks Lakshmanan 2020; Martens and Maalej 2019)
formalized the AI-content detection as a binary classification problem and assumed that a sample text is either entirely human-written or entirely AI-generated, Dugan et al.
(2023) noticed the trends in human-AI collaborative writing (Buschek, Zürn, and Eiband 2021; Lee, Liang, and
Yang 2022) and reflected on the binary classification setting,
pointing out that a text (or passage) could begin as humanwritten and end with AI content generated by LLMs (i.e.,
hybrid text). They argued that due to the collaborative na-

The recent large language models (LLMs), e.g., ChatGPT,
have been able to generate human-like and fluent responses
when provided with specific instructions. While admitting the
convenience brought by technological advancement, educators also have concerns that students might leverage LLMs to
complete their writing assignments and pass them off as their
original work. Although many AI content detection studies
have been conducted as a result of such concerns, most of
these prior studies modeled AI content detection as a classification problem, assuming that a text is either entirely humanwritten or entirely AI-generated. In this study, we investigated AI content detection in a rarely explored yet realistic
setting where the text to be detected is collaboratively written by human and generative LLMs (termed as hybrid text
for simplicity). We first formalized the detection task as identifying the transition points between human-written content
and AI-generated content from a given hybrid text (boundary
detection). We constructed a hybrid essay dataset by partially
and randomly removing sentences from the original studentwritten essays and then instructing ChatGPT to fill in for
the incomplete essays. Then we proposed a two-step detection approach where we (1) separated AI-generated content
from human-written content during the encoder training process; and (2) calculated the distances between every two adjacent prototypes (a prototype is the mean of a set of consecutive sentences from the hybrid text in the embedding space)
and assumed that the boundaries exist between the two adjacent prototypes that have the furthest distance from each
other. Through extensive experiments, we observed the following main findings: (1) the proposed approach consistently
outperformed the baseline methods across different experiment settings; (2) the encoder training process (i.e., step 1
of the above two-step approach) can significantly boost the
performance of the proposed approach; (3) when detecting
boundaries for single-boundary hybrid essays, the proposed
approach could be enhanced by adopting a relatively large
prototype size (i.e., the number of sentences needed to calculate a prototype), leading to a 22% improvement (against
the best baseline method) in the In-Domain evaluation and an
18% improvement in the Out-of-Domain evaluation.

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22502

