The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Differentiable Auxiliary Learning for Sketch Re-Identification
Xingyu Liu1 , Xu Cheng1 * , Haoyu Chen2 , Hao Yu1,2 , Guoying Zhao2
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
2
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
{xingyu, xcheng, yuhao}@nuist.edu.cn, {chen.haoyu, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi

Abstract
Sketch

Sketch re-identification (Re-ID) seeks to match pedestrians’
photos from surveillance videos with corresponding sketches.
However, we observe that existing works still have two critical limitations: (i) cross- and intra-modality discrepancies
hinder the extraction of modality-shared features, (ii) standard triplet loss fails to constrain latent feature distribution
in each modality with inadequate samples. To overcome the
above issues, we propose a differentiable auxiliary learning
network (DALNet) to explore a robust auxiliary modality for
Sketch Re-ID. Specifically, for (i) we construct an auxiliary
modality by using a dynamic auxiliary generator (DAG) to
bridge the gap between sketch and photo modalities. The auxiliary modality highlights the described person in photos to
mitigate background clutter and learns sketch style through
style refinement. Moreover, a modality interactive attention
module (MIA) is presented to align the features and learn the
invariant patterns of two modalities by auxiliary modality. To
address (ii), we propose a multi-modality collaborative learning scheme (MMCL) to align the latent distribution of three
modalities. An intra-modality circle loss in MMCL brings
learned global and modality-shared features of the same identity closer in the case of insufficient samples within each
modality. Extensive experiments verify the superior performance of our DALNet over the state-of-the-art methods for
Sketch Re-ID, and the generalization in sketch-based image
retrieval and sketch-photo face recognition tasks.

Photo
light variety

background

Intra-modality difference

(a)

Cross-modality difference

1

Sketch

Sketch
Photo Auxiliary

Photo Auxiliary

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Sketch-photo sample pairs from the PKUSketch dataset. (b) Visualization of our auxiliary images
from DAG. Our auxiliary modality possesses a noise-free
structure similar to photos and a sketch-like texture, thereby
facilitating the learning of modality-shared features.

from different camera views can capture more visual information (e.g., color, pose, background, and lighting), while
hand-drawn sketches from a frontal view are very abstract
with only contour information and prominent features. On
account of diverse painting styles, noticeable differences in
the portrayal of characters emerge within the sketch modality. Besides, background noise and light variety within the
photo modality pose a challenge for aligning sketches and
photos of the same identity.
Existing Sketch Re-ID methods (Pang et al. 2018; Gui
et al. 2020) rely on extracting shared patterns and standard triplet loss for cross-modality metric optimization. Typically, a two-stream network (Zhu et al. 2022) is utilized to
extract features across different modalities, and these features are mapped into a common feature space. Despite
the encouraging achievements, these methods still struggle
with huge modality discrepancies. Recently, Zhang et al.
(Zhang et al. 2022) developed cross-compatible embedding
and feature construction to enhance feature discrimination
among different modalities. However, cross transplantation
inevitably introduces extra noise into the learned patterns
due to local exchange between two modalities. Apart from
enhancing feature discrimination, bridging the modality gap
is noteworthy in Sketch Re-ID. An auxiliary sketch modality was proposed to guide the asymmetrical disentanglement
in the transformer framework (Chen et al. 2022). But they

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) (Ye et al. 2021) is commonly employed for matching pedestrian images captured
by multiple non-overlapping cameras. However, traditional
Re-ID methods can hardly be used when there are only the
descriptions of the corresponding individuals in the absence
of the query photos. To address this situation, Sketch Re-ID
(Pang et al. 2018) has emerged to match the sketches, drawn
by experts according to witness descriptions, with pedestrian
photos captured by surveillance cameras.
Due to the different presentation intrinsicality between
sketches and photos, Sketch Re-ID suffers from undesired
cross-modality differences. As shown in Figure 1(a), photos
* Corresponding author (Email: xcheng@nuist.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3747

