The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contrastive Balancing Representation Learning for Heterogeneous
Dose-Response Curves Estimation
Minqin Zhu1 * , Anpeng Wu1, 2 * , Haoxuan Li3 , Ruoxuan Xiong4 , Bo Li5 , Xiaoqing Yang6 , Xuan
Qin6 , Peng Zhen6 , Jiecheng Guo6 , Fei Wu1 , Kun Kuang1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University
4
Department of Quantitative Theory and Methods, Emory University
5
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University
6
Didi Chuxing
{minqinzhu, anpwu, kunkuang}@zju.edu.cn, hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn, ruoxuan.xiong@emory.edu,
libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xiaoqingyang, xuanqin, zhenpeng, jiechengguo}@didiglobal.com, wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Estimating the individuals’ potential response to varying
treatment doses is crucial for decision-making in areas such
as precision medicine and management science. Most recent
studies predict counterfactual outcomes by learning a covariate representation that is independent of the treatment variable. However, such independence constraints neglect much
of the covariate information that is useful for counterfactual
prediction, especially when the treatment variables are continuous. To tackle the above issue, in this paper, we first theoretically demonstrate the importance of the balancing and
prognostic representations for unbiased estimation of the heterogeneous dose-response curves, that is, the learned representations are constrained to satisfy the conditional independence between the covariates and both of the treatment
variables and the potential responses. Based on this, we propose a novel Contrastive balancing Representation learning
Network using a partial distance measure, called CRNet, for
estimating the heterogeneous dose-response curves without
losing the continuity of treatments. Extensive experiments are
conducted on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrating
that our proposal significantly outperforms previous methods.

Representation Learning Method

Formulation

Treatment-Balanced
Balancing Representation
Prognostic Representation
Double Balancing (ours)

T ⊥⊥ Φ(X)
T ⊥
⊥ X | Φ(X)
Y (t) ⊥
⊥ X | Φ(X)
(T, Y ) ⊥
⊥ X | Φ(X)

Table 1: A comparison of the constraints employed in various representation learning methods.

which can lead to spurious correlations between treatment
and outcome (Mealli et al. 2011; Pearl et al. 2009). Another
challenge is the heterogeneity of dose-response curves, that
is, individuals with different covariates will have different
responses even with the same dose given (Wager and Athey
2018; Schwab et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023c,b).
Compared with the binary treatment case, dose-response
curves has greater challenges in adjusting for the confounding bias of high-dimensional covariates on the continuous
treatment (Imai et al. 2004; Hirano et al. 2004; Kennedy et
al. 2017). To tackle this problem, the generalized propensity score (GPS) serves as a generalization of the propensity score (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) in the binary treatment case, using a Gaussian distribution to model the treatment conditional density for given covariates (Imai et al.
2004; Hirano et al. 2004). Motivated by covariate balancing propensity score (Imai and Ratkovic 2014; Hainmueller
2012), the optimal balancing weighting methods focus on
learning sample weights such that the treatment and covariates are independent on the re-weighted data (Fong, Hazlett,
and Imai 2018; Vegetabile et al. 2021). Despite focusing on
the unbiasedness that treatments and confounders are conditionally independent on balancing scores, these methods
show limited performance in practice when the covariates
are high-dimensional (Nie et al. 2021; Schwab et al. 2020).
Furthermore, these methods neglect the outcome during the
modeling process of the balancing weight, which might omit
important confounders that are necessary for outcome pre-

Introduction
Causal inference is crucial for individual decision-making,
particularly in answering counterfactual questions such as
”What would the individual’s potential response have been
had the person received a different dose of treatment” (Raita
et al. 2021). For example, precision medicine is developed
by studying the response of drug doses (i.e., continuous
treatment) to the potential health state (i.e., potential outcome) of patients (with various medical history information,
i.e., covariates) (Shi et al. 2020). With accessible observational data, an essential obstacle for the unbiased estimation of causal effects is the confounding bias from the confounders (i.e., common causes of treatment and outcome),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17175

