The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AdaFormer: Efficient Transformer with Adaptive Token Sparsification
for Image Super-resolution
Xiaotong Luo1 * , Zekun Ai1 * , Qiuyuan Liang1 , Ding Liu2 , Yuan Xie3† , Yanyun Qu1† , Yun Fu4
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
Bytedance Inc.
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
Northeastern University
{xiaotluo, aizekun}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Efficient transformer-based models have made remarkable
progress in image super-resolution (SR). Most of these works
mainly design elaborate structures to accelerate the inference
of the transformer, where all feature tokens are propagated
equally. However, they ignore the underlying characteristic
of image content, i.e., various image regions have distinct
restoration difficulties, especially for large images (2K-8K),
failing to achieve adaptive inference. In this work, we propose
an adaptive token sparsification transformer (AdaFormer) to
speed up the model inference for image SR. Specifically, a
texture-relevant sparse attention block with parallel global
and local branches is introduced, aiming to integrate informative tokens from the global view instead of only in fixed local
windows. Then, an early-exit strategy is designed to progressively halt tokens according to the token importance. To estimate the plausibility of each token, we adopt a lightweight
confidence estimator, which is constrained by an uncertaintyguided loss to obtain a binary halting mask about the tokens.
Experiments on large images have illustrated that our proposal reduces nearly 90% latency against SwinIR on Test8K,
while maintaining a comparable performance.

Figure 1: The SR result (4×) of AdaFormer. It visualizes
the token halted at different layers in yellow, green, and
brown masks. Compared with ELAN (Zhang et al. 2022),
our method achieves better PSNR with lower latency.

Recently, several efficient transformer-based SR methods have been proposed to reduce computational expenses.
SwinIR (Liang et al. 2021a) is the first efficient transformer
for image restoration, which introduces the local sliding
window mechanism and performs self-attention (SA) within
each window to speed up inference. ESRT (Lu et al. 2022)
designs a lightweight hybrid backbone, which reduces the
channel number of multi-head SA with a high-frequency filter module. Besides, ELAN (Zhang et al. 2022) employs
group-wise multi-scale SA with different local window sizes
and the shared-attention mechanism to save more computational costs. Although these methods have made some
progress in inference speed, there still exist two underlying
limitations. Firstly, they cannot achieve dynamic inference
once the model is trained, since all the tokens are propagated without distinction and the relevance between recovery degree and computational resources for different tokens
is ignored. Secondly, they mainly focus on designing the efficient window-based local SA, whereas the global edge and
texture information cannot be well captured due to the limited receptive field of fixed window size.
According to the fact that different image patches have

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct
high-resolution (HR) images from the degraded lowresolution (LR) counterparts. With the remarkable progress
of transformer on high-level vision tasks (Yin et al. 2022b;
Pang et al. 2023), a growing number of transformer-based
methods (Liang et al. 2021a; Cai et al. 2023) have emerged
for image SR, which significantly exceed the convolutional
neural network (CNN) based methods in performance by
mining the long-range pixel dependencies. However, most
of these methods are time-consuming with substantial computational complexity. It is unbearable for intelligent devices
with image resolution reached 4K (4096 × 2160) or even 8K
(7680 × 4320). Therefore, how to achieve efficient SR for
large images with lower computational complexity and inference time is an urgent problem to be solved.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4009

