The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Long-Term Fair Decision Making through Deep Generative Models
Yaowei Hu1 , Yongkai Wu2 , Lu Zhang1
1

University of Arkansas
Clemson University
yaoweihu@uark.edu, yongkaw@clemson.edu, lz006@uark.edu
2

Abstract

building decision models for fair one-shot decision-making
(Mehrabi et al. 2021; Caton and Haas 2020). However, it
has been shown that algorithms based on traditional fairness
notions, such as demographic parity (DP) and equal opportunity (EO), cannot efficiently mitigate group disparities and
could even exacerbate the gap (Liu et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2020). The challenges lie in the sequential nature of realworld decision-making systems, where each decision may
shift the underlying distribution of features or user behavior,
which in turn affects the subsequent decisions. For example, a bank loan decision can have an impact on an individual’s credit score, income, etc., which may influence his/her
future loan application. As a result, long-term fairness has
been proposed to focus on the mitigation of group disparities rather than making fair decisions in a single time step,
which is more challenging to achieve than traditional fairness notions due to the feedback loops between the decisions
and features as well as the data distribution shift during the
sequential decision-making process. Please refer to the technical appendix for a literature review.
In political and social science, affirmative action has been
implemented as a practice to pursue the goal of group parity (Crosby, Iyer, and Sincharoen 2006). For example, for
promoting group diversity, affirmative action has been used
in higher education allowing universities to consider race as
a factor in admissions. However, affirmative action is controversial and has been criticized on the grounds that raceconscious decisions might lead to reverse discrimination
against other groups or stigmatize all members of the target
group as unqualified. (Fischer and Massey 2007). Recently,
the US Supreme Court ruled that affirmative action policies
are unconstitutional and race can no longer be regarded as a
factor in admissions to US universities (har 2023).
Given the context, we ask whether we can mitigate group
disparity and achieve long-term fairness while limiting the
use of the sensitive attribute in decision-making models.
Although policies such as expanded outreach or ”top Xpercent” plans are worth investigating in practice, in this
paper, we explore the data-driven prospect of mitigating
group disparity only through learning and deploying appropriate decision-making models, taking into account the
system dynamics. In other words, we aim to learn a decision model that, once deployed, can lead to group parity by
properly reshaping the distribution. To this end, we lever-

This paper studies long-term fair machine learning which
aims to mitigate group disparity over the long term in sequential decision-making systems. To define long-term fairness, we leverage the temporal causal graph and use the 1Wasserstein distance between the interventional distributions
of different demographic groups at a sufficiently large time
step as the quantitative metric. Then, we propose a threephase learning framework where the decision model is trained
on high-fidelity data generated by a deep generative model.
We formulate the optimization problem as a performative risk
minimization and adopt the repeated gradient descent algorithm for learning. The empirical evaluation shows the efficacy of the proposed method using both synthetic and semisynthetic datasets.

Introduction
Machine learning models are extensively utilized for significant decision-making scenarios, like college admissions
(Baker and Hawn 2021), banking loans (Lee and Floridi
2021), job placements (Schumann et al. 2020), and evaluations of recidivism risks (Berk et al. 2021). Fair machine learning, which aims to reduce discrimination and
bias in machine-automated decisions, is one of the keys to
enabling broad societal acceptance of large-scale deployments of decision-making models. In the past decade, various notions, metrics, and techniques have emerged to address fairness in machine learning. For an overview of fair
machine learning studies, readers are directed to recent surveys (Tang, Zhang, and Zhang 2022; Alves et al. 2023).
However, our society is marked by pervasive group disparities. For example, in the context of bank loans, disparities in creditworthiness may be observed among different
racial groups. These disparities can arise from systemic or
historic factors that influence variables like credit score, employment history, and income. As another example, disparities may be observed in the qualification of students for college admission which could be influenced by factors such as
the availability of higher education institutions in rural areas, the economic capacity of families, exposure to college
preparatory resources, etc. Currently, the majority of studies in fair machine learning are focused on the problem of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22114

