The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LAFA: Multimodal Knowledge Graph Completion with Link Aware Fusion and
Aggregation
Bin Shang1,2 , Yinliang Zhao1,2 * , Jun Liu1,2 , Di Wang3 *
1
Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
National Engineering Lab for Big Data Analytics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
binshang0329@163.com, {zhaoy, liukeen}@xjtu.edu.cn, wangdi@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

the behaviors and appearances of it. Even though the scale
of many public MKGs is noticeably large, they are still confronted with incompleteness because the insufficient accumulation of multimodal corpus and the emerging entities
with complicated relations. In this case, many researches
on multimodal knowledge graph completion (MKGC) have
been generalized to find out missing triples automatically
(also called link prediction) by extracting knowledge from
multimodal data (Wang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2022; Shang et al. 2023b). Specifically, images (visual
data) can be considered as supplementary information to enhance entity embddings for the MKGC task.
Multimodal knowledge graph completion (MKGC) approaches complete MKGs by projecting entities and relations to latent space as well as learning the dense and
low-dimensional vectors (embeddings) of them according
to visual and structural information, and predict missing
triples by scoring function based on the learned embeddings.
Specifically, for MKGC task, one entity generally has multiple associated images, and they can improve the representation quality of the entity embedding. Therefore, it is necessary to fuse the structural properties of KG entities and
various images with matched semantics in integrated embeddings. On this account, IKRL (Xie et al. 2017) firstly
attempt to fuse visual information to the existing knowledge
graph embedding (KGE) models to predict missing triples
in MKGs. Mousselly et al. (Mousselly-Sergieh et al. 2018)
propose to use Imagined, DeViSE, and simple concatenation
to fuse multimodal information. TransAE (Wang et al. 2019)
presents an specific auto-encoder module.
Although existing studies for MKGC have shown promising improvements, these approaches are still afflicted by several noticeable limitations as follows: (1) Modality contradiction. Many existing MKGC approaches substantially ignore that visual information may lead to uncertainty and introduce noise when adding them to the traditional KG embeddings, which could bring on modality contradiction. Particularly, an entity usually has different attributes in various
triples (link information), and the contribution of each associated image to this entity is disparate in diverse link scenarios. For instance in Figure 1, entity Taylor Swift has many associated images, but the contribution of them is different in
the two links. Although recent works such as RSME (Wang
et al. 2021) and MKGformer (Chen et al. 2022) take into ac-

Recently, an enormous amount of research has emerged on
multimodal knowledge graph completion (MKGC), which
seeks to extract knowledge from multimodal data and predict
the most plausible missing facts to complete a given multimodal knowledge graph (MKG). However, existing MKGC
approaches largely ignore that visual information may introduce noise and lead to uncertainty when adding them to the
traditional KG embeddings due to the contribution of each
associated image to entity is different in diverse link scenarios. Moreover, treating each triple independently when learning entity embeddings leads to local structural and the whole
graph information missing. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel link aware fusion and aggregation based multimodal knowledge graph completion model named LAFA,
which is composed of link aware fusion module and link
aware aggregation module. The link aware fusion module alleviates noise of irrelevant visual information by calculating
the importance between an entity and its associated images
in different link scenarios, and fuses the visual and structural embeddings according to the importance through our
proposed modality embedding fusion mechanism. The link
aware aggregation module assigns neighbor structural information to a given central entity by calculating the importance
between the entity and its neighbors, and aggregating the
fused embeddings through linear combination according to
the importance. Extensive experiments on standard datasets
validate that LAFA can obtain state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent real-world data as fact
triples (head entity, relation, tail entity), which have shown
great research value and application prospect. KGs are
broadly used in many downstream tasks, such as multimedia reasoning (Li, Wang, and Zhu 2020), question answering (Huang et al. 2019), objective detection (Yang et al.
2023), and recommendation system (Guo et al. 2020; Wu
et al. 2022). Since existing KGs typically contain structural
and visual data, multimodal knowledge graphs (MKGs)
have recently attracted great attention in the fields of natural language processing and multimedia (Chen et al. 2022).
Generally, multiple images associate an entity to describe
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8957

