The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Learning via Input-Output Collaborative Distillation
Xuan Gong1,3 * , Shanglin Li2 * , Yuxiang Bao2 * , Barry Yao1,4 , Yawen Huang5 , Ziyan Wu6 , Baochang
†
†
Zhang2,7,8 , Yefeng Zheng5 , David Doermann1
1
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hangzhou Research Institute, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
4
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
5
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, Shenzhen, China
6
United Imaging Intelligence, Burlington, MA, USA
7
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
8
Nanchang Institute of Technology, Nanchang, China
xuangong@buffalo.edu, shanglin@buaa.edu.cn, yxbao@buaa.edu.cn, barryyao@vt.edu, yawenhuang@tencent.com,
ziyan.wu@uii-ai.com, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, yefengzheng@tencent.com, doermann@buffalo.edu
2

Abstract

Accordingly, federated learning (FL) does not necessarily
need all data samples to be centralized; instead, it relies on
model fusion/distillation techniques to train one centralized
model in a decentralized fashion. Privacy is a critical consideration, and it is vital to prevent private data leakage. Another challenge is data heterogeneity among locals, as distributed data centers tend to collect data in different settings.

Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm in
which distributed local nodes collaboratively train a central
model without sharing individually held private data. Existing
FL methods either iteratively share local model parameters or
deploy co-distillation. However, the former is highly susceptible to private data leakage, and the latter design relies on the
prerequisites of task-relevant real data. Instead, we propose a
data-free FL framework based on local-to-central collaborative distillation with direct input and output space exploitation. Our design eliminates any requirement of recursive local
parameter exchange or auxiliary task-relevant data to transfer knowledge, thereby giving direct privacy control to local users. In particular, to cope with the inherent data heterogeneity across locals, our technique learns to distill input on
which each local model produces consensual yet unique results to represent each expertise. Our proposed FL framework
achieves notable privacy-utility trade-offs with extensive experiments on image classification and segmentation tasks under various real-world heterogeneous federated learning settings on both natural and medical images. Code is available
at https://github.com/lsl001006/FedIOD.

Most federated learning methods are based on the recursive exchange of local model parameters during the training process (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Karimireddy et al. 2020). Each local node uploads its model parameters after a particular time of local training. The central server aggregates the parameters of the local model with
different schemes (Wang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Hsu,
Qi, and Brown 2020) and then distributes the aggregated parameters. Each local node receives the latest parameters to
update its local model accordingly and continues with the
next round of local training. However, naively employing
such iterative parameter exchange suffers from known weaknesses: (1) All participating models must have exactly homogeneous architectures. (2) Iteratively sharing the model
parameters opens all internal states of the model to whitebox inference attacks, resulting in significant privacy leakage (Chang et al. 2019). Recent works (Zhu, Liu, and Han
2019; Geiping et al. 2020) obtain private training data from
publicly shared model gradients.

Introduction
The recent success of deep learning in various applications
can be attributed to data-driven algorithms typically trained
in a centralized fashion, i.e., computational units and data
samples residing on the same server. Real-world scenarios,
however, tend to disperse this wealth of data throughout separate locations and governed by diverse entities. Due to privacy regulations and communication limitations, collecting
all data in one location for centralized training is often impractical, especially true for mobile vision and medical applications.

Distillation-based methods are proposed to train the central model with aggregated locally-computed logits (Li and
Wang 2019; Lin et al. 2020; Gong et al. 2022a), eliminating
the requirement of identical network architectures. However,
to transfer knowledge, additional public data are commonly
assumed to be accessible and sampled from the same underlying distribution as the privately held local data. This assumption can be strong in practice and unavoidably exposes
private data to stealthy attacks. Although (Zhu, Hong, and
Zhou 2021; Zhang, Wu, and Yuan 2022; Zhang et al. 2022)
takes a step further to eliminate the requirement of real data
for distillation, iterative model parameter exchange is still

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22058

