The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CLIM: Contrastive Language-Image Mosaic for Region Representation
Size Wu1 , Wenwei Zhang1 , Lumin Xu2
Sheng Jin3,4 , Wentao Liu4,5 , Chen Change Loy1 *
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
The University of Hong Kong
4
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{size001, wenwei001, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg, luminxu@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {jinsheng, liuwentao}@tetras.ai
Abstract

tection methods either apply the image-text pairs as weak
supervision to the training of object detection (Zhou et al.
2022) or reap the vision-language alignment from largescale image-text pre-training (Gu et al. 2021; Kuo et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2023b), which can be summarized as
Figure 1(a). Due to lack of object location information,
these methods fail to effectively transfer the vision-language
alignment to region representations.
There are also attempts (Zhong et al. 2022; Lin et al.
2023) to learn vision-language alignment directly at the region level as shown in Figure 1(b). For example, RegionCLIP (Zhong et al. 2022) matches region proposals with object nouns to generate region-text pairs. The region proposals are detected by a pre-trained Region Proposal Network
(RPN) and the object nouns are obtained by parsing the image captions. However, the generated region-text pairs are
inevitably noisy since both the localization of region proposals and the region-text matching can be inaccurate.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to learn
region-language alignment without the inaccurate and tedious region-text matching process. The proposed method,
named Contrastive Language-Image Mosaic (CLIM), combines multiple images into a mosaicked image and conducts contrastive learning as shown in Figure 1(c). This process forces the representation of each sub-image in the mosaicked image to be similar to its corresponding text representation and dissimilar to the others. By treating the subimages as ‘pseudo regions’, CLIM facilitates the learning of
region-text alignment while eliminating the need to annotate
bounding boxes of objects.
CLIM prepares a canvas at each training iteration and divides it evenly into a flexible number of regions (e.g., 2 × 2,
3 × 3 and 4 × 4). Each region is then filled by an image that
is randomly sampled from the training dataset, termed as a
‘pseudo region’. The canvas then becomes a mosaicked image, which is fed into the vision encoder as a whole to obtain
a feature map. The feature of each pseudo region is extracted
from the feature map using the corresponding box location
in the mosaicked image. Meanwhile, the texts of the original images are fed independently and parallelly to the text
encoder. Finally, the features of pseudo regions are aligned
with the text features in a contrastive manner.
We deliberately keep the design of CLIM simple so that it
can be easily applied to different open-vocabulary object de-

Detecting objects accurately from a large or open vocabulary
necessitates the vision-language alignment on region representations. However, learning such a region-text alignment
by obtaining high-quality box annotations with text labels or
descriptions is expensive and infeasible. In contrast, collecting image-text pairs is simpler but lacks precise object location information to associate regions with texts. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach called Contrastive LanguageImage Mosaic (CLIM), which leverages large-scale imagetext pairs effectively for aligning region and text representations. CLIM combines multiple images into a mosaicked image and treats each image as a ‘pseudo region’. The feature of
each pseudo region is extracted and trained to be similar to the
corresponding text embedding while dissimilar from others
by a contrastive loss, enabling the model to learn the regiontext alignment without costly box annotations. As a generally
applicable approach, CLIM consistently improves different
open-vocabulary object detection methods that use caption
supervision. Furthermore, CLIM can effectively enhance the
region representation of vision-language models, thus providing stronger backbones for open-vocabulary object detectors.
Our experimental results demonstrate that CLIM improves
different baseline open-vocabulary object detectors by a large
margin on both OV-COCO and OV-LVIS benchmarks. The
code is available at https://github.com/wusize/CLIM.

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision
that involves recognizing and localizing objects in the images. With the advent of deep learning, significant progress
has been made in object detection on benchmark datasets
that involve a confined set of categories, such as 80 classes
in COCO (Lin et al. 2014) and 20 classes in PASCAL
VOC (Everingham et al. 2010). However, to make object
detection useful in real-world applications, it is essential to
recognize objects in an open vocabulary that is inherently
long-tailed and open-ended, with novel concepts that are not
commonly seen in the benchmark datasets (Liu et al. 2019;
Reed 2001).
To obtain the generalization ability required by openvocabulary recognition, modern open-vocabulary object de* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6117

