The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Paths, Proofs, and Perfection:
Developing a Human-Interpretable Proof System for Constrained Shortest Paths
Konstantin Sidorov1 , Gonçalo Homem de Almeida Correia2 ,
Mathijs de Weerdt1 , Emir Demirović1
1

Algorithmics Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, Delft University of Technology
2
Faculty of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Delft University of Technology
{k.sidorov, g.correia, m.m.deweerdt, e.demirovic}@tudelft.nl
Abstract

optimality/infeasibility claim. One of the most celebrated
examples of this idea is proof logging in Boolean SAT solving, achieving major successes in, among other domains,
software verification and combinatorial designs (Biere,
Heule, and van Maaren 2021). Related approaches are
known for mixed-integer programming (Cheung, Gleixner,
and Steffy 2017) and pseudo-Boolean solving (Gocht, McCreesh, and Nordström 2020).
Proof systems of this type are generic enough to support
various application domains. This ends up being not only
the key strength of this approach but also its main weakness: proofs produced by such means, while exhaustive, also
tend to be exhausting, meaning that such proofs may contain
lengthy sequences of inferences not obvious to a human observer. In particular, the work (Heule, Kullmann, and Marek
2016) that resolves the Boolean Pythagorean triples problem was billed as the ”largest proof ever” shortly after its
publication (Lamb 2016), referring to the fact that the proof
exceeds 200 terabytes in disk space.
For a simple example supporting this concern, consider a
problem of finding the shortest path from vertex 1 to vertex 9
through the graph shown in Figure 1 that goes through either
vertex 3 or vertex 5, therefore adding an extra constraint to
the classical shortest-path problem.

People want to rely on optimization algorithms for complex
decisions but verifying the optimality of the solutions can
then become a valid concern, particularly for critical decisions taken by non-experts in optimization. One example is
the shortest-path problem on a network, occurring in many
contexts from transportation to logistics to telecommunications. While the standard shortest-path problem is both solvable in polynomial time and certifiable by duality, introducing side constraints makes solving and certifying the solutions much harder. We propose a proof system for constrained
shortest-path problems, which gives a set of logical rules to
derive new facts about feasible solutions. The key trait of the
proposed proof system is that it specifically includes highlevel graph concepts within its reasoning steps (such as connectivity or path structure), in contrast to using linear combinations of model constraints. Using our proof system, we can
provide a step-by-step, human-auditable explanation showing
that the path given by an external solver cannot be improved.
Additionally, to maximize the advantages of this setup, we
propose a proof search procedure that specifically aims to
find small proofs of this form using a procedure similar to A*
search. We evaluate our proof system on constrained shortest path instances generated from real-world road networks
and experimentally show that we may indeed derive more interpretable proofs compared to an integer programming approach, in some cases leading to much smaller proofs.

1

1

Introduction

2

2
4
3 (to 5)

6

1

Combinatorial optimization has achieved remarkable success in various practical domains, including supply chain
management, network design, and logistics. Despite most
of such problems being NP-complete, many approaches can
efficiently solve them in practice (Korte and Vygen 2000).
The downside of this success is that the software for solving these problems is typically very sophisticated, and testing such software is a non-trivial task (Gillard, Schaus, and
Deville 2019). Even modern optimization software may occasionally produce incorrect output, e.g., by falsely claiming
infeasibility (Gocht, McCreesh, and Nordström 2022; Cheung, Gleixner, and Steffy 2017).
One way to address this issue is to augment the software
output with a certificate – a logical derivation supporting the

1

7

2

6
3

3

1 (to 4)
5
2

7

9
2

8

3

Figure 1: Running example of a constrained shortest path
problem. Orange edges constitute the optimal path 1 → 3 →
4 → 6 → 7 → 9.
This problem can be successfully modeled with, for example, an integer programming paradigm, giving a path 13
units long highlighted in the figure. Additionally, given the
optimal path, we can build its optimality certificate with respect to the integer programming model. However, by inspecting such proof one may rightfully notice that this problem has much more ”graph” intuition than the underlying integer programming model – e.g., the concepts of distance or

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20794

