The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

z-SignFedAvg: A Unified Stochastic Sign-Based Compression for Federated
Learning
Zhiwei Tang1,2 , Yanmeng Wang1,2 , Tsung-Hui Chang1,2
1

School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a promising privacy-preserving
distributed learning paradigm but suffers from high communication cost when training large-scale machine learning models.
Sign-based methods, such as SignSGD, have been proposed
as a biased gradient compression technique for reducing the
communication cost. However, sign-based algorithms could
diverge under heterogeneous data, which thus motivated the development of advanced techniques, such as the error-feedback
method and stochastic sign-based compression, to fix this
issue. Nevertheless, these methods still suffer from slower
convergence rates, and none of them allows multiple local
SGD updates like FedAvg. In this paper, we propose a novel
noisy perturbation scheme with a general symmetric noise
distribution for sign-based compression, which not only allows one to flexibly control the bias-variance tradeoff for the
compressed gradient, but also provides a unified viewpoint
to existing stochastic sign-based methods. More importantly,
the proposed scheme enables the development of the very first
sign-based FedAvg algorithm (z-SignFedAvg) to accelerate
the convergence. Theoretically, we show that z-SignFedAvg
achieves a faster convergence rate than existing sign-based
methods and, under the uniformly distributed noise, can enjoy
the same convergence rate as its uncompressed counterpart.
Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate that the
z-SignFedAvg can achieve competitive empirical performance
on real datasets and outperforms existing schemes.

Introduction
We consider the Federated Learning (FL) network with one
parameter server and n clients (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al.
2020), with the focus on solving the following distributed
learning problem
n

min f (x) =

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where fi (·) is the local objective function for the i-th client,
for i = 1, . . . , n. Throughout this paper, we assume that each
fi is smooth and possibly non-convex. The local objective
functions are generated from the local dataset owned by each
client. When designing distributed algorithms to solve (1), a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15301

crucial aspect is the communication efficiency since a massive number of clients need to transmit their local gradients
to the server frequently (Li et al. 2020). As one of the most
popular FL algorithms, the federated averaging (FedAvg)
algorithm (McMahan et al. 2017; Konečnỳ et al. 2016) considers multiple local SGD updates with periodic communications to reduce the communication cost. Another way is
to compress the local gradients before sending them to the
server (Li et al. 2020; Alistarh et al. 2017; Reisizadeh et al.
2020). Among the existing compression methods, a simple
yet elegant technique is to take the sign of each coordinate
of the local gradients, which requires only one bit for transmitting each coordinate. For any x ∈ R, we define the sign
operator as: Sign(x) = 1 if x ≥ 0 and −1 otherwise.
It has been shown recently that optimization algorithms
with the sign-based compression can enjoy a great communication efficiency while still achieving comparable empirical
performance as uncompressed algorithms (Bernstein et al.
2018; Karimireddy et al. 2019; Safaryan and Richtárik 2021).
However, for distributed learning, especially the scenarios
with heterogeneous data, i.e., fi ̸= fj for every i ̸= j, a
naive application of the sign-based algorithm may end up
with divergence (Karimireddy et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020;
Safaryan and Richtárik 2021).
A counterexample for sign-based distributed gradient
descent. Consider the one-dimensional problem with two
clients: minx∈R (x − A)2 + (x + A)2 , where A > 0 is some
constant. For any x ∈ [−A, A], the averaged sign gradient
at x is Sign(x − A) + Sign(x + A) = 0, i.e., the algorithm
never moves. Similar examples are also discussed by (Chen
et al. 2020; Safaryan and Richtárik 2021). The fundamental
reason for this undesirable result is the uncontrollable bias
brought by the sign-based compression.
There are mainly two approaches to fixing this issue in the
existing literature. The first one is the stochastic sign-based
method, which introduces stochasticity into the sign operation (Jin et al. 2020; Safaryan and Richtárik 2021; Chen
et al. 2020), and the second one is the Error-Feedback (EF)
method (Karimireddy et al. 2019; Vogels, Karimireddy, and
Jaggi 2019; Tang et al. 2019). However, these works are still
unsatisfactory. Specifically, on one hand, both the theoretical convergence rates and empirical performance of these
algorithms are still worse than uncompressed algorithms like
(Ghadimi and Lan 2013; Yu, Yang, and Zhu 2019). On the

