The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Point-PEFT: Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning for 3D Pre-trained Models
Yiwen Tang1,2* , Ray Zhang2* , Zoey Guo2*
Xianzheng Ma2 , Bin Zhao1,2† , Zhigang Wang2 , Dong Wang2 , Xuelong Li1,2‡
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
stutangyw@gmail.com, {wangdong, wangzhigang}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
The popularity of pre-trained large models has revolutionized downstream tasks across diverse fields, such as language, vision, and multi-modality. To minimize the adaption
cost for downstream tasks, many Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) techniques are proposed for language and
2D image pre-trained models. However, the specialized PEFT
method for 3D pre-trained models is still under-explored. To
this end, we introduce Point-PEFT, a novel framework for
adapting point cloud pre-trained models with minimal learnable parameters. Specifically, for a pre-trained 3D model,
we freeze most of its parameters, and only tune the newly
added PEFT modules on downstream tasks, which consist
of a Point-prior Prompt and a Geometry-aware Adapter. The
Point-prior Prompt adopts a set of learnable prompt tokens,
for which we propose to construct a memory bank with
domain-specific knowledge, and utilize a parameter-free attention to enhance the prompt tokens. The Geometry-aware
Adapter aims to aggregate point cloud features within spatial neighborhoods to capture fine-grained geometric information through local interactions. Extensive experiments indicate that our Point-PEFT can achieve better performance
than the full fine-tuning on various downstream tasks, while
using only 5% of the trainable parameters, demonstrating
the efficiency and effectiveness of our approach. Code is released at https://github.com/Ivan-Tang-3D/Point-PEFT.

Figure 1: Our Point-PEFT vs. Full Fine-tuning on ModelNet40 (Wu et al. 2015) dataset. We compare the finetuning of three popular pre-trained models, Point-BERT (Yu
et al. 2022), Point-MAE (Pang et al. 2022), and PointM2AE (Zhang et al. 2022a), where our Point-PEFT achieves
superior performance and parameter efficiency.

and applied in both language and image domains, significantly reducing the consumption of tuning resources. The
principal concept involves freezing most trained parameters in large models, and optimizing only the newly inserted PEFT modules on downstream tasks. The popular
techniques include adapters (Houlsby et al. 2019), prompt
tuning (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021; Jia et al. 2022),
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al. 2021), and side
tuning (Zhang et al. 2020).
In 3D domains, pre-trained models for point clouds have
also shown promising results, e.g., Point-MAE (Pang et al.
2022) and Point-M2AE (Zhang et al. 2022a). However, the
downstream adaption of these 3D transformers is dominated
by expensive full fine-tuning, and the specialized 3D PEFT
method still remains an open question. Therefore, inspired
by the success in language and 2D image domains, we ask
the following question: can we develop a PEFT framework
specialized for 3D point clouds with both efficiency and
effectiveness?
To tackle this issue, we propose Point-PEFT, a novel

Introduction
The recent advancements in large-scale pre-training with numerous data have gained widespread attention in both industry and academia. In natural language processing, GPT
series (Brown et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2019) pre-trained
by extensive text corpora exhibit superior language generative capabilities and interactivity. For 2D image recognition, ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) and the multi-modal
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) can also reveal strong visual generalizability and robustness. However, the full fine-tuning of
these large models normally requires substantial time and
computation resources. To alleviate this, many efforts on
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) have been proposed
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Equal Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

5171

