The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Implicit Trust Region Approach to Behavior Regularized Offline
Reinforcement Learning
Zhe Zhang1,2 , Xiaoyang Tan1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
zhangzhe@nuaa.edu.cn, x.tan@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Current studies (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019;
Levine et al. 2020) mainly attribute the performance degradation to the extrapolation error from out-of-distribution
(OOD) actions. More specifically, the Q-values of OOD actions are easily overestimated due to the distribution shift between the learned policy and the behavior policy (or the offline dataset). Such overestimated errors could lead to some
unexpected decision-making. Hence how to mitigate the impacts of these over-optimistic OOD actions is a critical consideration for the design of offline RL. One way to achieve
this goal is to penalize Q-values for OOD actions (Kumar
et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021). The resulting conservative Qvalues are beneficial to alleviate the erroneously optimistic
value estimation and thus cast an implicit policy constraint.
However, these methods usually suffer from overly conservative value functions. In contrast, some other algorithms
(Fujimoto and Gu 2021; Ghasemipour, Schuurmans, and Gu
2021; Kumar et al. 2019; Wu, Tucker, and Nachum 2019) directly impose explicit policy constraints on the policy evaluation/improvement steps so as to avoid taking potentially
dangerous OOD actions. Both kinds of these methods can
achieve conservative but safe policy learning, which is especially suitable for the offline RL setting.
As a typical policy constraint method, behavior regularized actor-critic (BRAC) framework (Wu, Tucker, and
Nachum 2019) adopts the distance between the learned
policy and the behavior policy either as the value penalty
(BRAC-vp) for policy evaluation or as the policy regularization (BRAC-pr) for policy search. Nevertheless, we found
that this distance constraint alone is not enough for policy
improvement, as the learned policy could just wander about
in the feasible region of the policy space while satisfying
the constraint (i.e., staying close enough to the behavior policy, see Figure 1 for an illustration). It is worth mentioning that this problem generally exists in many current policy
constraint-based offline RL methods besides BRAC.
To address this issue, an extra constraint that ensures
monotonic policy improvement is necessary. For this we
propose to take the distance between two successive policies
into account during learning. While a naive implementation
of this idea may be too computationally heavy, we present
a simple but effective strategy by reshaping the immediate
reward in the BRAC framework with a log-probability ratio
between the learned and behavior policies. Interestingly, we

We revisit behavior regularization, a popular approach to mitigate the extrapolation error in offline reinforcement learning
(RL), showing that current behavior regularization may suffer
from unstable learning and hinder policy improvement. Motivated by this, a novel reward shaping-based behavior regularization method is proposed, where the log-probability ratio
between the learned policy and the behavior policy is monitored during learning. We show that this is equivalent to an
implicit but computationally lightweight trust region mechanism, which is beneficial to mitigate the influence of estimation errors of the value function, leading to more stable
performance improvement. Empirical results on the popular
D4RL benchmark verify the effectiveness of the presented
method with promising performance compared with some
state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) has achieved great
success in various fields, e.g., game playing (Silver et al.
2017; Usunier et al. 2016), robotic manipulation (Levine
et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017), natural language processing
(Dhingra et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017) and so on. A striking characteristic of deep RL is its low sample efficiency
and large request for online interactions with the environment. And this drawback also limits its broader applications
to real-world scenes, especially for those where online data
may be costly and dangerously collected, e.g., autonomous
driving (Gao, Sun, and Xiao 2019; Kiran et al. 2021), healthcare (Kosorok and Moodie 2015; Ling et al. 2017). The offline RL setting has recently been proposed to address the
above realistic issue. In particular, offline RL seeks to learn
the agent from an offline dataset collected by the behavior
policy in advance while without any online data. Similar to
off-policy algorithms, offline RL involves learning from behaviors generated by a policy different than the new policy.
Unfortunately, the direct employment of the common offpolicy methods (e.g., SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018), TD3 (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018)) often fails to achieve the
same level of performance as in the online setting.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16944

