The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Graph Learning:
A Decoupled Perspective
Binwu Wang1,2 , Pengkun Wang1,2, ∗ Yundong Zhang1,2 , Xu Wang1,2 , Zhengyang Zhou1,2 ,
Lei Bai3 , Wang Yang1,2, *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
Suzhou Institute of Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wbw1995,zyd2020,wx309}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zzy0929@ustc.edu.cn, baisanshi@gmail.com,
{pengkun,angyan}@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2023; Lan et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022) entail conceptualizing spatial-temporal data as spatial-temporal graphs,
where monitoring sensing systems are represented through
graph structures. Subsequently, spatial-temporal graph convolution networks (STGs) are as an engine to model the
spatial-temporal correlations, typically including two modules: graph convolutional networks (GCNs) for spatial correlation and sequence modules for temporal correlation, such
as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Tian et al. 2018;
Chahal et al. 2023) or Transformer (Gu et al. 2023; Yan,
Ma, and Pu 2021).
Despite their promising results, most of these models are
evaluated using short-term datasets (e.g., two months) and
portray the underlying graph as static and unchanging. However, when considering a longer time frame, the distribution
of the graph can undergo substantial evolution over time,
which is termed a dynamic spatial-temporal graph. This concept encompasses two crucial elements. Firstly, the underlying structure of the graph would change over time. For
example, new nodes may emerge due to urban development and traffic network expansion. These new nodes would
introduce new patterns and updated neighbor information.
Secondly, the distribution feature of the original nodes in
the graph would also evolve over time. These evolved patterns should be incorporated into models to update outdated
knowledge. Otherwise, the prediction performance of the
model for these nodes would be unpromising. Overall, to
accurately model the evolving nature of a dynamic spatialtemporal graph, it is crucial to learn these unseen patterns
and new neighbor information.
The initial approach is the retraining method, however,
once the spatial-temporal graph evolves, retraining a new
model can be computationally burdensome. To mitigate this
issue, researchers have shifted their focus towards developing continuous learning strategies (Chen, Wang, and Xie
2021; Wang et al. 2023a) that aim to reduce computational
complexity, but there may be a trade-off in the prediction
performance. However, both the retraining method and continuous methods assume that there is sufficient data available from the updated graph for at least one month. In fact,
this assumption is very ideal and oversimplifies the dynamic
graph scenario, especially for new nodes. Consequently, the
emergence of few-shot (or even zero-shot) challenges would

With the progress of urban transportation systems, a significant amount of high-quality traffic data is continuously collected through streaming manners, which has propelled the
prosperity of the field of spatial-temporal graph prediction.
In this paper, rather than solely focusing on designing powerful models for static graphs, we shift our focus to spatialtemporal graph prediction in the dynamic scenario, which
involves a continuously expanding and evolving underlying
graph. To address inherent challenges, a decoupled learning
framework (DLF) is proposed in this paper, which consists
of a spatial-temporal graph learning network (DSTG) with
a specialized decoupling training strategy. Incorporating inductive biases of time-series structures, DSTG can interpret
time dependencies into latent trend and seasonal terms. To
enable prompt adaptation to the evolving distribution of the
dynamic graph, our decoupling training strategy is devised
to iteratively update these two types of patterns. Specifically,
for learning seasonal patterns, we conduct thorough training
for the model using a long time series (e.g., three months of
data). To enhance the learning ability of the model, we also
introduce the masked auto-encoding mechanism. During this
period, we frequently update trend patterns to expand new information from dynamic graphs. Considering both effectiveness and efficiency, we develop a subnet sampling strategy to
select a few representative nodes for fine-tuning the weights
of the model. These sampled nodes cover unseen patterns and
previously learned patterns. Experiments on dynamic spatialtemporal graph datasets further demonstrate the competitive
performance, superior efficiency, and strong scalability of the
proposed framework.

Introduction
Spatial-temporal graph prediction has emerged as an essential task in the intelligent transportation systems (Yin,
Zhang, and Jing 2023; Wang et al. 2023a; Varga et al.
2023; Jiang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b), with the potential to have a significant impact on our daily routines. Recently, researchers have been devoted to developing deeplearning models due to their remarkable capacity to capture
complex relationships. The prevailing approaches (Jin et al.
* Yang Wang and Pengkun Wang are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9089

