The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pay Attention to Target: Relation-Aware Temporal Consistency
for Domain Adaptive Video Semantic Segmentation
Huayu Mai1∗ , Rui Sun1 * , Yuan Wang1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2† , Feng Wu1,2
1

Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{mai556, issunrui, wy2016}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

(source domain) inevitably suffer from performance degradation when applied directly to real-world videos (target
domain) raised by distribution differences (domain shift).
How to alleviate this gap to empower the learned model
generalization capability is thus extremely challenging.
In this work, we focus on the domain adaptive video semantic segmentation (DAVSS) task, which aims to adapt a
model trained on source domain videos equipped with segmentation annotations to target domain videos in the absence
of accessible labels. To tackle this issue, existing methods can
be roughly categorized as adversarial training methods and
consistency regularization methods. In adversarial training
formulation (Guan et al. 2021), the model seeks to capture
domain-invariant spatial-temporal information, but it cannot
guarantee a low empirical error on unlabeled target domain
videos (Chen et al. 2019; Kumar et al. 2018), along with
training stability (Kodali et al. 2017). Recently, consistency
regularization paradigm (Gao et al. 2023; Xing et al. 2022;
Gao et al. 2023) dominate this field credited to its simplicity
yet competitive performance. The core idea of the consistency
regularization methods is to impose temporal consistency
constraint to the prediction (pseudo labels) of the current
frame as well as the one from the previous frame that is
warped to the current frame resorting to optical flow.
After an in-depth analysis of the consistency regularization paradigm, we argue that pseudo-labels matter in DAVSS,
which is intuitively sensible from the definition of the task
itself; that is, pseudo-labels play a dual role - minimizing
the inter-domain discrepancy and maximizing the target domain’s temporal consistency. However, we find pseudo-labels
become performance bottleneck raised by two key ingredients
lacking in previous works. (1) Accessibility of pseudo-labels.
Considering the absent target annotations, models trained on
the source domain with significant domain shift are prone to
suffer from limited coverage of underlying features for the
same class in the target domain (e.g., the decision boundary
crosses the high-density region for target domain class vegetation in Figure 1 (a), leading to incomplete segmentation
with different fragments of object vegetation). In this case,
considerable unconfident yet reliable pseudo-labels tend to
be easily overwhelmed by noise ones. Therefore, it is highly
desirable to suppress noisy pseudo-labels and guarantee the
truly reliable ones embrace higher weights, in pursuit of enhancing their accessibility. (2) Effectiveness of supervision

Video semantic segmentation has achieved conspicuous
achievements attributed to the development of deep learning,
but suffers from labor-intensive annotated training data gathering. To alleviate the data-hunger issue, domain adaptation
approaches are developed in the hope of adapting the model
trained on the labeled synthetic videos to the real videos in the
absence of annotations. By analyzing the dominant paradigm
consistency regularization in the domain adaptation task, we
find that the bottlenecks exist in previous methods from the
perspective of pseudo-labels. To take full advantage of the
information contained in the pseudo-labels and empower more
effective supervision signals, we propose a coherent PAT network including a target domain focalizer and relation-aware
temporal consistency. The proposed PAT network enjoys several merits. First, the target domain focalizer is responsible
for paying attention to the target domain, and increasing the
accessibility of pseudo-labels in consistency training. Second,
the relation-aware temporal consistency aims at modeling the
inter-class consistent relationship across frames to equip the
model with effective supervision signals. Extensive experimental results on two challenging benchmarks demonstrate
that our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art
domain adaptive video semantic segmentation methods.

Introduction
Video semantic segmentation, which aims to predict a specific
semantic class for each pixel in consecutive video frames,
has achieved conspicuous achievements attributed to the recent advances in deep neural network (Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015; Wang, Luo, and Zhang 2023; Pan et al. 2023;
Sun et al. 2023b) with widespread applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality (Cordts et al.
2016; Couprie et al. 2013; Ngan and Li 2011), etc. However,
it is labor-intensive and time-consuming to gather massive
pixel-level annotations as training data. To alleviate the datahunger issue, a feasible solution is to resort to synthetic data
rendered by video game engines (e.g., GTA5 (Richter et al.
2016)) in a self-generated manner with minimal cost. However, video segmentation models trained on synthetic data
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4162

