The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PSC-CPI: Multi-Scale Protein Sequence-Structure Contrasting for Efficient and
Generalizable Compound-Protein Interaction Prediction
Lirong Wu1,2 , Yufei Huang1,2 , Cheng Tan1,2 , Zhangyang Gao1,2 , Bozhen Hu1,2 , Haitao Lin1,2 ,
†
Zicheng Liu1,2 , Stan Z. Li1,
1

AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China, 310030
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, 310058
{wulirong, huangyufei, tancheng, gaozhangyang, linhaitao, hubozhen, liuzicheng, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn
Abstract

2021) have been proposed to screen drugs virtually in a highthroughput way. The primary purpose of CPI prediction is
to facilitate drug discovery by predicting the interaction pattern (e.g., contact map) and strength (e.g., binding affinity)
of the CPI. An example of the compound-protein interaction
between the protein target of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4)
and the molecular drug of alogliptin is shown in Fig. 1.

C18H21N5O2
Molecular Drug

DPP-4
Protein Target

Compound-Protein
Inrteraction (CPI)

Interaction Pattern Contact Map

Residue Site

Compound-Protein Interaction (CPI) prediction aims to predict the pattern and strength of compound-protein interactions for rational drug discovery. Existing deep learningbased methods utilize only the single modality of protein sequences or structures and lack the co-modeling of the joint
distribution of the two modalities, which may lead to significant performance drops in complex real-world scenarios due
to various factors, e.g., modality missing and domain shifting. More importantly, these methods only model protein sequences and structures at a single fixed scale, neglecting more
fine-grained multi-scale information, such as those embedded
in key protein fragments. In this paper, we propose a novel
multi-scale Protein Sequence-structure Contrasting framework for CPI prediction (PSC-CPI), which captures the dependencies between protein sequences and structures through
both intra-modality and cross-modality contrasting. We further apply length-variable protein augmentation to allow contrasting to be performed at different scales, from the amino
acid level to the sequence level. Finally, in order to more fairly
evaluate the model generalizability, we split the test data into
four settings based on whether compounds and proteins have
been observed during the training stage. Extensive experiments have shown that PSC-CPI generalizes well in all four
settings, particularly in the more challenging “Unseen-Both”
setting, where neither compounds nor proteins have been observed during training. Furthermore, even when encountering a situation of modality missing, i.e., inference with only
single-modality data, PSC-CPI still exhibits comparable or
even better performance than previous approaches.

Atom Site

Interaction Strength Binding Affinity

Figure 1: An illustration of Compound-Protein Interaction.
Computational methods for CPI prediction can be mainly
divided into two categories: simulation-based methods and
deep learning-based methods. Molecular docking (Trott and
Olson 2010; Verdonk et al. 2003; Fan, Fu, and Zhang 2019;
Pinzi and Rastelli 2019; Lin et al. 2023; Sethi et al. 2019)
and molecular dynamics simulations (Salo-Ahen et al. 2020;
Hollingsworth and Dror 2018) are two typical simulationbased methods. They utilize unimodal 3D protein structures
to predict both the interaction sites as well as the binding postures. Despite the remarkable success, these methods
(1) rely heavily on the availability of protein 3D structures
and (2) require tremendous computational resources and are
very time-consuming. With the development of deep learning techniques, there have been many deep learning-based
methods (Lim et al. 2021) proposed for high-efficiency CPI
prediction, making it possible to achieve large-scale drug
screening in a relatively short time. Moreover, a large number of protein structure-free methods (Gao et al. 2018; Li
et al. 2020; Karimi et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2023) are proposed to reduce the reliance on protein 3D structures. They
can accurately predict the CPIs using only the protein sequences. However, it is the structure of a protein, rather than
its sequence, that is the key to determining its functions and
interactions with compounds. To combine the strengths of
the two modalities, a recent work (You and Shen 2022) proposes to integrate the representations of protein sequences

Introduction
While various experimental assays (Bleicher et al. 2003; Inglese and Auld 2007; Mayr and Bojanic 2009) have been
applied to screen drug candidates, identifying valid drugs
with desirable properties from the enormous chemical space
(estimated to contain 1060 potential “drug-like” molecule
compounds (Bohacek, McMartin, and Guida 1996; Karimi
et al. 2020)) is still expensive and time-consuming. To overcome this bottleneck, a number of computational methods
for Compound-Protein Interaction (CPI) prediction (You
et al. 2020; Karimi et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2018; Lim et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

310

