The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Invariant Random Forest: Tree-Based Model Solution for OOD Generalization
Yufan Liao1,2 , Qi Wu2 , Xing Yan1 *
1

Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University of China
2
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
liaoyf@ruc.edu.cn, qi.wu@cityu.edu.hk, xingyan@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

Decision trees are a type of classic machine learning models. As opposed to DNNs, decision trees are using white-box
models which are simple to interpret. Thus, decision trees
can be applied to the areas where safety and reliability are
required or collaborations are needed between human and
AI, such as healthcare, credit assessment, etc. Induced by
decision trees, ensemble models like Random Forest (RF)
(Breiman 2001), Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GIDT)
(Friedman 2001), and XGBoost (Chen et al. 2015) become
popular choices in real applications.
Though tree-based models have high interpretability, they
may also suffer from distribution shifts and spurious correlations, just as DNNs may suffer. Figure 1 gives the illustration of an OOD situation tree models may face. With
regular splitting criteria, decision trees only consider the average performance but ignore the heterogeneous behaviors
across different environments. Unstable behavior means that
the performance of a particular split can change or even twist
on the testing set, no matter how good the performance is on
training data. When we already know that the data distribution may alter during testing time, it is vital to avoid using
the traditional tree models for precautions.
In this paper, we first describe the failure of decision tree
models in the case where testing distribution and training
distribution are different. Then, we derive an invariant across
multiple environments for classification tasks under the setting of stable and unstable features. Based on this invariant, we introduce our proposed model, Invariant Decision
Tree (IDT) and the corresponding ensemble version Invariant Random Forest (IRF), by designing an additional penalty
term in the splitting criterion for growing trees. The penalty
term encourages the use of stable features as the splitting
variable in the tree growth. Experiments on both synthetic
datasets and real datasets prove the superiority of our proposed method in OOD generalization.

Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) generalization is an essential
topic in machine learning. However, recent research is only
focusing on the corresponding methods for neural networks.
This paper introduces a novel and effective solution for OOD
generalization of decision tree models, named Invariant Decision Tree (IDT). IDT enforces a penalty term with regard to
the unstable/varying behavior of a split across different environments during the growth of the tree. Its ensemble version,
the Invariant Random Forest (IRF), is constructed. Our proposed method is motivated by a theoretical result under mild
conditions, and validated by numerical tests with both synthetic and real datasets. The superior performance compared
to non-OOD tree models implies that considering OOD generalization for tree models is absolutely necessary and should
be given more attention.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models achieve great successes in many
applications such as image classification, speech recognition, and so on, when training data and testing data are generated from the same distribution. However, when the theme
of the task is about predicting rather than recognizing, it is
a big deal that the distribution of data in testing time may
have a huge difference compared to the distribution of training data. Model needs to predict well when the testing data
comes from unseen distributions. For example, in autopilot
tasks, we may encounter unseen signs; when predicting the
stock market, huge crashes may happen for new reasons.
This is called the Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) generalization
problem.
The performance of existing machine learning models
may drop severely in OOD scenarios (Shen et al. 2021;
Zhou et al. 2022; Geirhos et al. 2020). To make up for this
weakness, many methods have been proposed to improve
the OOD generalization ability of machine learning models,
such as IRM (Arjovsky et al. 2019) and REx (Krueger et al.
2021). But almost all the methods are caring about Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs). For other types of models in machine learning, there are no solutions proposed so far.

2

Related Works

Invariant Learning To achieve OOD generalization of
DNNs, invariant learning methods such as IRM (Arjovsky
et al. 2019) and REx (Krueger et al. 2021) propose to pursue invariant final layer or invariant loss across data from
different sources (e.g., locations, time, etc.). The data from
different sources are usually called different environments
or domains in this kind of literature. IRM seeks the invariant

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13772

