The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Editing Language Model-Based Knowledge Graph Embeddings
Siyuan Cheng1, 2, 4 * , Ningyu Zhang1, 2† ,
Bozhong Tian1, 2 * , Xi Chen4 * , Qingbin Liu4 , Huajun Chen1, 2, 3†
2

1
Zhejiang University
Zhejiang University - Ant Group Joint Laboratory of Knowledge Graph
3
Donghai Laboratory
4
Platform and Content Group, Tencent
{sycheng, zhangningyu, tbozhong, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn
{jasonxchen, qingbinliu}@tencent.com

Abstract

EDIT

Recently decades have witnessed the empirical success of
framing Knowledge Graph (KG) embeddings via language
models. However, language model-based KG embeddings
are usually deployed as static artifacts, making them difficult to modify post-deployment without re-training after deployment. To address this issue, we propose a new task of
editing language model-based KG embeddings in this paper. This task is designed to facilitate rapid, data-efficient
updates to KG embeddings without compromising the performance of other aspects. We build four new datasets:
E-FB15k237, A-FB15k237, E-WN18RR, and A-WN18RR,
and evaluate several knowledge editing baselines demonstrating the limited ability of previous models to handle
the proposed challenging task. We further propose a simple yet strong baseline dubbed KGEditor, which utilizes additional parametric layers of the hypernetwork to edit/add
facts. Our comprehensive experimental results reveal that
KGEditor excels in updating specific facts without impacting the overall performance, even when faced with limited
training resources. Code and datasets will be available at
https://github.com/AnonymousForPapers/DeltaKG.

KGE
Model
Pres
iden
tOf

Biden
#
∆𝑊

Pre
side
ntO
f

Joe Biden

Donald Trump
ADD
#
∆𝑊

KGE
Model

Brand new knowledge
Argentina, Award, 2022 World Cup Champions

aw

ar
d
2022 World Cup

Figure 1: Top: Illustration of the EDIT task. We edit the
wrong fact knowledge stored in the KG embeddings. Bottom: Illustration of the ADD task. We add brand-new knowledge into the model without re-training.

learning to optimize target objectives by utilizing scoring
functions that preserve the inherent structure of KGs.
However, a recent shift in KG embedding methodologies
has emerged, moving away from the explicit modeling of
structure (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019; Zhang et al. 2020c;
Wang et al. 2022b,a). Instead, contemporary techniques focus on incorporating text descriptions through the use of expressive black-box models, e.g., pre-trained language models. This new paradigm operates under the assumption that
the model will inherently capture the underlying structure
without requiring explicit instruction. Leveraging language
models to frame KG embeddings has emerged as a highly
promising approach, yielding considerable empirical success. This technique offers the potential to generate informative representations for long-tail entities and those on-thefly emerging entities. However, KG embeddings with language models are usually deployed as static artifacts, which
are challenging to modify without re-training. To respond to
changes (e.g., emerging new facts) or a correction for facts
of existing KGs, the ability to conduct flexible knowledge
updates to KG embeddings after deployment is desirable.
To address this need, we introduce a new task of editing

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) represent large-scale, multirelational graphs containing a wealth of symbolic facts.
These structures offer invaluable back-end support for
various knowledge-intensive tasks, such as information
retrieval, question-answering, and recommender systems.
(Yang et al. 2021, 2022; Wu et al. 2022b,a). To better utilize that symbolic knowledge in KGs for machine learning models, many KG embedding approaches have been devoted to representing KGs in low-dimension vector spaces
(Wang et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2022a). Traditional KG embedding models, e.g., TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), RotatE
(Sun et al. 2019), are naturally taxonomized as structurebased methods (Xie et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2020b,a; Wang
et al. 2022b). These approaches employ supervised machine
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17835

