The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Counterfactual-Enhanced Information Bottleneck for Aspect-Based Sentiment
Analysis
Mingshan Chang1,2 , Min Yang1 * , Qingshan Jiang1 , Ruifeng Xu3
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{ms.chang, min.yang, qs.jiang}@siat.ac.cn, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite having achieved notable success for aspect-based
sentiment analysis (ABSA), deep neural networks are susceptible to spurious correlations between input features and
output labels, leading to poor robustness. In this paper,
we propose a novel Counterfactual-Enhanced Information
Bottleneck framework (called CEIB) to reduce spurious correlations for ABSA. CEIB extends the information bottleneck
(IB) principle to a factual-counterfactual balancing setting by
integrating augmented counterfactual data, with the goal of
learning a robust ABSA model. Concretely, we first devise
a multi-pattern prompting method, which utilizes the large
language model (LLM) to generate high-quality counterfactual samples from the original samples. Then, we employ
the information bottleneck principle and separate the mutual information into factual and counterfactual parts. In this
way, we can learn effective and robust representations for the
ABSA task by balancing the predictive information of these
two parts. Extensive experiments on five benchmark ABSA
datasets show that our CEIB approach achieves superior prediction performance and robustness over the state-of-the-art
baselines. Code and data to reproduce the results in this paper is available at: https://github.com/shesshan/CEIB.

Figure 1: Spurious correlation between the context words
“never had” and the sentiment label “P OSITIVE” in the
restaurant dataset. We use counterfactual data featuring
identical spurious context words while different sentiment
labels to encourage the model to capture vital opinion words.

line, several works explicitly capture syntax-aware features
for the aspect by incorporating the syntactic knowledge with
graph neural networks (Huang and Carley 2019; Wang et al.
2020; Liang et al. 2022). More recently, pre-trained language models (PLMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
have been applied to the ABSA task, yielding state-of-theart results (Song et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2019;
Zhang, Zhou, and Wang 2022). Extensive linguistic knowledge learned from the large-scale textual corpus can be utilized to improve the performance for ABSA.
Despite the effectiveness of prior studies, few efforts are
devoted to mitigating the spurious correlation problem for
ABSA. Specifically, deep ABSA models appear to associate
superficial patterns with predicted labels, which are held by
most training samples but not intrinsic to the ABSA task.
For example, as shown in Figure 1, due to the high cooccurrence of the context words “never had” and the sentiment label “P OSITIVE” in the training corpus, deep models tend to learn the strong correlation between the context words “never had” and the label “P OSITIVE”, rather
than capturing the semantically crucial opinion expressions.
As a result, models would fail to infer the ground-truth label “N EUTRAL” for the testing instance, which contains the

Introduction
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA), which aims to
identify the sentiment of a specific aspect in a sentence, has
raised increasing interest in both academic and industrial
communities (Zhang et al. 2022). For accurate and stable
sentiment prediction in this fine-grained sentiment analysis
task, it is essential to capture the context words expressing
opinions towards the target aspect.
So far, deep learning techniques have been predominant in
the ABSA task. Deep neural networks can automatically and
efficiently learn discriminative contextual representations of
both the context and aspect without time-consuming human
annotation (Negi and Buitelaar 2014). To model the semantic relationship between the target aspect and its context,
various attention mechanisms have been proposed to learn
interactive features of the context and aspect (Tang, Qin,
and Liu 2016; Ma et al. 2017; Lei et al. 2019). In another
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17736

