The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robustness Verification of Multi-Class Tree Ensembles
Laurens Devos* , Lorenzo Cascioli* , Jesse Davis
KU Leuven, Belgium,
laurens.devos@kuleuven.be, lorenzo.cascioli@kuleuven.be, jesse.davis@kuleuven.be

reducing multiclass problems to a series binary ones. Specifically, they employ a one-versus-other strategy that contrasts the class of interest to one other class. This is then
repeated for each possible other class. However, multiclass
problems are an inherently richer and more complex setting. We show that the one-versus-other reduction has two
substantial shortcomings. First, it does not return correct results. Essentially, the one-versus-other strategy reasons on
the level of pairs of classes and cannot simultaneously reason about all classes. Second, there are additional possible
attacks that existing algorithms cannot handle. For example,
instead of just trying to elicit a misprediction, it is possible
to attack the model in a targeted way where the constructed
example will be predicted to belong to a specific class chosen by the adversary.
This paper addresses this gap by proposing a novel approach to verification in tree ensembles that directly operates in a multiclass setting. We take the approach of viewing
robustness verification as a constrained optimization problem (Devos, Meert, and Davis 2021b) which can then be
solved using a heuristic, anytime search. We generalize the
optimization task to a multiclass setting and show that this
yields four different classes of problems that are relevant.
We propose a novel heuristic for solving the corresponding
search problems and prove its consistency. Empirically, we
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on tree ensembles
learned using both XGBoost and random forests. On benchmark datasets, we find that the current paradigm for performing robustness checking in multiclass tree ensembles
returns incorrect results between 7% to 30% of the time.
In summary, we make the following five contributions: (1)
we prove that the current approach to handling multiclass
verification in tree ensemble can return incorrect results, (2)
we propose a novel formulation of verification for multiclass tree ensembles, (3) we propose a new search heuristic for solving this framing and prove its consistency, (4)
we empirically confirm our results, and (5) we provide an
open-source implementation of our framework available on
https://github.com/laudv/veritas.

Abstract
Tree ensembles are one of the most widely used model
classes. However, these models are susceptible to adversarial
examples, which are slightly perturbed examples that elicit
a misprediction. There has been significant research on designing approaches to verify the robustness of tree ensembles
to such attacks. However, existing verification algorithms for
tree ensembles are only able to analyze binary classifiers and
hence address multiclass problems by reducing them to binary ones using a one-versus-other strategy. In this paper, we
show that naively applying this strategy can yield incorrect
results in certain situations. We address this shortcoming by
proposing a novel approximate heuristic approach to verification for multiclass tree ensembles. Our approach is based on
a novel generalization of the verification task, which we show
emits other relevant verification queries.

Introduction
Tree ensembles such as gradient boosted trees and random
forests are a powerful model class. They are frequently used
in practice because they can tackle a variety of important
real-world problems in diverse areas such as medicine (Ghiasi and Zendehboudi 2021), finance (Davis et al. 2020) and
sports analytics (Decroos et al. 2019). Moreover, there are
many easy to use and performant public implementations
such as XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016), LightGBM (Ke
et al. 2017), CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al. 2018) and BitBoost (Devos, Meert, and Davis 2020).
Unfortunately, like most flexible and expressive model
classes, tree ensembles suffer from robustness issues.
Namely, they are susceptible to evasion attacks (Kantchelian, Tygar, and Joseph 2016) where an adversary carefully
crafts an example to elicit a misprediction from the model.
This has spurred interest in developing approaches that are
able to reason about learned ensembles to verify their robustness. A wide variety of approaches have been proposed
for this task (Kantchelian, Tygar, and Joseph 2016; Devos,
Meert, and Davis 2021b; Zhang, Zhang, and Hsieh 2020;
Chen et al. 2019b).
Current algorithms are designed for binary classification
problems. They only operate in multiclass settings by first

Preliminaries
We asssume an input space X ⊆ Rd and an output space
Y = {0, 1, . . . , C − 1}, with C the number of classes in the
multiclass classification problem.

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21019

