The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Curved Representation Space of Vision Transformers
Juyeop Kim, Junha Park, Songkuk Kim* , Jong-Seok Lee*
School of Integrated Technology / BK21 Graduate Program in Intelligent Semiconductor Technology
Yonsei University, Korea
{juyeopkim, junha.park, songkuk, jong-seok.lee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks with self-attention (a.k.a. Transformers) like
ViT and Swin have emerged as a better alternative to traditional convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However,
our understanding of how the new architecture works is
still limited. In this paper, we focus on the phenomenon
that Transformers show higher robustness against corruptions
than CNNs, while not being overconfident. This is contrary to
the intuition that robustness increases with confidence. We resolve this contradiction by empirically investigating how the
output of the penultimate layer moves in the representation
space as the input data moves linearly within a small area. In
particular, we show the following. (1) While CNNs exhibit
fairly linear relationship between the input and output movements, Transformers show nonlinear relationship for some
data. For those data, the output of Transformers moves in a
curved trajectory as the input moves linearly. (2) When a data
is located in a curved region, it is hard to move it out of the
decision region since the output moves along a curved trajectory instead of a straight line to the decision boundary, resulting in high robustness of Transformers. (3) If a data is slightly
modified to jump out of the curved region, the movements afterwards become linear and the output goes to the decision
boundary directly. In other words, there does exist a decision
boundary near the data, which is hard to find only because of
the curved representation space. This explains the underconfident prediction of Transformers. Also, we examine mathematical properties of the attention operation that induce nonlinear response to linear perturbation. Finally, we share our
additional findings, regarding what contributes to the curved
representation space of Transformers, and how the curvedness evolves during training.

(a) Input space

(b) Representation space
(ResNet50)

(c) Representation space
(Swin-T)

Figure 1: 2D projected movements of (a) the data (black dot)
in the input space and corresponding output features in the
representation space for (b) ResNet50 and (c) Swin-T.
In addition to the improved task performance (e.g., classification accuracy) compared to CNNs, Transformers also
show desirable characteristics in other aspects. It has been
shown that Transformers are more robust to adversarial perturbations than CNNs (Bai et al. 2021; Naseer et al. 2021;
Paul and Chen 2022). Moreover, Transformers are reported
not overconfident in their predictions unlike CNNs (Minderer et al. 2021) (and we show that Transformers are actually underconfident in this paper).
The high robustness, however, does not comport with underconfidence. Intuitively, a data that is correctly classified
by a model with lower confidence is likely to be located
closer to the decision boundary (see Appendix for detailed
discussion). Then, a smaller amount of perturbation would
move the data out of the decision region, which translates
into lower robustness of the model. However, the previous
results claim the opposite.
To mitigate the contradiction of robustness and underconfidence, this paper presents our empirical study to explore

Introduction
Self-attention-based neural network architectures, including
Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), Swin Transformers (Liu et al. 2021), etc. (hereinafter referred to as
Transformers), have shown to outperform traditional convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in various computer vision
tasks. The success of the new architecture has prompted a
question, how Transformers work, especially compared to
CNNs, which would also shed light on deeper understanding of CNNs and eventually neural networks.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13142

