The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MuST: Robust Image Watermarking for Multi-Source Tracing
Guanjie Wang1 , Zehua Ma* 1 , Chang Liu1 , Xi Yang1
Han Fang2 , Weiming Zhang* 1 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
wangguanjie@mail.ustc.edu.cn

0 0 1 1 0 ID A

Abstract
In recent years, with the popularity of social media applications, massive digital images are available online, which
brings great convenience to image recreation. However, the
use of unauthorized image materials in multi-source composite images is still inadequately regulated, which may cause
significant loss and discouragement to the copyright owners
of the source image materials. Ideally, deep watermarking
techniques could provide a solution for protecting these copyrights based on their encoder-noise-decoder training strategy.
Yet existing image watermarking schemes, which are mostly
designed for single images, cannot well address the copyright protection requirements in this scenario, since the multisource image composing process commonly includes distortions that are not well investigated in previous methods, e.g.,
the extreme downsizing.
To meet such demands, we propose MuST, a multi-source
tracing robust watermarking scheme, whose architecture includes a multi-source image detector and minimum external
rectangle operation for multiple watermark resynchronization
and extraction. Furthermore, we constructed an image material dataset covering common image categories and designed
the simulation model of the multi-source image composing
process as the noise layer. Experiments demonstrate the excellent performance of MuST in tracing sources of image materials from the composite images compared with SOTA watermarking methods, which could maintain the extraction accuracy above 98% to trace the sources of at least 3 different
image materials while keeping the average PSNR of watermarked image materials higher than 42.51 dB. We released
our code on https://github.com/MrCrims/MuST.

0 0 1 1 0 ID A

Downloading
Owner A

Paid-image
database B

Internet

Unauthorized
Users
Reselling
Second-hand
Dealer
1 0 0 0 1 ID B

Composite Image
1 0 0 0 1 ID B

Figure 1: The schematic diagram of the multi-source tracing
process. The image watermarking scheme needs to be robust
to the multi-source image composing process to verify the
multi-source copyright ownership.

Digital watermarking is a commonly used technology to
protect the copyright of image owners. The existing watermarking schemes (Zhu et al. 2018; Jia, Fang, and Zhang
2021; Ma et al. 2022) commonly focus on the robustness
of an entire image under a series of classical distortions. Yet
the composite image is commonly generated by multiple image materials with complex image editing operations, which
poses challenges to the existing watermarking schemes.
As shown in Figure 1, the unauthorized user commonly
takes the primary component of different image materials
to create a composite image with a specific theme. These
unauthorized image materials commonly come from multiple sources, including a vast number of personal images on
the internet (Kroll 2023) and various image libraries that are
being resold without authorization (Li 2019). To make the
composite image more natural, attackers will employ complex image editing operations, which are summarized as two
main distortions: image pasting distortions and image fusion
distortions. Specifically, image pasting distortions (IPD) occur when unauthorized users paste image materials onto
background images, typically including irregular cropping,
resizing, and positional changes. The image fusion distortions (IFD) commonly include complex image processing
operations, such as feathering and contrast transformation,
to better fuse the image material and the background image. For the existing watermarking schemes, the image past-

Introduction
With the rapid growth of entertainment and business demand, the creation of composite images using different materials is common in all walks of life. Nonetheless, the incorporation of unauthorized image materials in composite images will infringe the copyright of the original authors and
even lead to commercial disputes. Therefore, how to trace
the copyright of image materials for image libraries and individual creators from composite images has become an urgent problem in need of resolution.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5364

