The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Lyapunov-Stable Deep Equilibrium Models
Haoyu Chu1,2,3 , Shikui Wei* 1,3 , Ting Liu4 , Yao Zhao1,3 , Yuto Miyatake5
1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
4
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
5
Cybermedia Center, Osaka University
19112001@bjtu.edu.cn, shkwei@bjtu.edu.cn, liuting@nwpu.edu.cn, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn, miyatake@cas.cmc.osaka-u.ac.jp
2

Abstract

2013; Lu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023). Hence, it is imperative to investigate the robustness of DEQ models. An intriguing question arises: can adversarial examples easily deceive
DEQ models as well? If so, can we fundamentally mitigate
this issue?
Wei and Kolter (2021) showed that DEQ models are
also vulnerable to adversarial examples and considered ℓ∞
certified robustness for DEQ models. They presented IBPMonDEQ, a modification of monotone deep equilibrium
layers that allows for the computation of lower and upper bounds on its output via interval bound propagation.
Nevertheless, our experimental analysis revealed that IBPMonDEQ does not provide significant improvement in adversarial robustness for some complex image recognition
tasks. Likewise, Li, Wang, and Lin (2022) proposed a defense method for DEQ models based on certified training.
The deep learning community has shown a great interest
in improving the adversarial robustness of neural networks.
For another kind of implicit network, neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs) (Chen et al. 2018), defense
methods based on the Lyapunov method have emerged owing to their connection with dynamical systems. Kang et al.
(2021) proposed a stable Neural ODE with Lyapunov-stable
equilibrium points for defending against adversarial attacks.
Rodriguez, Ames, and Yue (2022) proposed a method for
training ODEs by using a control-theoretic Lyapunov condition for stability, leading to improvement on adversarial
robustness.
Typically, a stable dynamical system implies that all solutions in some region around an equilibrium point (i.e., in
a neighborhood of an equilibrium point) flow to that point.
Lyapunov’s direct method generalizes this concept by reasoning about convergence to states that minimize a potential
Lyapunov function. Because Lyapunov theory deals with the
effect of the initial perturbations on dynamic systems, integrating Lyapunov theory into implicit layers can automatically confer many benefits, such as adversarial robustness.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for improving the robustness of DEQ models through provable stability guaranteed by the Lyapunov theory. Unlike existing
methods that rely on certified training or adversarial training (Wei and Kolter 2021; Li, Wang, and Lin 2022; Yang,
Pang, and Liu 2022; Yang et al. 2023), our approach treats
the DEQ model as a nonlinear dynamic system and ensures

Deep equilibrium (DEQ) models have emerged as a promising class of implicit layer models, which abandon traditional
depth by solving for the fixed points of a single nonlinear
layer. Despite their success, the stability of the fixed points
for these models remains poorly understood. By considering
DEQ models as nonlinear dynamic systems, we propose a
robust DEQ model named LyaDEQ with guaranteed provable stability via Lyapunov theory. The crux of our method
is ensuring the Lyapunov stability of the DEQ model’s fixed
points, which enables the proposed model to resist minor initial perturbations. To avoid poor adversarial defense due to
Lyapunov-stable fixed points being located near each other,
we orthogonalize the layers after the Lyapunov stability module to separate different fixed points. We evaluate LyaDEQ
models under well-known adversarial attacks, and experimental results demonstrate significant improvement in robustness. Furthermore, we show that the LyaDEQ model can
be combined with other defense methods, such as adversarial
training, to achieve even better adversarial robustness.

Introduction
Deep equilibrium models have demonstrated remarkable
progress in various deep learning tasks, such as language modeling, image classification, semantic segmentation, compressive imaging, and optical flow estimation (Bai,
Koltun, and Kolter 2020; Winston and Kolter 2020; Zhao,
Zheng, and Yuan 2023; Bai et al. 2022). Unlike conventional
neural networks that rely on stacking layers, DEQ models
define their outputs as solutions to an input-dependent fixed
points equation and use arbitrary black-box solvers to reach
the fixed points without storing intermediate activations. As
a result, DEQ models are categorized as implicit networks,
presenting a unique approach to deep learning.
However, the robustness of DEQ models remains largely
unexplored. As widely known, deep neural networks
(DNNs) are susceptible to adversarial examples, which are
crafted with minor perturbations to input images. Given the
pervasive use of deep learning in various aspects of daily
life, the emergence of adversarial examples poses a severe
threat to the security of deep learning systems (Szegedy et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11615

