The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BOK-VQA: Bilingual outside Knowledge-Based Visual Question Answering via
Graph Representation Pretraining
MinJun Kim1 * , SeungWoo Song1 * , YouHan Lee2 , Haneol Jang1 , KyungTae Lim3†
1

Hanbat National University
2
Kakao Brain
3
Seoul National University of Science and Technology
{20181796, 20181620}@edu.hanbat.ac.kr, youhan.lee@kakaobrain.com, hejang@hanbat.ac.kr, ktlim@seoultech.ac.kr
Abstract
The current research direction in generative models, such as
the recently developed GPT4, aims to find relevant knowledge information for multimodal and multilingual inputs to
provide answers. Under these research circumstances, the demand for multilingual evaluation of visual question answering
(VQA) tasks, a representative task of multimodal systems,
has increased. Accordingly, we propose a bilingual outsideknowledge VQA (BOK-VQA) dataset in this study that can
be extended to multilingualism. The proposed data include
17K images, 17K question-answer pairs for both Korean and
English and 280K instances of knowledge information related to question-answer content. We also present a framework
that can effectively inject knowledge information into a VQA
system by pretraining the knowledge information of BOKVQA data in the form of graph embeddings. Finally, through
in-depth analysis, we demonstrated the actual effect of the
knowledge information contained in the constructed training
data on VQA.

Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015) refers
to a system that provides answers to natural language questions related to input images. In recent years, an extended
form of VQA, called knowledge based VQA (KB-VQA),
has developed that utilizes external knowledge sources,
such as Wikipedia or knowledge graphs (KGs), to enable
higher-level reasoning to answer complex questions. This
knowledge-based approach in VQA leverages various types
of information, including biographical (K-VQA) (Shah et al.
2019), common sense (FVQA) (Wang et al. 2017b), (KBVQA) (Wang et al. 2017a), Wikipedia abstracts (OK-VQA)
(Schwenk et al. 2022), and scene graphs (GQA) (Hudson and
Manning 2019).
However, despite these advancements, the existing versions of KB-VQA encounter various challenges. First, owing
to the cost of construction, the size of training data is either
relatively small (FVQA and KB-VQA) or generated automatically based on metadata (GQA). Second, most datasets are
constructed predominantly in English. Given these language
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18381

biases, a recent approach for addressing this issue introduced
xGQA (Pfeiffer et al. 2022), a multilingual VQA evaluation
dataset for a few-shot evaluation, however, xGQA is limited
by the lack of sufficient training data.
Further, KB-VQA encounters challenges in the construction of training data for less-resourced languages owing to the
need for accompanying information (e.g., Wikipedia). The
consideration of this issue gives rise to the major research
question of this study, i.e., can we leverage the rich external knowledge of highly-resourced languages to construct
KB-VQA training data for less-resourced languages? We
attempted to address this question in this study. Considering that it is not necessary to rely on a specific language if
utilizing the knowledge representation of highly-resourced
languages in the form of entity embeddings, we proposed
a bilingual dataset and method for representing knowledge
through KG Embeddings (KGEs).
The proposed dataset possessed the following characteristics: (1) We constructed a relatively large-scale training
dataset using 17K Korean-English question-answer pairs and
280K instances of information. (2) It is compiled with the
structure of bilingual outside-knowledge VQA (BOK-VQA),
which utilizes knowledge base (KB) information from English, a representative high-resource language, in conjunction
with other languages.
KGs, which typically consist of object and relation information, can be used to represent complex relationships. Thus,
KGE methods (Nickel et al. 2011; Bordes et al. 2013; Wang
et al. 2014; Trouillon et al. 2016; Dettmers et al. 2018; Sun
et al. 2019) have been proposed as techniques for compressing and representing data while preserving the structure and
information of KGs. This leads us to the final question of
this study, i.e., how can knowledge embeddings be efficiently
fused into VQA? For that, we propose a graph-embedded
learning-based VQA (GEL - VQA) model. This model acquires
knowledge information from KGs through triple prediction
and subsequently leverages this information to address VQA
problems. The proposed multitasking model is designed to
minimize the loss of information across different tasks by
predicting the information required to solve VQA questions
through triple prediction and concurrently conducting VQA
training.
Through in-depth experiments, we revealed that the performance of VQA varied widely from 21.16 to 55.48 depending

