The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Fast Exact Solver with Theoretical Analysis for the
Maximum Edge-Weighted Clique Problem
Lu Liu, Mingyu Xiao* , Yi Zhou
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2w6f8c@gmail.com, myxiao@uestc.edu.cn, zhou.yi@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

edges are weighted and the goal is to maximize the total vertex and edge weight in the clique. Please see (Wu and Hao
2015) for an introduction to MCP and its variants. All these
variants are NP-hard since MCP is a special case of them.
To find a clique in a graph G is equal to finding an independent set in the complement graph of G. Therefore,
we can get the corresponding variants of the maximum independent set problem. The maximum clique problem and
the corresponding maximum independent set problem may
have the same computational complexity. However, in terms
of practical solvers, the algorithms for the pair of problems
may be different since the complement of a sparse graph
will become dense, and usually fast practical algorithms on
sparse and dense graphs are different.
In this paper, we focus on MEWCP. Because of edge
weights, MEWCP is more flexible than MCP in modeling
problems arising in different fields, such as material science
(Agapito et al. 2016), bioinformatics (Butenko and Wilhelm
2006; Li et al. 2010; Tomita, Akutsu, and Matsunaga 2011),
computer vision and pattern recognition (Ma and Latecki
2012; San Segundo and Artieda 2015), robotics (San Segundo and Rodriguez-Losada 2013), and so on. Though important, MEWCP is less studied compared to MVWCP, and
most existing algorithms for MVWCP cannot be directly applied to MEWCP. This is unusual and we believe that there
is something essentially different between the two variants.
All above motivated us to carefully study the complexity of
MEWCP.
In terms of algorithms, there are several heuristic and exact algorithms to address MEWCP. Pullan (2008) proposed
a local search algorithm that switches three phases to avoid
local optimum. An evolutionary algorithm is proposed by
Fontes, Goncalves, and Fontes (2018). Li et al. (2018b) presented a local search algorithm based on multiple rules to select the added vertex or the swapped vertex pair. A stochastic
local search algorithm, which combines clique construction,
local search, and graph reduction, is presented in (Chu et al.
2020). The heuristic algorithms can obtain solutions of high
quality in a short time, but cannot guarantee the optimality
of the solutions obtained.
Existing exact algorithms for MEWCP can be divided into
two approaches. One approach is to formulate mathematical programming and then use existing solvers to solve the
model (Gouveia and Martins 2015; Shimizu, Yamaguchi,

The maximum vertex-weighted clique problem (MVWCP)
and the maximum edge-weighted clique problem (MEWCP)
are two natural extensions of the fundamental maximum
clique problem. In this paper, we systematically study
MEWCP and make the following major contributions: (1) We
show that MEWCP is NP-hard even when the minimum degree of the graph is n − 2, in contrast to MVWCP which is
polynomial-time solvable when the minimum degree of the
graph is at least n − 3. This result distinguishes the complexity of the two problems for the first time. (2) To address MEWCP, we develop an efficient branch-and-bound algorithm called MEWCat with both practical and theoretical
performance guarantees. In practice, MEWCat utilizes a new
upper bound tighter than existing ones, which allows for more
efficient pruning of branches. In theory, we prove a runningtime bound of O∗ (1.4423n ) for MEWCat, which breaks the
trivial bound of O∗ (2n ) in the research line of practical exact MEWCP solvers for the first time. (3) Empirically, we
evaluate the performance of MEWCat on various benchmark
instances. The experiments demonstrate that MEWCat outperforms state-of-the-art exact solvers significantly. For instance, on 16 DIMACS graphs that the state-of-the-art solver
BBEWC fails to solve within 7200 seconds, MEWCat solves
all of them with an average time of less than 1000 seconds.
On real-world graphs, MEWCat achieves an average speedup
of over 36x.

Introduction
A clique is a graph such that every pair of vertices in it
are adjacent. The maximum clique problem (MCP), to find a
clique of maximum cardinality from a given graph, is a classical NP-hard problem that has been extensively studied in
optimization (Gary and Johnson 1979; Karp 2010).
There are several variants of MCP. The maximum vertexweighted clique problem (MVWCP) is to find a clique in
a vertex-weighted graph such that the total vertex weight
is maximized. The maximum edge-weighted clique problem
(MEWCP) is to find a clique in an edge-weighted graph such
that the total edge weight is maximized. In the maximum
total-weighted clique problem (MTWCP), both vertices and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20768

