The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Value Kaleidoscope:
Engaging AI with Pluralistic Human Values, Rights, and Duties
1,2

1,2

2

2

Taylor Sorensen , Liwei Jiang , Jena D. Hwang , Sydney Levine ,
1,2
1,2
2
1,2
1
Valentina Pyatkin , Peter West , Nouha Dziri , Ximing Lu , Kavel Rao ,
2
3,2
4
1,2
Chandra Bhagavatula , Maarten Sap , John Tasioulas , Yejin Choi
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
4
Department of Philosophy, University of Oxford
{tsor13,yejin}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Human values are crucial to human decision-making. Value
pluralism is the view that multiple correct values may be held
in tension with one another (e.g., when considering lying to a
friend to protect their feelings, how does one balance honesty
with friendship?). As statistical learners, AI systems fit to averages by default, washing out these potentially irreducible
value conflicts. To improve AI systems to better reflect value
pluralism, the first-order challenge is to explore the extent to
which AI systems can model pluralistic human values, rights,
and duties as well as their interaction.
We introduce ValuePrism, a large-scale dataset of 218k values, rights, and duties connected to 31k human-written situations. ValuePrism’s contextualized values are generated by
GPT-4 and deemed high-quality by human annotators 91%
of the time. We conduct a large-scale study with annotators
across diverse social and demographic backgrounds to try to
understand whose values are represented.
With ValuePrism, we build Value Kaleidoscope (or Kaleido),
an open, light-weight, and structured language-based multitask model that generates, explains, and assesses the relevance and valence (i.e., support or oppose) of human values,
rights, and duties within a specific context. Humans prefer
the sets of values output by our system over the teacher GPT4, finding them more accurate and with broader coverage. In
addition, we demonstrate that Kaleido can help explain variability in human decision-making by outputting contrasting
values. Finally, we show that Kaleido’s representations transfer to other philosophical frameworks and datasets, confirming the benefit of an explicit, modular, and interpretable approach to value pluralism. We hope that our work will serve
as a step to making more explicit the implicit values behind
human decision-making and to steering AI systems to make
decisions that are more in accordance with them.

1

Figure 1: Different human values relate, support, or oppose everyday situations to varying degrees. K ALEIDO is
designed to generate, explain, and assess how the pluralistic human values, rights, and duties may shape human judgments.
make opposing decisions if they value different things or the
same things but to varying extents (Figure 1). The notion
that different human values can lead to distinct—though potentially equally valid—decisions is called value pluralism
(Páez et al. 2020; Komppula et al. 2018; Brosch and Sander
2013; Keeney 1992; Griffiths 2021; Liscio et al. 2023).
Various fields have focused on this concept. Philosophers
distinguish value pluralism (different views cannot be reduced into an ultimate “supervalue” (Williams 1985; Larmore 1987; Kekes 1993; Stocker 1990; Chang 1997; Dancy
2004)) from monism (there exists a single core value (Kant
1785/2002; Driver 2022)). Sociologists recognize cultural,
social, and ideological differences that drive societal clashes,
movements, and changes (Archive 2011). Psychologists empirically confirm that ethical experiences involve weighing

Introduction

When people confront difficult decisions (whether or not to
break a promise, what degree program to enroll in, how to
spend a Sunday afternoon), their options reflect their values (friendship, knowledge, freedom, saving money, spending time in nature). Two people in the same situation may
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19937

