The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Source Collaborative Gradient Discrepancy Minimization for Federated
Domain Generalization
Yikang Wei1,2 , Yahong Han1,2∗
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{yikang,yahong}@tju.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Federated Domain Generalization aims to learn a domaininvariant model from multiple decentralized source domains
for deployment on unseen target domain. Due to privacy concerns, the data from different source domains are kept isolated, which poses challenges in bridging the domain gap.
To address this issue, we propose a Multi-source Collaborative Gradient Discrepancy Minimization (MCGDM) method
for federated domain generalization. Specifically, we propose
intra-domain gradient matching between the original images and augmented images to avoid overfitting the domainspecific information within isolated domains. Additionally,
we propose inter-domain gradient matching with the collaboration of other domains, which can further reduce the domain
shift across decentralized domains. Combining intra-domain
and inter-domain gradient matching, our method enables the
learned model to generalize well on unseen domains. Furthermore, our method can be extended to the federated domain adaptation task by fine-tuning the target model on the
pseudo-labeled target domain. The extensive experiments on
federated domain generalization and adaptation indicate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods significantly.

Figure 1: (a) DG assumes that the data from multiple source
domains {Xi , Yi }ni=1 can be accessed simultaneously to
learn a generalized model M for deployment on the unseen
domain XT . (b) FedDG assumes that the data from different source domains are decentralized, but the local models
{Mi }ni=1 of different domains can be collaboratively trained
and aggregated with a parameter server. (c) FedDA assumes
that an additional unlabeled target domain XT can be accessed on server side for improving the performance.

Gong 2021; Liu et al. 2021) collaboratively trains local models on the local clients and then aggregates the local models
on the server side, as shown in Figure 1(b). Since the domain
shift is partly caused by the discrepancy in image styles, existing FedDG methods synthesize images with novel styles
by interpolating shared style information across domains
(Liu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023) or training data generators within isolated domains (Xu et al. 2023) to mitigate
the domain shift. However, when the target domain is unseen, the generated styles may not fully cover the characteristics of the unseen domain, resulting in limited generalization performance. Additionally, sharing style information across decentralized source domains raises privacy concerns, as it may risk privacy leakage.
Unlike existing FedDG methods aiming to expand the
source domains, we explore the possibility of learning the
domain-invariant model by reducing the domain shift on decentralized source domains without sharing data information. The domain shift for FedDG mainly comes from two
aspects. Firstly, there exists domain gap between source domains and the unseen target domain, so the local models
trained on source domains tend to be domain-specific and
perform poorly on the unseen target domain. Secondly, the
different source domains are isolated, so the domain shift

Introduction
Domain generalization (DG) (Zhou et al. 2021a; Wang et al.
2022) aims to learn a domain-invariant model from multiple labeled source domains for deployment on the unseen
target domains. The conventional DG methods (Wang et al.
2020; Huang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021) assume that the
data from different source domains are centralized for conducting domain generalization, e.g. reducing domain shift
across multiple source domains to learn domain-invariant
model, as shown in Figure 1(a). Considering data privacy
issues (Ye et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023a,b,c; Zhou and
Konukoglu 2023), the data from different source domains
are kept decentralized and only can be accessed on the isolated local clients. This data decentralization scenario brings
great challenges to overcome the domain shift on the decentralized source domains.
To utilize the decentralized source domains, Federated
Domain Generalization (FedDG) (Yuan et al. 2023; Wu and
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15805

