The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mean Teacher DETR with Masked Feature Alignment:
A Robust Domain Adaptive Detection Transformer Framework
Weixi Weng, Chun Yuan
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
wengwx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

collected from different distributions, i.e. domain shift.
In order to enable object detectors trained on a labeled
source domain to be effectively deployed on a completely
unlabeled target domain, unsupervised domain adaptive object detection(UDAOD) emerged as a solution. UDAOD research on DETR is gradually gaining increasing attention,
with particular emphasis on feature alignment (Wang et al.
2021; Gong et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023).
Feature alignment is commonly implemented through adversarial training, with the objective of extracting domaininvariant global-level, local-level and instance-level features
from source domain and target domain, thus reducing domain shift. Existing methods on DETR can be categorized
into one-stage feature alignment methods (Wang et al. 2021;
Gong et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) and two-stage feature
alignment method based on mean teacher (Yu et al. 2022).
We deeply studied the above two methods and identified several inherent issues, which will be elaborated below.
One-stage feature alignment methods (Xu et al. 2020a;
Gong et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) generally train DETR
from scratch with labeled source images and unlabeled target images, conducting feature alignment on the output of
the backbone, encoder, and decoder. However, training in
this manner has inherent issues: (I1) performance fluctuation: the lack of labels for target images restricts the model’s
ability to extract features from target images, and conducting feature alignment with low-quality target features easily results in performance fluctuation. Furthermore, it’s very
likely to end up with an underperforming model as shown
by the red line in Figure 1; (I2) training stagnation: at the
early training stage, if there is a significant difference in the
distribution between the two types of training data, domain
discriminators converge quickly and become proficient at
distinguishing features in the later period of training. However, the backbone struggles to produce domain-invariant
features at this point, which results in marginal performance
improvement as shown by the yellow line in Figure 1.
Two-stage feature alignment method (Yu et al. 2022)
based on mean teacher (Sohn et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021)
aims to leverage unlabeled target images by self-training.
Take MTTrans (Yu et al. 2022) for example, it comprises a
pretraining stage followed by a self-training stage. It firstly
pretrains a model merely on labeled source images and only
conducts feature alignment in the self-training stage, shar-

Unsupervised domain adaptive object detection (UDAOD)
research on Detection Transformer (DETR) mainly focuses
on feature alignment and existing methods can be divided into
two kinds, each of which has its unresolved issues. One-stage
feature alignment methods can easily lead to performance
fluctuation and training stagnation. Two-stage feature alignment method based on mean teacher comprises a pretraining
stage followed by a self-training stage, each facing problems
in obtaining a reliable pretrained model and achieving consistent performance gains. Methods mentioned above have not
yet explored how to utilize the third related domain such as
the target-like domain to assist adaptation. To address these
issues, we propose a two-stage framework named MTM, i.e.
Mean Teacher-DETR with Masked Feature Alignment. In
the pretraining stage, we utilize labeled target-like images
produced by image style transfer to avoid performance fluctuation. In the self-training stage, we leverage unlabeled target images by pseudo labels based on mean teacher and propose a module called Object Queries Knowledge Transfer
(OQKT) to ensure consistent performance gains of the student model. Most importantly, we propose masked feature
alignment methods including Masked Domain Query-based
Feature Alignment (MDQFA) and Masked Token-Wise Feature Alignment (MTWFA) to alleviate domain shift in a more
robust way, which not only prevent training stagnation and
lead to a robust pretrained model in the pretraining stage
but also enhance the model’s target performance in the selftraining stage. Experiments on three challenging scenarios
and a theoretical analysis verify the effectiveness of MTM.

Introduction
Object detection is always recognized as an important task
in the field of computer vision. Recently, Detection Transformer (DETR) (Carion et al. 2020) redefines object prediction by departing from the traditional anchor-based methodology (Girshick 2015) and embracing the concept of object queries which serve as learnable embeddings interacting
with the image features, allowing the model to predict object classes and bounding box coordinates. While DETR has
demonstrated remarkable performance on various datasets,
its application to real-world environments still presents challenges, particularly when training data and testing data are
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5912

