The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Restoring Speaking Lips from Occlusion for Audio-Visual Speech Recognition
Jiadong Wang1,3 , Zexu Pan1 , Malu Zhang2 * , Robby T. Tan 1 , Haizhou Li 3,1
1
National University of Singapore
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
jiadong.wang@u.nus.edu, maluzhang@uestc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Prior studies on audio-visual speech recognition typically assume the visibility of speaking lips, ignoring the fact that
visual occlusion occurs in real-world videos, thus adversely
affecting recognition performance. To address this issue, we
propose a framework that restores occluded lips in a video
by utilizing both the video itself and the corresponding noisy
audio. Specifically, the framework aims to achieve these
three tasks: detecting occluded frames, masking occluded areas, and reconstruction of masked regions. We tackle the
first two issues by utilizing the Class Activation Mapping
(CAM) obtained from occluded frame detection to facilitate
the masking of occluded areas. Additionally, we introduce
a novel synthesis-matching strategy for the reconstruction
to ensure the compatibility of audio features with different
levels of occlusion. Our framework is evaluated in terms of
Word Error Rate (WER) on the original videos, the videos
corrupted by concealed lips, and the videos restored using
the framework with several existing state-of-the-art audiovisual speech recognition methods. Experimental results substantiate that our framework significantly mitigates performance degradation resulting from lip occlusion. Under -5dB
noise conditions, AV-Hubert’s WER increases from 10.62%
to 13.87% due to lip occlusion, but rebounds to 11.87% in
conjunction with the proposed framework. Furthermore, the
framework also demonstrates its capacity to produce natural
synthesized images in qualitative assessments.

(a) Partial occlusion

(b) Full occlusion

Figure 1: Examples of lip occlusion.

in the video, without any occlusion. However, this assumption is overly optimistic in the real world, as a microphone
or a hand can easily obstruct the view of a speaking lip
(Hong et al. 2023). Unfortunately, state-of-the-art audiovisual speech recognition methods (Hong et al. 2022; Ma,
Petridis, and Pantic 2021) are known to be susceptible to
lip occlusion, resulting in an increase in error rate of up to
65% (Hong et al. 2023). To address this significant degradation in audio-visual speech recognition, a study introduced a
module for dynamically assessing modality reliability. This
module is integrated into the audio-visual speech recognition network to circumvent the utilization of corrupted visual frames in videos affected by lip occlusion (Hong et al.
2023). However, this approach does not involve the restoration of occluded lips in corrupted videos, and as a result, it
cannot directly leverage the capabilities of existing audiovisual speech recognition methods that assume no lip occlusion.
Inspired by speech enhancement techniques (Zhang et al.
2020, 2022) that restore clear speech from noisy recordings,
we aim to mitigate the adverse effects of lip occlusion on
audio-visual speech recognition by restoring occluded lips.
Considering the partially occluded lip shown in Fig. 1a as
an example, our goal is to remove the object occluding the
lip and restore the occluded region. When the lip is completely occluded, as illustrated in Fig. 1b, restoring the lip
using solely the input image becomes a challenging task. In
such instances, we depend on synchronized audio to supplement the visual information.

Introduction
Audio-visual speech recognition aims to transcribe spoken
words by utilizing both lip movements and speech signals.
It has recently gained substantial attention because of the
lip-reading module’s capability to maintain robustness in
the presence of acoustic noise, which used to significantly
degrade speech recognition performance. Additionally, this
lip-reading module finds widespread application in other
speech-related tasks, such as speech extraction (Pan et al.
2021; Pan, Ge, and Li 2022) and speaker verification (Shi
et al. 2022).
Many current methods in lip-reading or audio-visual
speech recognition assume that the lips are clearly visible
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19144

