The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Where and How to Attack? A Causality-Inspired Recipe for Generating
Counterfactual Adversarial Examples
Ruichu Cai1,2 , Yuxuan Zhu1 , Jie Qiao1 * , Zefeng Liang1 , Furui Liu3 , Zhifeng Hao4
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
{cairuichu, iamyuxuanzhu, qiaojie.chn, lzfeng011021}@gmail.com, liufurui@zhejianglab.com, haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn
Observational data
Color
Shape
Object: Car
Background: Road

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to be
vulnerable to well-crafted adversarial examples, which are
generated through either well-conceived Lp -norm restricted
or unrestricted attacks. Nevertheless, the majority of those approaches assume that adversaries can modify any features as
they wish, and neglect the causal generating process of the
data, which is unreasonable and unpractical. For instance,
a modification in income would inevitably impact features
like the debt-to-income ratio within a banking system. By
considering the underappreciated causal generating process,
first, we pinpoint the source of the vulnerability of DNNs
via the lens of causality, then give theoretical results to answer where to attack. Second, considering the consequences
of the attack interventions on the current state of the examples to generate more realistic adversarial examples, we propose CADE, a framework that can generate Counterfactual
ADversarial Examples to answer how to attack. The empirical results demonstrate CADE’s effectiveness, as evidenced
by its competitive performance across diverse attack scenarios, including white-box, transfer-based, and random intervention attacks.

DNN Prediction: Car

Interventional data
Color
Shape
Object: Car
Background: Space

DNN Prediction: Satellite

Figure 1: Discriminative DNN’s vulnerability to the interventional data.
bounded norm to preserve the photo-realism, while the unrestricted approaches replace such bounded perturbation with,
e.g., geometric distortions (Guo et al. 2018), color/texture
changing (Hosseini and Poovendran 2018; Bhattad et al.
2020; Yuan et al. 2022), and semantic changing (Qiu et al.
2020; Song et al. 2018), etc. Nevertheless, the majority of
these methods assume that an attacker can modify any features as they wish, which is unreasonable if we aim to generate an adversarial example in real-world, e.g., the intractability of accessing the digital input to an image recognition
model renders those methods perturbing the raw pixel-space
fail. Moreover, we argue that only altering the alterable features while leaving others unchanged might also be impractical as it ignores the effect caused by the altering features,
which has been underappreciated by the majority of the existing methods.
As a motivating example, consider a credit scoring model
used by a financial institution to assess the creditworthiness
of loan applicants. The model incorporates various features
such as income, debt-to-income ratio, and credit history. To
produce the adversarial example, it is unreasonable to disturb the income while leaving the debt-to-income ratio unchanged as it is induced by income and debt. This seemingly trivial observation has the underappreciated aspect that
a causal generating process should also be involved to produce the adversarial example toward a practical scenario.
In this work, we provide a new perspective view on the
adversarial attacks by taking the causal generating process
into consideration, and propose a framework, CADE, that
can generate Counterfactual ADversarial Examples. We introduce our CADE by answering two fundamental ques-

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous
success in various tasks and have been widely used in critical
domains such as facial recognition (Schroff, Kalenichenko,
and Philbin 2015), medical diagnostics (Peng et al. 2021),
and autonomous driving (Tian et al. 2018). Despite their unprecedented achievements, DNNs remain vulnerable to the
well-crafted adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2014; Biggio et al. 2013), and there has been a recent thrust on generating adversarial examples through, e.g., Lp -norm restricted
attack (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Kurakin,
Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Madry et al. 2018; Carlini
and Wagner 2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
2016), and unrestricted attack (Brown et al. 2017; Hosseini
and Poovendran 2018; Bhattad et al. 2020; Song et al. 2018;
Qiu et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2022).
The Lp -norm approaches reveal DNNs’ vulnerability by
searching for the perturbation in raw pixel-space within a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11132

