The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Invisible Backdoor Attack against 3D Point Cloud Classifier in Graph Spectral
Domain
Linkun Fan1 , Fazhi He∗1 , Tongzhen Si2 , Wei Tang1 , Bing Li13
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
School of Information Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan, China
3
Hubei Luojia Laboratory
flinkun@whu.edu.cn, fzhe@whu.edu.cn, tjsitongzhen@gmail.com, weitang2021@whu.edu.cn, bingli@whu.edu.cn
2

Benign

Abstract
3D point cloud has been wildly used in security crucial domains, such as self-driving and 3D face recognition. Backdoor attack is a serious threat that usually destroy Deep Neural Networks (DNN) in the training stage. Though a few 3D
backdoor attacks are designed to achieve guaranteed attack
efficiency, their deformation will alarm human inspection. To
obtain invisible backdoored point cloud, this paper proposes
a novel 3D backdoor attack, named IBAPC, which generates backdoor trigger in the graph spectral domain. The effectiveness is grounded by the advantage of graph spectral
signal that it can induce both global structure and local points
to be responsible for the caused deformation in spatial domain. In detail, a new backdoor implanting function is proposed whose aim is to transform point cloud to graph spectral signal for conducting backdoor trigger. Then, we design
a backdoor training procedure which updates the parameter
of backdoor implanting function and victim 3D DNN alternately. Finally, the backdoored 3D DNN and its associated
backdoor implanting function is obtained by finishing the
backdoor training procedure. Experiment results suggest that
IBAPC achieves SOTA attack stealthiness from three aspects
including objective distance measurement, subjective human
evaluation, graph spectral signal residual. At the same time,
it obtains competitive attack efficiency. The code is available
at https://github.com/f-lk/IBAPC.

PointPBAI PointPBAO PointPA_X

Frequency

Frequency

Frequency

IRBA

Frequency

NRBdoor

Frequency

IBAPC(our)

Frequency

Figure 1: Backdoored 3D point clouds from different attacks. The second line represent residual of graph spectral
signal, lower is better. IBAPC is invisible to human vision,
and achieves SOTA stealthiness from three perspectives including objective distance measurement, subjective human
evaluation, graph spectral signal residual.
(Liu and Hu 2022; Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019). They aim to
deceive 3D DNN in the inference stage.
Backdoor attack is another serious security threat that destroys DNN in training stage. It aims to implant hidden malicious behaviors into victim DNN. One typical scenario is
that users upload their 3D DNN and dataset to a third-party
platform for sufficient computing resources. Hence, it enables the attacker (third-party platform) to implant backdoor
into the victim DNN. The backdoored DNN works normally
on benign samples, but causes mis-classification on samples
containing a specific “trigger”. Such attack has the characteristics of high time efficiency in the inference stage, strong
stealthiness, and universality. Therefore, lots of efforts are
motivated to investigate backdoor attacks and their defenses
in 2D image domain (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017; Wu
et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2023).
However, backdoor attacks designed for 2D image will
disable for 3D point cloud due to data format restriction. As
a result, a few 3D backdoor attacks are designed recently.
Though they obtain high Attack Success Rate (ASR), the deformation is so serious that they are unavailing, since they
will be detected even by human observing, shown as Fig 1.
Therefore, this paper aims to design an Invisible Backdoor
Attack against 3D Point Cloud (IBAPC).
We firstly analyze why the stealthiness of existing attacks
are poor. In detail, the first reason is that the conducted
deformation is concentrated on just one type of deformation, such as added points or shape transformation. In detail,

Introduction
3D point cloud plays an important role in representing 3D
shape. It has been deeply applied in many security-crucial
domains, including self-driving, 3D face recognition, and
service robot. Take self-driving as an example, a vehicle usually perceives the environment and recognizes objects by
point clouds. Thus, the security concern about point cloud
should be solved.
For efficiency, many 3D Deep Neural Networks (3D
DNN) are developed to understand point cloud (Qi et al.
2017a; Liu et al. 2019). However, these popular 3D DNNs
have been proved vulnerable to carefully designed attacks.
Specifically, adversarial attack and backdoor attack are two
main threats. Recently, many 3D adversarial attacks are designed for 3D DNN and achieve guaranteed performance
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21072

