The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mitigating Idiom Inconsistency: A Multi-Semantic Contrastive Learning Method
for Chinese Idiom Reading Comprehension
Mingmin Wu1,2,3,4 , Yuxue Hu1,2,3,4 , Yongcheng Zhang1 , Zeng Zhi5 , Guixin Su1 , Ying Sha1,2,3,4 *
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
Key Laboratory of Smart Farming for Agricultural Animals, Wuhan, China
3
Hubei Engineering Technology Research Center of Agricultural Big Data, Wuhan, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{wmm nlp, zhyc, cometsue}@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, zhizeng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {hyx, shaying}@mail.hzau.edu.cn
2

Abstract

对牛弹琴

Idiom

Chinese idioms pose a significant challenge for machine reading comprehension due to their metaphorical meanings often
diverging from their literal counterparts, leading to metaphorical inconsistency. Furthermore, the same idiom can have
different meanings in different contexts, resulting in contextual inconsistency. Although deep learning-based methods have achieved some success in idioms reading comprehension, existing approaches still struggle to accurately capture idiom representations due to metaphorical inconsistency
and contextual inconsistency of idioms. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel model, Multi-Semantic Contrastive Learning Method (MSCLM), which simultaneously
addresses metaphorical inconsistency and contextual inconsistency of idioms. To mitigate metaphorical inconsistency,
we propose a metaphor contrastive learning module based on
the prompt method, bridging the semantic gap between literal and metaphorical meanings of idioms. To mitigate contextual inconsistency, we propose a multi-semantic crossattention module to explore semantic features between different metaphors of the same idiom in various contexts. Our
model has been compared with multiple current latest models
(including GPT-3.5) on multiple Chinese idiom reading comprehension datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate
that MSCLM outperforms state-of-the-art models.

Literal Meaning

Play the piano to the cow.

Metaphorical Meaning

Talk to unreasonable people.

Table 1: An example of metaphorical inconsistency. The literal and metaphorical meanings of idioms are different.
Idiom
Literal
1. Metaphor
2. Metaphor

不翼而飞
Fly away without
wings.
Things suddenly
disappeared.
News and words
spread quickly.

平易近人
Flatness facilitates
approachability.
The person is kind
and friendly.
The text is easy to
understand.

Table 2: Examples of contextual inconsistency. The same idiom may have different meanings in different contexts.

of new ones, a deeper comprehension of idioms is still critical for various natural language processing tasks (Shao et al.
2017; Liu, Pang, and Liu 2019). To address this challenge,
Zheng et al. (2019) proposed a cloze task for idioms and
built a widely used Chinese idiom cloze test dataset, ChID.
This dataset contains passages with blank spaces accompanied by seven idiom options, as shown in Table 3. The task
is to choose the idiom that best fits the context of the blank
space, demonstrating the machine’s comprehension of Chinese idioms.
The development of the pre-training models has led to the
emergence of various Chinese idiom understanding methods based on BERT model (Devlin et al. 2018) and the Chinese idiom-oriented model (Tan, Jiang, and Dai 2021). CM
model (Wang et al. 2020) uses BERT to encode the context sequence and the idiom’s definition. SKER model (Long
et al. 2020) constructs a synonym graph of idioms based on
their definitions to create new idiom representations. However, these models do not account for the fact that idioms
with similar semantic meanings can be applicable to differ-

Introduction
As a distinctive linguistic phenomenon in the Chinese language, Chinese idioms present a significant challenge for
Chinese reading comprehension. Chinese idiom is a special kind of condensed form of language expression, typically consisting of four Chinese characters, which convey
profound meanings that can differ greatly from their literal meanings, as shown in Table 1. Although large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3 have impressive performance in various reading comprehension tasks, they still
struggle with understanding idioms (Bertolini, Weeds, and
Weir 2022; Raunak et al. 2023). Given the prevalence of idioms in the Chinese language and the constantly emerging
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19243

