The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepPointMap: Advancing LiDAR SLAM with Unified Neural Descriptors
Xiaze Zhang1 , Ziheng Ding1 , Qi Jing1 , Yuejie Zhang1,3 , Wenchao Ding2,* , Rui Feng1,2,3,*
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{xzzhang22, zhding22, jingq22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhangyuejie, dingwenchao, fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Point clouds have shown significant potential in various domains, including Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM). However, existing approaches either rely on dense
point clouds to achieve high localization accuracy or use generalized descriptors to reduce map size. Unfortunately, these
two aspects seem to conflict with each other. To address this
limitation, we propose a unified architecture, DeepPointMap,
achieving excellent preference in both aspects. We utilize neural networks to extract highly representative and sparse neural
descriptors from point clouds, enabling memory-efficient map
representation and accurate multi-scale localization tasks (e.g.,
odometry and loop-closure). Moreover, we showcase the versatility of our framework by extending it to more challenging
multi-agent collaborative SLAM. The promising results obtained in these scenarios further emphasize the effectiveness
and potential of our approach.

Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a fundamental problem in robotics and autonomous driving, which
aims to reconstruct the map of the explored environment
while simultaneously estimating the location of the agent
within it. It plays a vital role in enabling autonomous agents
to navigate and understand their surroundings. Point clouds
have gained prominence as a powerful representation for
capturing intricate 3D structures. Taking advantage of this,
LiDAR SLAM has become a prominent approach for achieving accurate localization and generating high-quality maps.
Currently, several SLAM methods (Shan and Englot 2018;
Chen et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2021; Vizzo et al. 2021; Dellenbach et al. 2022) based on hand-crafted features have demonstrated impressive performance on specific benchmarks. However, hand-crafted features are often either too sparse or over
redundant, due to inefficacy in capturing semantic information. Sparse features may result in low-fidelity maps while
dense features may be memory inefficient and problematic
for large-scale reconstruction. Some methods (Qin et al. 2022;
Yew and Lee 2022) use deep learning-based approaches to
extract more compact features and achieve global registration. Although yielding promising results on point cloud
*

Corresponding authors: Rui Feng and Wenchao Ding.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10413

registration benchmarks, they are hard to directly adapt to
SLAM tasks since they can only deal with the registration
task of single input size (e.g., scan-level), and can be heavily
impacted by cumulative errors. Furthermore, most of the existing methods adopt pure geometric pipeline to compose the
SLAM system, e.g., involving hand-crafted feature extraction,
iterative-based odometry and projection-based loop-closure.
The geometric pipeline may lose considerable information
from sensor inputs, which makes a neural information processing pipeline a more promising direction.
To tackle these challenges, we present DeepPointMap
(DPM), a novel deep learning-based LiDAR SLAM framework including two neural networks: (1) the DPM Encoder
which extracts unified neural descriptors to represent the
environment efficiently, and (2) the DPM Decoder which
performs multi-scale matching and registration (i.e., odometry and loop-closure) based on the aforementioned neural descriptors. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the highly compact
neural descriptors provide a novel solution for environment
encoding and facilitate high-fidelity mapping and information sharing (e.g., in multi-agent cooperative SLAM), while
the DPM Decoder renders a unified neural information processing pipeline for neural descriptors. Unlike other neural
descriptor-based methods which can be only used in limited
scenarios or specific SLAM components, our descriptor is
used to accomplish several sub-tasks of SLAM in a unified
manner, yielding exceptional localization accuracy, memory
efficiency, map fidelity, and real-time processing.
In summary, we introduce an efficient LiDAR SLAM
framework predominantly based on neural networks, offering a promising solution for advancing the field of LiDAR
SLAM. It achieves a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) in localization accuracy, preserving a high-fidelity map reconstruction,
with smaller memory consumption. These advantages can be
further exploited in more challenging applications such as
multi-agent cooperative SLAM which has limited communication bandwidth for feature sharing among agents. Our
contributions can be summarized as:
• We propose using neural descriptors for online LiDAR
SLAM. Compared to the traditional geometric descriptors,
our neural descriptors serve as a compact map representation and facilitate a unified SLAM architecture, achieving
desirable localization accuracy, memory efficiency, and
map fidelity.

