The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Only When It Matters:
Cost-Aware Long-Tailed Classification
Yu-Cheng He1 , Yao-Xiang Ding2 , Han-Jia Ye1,3 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1,3
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
State Key Laboratory of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{heyc,yehj,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, dingyx.gm@gmail.com
Abstract

Most current long-tailed classification approaches assume
the cost-agnostic scenario, where the training distribution of
classes is long-tailed while the testing distribution of classes
is balanced. Meanwhile, the misclassification costs of all instances are the same. On the other hand, in many real-world
applications, it is more proper to assume that the training and
testing distributions of classes are the same, while the misclassification cost of tail-class instances is varied. In this work, we
model such a scenario as cost-aware long-tailed classification,
in which the identification of high-cost tail instances and focusing learning on them thereafter is essential. In consequence,
we propose the learning strategy of augmenting new instances
based on adaptive region partition in the feature space. We
conduct theoretical analysis to show that under the assumption
that the feature-space distance and the misclassification cost
are correlated, the identification of high-cost tail instances can
be realized by building region partitions with a low variance
of risk within each region. The resulting AugARP approach
could significantly outperform baseline approaches on both
benchmark datasets and real-world product sales datasets.

Introduction
Long-tailed classification, in which the training distribution
of classes is highly imbalanced and long-tailed, has received
great attention in recent years (Liu et al. 2019; Wei and
Li 2018; Zhang et al. 2021; Buda, Maki, and Mazurowski
2018). The major challenge for long-tailed classification is
the lack of data for the tail classes, making it difficult to obtain
generalizable information from them. Meanwhile, this issue
becomes significant when the performance on the tail data
is essential. To model this situation, most current long-tailed
classification studies assume that the testing distribution is
class-balanced: the numbers of instances for all classes are
the same. As a result, the performance under tail classes is
focused on by increasing the ratio of tail instances in the
testing dataset. Meanwhile, this setting is cost-agnostic: The
misclassification cost of any instance is the same.
However, we argue that this is not the only natural scenario of long-tailed classification. In fact, class-imbalanced
learning is a long-standing research topic in machine learning (Zhou 2021). In tradition, class-imbalanced learning
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12411

usually appears in companion with cost-sensitive learning,
(Elkan 2001; Zhou and Liu 2010) where the misclassification
of minority class instances is higher than the majority class
instances. This situation appears in many real-world applications such as object detection (Oksuz et al. 2020) and medical
diagnosis (Mazurowski et al. 2008). This relationship is not
incident: the minority instances are essential only when misclassifying them leads to higher costs. In consequence, we
follow this tradition to study cost-aware long-tailed classification, where the training and testing class distributions remain
the same, while the misclassification cost of instances is varied. Furthermore, we assume that not all tail class instances
are essentially important: only some of the tail class instances
incur high costs. This situation appears in many real-world
applications. For example, for a classification model on an
e-commerce platform, the costs of misclassifying different
goods, which can be the sale prices, are varied even on the tail
instances with low sale volumes. Some low-sale goods may
also be low-priced so the misclassification cost is also low.
On the other hand, what matters are indeed those low-sale
high-cost goods, which should be the true targets to pay attention to. Furthermore, it is common in real-world applications
that the instance features and their cost are highly correlated.
For instance, in the e-commerce example, the high-price
goods are likely to share common properties, making their
features similar. Designing cost-aware learning algorithms
by utilizing this phenomenon is also a meaningful challenge.
In this paper, we conduct both theoretical and algorithmic studies on cost-aware long-tailed classification. We focus on the central challenge of identifying the high-cost instances and focusing the learning process on them thereafter.
To supply generalizable information on the high-cost parts
of the tail distribution, we propose the learning strategy of
augmenting new instances based on region partitions in the
feature space, which are built online during the learning process. We first conduct the access risk analysis of the learned
model from the region partition. Based on the assumption
that the feature-space distance among instances and their
misclassification costs are correlated, the risk bound indicates the region partition rule of minimizing the variance
of risk in each region. Based on this finding, we propose
the AugARP approach for adaptive region partition by introducing an attention module into the convolutional network,
which can be used in companion with any current instance-

