The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Class-Attribute Priors: Adapting Optimization to
Heterogeneity and Fairness Objective
Xuechen Zhang1 , Mingchen Li2 , Jiasi Chen2 , Christos Thrampoulidis3 , Samet Oymak2
1

University of California, Riverside
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
3
University of British Columbia
xzhan394@ucr.edu, milii@umich.edu, jiasi@umich.edu, cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca, oymak@umich.edu
2

Abstract
Modern classification problems exhibit heterogeneities across
individual classes: Each class may have unique attributes, such
as sample size, label quality, or predictability (easy vs difficult), and variable importance at test-time. Without care, these
heterogeneities impede the learning process, most notably,
when optimizing fairness objectives. Confirming this, under
a gaussian mixture setting, we show that the optimal SVM
classifier for balanced accuracy needs to be adaptive to the
class attributes. This motivates us to propose CAP: An effective and general method that generates a class-specific learning
strategy (e.g. hyperparameter) based on the attributes of that
class. This way, optimization process better adapts to heterogeneities. CAP leads to substantial improvements over the
naive approach of assigning separate hyperparameters to each
class. We instantiate CAP for loss function design and post-hoc
logit adjustment, with emphasis on label-imbalanced problems.
We show that CAP is competitive with prior art and its flexibility unlocks clear benefits for fairness objectives beyond
balanced accuracy. Finally, we evaluate CAP on problems with
label noise as well as weighted test objectives to showcase
how CAP can jointly adapt to different heterogeneities.

1

Introduction

Contemporary machine learning problems arising in natural language processing and computer vision often involve
large number of classes to predict. Collecting high-quality
training datasets for all of these classes is not always possible, and realistic datasets (Menon et al. 2020; Feldman 2020;
Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) suffer from class-imbalances,
missing or noisy labels (among other application-specific
considerations). Optimizing desired accuracy objectives with
such heterogeneities poses a significant challenge and motivates the contemporary research on imbalanced classification, fairness, and weak-supervision. Additionally, besides
distributional heterogeneities, we might have objective heterogeneity. For instance, the target test accuracy may be a
particular weighted combination of individual classes, where
important classes are upweighted.
A plausible approach to address these distributional and
objective heterogeneities is designing optimization strategies
that are tailored to individual classes. A classical example is
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16890

assigning individual weights to classes during optimization.
The recent proposals on imbalanced classification (Li et al.
2021; Chawla et al. 2002) can be viewed as generalization
of weighting and can be interpreted as developing unique
loss functions for individual classes. More generally, one
can use class-specific data augmentation schemes, regularization or even optimizers (e.g. Adam, SGD, etc) to improve
target test objective. While promising, this approach suffers
when there are a large number of classes K: naively learning
class-specific strategies would require O(K) hyperparameters (O(1) strategy hyperparameter per class). This not only
creates computational bottlenecks but also raises concerns of
overfitting for tail classes with small sample size.
To overcome such bottlenecks, we introduce the Classattribute Priors (CAP) approach. Rather than treating hyperparameters as free variables, CAP is a meta-approach that
treats them as a function of the class attributes. As we discuss
later, example attributes A of a class include its frequency,
label-noise level, training difficulty, similarity to other classes,
test-time importance, and more. Our primary goal with CAP
is building an attribute-to-hyperparameter function A2H
that generates class-specific hyperparameters based on the
attributes associated with that class. This process infuses
high-level information about the dataset to accelerate the design of class-specific strategies. The A2H maps the attributes
A to a class-specific strategy S. The primary advantage is
robustness and sample efficiency of A2H, as it requires O(1)
hyperparameters to generate O(K) strategies. The main contribution of this work is proposing CAP framework and instantiating it for loss function design and post-hoc optimization
which reveals its empirical benefits. Specifically, we make
the following contributions:
1. Introducing Class-attribute Priors (Sec 3). We first provide theoretical evidence on the benefits of using multiple
attributes (see Fig 2). This motivates CAP: A meta approach that utilizes the high-level attributes of individual
classes to personalize the optimization process. Importantly, CAP is particularly favorable to tail classes which
contain too few examples to optimize individually.
2. CAP improves existing approaches (Sec 4). By integrating CAP within existing label-imbalanced training methods, CAP not only improves their performance but also
increases their stability, notably, AutoBalance (Li et al.
2021) and logit-adjustment loss (Menon et al. 2020).

