The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Wasserstein Differential Privacy
Chengyi Yang1 , Jiayin Qi2* , Aimin Zhou1
1

Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, School of Computer Science and Technology, and Key Laboratory of MEA (Ministry
of Education), East China Normal University
2
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University
52265901027@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, qijiayin@139.com, amzhou@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

probability, it is believed that (", )-DP cannot strictly handle composition problems (Mironov 2017; Dong, Roth, and
Su 2022). To address the above issues, further researches
have been considering the specific data distribution, which
can be divided into two main directions: the distribution of
privacy loss and the distribution of unique difference. For
example, concentrated differential privacy (CDP) (Dwork
and Rothblum 2016), zero-concentrated differential privacy
(zCDP) (Bun and Steinke 2016), and truncated concentrated
differential privacy (tCDP) (Bun et al. 2018) all assume that
the mean of privacy loss follows subgaussian distribution.
While Bayesian differential privacy (BDP) (Triastcyn and
Faltings 2020) considers the distribution of the only different data entry x0 . Nevertheless, they are all defined by the
upper bound of divergence, which implies that their privacy
budgets are overly pessimistic (Triastcyn and Faltings 2020).
In this paper, we introduce a variant of differential privacy from another perspective. We define the privacy budget through the upper bound of the Wasserstein distance
between adjacent distributions, which is called Wasserstein differential privacy (WDP). From a semantic perspective, WDP also follows the concept of indistinguishability (Dwork et al. 2006b) in differential privacy. Specifically,
for all possible adjacent databases D and D0 , WDP reflects
the maximum variation of optimal transport (OT) cost between the distributions queried by an adversary before and
after any data entry change in the database.
Intuitively speaking, the advantages of WDP can be divided into at least two aspects. (1) WDP focuses on individuals within the distribution, rather than focusing on the
entire distribution like divergence, which is consistent with
the original intention of differential privacy to protect individual private information from leakage. (2) More importantly, WDP satisfies all the conditions to become a metric,
including non-negativity, symmetry and triangle inequality
(see Proposition 1-3), which is not fully possessed by privacy loss under the definition of divergence, as divergence
itself does not satisfy symmetry and triangle inequality (see
Proposition 11 in the appendix of Mironov (2017)).
The combination of DP and OT has been taken into
consideration in several existing works. Their contributions are essentially to provide privacy guarantees for computing Wasserstein distance between data domains (Tien,
Habrard, and Sebban 2019), distributions (Rakotomamonjy

Differential privacy (DP) has achieved remarkable results in
the field of privacy-preserving machine learning. However,
existing DP frameworks do not satisfy all the conditions for
becoming metrics, which prevents them from deriving better
basic private properties and leads to exaggerated values on
privacy budgets. We propose Wasserstein differential privacy
(WDP), an alternative DP framework to measure the risk of
privacy leakage, which satisfies the properties of symmetry
and triangle inequality. We show and prove that WDP has 13
excellent properties, which can be theoretical supports for the
better performance of WDP than other DP frameworks. In addition, we derive a general privacy accounting method called
Wasserstein accountant, which enables WDP to be applied in
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) scenarios containing subsampling. Experiments on basic mechanisms, compositions
and deep learning show that the privacy budgets obtained
by Wasserstein accountant are relatively stable and less influenced by order. Moreover, the overestimation on privacy
budgets can be effectively alleviated. The code is available at
https://github.com/Hifipsysta/WDP.

Introduction

Differential privacy (Dwork et al. 2006b) is a mathematically rigorous definition of privacy, providing quantifiable
descriptions of the risk on leaking sensitive information. In
the early stage, researches on differential privacy mainly
focused on the issue of statistical queries (SQ) (McSherry
2009; Kasiviswanathan et al. 2011). With the risk of privacy
leakage being warned in machine learning (Wang, Si, and
Wu 2015; Shokri et al. 2017; Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019), differential privacy has been gradually applied for privacy protection in deep learning (Shokri and Shmatikov 2015; Abadi
et al. 2016; Phan et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2022).
However, these techniques are always constructed on the
postulation of standard DP (Dwork et al. 2006b), which only
provides the worst-case scenario, and tends to overestimate
privacy budgets under the measure of maximum divergence
(Triastcyn and Faltings 2020). Although the most commonly
applied approximate differential privacy (", -DP) (Dwork
et al. 2006a) ignores extreme situations with small probabilities by introducing a relaxation term called failure
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16299

