The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Efficient Verification of Quantized Neural Networks
Pei Huang1 , Haoze Wu1 , Yuting Yang2 , Ieva Daukantas3 ,
Min Wu1 , Yedi Zhang4 , Clark Barrett1 *
2

1
Stanford University, Stanford, USA
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore
{huangpei,haozewu,minwu}@stanford.edu, yangyuting@ict.ac.cn
daukantas@itu.dk, yd.zhang@nus.edu.sg, barrett@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

For instance, 8-bit quantized DNNs have been applied in
Tesla’s Full Self-Driving Chip (previously Autopilot Hardware 3.0) (Henzinger, Lechner, and Žikelić 2021; Tes FSD
Chip-Tesla). With the increasing popularization and use of
QNNs, it is urgent to develop efficient and effective verification techniques for them.
In this work, we propose an efficient verification framework for QNNs with three components, offering different
trade-offs between scalability and precision. The baseline
approach models neural networks and formal properties as
integer linear programming (ILP) problems. ILP is an exact method in the sense that it guarantees both soundness
(if it reports the system is safe, then it really is safe) and
completeness (if the system really is safe, then it will report that it is safe). Unlike previous work, which focuses
on simple models of quantized neural networks, ours is the
first formal approach that precisely captures the quantization scheme used in popular deep learning frameworks such
as PyTorch/TensorFlow.
Our ILP approach is precise but may encounter scalability issues on larger QNNs. To address this, we also propose
a gradient-based method for finding counterexamples. We
use a rewriting trick for the non-differentiable round operation, which enables the backward process to cross through
the round operation and gives us the desired gradient information. If this method finds a counterexample, then we
immediately know that the property does not hold, without
having to invoke the ILP solver.
The third component of the framework lies in between the
first two. It relies on abstract interpretation-based reasoning
to do an incomplete but formal analysis. We extend existing abstract interpretation-based interval analysis methods
to support the semantics of “round” and “clip” operations in
quantized neural networks. In particular, for the clip operation, we reduce it to a gadget built from two ReLU units.
If the abstract interpretation approach succeeds, we know
the property holds. Otherwise, the result of the analysis can
be used to reduce the runtime of the ILP-based complete
method. The overall framework is depicted in Fig. 1.
Based on our framework, we realize an Efficient QNN
Verification system named EQV. We use EQV to verify
the robustness of QNNs against bounded input perturbations. Our experimental results show that EQV can scale to
networks that are more than twice as large as the largest

Quantization replaces floating point arithmetic with integer
arithmetic in deep neural network models, providing more
efficient on-device inference with less power and memory.
In this work, we propose a framework for formally verifying
properties of quantized neural networks. Our baseline technique is based on integer linear programming which guarantees both soundness and completeness. We then show how efficiency can be improved by utilizing gradient-based heuristic
search methods and also bound-propagation techniques. We
evaluate our approach on perception networks quantized with
PyTorch. Our results show that we can verify quantized networks with better scalability and efficiency than the previous
state of the art.

Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) (Goodfellow,
Bengio, and Courville 2016) have demonstrated tremendous
capabilities across a wide range of tasks (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Devlin et al. 2019; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021).
However, DNNs have also shown various security and safety
issues, e.g., vulnerability to input perturbations (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Huang et al. 2022b,a; Yang
et al. 2023). Such issues must be addressed before DNNs
can be used in safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous
driving (Xu et al. 2017) and medical diagnostics (Ciresan
et al. 2012). Formal verification is an established technique
which applies mathematical reasoning to ensure the correct
behavior of safety-critical systems, and several approaches
for applying formal methods to DNNs have been investigated (Huang et al. 2017; Lechner et al. 2022).
Our focus is the verification of quantized neural networks
(QNNs). Quantization replaces inputs and parameters represented as 32/64-bit floating point numbers with a lower bitwidth fixed point (e.g., 8-bits) representation (Jacob et al.
2018; Han, Mao, and Dally 2016). QNNs can greatly reduce both memory requirements and computational costs
while maintaining competitive accuracy. As a result, they are
increasingly being used in embedded applications, including safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21152

