The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SphereDiffusion: Spherical Geometry-Aware Distortion Resilient Diffusion Model
Tao Wu 1 * , Xuewei Li 1 * , Zhongang Qi 2† , Di Hu3 , Xintao Wang2 , Ying Shan2 , Xi Li 1,4†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Zhejiang – Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab, Hangzhou
taowucs@zju.edu.cn, xueweili@zju.edu.cn, zhongangqi@tencent.com, dihu@ruc.edu.cn, xintaowang@tencent.com,
yingsshan@tencent.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
have

Controllable spherical panoramic image generation holds
substantial applicative potential across a variety of domains.
However, it remains a challenging task due to the inherent
spherical distortion and geometry characteristics, resulting in
low-quality content generation. In this paper, we introduce a
novel framework of SphereDiffusion to address these unique
challenges, for better generating high-quality and precisely
controllable spherical panoramic images. For the spherical
distortion characteristic, we embed the semantics of the distorted object with text encoding, then explicitly construct
the relationship with text-object correspondence to better use
the pre-trained knowledge of the planar images. Meanwhile,
we employ a deformable technique to mitigate the semantic deviation in latent space caused by spherical distortion.
For the spherical geometry characteristic, in virtue of spherical rotation invariance, we improve the data diversity and
optimization objectives in the training process, enabling the
model to better learn the spherical geometry characteristic.
Furthermore, we enhance the denoising process of the diffusion model, enabling it to effectively use the learned geometric characteristic to ensure the boundary continuity of the generated images. With these specific techniques, experiments on
Structured3D dataset show that SphereDiffusion significantly
improves the quality of controllable spherical image generation and relatively reduces around 35% FID on average.

Spherical Distortion

have

Spherical Geometry

Spherical Panoramic image

Unable to use pre-trained
text-object knowledge.

Semantic deviation of the
extracted latent features

Unable to learn spherical
geometry when training.

Diffusion Model

Unable to use spherical
geometry when generation.

a living room
with light blue
cabinets and
gray walls

A NFOV Segmentation Map

light blue walls and
gray cabinets
Prompt-Image Mismatch

Boundary Discontinuity

Figure 1: The characteristics of spherical panoramic images
and the impact of these characteristics on existing controllable generation methods.

In contrast, extensive works (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala
2023; Mou et al. 2023) have greatly succeeded in controllable high-quality planar image generation. Most of the existing works resort to fine-tuning the pre-trained large-scale
diffusion models to adapt to different application scenarios. However, such a paradigm falls short of expectations
for generating the spherical panoramic images, since simply
fine-tuning cannot capture the unique characteristics of the
spherical panoramic images.
Two characteristics of spherical panoramic images are essentially different from the planar images: spherical distortion and spherical geometry. As shown in Figure 1, on the
one hand, spherical distortion mainly refers to the deformation of objects. Existing controllable generation models are
primarily designed and pre-trained based on planar images.
Thus, the text-object correspondence knowledge stored in
these pre-trained weights cannot be effectively utilized for
spherical panoramic images due to the significant deformation of distorted objects. At the same time, spherical distortion makes it difficult to extract effective features of spherical panoramic images, resulting in semantic deviation when

Introduction
Spherical panoramic images, also known as 360◦ panoramic
images or omnidirectional panoramic images, are used in
various domains such as autonomous driving (de La Garanderie, Abarghouei, and Breckon 2018; Ma et al. 2021), virtual reality (Xu, Zhang, and Gao 2021; Ai et al. 2022),
etc. Numerous studies (Yan et al. 2022; Hara, Mukuta, and
Harada 2021; Akimoto, Matsuo, and Aoki 2022) have been
proposed for the synthesis of spherical panoramic images,
with a primary focus on reconstructing scenes from narrow
field of view (NFOV) images. However, these generation
methods often produce images of inferior quality and lack
controllability, which are crucial in real applications.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6126

