The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine-Grained Distillation for Long Document Retrieval
Yucheng Zhou1 * , Tao Shen2 , Xiubo Geng3 , Chongyang Tao3 , Jianbing Shen1 ,
Guodong Long2 , Can Xu3 , Daxin Jiang3†
1
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
AAII, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
3
Microsoft Corporation
yucheng.zhou@connect.um.edu.mo, {tao.shen, guodong.long}@uts.edu.au,
{xigeng,chongyang.tao,can.xu,djiang}@microsoft.com, jianbingshen@um.edu.mo
2

Document: … The European Renaissance was a time of massive economic and
cultural growth following the stagnation of the Middle Ages. Beginning in Italy in the
14th century, the movement spread to all parts of the continent during the next 300
years. The outstanding cultural and artistic heritage of the Renaissance can still be seen
today in many of the great cities of the period, including Florence and Venice in Italy,
Bruges in Belgium and Toledo in Spain. It All Began in Florence Florence is the city
where the Renaissance began, and where it reached its peak in the 15th and 16th
centuries under the patronage of the powerful Medici family. Some of the greatest
names in Renaissance art are associated with the city, including Leonardo da Vinci,
Botticelli and Michelangelo. The poet Dante, the political theorist Machiavelli and the
scientist Galileo also lived and worked in Florence. Buildings like the Pitti Palace,
Uffizi Gallery and Florence Cathedral are among the masterpieces of Renaissance
architecture. The Legacy of Venice To present-day tourists, Venice is renowned for its
picturesque canals and its lack of motorized vehicles …

Abstract
Long document retrieval aims to fetch query-relevant documents from a large-scale collection, where knowledge distillation has become de facto to improve a retriever by mimicking a heterogeneous yet powerful cross-encoder. However,
in contrast to passages or sentences, retrieval on long documents suffers from the scope hypothesis that a long document
may cover multiple topics. This maximizes their structure heterogeneity and poses a granular-mismatch issue, leading to
an inferior distillation efficacy. In this work, we propose a
new learning framework, fine-grained distillation (FGD), for
long-document retrievers. While preserving the conventional
dense retrieval paradigm, it first produces global-consistent
representations crossing different fine granularity and then
applies multi-granular aligned distillation merely during training. In experiments, we evaluate our framework on two longdocument retrieval benchmarks, which show state-of-the-art
performance.

Query1: 3 people who were important of the european renaissance time period
Query2: what are the italian renaissance cities

Figure 1: A case for scope hypothesis in long document. The
document contains multiple topics, and the relevance to a
query may vary across different parts of the document.

Introduction
Large-scale retrieval, as a fundamental task in information
retrieval (IR), has attracted increased interest from industry
and academia in the last decades, as it plays an indispensable
role in a wide range of real-world applications, such as web
engines (Fan et al. 2022), question answering (Karpukhin
et al. 2020) and dialogue systems (Yu et al. 2021). Given a
text query, it aims to fetch top-relevant documents1 from a
huge collection (Cai et al. 2021). As the collection usually
scales up to millions or billions, a retrieval method must
satisfy the efficiency or latency requirement of online deployment to calculate the relevance score between a query and
every document.
* Work is done during internship at Microsoft. This work was
supported in part by FDCT grants 0154/2022/A3, 0102/2023/RIA2
and SKLIOTSC(UM)-2021-2023, MYRG-CRG2022-00013IOTSC-ICI grant and SRG2022-00023-IOTSC grant.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Each entry of the collection can be any text granularity (e.g.,
sentence, passage, document) but we take ‘document’ to denote
‘entry of collection’ in this paper for clear writing.

19732

Recently, pre-trained language models (PLMs), e.g., BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), DeBERTa
(He et al. 2021), have dominated the field of IR in deep representation learning literature, as they are readily adapted to
capture token-wise correlations and produce generic representations by fine-tuning. In the common practice of PLMs,
a pair of text pieces (i.e., a query and every document in our
task) should be concatenated to pass into the models (Devlin
et al. 2019) for fine-grained relevance measurement – known
as cross-encoder that performs very competitively – however
cannot meet the efficiency requirement due to combinatorial
explosion in terms of online PLM inference (Zhang et al.
2022a; Ren et al. 2021). In contrast, a bi-encoder (a.k.a. dualencoder or two-tower) leverages the PLMs to embed queries
and documents individually into a single vector in the same
dense semantic space, and then query-document relevance
can be derived by a lightweight metric (e.g., dot-product)
(Reimers and Gurevych 2019). The bi-encoder enables offline document embeddings and satisfies the online efficiency
requirement, so it has become the de facto model choice for
PLM-based large-scale retrievers. However, the bi-encoder
is vulnerable to information bottleneck by the single dense
vector and thus lags behind the cross-encoder considerably
(Wang et al. 2022; Gao and Callan 2022).
To narrow the performance gap against cross-encoder, a

