The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A General Model for Aggregating Annotations AcrossSimple, Complex, and
Multi-object Annotation Tasks (Abstract Reprint)
Alexander Braylan1 , Madalyn Marabella1 , Omar Alonso2 , Matthew Lease3
1

Dept. of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin
2
Amazon
3
School of Information, University of Texas at Austin

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Braylan, Marabella, Alonso, and Lease (2023).

contribute a new general semisupervised learning method
for complex label aggregation that outperforms prior work.

Abstract

References

Human annotations are vital to supervised learning, yet annotators often disagree on the correct label, especially as annotation tasks increase in complexity. A common strategy
to improve label quality is to ask multiple annotators to label the same item and then aggregate their labels. To date,
many aggregation models have been proposed for simple
categorical or numerical annotation tasks, but far less work
has considered more complex annotation tasks, such as those
involving open-ended, multivariate, or structured responses.
Similarly, while a variety of bespoke models have been proposed for specific tasks, our work is the first we are aware
of to introduce aggregation methods that generalize across
many, diverse complex tasks, including sequence labeling,
translation, syntactic parsing, ranking, bounding boxes, and
keypoints. This generality is achieved by applying readily
available task-specific distance functions, then devising a
task-agnostic method to model these distances between labels, rather than the labels themselves.
This article presents a unified treatment of our prior work
on complex annotation modeling and extends that work with
investigation of three new research questions. First, how do
complex annotation task and dataset properties impact aggregation accuracy? Second, how should a task owner navigate the many modeling choices in order to maximize aggregation accuracy? Finally, what tests and diagnoses can
verify that aggregation models are specified correctly for the
given data? To understand how various factors impact accuracy and to inform model selection, we conduct large-scale
simulation studies and broad experiments on real, complex
datasets. Regarding testing, we introduce the concept of unit
tests for aggregation models and present a suite of such tests
to ensure that a given model is not mis-specified and exhibits
expected behavior.
Beyond investigating these research questions above, we
discuss the foundational concept and nature of annotation
complexity, present a new aggregation model as a conceptual bridge between traditional models and our own, and

Braylan, A.; Marabella, M.; Alonso, O.; and Lease, M. 2023.
A General Model for Aggregating Annotations Across Simple, Complex, and Multi-Object Annotation Tasks. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 78: 901–973.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22693

