The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DePRL: Achieving Linear Convergence Speedup in Personalized Decentralized
Learning with Shared Representations
Guojun Xiong1 , Gang Yan2 , Shiqiang Wang3 , Jian Li1
1

Stony Brook University
Binghamton University
3
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
{guojun.xiong, jian.li.3}@stonybrook.edu, gyan2@binghamton.edu, wangshiq@us.ibm.com
2

Abstract
Decentralized learning has emerged as an alternative method
to the popular parameter-server framework which suffers from
high communication burden, single-point failure and scalability issues due to the need of a central server. However, most
existing works focus on a single shared model for all workers
regardless of the data heterogeneity problem, rendering the resulting model performing poorly on individual workers. In this
work, we propose a novel personalized decentralized learning
algorithm named DePRL via shared representations. Our algorithm relies on ideas from representation learning theory to
learn a low-dimensional global representation collaboratively
among all workers in a fully decentralized manner, and a userspecific low-dimensional local head leading to a personalized
solution for each worker. We show that DePRL achieves, for
the first time, a provable linear speedup for convergence with
general non-linear representations (i.e., the convergence rate is
improved linearly with respect to the number of workers). Experimental results support our theoretical findings showing the
superiority of our method in data heterogeneous environments.

Introduction
Fueled by the rise of machine learning applications in Internet of Things, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017;
Imteaj et al. 2022) has become an emerging paradigm that
allows a large number of workers to produce a global model
without sharing local data. The task of coordinating between
workers is fulfilled by a central server that aggregates models
received from workers at each round and broadcasts updated
models to them. However, this parameter-server (PS) based
scheme has a major drawback for the need of a central server
(Kairouz et al. 2019). In practice, the communication occurs
between the server and workers leads to a quite large communication burden for the server (Lian et al. 2017), and the
server could face system failure or attacks, which may leak
users’ privacy or jeopardize the training process.
With this regard, consensus-based decentralized learning
has recently emerged as a promising method, where each
worker maintains a local copy of the model and embraces
peer-to-peer communication for faster convergence (Lian
et al. 2017, 2018). In decentralized learning, workers follow
a communication graph to reach a so-called consensus model.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16103

However, like conventional PS framework, one of the most
important challenges in decentralized learning is the issue of
data heterogeneity, where the data distribution among workers may vary to a large extent. As a result, if all workers learn
a single shared model with parameter w, the resulting model
could perform poorly on many of individual workers. To this
end, personalized decentralized learning (Vanhaesebrouck,
Bellet, and Tommasi 2017; Dai et al. 2022) is important
for achieving personalized models for each worker i with
parameter wi instead of using a single shared model.
In this paper, we take a further step towards personalized
decentralized learning. In particular, we take advantage of
common representation among workers. This is inspired by
observations in centralized learning, which suggest that heterogeneous data distributed across tasks (e.g., image classification) may share a common (low-dimensional) representation despite having different labels (Bengio, Courville, and
Vincent 2013; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). To our best
knowledge, Collins et al. (2021) is the first to leverage this
insight to design personalized PS based scheme, while we
generalize it to decentralized setting. Specifically, we consider the setting in which all workers’ model parameters share
a common map, coupled with a personalized map that fits
their local data. Formally, the parameter for worker i’s model
can be represented as wi = θ i ◦ ϕ , where ϕ : Rd → Rz is a
shared global representation1 which maps d-dimensional
data points to a lower space of size z, and θ i : Rz → Y is
the worker specific local head which maps from the lower
dimensional subspace to the space of labels. Typically z ≪ d
and thus given any fixed representation ϕ , the worker specific
heads θ i are easy to optimize locally. Though Collins et al.
(2021) provided a rigorous analysis with linear global representation, the following important questions remain open:
Does there exist a personalized, fully decentralized
algorithm that can solve the optimization problem
PN
minϕ ∈Φ N1 i=1 minθ i ∈Θ Fi (θ i ◦ϕ ), where Fi (·) is the loss
function associated with worker i? Can we provide a convergence analysis for such a personalized, decentralized algo1
For abuse of notion, we use ϕ to denote both the global representation model and its associated parameter, and {θ i }N
i=1 to denote
both the local heads and its associated parameter. For simplicity, we
call ϕ the global representation and θ i the local head of worker i
in the rest of the paper. The “◦” symbol denotes the composition
relation between the parameters θ i and ϕ as in Collins et al. (2021).

