The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Elijah: Eliminating Backdoors Injected in Diffusion Models via Distribution Shift
Shengwei An1 , Sheng-Yen Chou2 , Kaiyuan Zhang1 , Qiuling Xu1 , Guanhong Tao1 , Guangyu Shen1 ,
Siyuan Cheng1 , Shiqing Ma3 , Pin-Yu Chen4 , Tsung-Yi Ho2 , Xiangyu Zhang1
1

Purdue University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
University of Massachusetts Amherst
4
IBM Research

2

Abstract

classifier is poisoned, during inference, whenever an input
contains the trigger, the model will output the target label.
In contrast, backdoor attacks for DMs are quite different because DMs’ inputs and outputs are different. Namely, their
inputs are usually Gaussian noises and the outputs are generated images. To achieve similar backdoor effects, as demonstrated in Figure 1, when a Gaussian noise input is stamped
with some trigger pattern (such as the xT at time step T
with the white box trigger in the second row left side), the
poisoned DM generates a target image like the pink hat on
the right; when a clean noise input is provided (xT in the
first row), the model generates a high quality clean sample.
Such attacks could have catastrophic consequences. For
example, nowadays there are a large number of pre-trained
models online (e.g., Hugging Face), including DMs, and
fine-tuning based on them can save resources and enhance
performance (Hendrycks, Lee, and Mazeika 2019; De et al.
2022). Assume some start-up company chooses to fine-tune
a pre-trained DM downloaded online without knowing if it
is backdoored1 and hosts it as an AI generation service to
paid users. If the target image injected is inappropriate or illegal, the attacker could substantially damage the company’s
business, or even cause prosecution, by inducing the offensive image (Chou, Chen, and Ho 2023a,b; Rawat, Levacher,
and Sinn 2021; Zhai et al. 2023; Struppek, Hintersdorf, and
Kersting 2023; Vice et al. 2023; Chen, Fu, and Lyu 2023).
In another example, generative models are often used to represent data distributions while protecting privacy (Liu et al.
2019b). These models can have many downstream applications. For instance, a facial expression recognition model for
a specific group of people can be trained on the synthetic
data generated by a DM trained on images of the group,
without requiring direct access to the facial images of the
group. Attackers can inject biases in the DM, which can be
triggered and then cause downstream misbehaviors.
Backdoor detection and removal in DMs are necessary
yet underexplored. Traditional defenses on classifiers heavily rely on label information (Li et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2019a,
2022; Tao et al. 2022a). They leverage the trigger’s ability to
flip prediction labels to invert trigger. Some also uses ASR
to determine if a model is backdoored. However, DMs don’t

Diffusion models (DM) have become state-of-the-art generative models because of their capability of generating
high-quality images from noises without adversarial training.
However, they are vulnerable to backdoor attacks as reported
by recent studies. When a data input (e.g., some Gaussian
noise) is stamped with a trigger (e.g., a white patch), the
backdoored model always generates the target image (e.g.,
an improper photo). However, effective defense strategies to
mitigate backdoors from DMs are underexplored. To bridge
this gap, we propose the first backdoor detection and removal framework for DMs. We evaluate our framework E LI JAH on over hundreds of DMs of 3 types including DDPM,
NCSN and LDM, with 13 samplers against 3 existing backdoor attacks. Extensive experiments show that our approach
can have close to 100% detection accuracy and reduce the
backdoor effects to close to zero without significantly sacrificing the model utility.

1

Introduction

Generative AIs become increasingly popular due to their
applications in different synthesis or editing tasks (Couairon et al. 2023; Meng et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022).
Among the different types of generative AI models, Diffusion Models (DM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song and
Ermon 2019; Song et al. 2021; Karras et al. 2022) are the
recent driving force because of their superior ability to produce high-quality and diverse samples in many domains (Xu
et al. 2022; Jeong et al. 2021; Popov et al. 2021; Kim, Kim,
and Yoon 2022; Kong et al. 2021; Mei and Patel 2022;
Ho et al. 2022), and their more stable training than the adversarial training in traditional Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Miyato et al. 2018).
However, recent studies show that they are vulnerable to
backdoor attacks (Chou, Chen, and Ho 2023a; Chen, Song,
and Li 2023; Chou, Chen, and Ho 2023b). In traditional
backdoor attacks for discriminative models such as classifiers, during training, attackers poison the training data (e.g.,
adding a trigger to the data and labeling them as the target
class). At the same time, attackers ensure the model’s benign
utility (e.g., classification accuracy) remains high. After the

1
Naive fine-tuning cannot remove the backdoor as shown by
our experiments in Section 4.4.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10847

