The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Interactive Visual Task Learning for Robots
Weiwei Gu, Anant Sah, Nakul Gopalan
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University
{weiweigu, asah4, ng}@asu.edu

Abstract

large leap for robotics applications in everyday settings. In
this work we aim to take a step in the direction of generalizable interactive learning as demonstrated Fig. 1.
Previously, large image and language models have been
extended to robotics to manipulate novel objects, and create visual scenes (Shridhar, Manuelli, and Fox 2021; Brohan
et al. 2023a). These methods recognize novel objects by using their underlying large language and visual models to extract task-relevant knowledge. However, they are not capable
of learning to create a novel visual scene from in-situ interactions with a human user. There is also significant work in
few-shot learning of visual concepts in computer vision (Mei
et al. 2022; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Vinyals et al.
2017; Sung et al. 2018; Wang, Ye, and Gupta 2018; Tian
et al. 2020), albeit without extensions to robotics domains.
These approaches focus on learning novel concepts for image classification, but ignore the fact that the novel concepts
also bring new information to update our understanding of
concepts already known to the robot. The reverse path of
knowledge propagation, that is, from novel concepts to previously known concepts is equivalently important in performing tasks in the real-life scenarios, especially when the
agent has little knowledge of the world and needs to continually add information to known concepts.
In this work, we propose a novel framework, Hi-Viscont,
that enables robots to learn visual tasks and visual concepts
from natural interactions with a human user. We learn the
task type and concepts from users one-shot, and then generalize to novel task variants within the task type zero-shot. We
do this by connecting our insights on one-shot visual concept
learning and the use of scene graphs. The robot learns the
structure of a visual task by converting linguistic interactions
with a human user into a scene graph with language annotations. Moreover, Hi-Viscont updates parental concepts of the
novel concept being taught. Such updates allow us to generalize the use of the novel concepts in to solve novel tasks.
The contribution of this work is three-fold:
1. We present concept learning results on VQA tasks that
are comparable to the state-of-the-art FALCON model.
More specifically, Hi-Viscont improves on FALCON on
all non-leaf concepts across all domains with significance.
2. We enable the robot agent to learn a visual task from
in-situ interactions with a scene graph, allowing zero-

We present a framework for robots to learn novel visual concepts and tasks via in-situ linguistic interactions with human
users. Previous approaches have either used large pre-trained
visual models to infer novel objects zero-shot, or added novel
concepts along with their attributes and representations to a
concept hierarchy. We extend the approaches that focus on
learning visual concept hierarchies by enabling them to learn
novel concepts and solve unseen robotics tasks with them.
To enable a visual concept learner to solve robotics tasks
one-shot, we developed two distinct techniques. Firstly, we
propose a novel approach, Hi-Viscont(HIerarchical VISual
CONcept learner for Task), which augments information of
a novel concept to its parent nodes within a concept hierarchy. This information propagation allows all concepts in a
hierarchy to update as novel concepts are taught in a continual learning setting. Secondly, we represent a visual task as
a scene graph with language annotations, allowing us to create novel permutations of a demonstrated task zero-shot insitu. We present two sets of results. Firstly, we compare HiViscont with the baseline model (FALCON) on visual question answering(VQA) in three domains. While being comparable to the baseline model on leaf level concepts, Hi-Viscont
achieves an improvement of over 9% on non-leaf concepts on
average. Secondly, we conduct a human-subjects experiment
where users teach our robot visual tasks in-situ. We compare our model’s performance against the baseline FALCON
model. Our framework achieves 33% improvements in success rate metric, and 19% improvements in the object level
accuracy compared to the baseline model. With both of these
results we demonstrate the ability of our model to learn tasks
and concepts in a continual learning setting on the robot.

Introduction
Robots in a household will encounter novel objects and tasks
all the time. For example, a robot might need to use a novel
vegetable peeler to peel potatoes even though it has never
seen, let alone used such a peeler before. Our work focuses on teaching robots novel concepts and tasks one-shot
via human-robot interactions, which include demonstrations
and linguistic explanations. We then want the robot to generalize to a similar but unseen visual task. A robotic system
that can learn generalizable tasks and concepts from few natural interactions from a human-teacher would represent a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10297

