The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RadOcc: Learning Cross-Modality Occupancy Knowledge through
Rendering Assisted Distillation
Haiming Zhang1,2 * , Xu Yan3† , Dongfeng Bai3 , Jiantao Gao3 , Pan Wang3 ,
Bingbing Liu3 , Shuguang Cui2,1 , Zhen Li2,1†
1

FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{haimingzhang@link., xuyan1@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
3D occupancy prediction is an emerging task that aims to
estimate the occupancy states and semantics of 3D scenes
using multi-view images. However, image-based scene perception encounters significant challenges in achieving accurate prediction due to the absence of geometric priors. In
this paper, we address this issue by exploring cross-modal
knowledge distillation in this task, i.e., we leverage a stronger
multi-modal model to guide the visual model during training. In practice, we observe that directly applying features
or logits alignment, proposed and widely used in bird’s-eyeview (BEV) perception, does not yield satisfactory results. To
overcome this problem, we introduce RadOcc, a Rendering
assisted distillation paradigm for 3D Occupancy prediction.
By employing differentiable volume rendering, we generate
depth and semantic maps in perspective views and propose
two novel consistency criteria between the rendered outputs
of teacher and student models. Specifically, the depth consistency loss aligns the termination distributions of the rendered rays, while the semantic consistency loss mimics the
intra-segment similarity guided by vision foundation models (VLMs). Experimental results on the nuScenes dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method in improving various 3D occupancy prediction approaches, e.g.,
our proposed methodology enhances our baseline by 2.2% in
the metric of mIoU and achieves 50% in Occ3D benchmark.

Multi-modal
Teacher

Camera-based
Student

Multi-modal
Teacher

Camera-based
Student

voxel feature

voxel feature

voxel features
or

or

BEV features
logits

logits

(a) Voxel / BEV / logits Distillation

Predict and Volume Rendering
depths

depths

semantics

semantics

(b) Rendering Assisted Distillation

Figure 1: Rendering Assisted Distillation. (a) Existing methods conduct alignment on features or logits. (b) Our proposed RadOcc method constrains the rendered depth maps
and semantics simultaneously.

In the realm of 3D occupancy prediction, remarkable advancements have been achieved thus far. These advancements have been made possible by adopting a pipeline inspired by Bird’s Eye View (BEV) perception, which utilizes
either forward projection (Huang et al. 2021) or backward
projection (Li et al. 2022b) techniques for view transformation. This process generates 3D volume features that capture the spatial information of the scene, which are then fed
into the prediction head for occupancy predictions. However, relying solely on camera modality poses challenges
in accurate prediction due to the lack of geometric perception. To overcome this bottleneck, two mainstream solutions
have emerged in the field of BEV perception: 1) integrating
geometric-aware LiDAR input and fusing the complementary information of the two modalities (Liu et al. 2023), and
2) conducting knowledge distillation to transfer the complementary knowledge from other modalities to a singlemodality model (Zhou et al. 2023a). As the first solution
introduces additional network designs and computational
overhead, recent works have increasingly focused on the
second solution, aiming to develop stronger single-modal

Introduction
3D occupancy prediction (3D-OP) is a crucial task within
the field of 3D scene understanding, which has garnered
considerable attention, particularly in the field of autonomous driving (Wang et al. 2023b; Tong et al. 2023; Tian
et al. 2023). In contrast to other 3D perception tasks, such
as object detection using bounding box representations, 3DOP involves the simultaneous estimation of both the occupancy state and semantics in the 3D space using multi-view
images (Tian et al. 2023). This is achieved by leveraging
geometry-aware cubes to represent a wide range of objects
and background shapes.
* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
†

Corresponding authors: Xu Yan and Zhen Li.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7060

