The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Suppressing Uncertainty in Gaze Estimation
Shijing Wang, Yaping Huang*
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
{shijingwang, yphuang}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Uncertainty in gaze estimation manifests in two aspects: 1)
low-quality images caused by occlusion, blurriness, inconsistent eye movements, or even non-face images; 2) incorrect labels resulting from the misalignment between the labeled and actual gaze points during the annotation process.
Allowing these uncertainties to participate in training hinders
the improvement of gaze estimation. To tackle these challenges, in this paper, we propose an effective solution, named
Suppressing Uncertainty in Gaze Estimation (SUGE), which
introduces a novel triplet-label consistency measurement to
estimate and reduce the uncertainties. Specifically, for each
training sample, we propose to estimate a novel “neighboring
label” calculated by a linearly weighted projection from the
neighbors to capture the similarity relationship between image features and their corresponding labels, which can be incorporated with the predicted pseudo label and ground-truth
label for uncertainty estimation. By modeling such tripletlabel consistency, we can measure the qualities of both images and labels, and further largely reduce the negative effects
of unqualified images and wrong labels through our designed
sample weighting and label correction strategies. Experimental results on the gaze estimation benchmarks indicate that
our proposed SUGE achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of uncertainties in gaze estimation using the EyeDiap dataset as an example. The upper half of the
figure reflects unqualified images, where the images in right
side are extremely difficult for machines and even human.
These images are better to be suppressed in training. The
lower half of the figure reflects wrongly annotated labels,
where the left side represents the common data annotation
process. Due to the challenge of achieving perfect alignment
between the actual gaze points and the given gaze points,
inaccurate and incorrect labels exist in the datasets, which
should be rectified.

Introduction

distinctive gaze features. However, the success of deep models heavily relies on sufficient amount of data with accurate ground truth labels. Unfortunately, it is very challenging for humans to provide consistent and precise annotations for gaze estimation task, especially in the complex natural scenes. Common gaze estimation datasets (Funes Mora,
Monay, and Odobez 2014) (Zhang et al. 2017b) (Kellnhofer
et al. 2019) (Zhang et al. 2020b) usually obtain annotations
by requiring subjects to fixate on given points during data
collection. But this annotation strategy is based on the assumption of the perfect alignment between the actual gaze
points and the provided points, which is practically impossible to achieve.
As shown in Fig. 1, many captured gaze images suffer
from serious quality degradation due to eyelid occlusion,
blurriness of the eyes, inconsistent eye movements, which
may lead to some unqualified eye images, or even background images are involved in the collecting process. On the
other hand, there are also a significant number of visibly in-

Gaze estimation is a crucial task in computer vision that
aims to accurately determine the direction of a person’s gaze
based on visual cues. In recent years, gaze estimation has
gained significant attention due to its wide-ranging applications in fields such as human-computer interaction (Majaranta and Bulling 2014) (Rahal and Fiedler 2019), virtual reality (Patney et al. 2016) (Kim et al. 2019), and assistive technology (Jiang and Zhao 2017) (Liu, Li, and Yi
2016) (Dias et al. 2020). Benefiting from the deep learning techniques and large-scale training data, appearancebased gaze estimation has made rapid progress and achieved
promising results.
Recent works are mainly dedicated to developing advanced networks (Zhang et al. 2017a) (Kellnhofer et al.
2019) (Cheng et al. 2020) (Cheng and Lu 2022) to extract
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5581

