The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Transferable Adversarial Attacks with Centralized Perturbation
Shangbo Wu1 , Yu-an Tan1 , Yajie Wang1 , Ruinan Ma1 , Wencong Ma2 , Yuanzhang Li2 *
1

School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{shangbo.wu, tan2008, wangyajie19, ruinan, wencong.ma, popular}@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Adversarial transferability enables black-box attacks on unknown victim deep neural networks (DNNs), rendering attacks viable in real-world scenarios. Current transferable attacks create adversarial perturbation over the entire image,
resulting in excessive noise that overfit the source model.
Concentrating perturbation to dominant image regions that
are model-agnostic is crucial to improving adversarial efficacy. However, limiting perturbation to local regions in the
spatial domain proves inadequate in augmenting transferability. To this end, we propose a transferable adversarial attack
with fine-grained perturbation optimization in the frequency
domain, creating centralized perturbation. We devise a systematic pipeline to dynamically constrain perturbation optimization to dominant frequency coefficients. The constraint
is optimized in parallel at each iteration, ensuring the directional alignment of perturbation optimization with model
prediction. Our approach allows us to centralize perturbation towards sample-specific important frequency features,
which are shared by DNNs, effectively mitigating source
model overfitting. Experiments demonstrate that by dynamically centralizing perturbation on dominating frequency coefficients, crafted adversarial examples exhibit stronger transferability, and allowing them to bypass various defenses.

Figure 1: Adversarial examples crafted by vanilla MIFGSM (blue arrow, left sample) and MI-FGSM boosted by
our approach (pink arrow, right sample) on source model
ResNet50 with ε = 8/255 and T = 10. Perturbation normalized for visualization (bottom row).

Introduction
DNNs demonstrate outstanding performance across various real-world applications (He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021). However, DNNs remain susceptible to adversarial examples — malicious samples with carefully-crafted
imperceptible perturbation that disrupt DNN functionalities (Zhang et al. 2023). The transferability of adversarial
examples (Liu et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2019) allows for crossmodel black-box attacks on even unknown victim DNNs,
i.e., perturbation created on one model can fool another with
no modification, posing a practical real-world threat.
Existing transferable adversarial attacks are gradientbased iterative attacks, stemming from FGSM (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) and PGD (Madry et al. 2018). By
greedily accumulating gradient information obtained from
the white-box source model, these attacks are able to generate transferable adversarial perturbation. However, as at-

tacks try to search the entirety of the input space, the perturbation created tend to overfit the source model, producing
excessive noise.
Yao et al. (2019) and Xu et al. (2019) explored perturbation constraints within the spatial domain, boasting an
improved efficiency for white-box attacks and effectiveness
against model interpretability methods. While these attempts
fall short for transfer-based black-box attacks, the idea of
concentrating perturbation is valuable.
Ehrlich and Davis (2019) first showed intriguing properties of the frequency features of images that can be exploited. Prior work attempts to craft low-frequency perturbation with a fixed frequency constraint, assuming that the
fixed low-frequency region reflect higher DNN sensitivity.
However, DNNs do not respond uniformly nor unchangeably to these regions. Sensitivity to frequency coefficients
varies across images, only with lower frequencies tending to
be more impactful. Our goal is to mitigate the effects of perturbation overfitting to the source model, to improve trans-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6109

