The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Competition among Pairwise Lottery Contests
Xiaotie Deng1 , Hangxin Gan2 , Ningyuan Li1 , Weian Li1 , Qi Qi3 *
1

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Mathematical Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
{xiaotie, liningyuan, weian li}@pku.edu.cn, hangxin.gan@mail.nankai.edu.cn, qi.qi@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

effort has a higher probability of winning than one who allocates lesser effort. In real-world scenarios, the lottery contest is highly applicable due to the stochastic factors that
may impact the outcome. More specifically, despite allocating greater effort towards a given issue, winning is not always certain due to the unpredictability of such factors.
Current research on pairwise and lottery contests tends to
center around studying the equilibrium behaviors of contestants or optimizing lottery functions to achieve certain objectives. However, little attention has been paid to investigating competing designers. According to a recent survey
on contest theory (Segev 2020), exploring the economy of
competitions among designers poses several challenges, particularly in analyzing their equilibrium behavior. In a single
contest or a fixed number of contests, the focus is primarily
on the strategic behavior of contestants. However, designers
also have strategic behavior that needs to be taken into account, including how contestants allocate their efforts and
how designers compete with one another.
In this paper, we concentrate on the pairwise lottery contests (PLC), where two contestants compete for a prize with
a winning probability determined by the lottery rule that is
based on their (weighted) effort. Designers are allowed to
hold one or several PLCs. Each designer’s goal is to maximize the total exerted effort of the participants in all her held
contests. Each contestant pursues maximizing the expected
prize from the contests she joins. There is a two-stage game
in our model: one is among contest designers, who decide
the number of held contests and design the configuration
(including prize, participants and biases) of held contests.
The other is among contestants who decide how to allocate
effort.

We investigate a two-stage competitive model involving multiple contests. In this model, each contest designer chooses
two participants from a pool of candidate contestants and determines the biases. Contestants strategically distribute their
efforts across various contests within their budget. We first
show the existence of a pure strategy Nash equilibrium (PNE)
for the contestants, and propose a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme to compute an approximate PNE. In the
scenario where designers simultaneously decide the participants and biases, the subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) may
not exist. Nonetheless, when designers’ decisions are made
in two substages, the existence of SPE is established. In the
scenario where designers can hold multiple contests, we show
that the SPE always exists under mild conditions and can be
computed efficiently.

Introduction
Contest theory is a commonly used and classic tool in the
field of economics to define competition. In fact, many competitive scenarios can be perceived as contests. These may
include political elections, sports events, promotional contests between firms aiming to increase their market share,
and so forth. When designing a contest, the objective is to
motivate the contestants to put forth greater effort in order
to achieve specific goals. This involves determining the prize
amount, the number of participants, and the winning rule.
Pairwise contests are a type of competition where the
number of participants is limited to two. Classic examples
of pairwise contests include the Colonel Blotto games (Borel
1921), which depict two players engaged in a battle where
the outcome determines the victor. Such contests have numerous real-world applications. For instance, the US presidential election is a well-known example where two candidates compete over all states. Similarly, in competitive sports
such as the NBA, two teams compete multiple times to determine the champion. The Internet price war (Li et al. 2019)
provides another example, where two e-commerce platforms
compete for regional markets by offering discount coupons.
The lottery contest is a form of imperfectly discriminatory competition, where the contestant who allocates more

Our Contributions
Our model introduces several innovative features that enrich
the current discourse in contest theory. Firstly, much of the
existing literature predominantly concentrates on single contest design or contestants’ equilibrium analysis within prescribed multi-contest frameworks. In contrast, we cast sight
into the case of multiple contests held by different strategic designers. Therefore, the designers’ strategic behaviors
are integrally addressed and analyzed. Secondly, traditional
models, exemplified by the Colonel Blotto games, typically
focus on pairwise contests involving just two contestants and

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9662

