The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Foreseeing Reconstruction Quality of
Gradient Inversion: An Optimization Perspective
Hyeong Gwon Hong1 , Yooshin Cho2 , Hanbyel Cho2 , Jaesung Ahn1 , Junmo Kim2
1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, South Korea
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
{honggudrnjs, choys95, tlrl4658, jaesung02, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Gradient inversion attacks can leak data privacy when clients
share weight updates with the server in federated learning (FL).
Existing studies mainly use L2 or cosine distance as the loss
function for gradient matching in the attack. Our empirical investigation shows that the vulnerability ranking varies with the
loss function used. Gradient norm, which is commonly used as
a vulnerability proxy for gradient inversion attack, cannot explain this as it remains constant regardless of the loss function
for gradient matching. In this paper, we propose a loss-aware
vulnerability proxy (LAVP) for the first time. LAVP refers to
either the maximum or minimum eigenvalue of the Hessian
with respect to gradient matching loss at ground truth. This
suggestion is based on our theoretical findings regarding the
local optimization of the gradient inversion in proximity to the
ground truth, which corresponds to the worst case attack scenario. We demonstrate the effectiveness of LAVP on various
architectures and datasets, showing its consistent superiority
over the gradient norm in capturing sample vulnerabilities.
The performance of each proxy is measured in terms of Spearman’s rank correlation with respect to several similarity scores.
This work will contribute to enhancing FL security against
any potential loss functions beyond L2 or cosine distance in
the future.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a collaborative machine learning
paradigm in which local clients act as trainers and a central server acts as a global aggregator (Konečnỳ et al. 2016;
McMahan et al. 2017). Each learning round in FL begins
with the server distributing global model weights to participating clients. Then, the clients compute weight updates for
the shared global model based on their own data and send
these updates back to the server. At the end of the round,
the server aggregates all the weight updates received from
participating clients for the update of global model.
An important aspect of FL is that participants cannot access the raw data of others, instead they communicate through
the weight updates. These weight updates were previously believed to reveal minimal information about the original data.
However, recent studies (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019; Zhu and
Blaschko 2020; Geiping et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2021; Jeon et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12473

2021; Kariyappa et al. 2023; Zhu, Yao, and Blaschko 2023)
have challenged this belief regarding data privacy in FL. They
have demonstrated the possibility of an honest-but-curious
server launching a gradient inversion attack, thereby stealthily
recovering clients’ data using weight gradients shared from
clients.
In these attack algorithms, a randomly initialized input
variable is optimized to match the current weight gradient
computed with itself with the gradient shared from a client.
As a loss function for gradient matching, the literature primarily employs either L2 distance (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019;
Yin et al. 2021) or cosine distance (Geiping et al. 2020; Jeon
et al. 2021; Zhu, Yao, and Blaschko 2023) as in Figure 1a.
However, the reconstruction behavior of gradient inversion
attack depends on the loss function for gradient matching.
In Figure 1b, the L2 distance achieves a more accurate reconstruction for Image C (blue) than for Image B (green),
while the cosine distance displays the opposite pattern. The
choice of loss function for gradient matching has a significant
impact on the vulnerability ranking.
The gradient norm, commonly used as a vulnerability
proxy in existing literature (Geiping et al. 2020; Yin et al.
2021), remains constant regardless of the loss function for
gradient matching. Thus, it cannot account for the loss function dependence of vulnerability rankings among samples as
described in 1c. To address this issue, there is a need for a
proxy that can provide a comprehensive explanation for the
dependence of vulnerability rankings on the loss function.
In this paper, we introduce a novel loss-aware vulnerability
proxy (LAVP) for the first time. In specific, LAVP refers to
either the maximum or minimum eigenvalue of the Hessian of
gradient matching loss at the ground truth. LAVP is founded
on two theorems we have developed concerning gradient
matching optimization. We prove that the gradient matching
loss drops more significantly when bi-Lipschitz constants of
the gradient function are smaller. For simplicity, we focus on
the local optimization near the ground truth, representing the
worst-case attack scenario. In this case, bi-Lipschitz constants
near ground truth correspond to the maximum and minimum
eigenvalues of the Hessian at the ground truth, which is how
LAVP is derived.
We empirically show the efficacy of LAVP by presenting
stronger correlation than the gradient norm, with the quality of reconstructed images from gradient inversion attacks.

