The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Invariant Inter-pixel Correlations for Superpixel Generation
Sen Xu1,2 , Shikui Wei* 1,2 , Tao Ruan3 , Lixin Liao4
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
Frontiers Science Center for Smart High-speed Railway System, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
DaoAI Robotics Inc.
{senxu1, shkwei, ruantao} @bjtu.edu.cn, liaolixin@163.com
2

decision
boundary

Abstract
Deep superpixel algorithms have made remarkable strides by
substituting hand-crafted features with learnable ones. Nevertheless, we observe that existing deep superpixel methods, serving as mid-level representation operations, remain
sensitive to the statistical properties (e.g., color distribution, high-level semantics) embedded within the training
dataset. Consequently, learnable features exhibit constrained
discriminative capability, resulting in unsatisfactory pixel
grouping performance, particularly in untrainable application scenarios. To address this issue, we propose the Content
Disentangle Superpixel (CDS) algorithm to selectively separate the invariant inter-pixel correlations and statistical properties, i.e., style noise. Specifically, We first construct auxiliary modalities that are homologous to the original RGB
image but have substantial stylistic variations. Then, driven
by mutual information, we propose the local-grid correlation alignment across modalities to reduce the distribution
discrepancy of adaptively selected features and learn invariant inter-pixel correlations. Afterwards, we perform globalstyle mutual information minimization to enforce the separation of invariant content and train data styles. The experimental results on four benchmark datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our approach to existing state-of-theart methods, regarding boundary adherence, generalization,
and efficiency. Code and pre-trained model are available at
https://github.com/rookiie/CDSpixel.

domain shift

𝐻!
(a)

𝐻!"#

𝐻"

(b)

Figure 1: Motivation. (a) Visualization of the t-SNE distributions on the BSDS dataset. From left to right are the baseline and our CDS. After applying color inversion, the feature distribution of baseline displays a noticeable decision
boundary. In contrast, the feature distribution extracted by
CDS is more compact (i.e.,[-80, +80] vs [-40, +40]) and indivisible. (b) Gradually modifying the stylistic information
of both auxiliary (Ht ) and original data (Ho ) enhances the
purity of the shared invariant inter-pixel correlations (Hinv ).

Feng 2022; Guo et al. 2018), etc. The usual practice of traditional superpixel algorithms is to initialize a regular grid
of superpixels and iteratively adjust the association of pixels
and neighboring superpixels. Afterward, deep learning algorithms leverage image features learned by neural networks
to replace hand-crafted features, i.e., XYlab used by traditional methods, significantly improving the performance of
superpixel algorithms.
However, although learnable features have been proven
effective, they also introduce new challenges. Superpixel
segmentation, as a mid-level image representation task,
needs to adapt to a variety of open-world scenarios. Traditional superpixel algorithms employ independent online
processes (e.g., clustering or graph-cut), which remain unaffected by inter-instance influences. In contrast, deep superpixel algorithms carry the potential risk of learning the
unique data distribution present in the training set. To validate this potential risk, we conducted a straightforward experimental verification in Fig. 1(a). Given that this concern reflects the algorithm’s generalization ability, we opted
for SCN (Yang et al. 2020), a deep superpixel algorithm
renowned for its solid generalization, for experimental validation. We applied an inversion operation (subtracting each
pixel value from 255) to simulate variations in the data distribution within the test set. While the inter-pixel correla-

Introduction
Superpixel segmentation (Achanta et al. 2012; Liu et al.
2011; Achanta and Susstrunk 2017; Yang et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2021) divides an image into compact and contiguous
regions of pixels based on specific criteria such as color similarity, texture, or brightness. Compared to pixel-level processing, superpixels significantly reduce the number of image primitives and preserve the structural information, thus
improving the efficiency and accuracy of many downstream
tasks, i.e., semantic segmentation (He et al. 2015; Zhu et al.
2014; Kwak, Hong, and Han 2017; Gadde et al. 2016),
stereo matching (Yang et al. 2020; Birchfield and Tomasi
1999; Wang and Zheng 2008), self-supervised pretraining
(Sautier et al. 2022), image classification (Zhao, Zhu, and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6351

