The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

S3A: Towards Realistic Zero-Shot Classification via Self Structural Semantic
Alignment
Sheng Zhang1 , Muzammal Naseer1 , Guangyi Chen1, 2 , Zhiqiang Shen1 ,
Salman Khan1, 3 , Kun Zhang1, 2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1, 4
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Australian National University
4
Linköping University
{sheng.zhang, muzammal.naseer, guangyi.chen, zhiqiang.shen, salman.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae
kunz1@cmu.edu, fahad.khan@liu.se
Abstract

VLM joint embedding space for classification. To adapt
pre-trained VLMs to downstream unseen data, existing prevailing methods (Wu et al. 2023; Zang et al. 2022; Ghiasi
et al. 2021) usually assume the access to source labeled
data (Chen et al. 2022; Khattak et al. 2023; Zhou et al.
2022a) (e.g., in zero-shot learning (Zhou et al. 2022b; Gao
et al. 2021)), target label distribution (e.g., in unsupervised
prompt tuning (Kahana, Cohen, and Hoshen 2022)), or an
ideal vocabulary that exactly matches the ground-truth label
set or with very few open words (e.g., in open-vocabulary
learning (Wu et al. 2023; Zang et al. 2022; Ghiasi et al.
2021)). However, this ideal vocabulary is unattainable without exhaustive annotation of all unseen data; whereas, human annotations are exorbitant and difficult to scale. Therefore, both assumptions are restrictive and impractical in
open-world scenarios with diverse and dynamic nature.

Large-scale pre-trained Vision Language Models (VLMs)
have proven effective for zero-shot classification. Despite the
success, most traditional VLMs-based methods are restricted
by the assumption of partial source supervision or ideal target vocabularies, which rarely satisfy the open-world scenario. In this paper, we aim at a more challenging setting,
Realistic Zero-Shot Classification, which assumes no annotation but instead a broad vocabulary. To address the new
problem, we propose the Self Structural Semantic Alignment (S3 A) framework, which extracts the structural semantic
information from unlabeled data while simultaneously selflearning. Our S3 A framework adopts a unique Cluster-VotePrompt-Realign (CVPR) algorithm, which iteratively groups
unlabeled data to derive structural semantics for pseudosupervision. Our CVPR algorithm includes iterative clustering on images, voting within each cluster to identify initial
class candidates from the vocabulary, generating discriminative prompts with large language models to discern confusing candidates, and realigning images and the vocabulary as structural semantic alignment. Finally, we propose
to self-train the CLIP image encoder with both individual
and structural semantic alignment through a teacher-student
learning strategy. Our comprehensive experiments across various generic and fine-grained benchmarks demonstrate that
the S3 A method substantially improves over existing VLMsbased approaches, achieving a more than 15% accuracy improvement over CLIP on average. Our codes, models, and
prompts are publicly released at https://github.com/shengeatamath/S3A.

In this paper, we embark on a journey towards Realistic Zero-Shot Classification (RZSC), a more challenging
yet practical problem compared with conventional zero-shot
learning due to its realistic conditions. Here, we term Realistic as the realistic nature of RZSC which aims to recognize
categories on unseen datasets without annotation and ideal
vocabulary, but with a vast, comprehensive vocabulary with
more than 20K category names encompassing all common
classes (Sariyildiz et al. 2021; Ridnik et al. 2021). However,
it is challenging since the vast vocabulary can lead to alignment confusion among fine-grained options; as we witness
the consistent and dramatic CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) performance drops and reduced neighborhood ranges in Fig. 1.

Introduction

To confront this challenge, we introduce the Self Structural Semantic Alignment (S3 A) framework, which iteratively discovers structural semantic alignment from unlabeled data for joint self-learning. This is orchestrated
through our unique Cluster-Vote-Prompt-Realign (CVPR)
algorithm, a principled process comprising four key steps:
(1) Clustering unearths inherent grouping structures of
image embeddings, producing meaningful image semantics. (2) Voting associates each cluster with initial category candidates, representing potential structural semantic alignments. These two steps can be executed iteratively
to obtain more reliable candidates. (3) Prompting leverages the power of large language models (LLMs) to discern

In recent years, large-scale pre-trained Vision Language
Models (VLMs) such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021; Ren
et al. 2022), ALIGN (Li et al. 2021), and BLIP (Li et al.
2022, 2023) have garnered significant attention for their
remarkable zero-shot generalization ability on multifarious
downstream tasks, particularly in recognizing unseen categories (Zhang et al. 2023a). The common practice to leverage this ability is packing category names into a textual
prompt (e.g., “A photo of a [CLS]”) and aligning image embeddings with text embeddings of filled prompts in
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7278

