The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PMRC: Prompt-Based Machine Reading Comprehension for Few-Shot Named
Entity Recognition
Jin Huang, Danfeng Yan* , Yuanqiang Cai
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Xitucheng Road 10, Beijing, China
jinhuang@bupt.edu.cn, yandf@bupt.edu.cn, caiyuanqiang@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

in the input sequence is assigned a specific label. However,
manual annotation of a large corpus for NER requires substantial time and expertise from domain experts, making it a
costly endeavor. Moreover, models trained using these methods need to adjust their structures and undergo retraining
when faced with new data, limiting their ability to leverage
knowledge learned from the original data.
To address these challenges, researchers have proposed
the concept of few-shot NER (Wiseman and Stratos 2019;
Yang and Katiyar 2020; Ziyadi et al. 2020). In few-shot
NER, a pre-trained language model is used as the base
model, and only a small amount of labeled data is utilized for
fine-tuning in a specific domain. This approach significantly
reduces the cost of annotation and enables the rapid construction of a well-performing NER model for new domains.
However, existing few-shot NER models often require reconfiguration to adapt to new entity categories, which limits
their performance, especially when labeled data is limited.
Additionally, many existing models require the use of a unified label set during both training and testing, which results
in poor recognition capability for newly encountered entity
categories.
Recently, prompt-based fine-tuning (Liu et al. 2023; Li
and Liang 2021; Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021) have
emerged as an important new paradigm in the NLP community. Prompt-based methods aim to bridge the gap between
pre-training tasks and downstream tasks by reconfiguring
the input of pre-trained language models. This paradigm
effectively harnesses the capabilities of language models.
Prompt-based approaches have been widely adopted in the
few-shot learning domain and have shown promising results.
For example, in the NER field, (Cui et al. 2021) redefine the
task as a cloze-style task, where prompts are used to guide
the model to fill in the missing entity information. However,
existing methods often require manual design of prompting
templates, and in the case of limited samples, the model’s
sensitivity to templates makes the search for the optimal
template time-consuming. Additionally, these methods require enumerating all possible entity spans in the original
text during the training and prediction processes to predict
entity types, resulting in computational complexity similar
to that of n-gram models.
To address these challenges, we propose a prompt-based
machine reading comprehension model (PMRC) for few-

The prompt-based method has been proven effective in improving the performance of pre-trained language models
(PLMs) on sentence-level few-shot tasks. However, when applying prompting to token-level tasks such as Named Entity
Recognition (NER), specific templates need to be designed,
and all possible segments of the input text need to be enumerated. These methods have high computational complexity in
both training and inference processes, making them difficult
to apply in real-world scenarios. To address these issues, we
redefine the NER task as a Machine Reading Comprehension
(MRC) task and incorporate prompting into the MRC framework. Specifically, we sequentially insert boundary markers
for various entity types into the templates and use these markers as anchors during the inference process to differentiate
entity types. In contrast to the traditional multi-turn questionanswering extraction in the MRC framework, our method can
extract all spans of entity types in one round. Furthermore, we
propose word-based template and example-based template
that enhance the MRC framework’s perception of entity start
and end positions while significantly reducing the manual effort required for template design. It is worth noting that in
cross-domain scenarios, PMRC does not require redesigning
the model architecture and can continue training by simply
replacing the templates to recognize entity types in the target
domain. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art models in low-resource settings,
achieving an average performance improvement of +5.2% in
settings where access to source domain data is limited. Particularly, on the ATIS dataset with a large number of entity types
and 10-shot setting, PMRC achieves a performance improvement of +15.7%. Moreover, our method achieves a decoding
speed 40.56 times faster than the template-based cloze-style
approach.

Instruction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental problem
in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). It aims
to identify spans of text that correspond to named entities
and assign them to predefined entity categories such as person, location, organization (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder 2003). Typically, NER tasks are regarded as sequence
labeling problems (Ma and Hovy 2016), where each entity
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18316

