The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

InstructDoc: A Dataset for Zero-Shot Generalization of Visual Document
Understanding with Instructions
Ryota Tanaka1,2 , Taichi Iki1 , Kyosuke Nishida1 , Kuniko Saito1 , Jun Suzuki2
1

NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation
2
Tohoku University
{ryota.tanaka, taichi.iki, kyosuke.nishida, kuniko.saito}@ntt.com, jun.suzuki@tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract

structions. However, according to (Liu et al. 2023b), most of
the previous visual instruction tuning datasets have primarily focused on understanding visual (non-textual) objects in
scene images and existing models struggle with accomplishing tasks that require visual document understanding abilities. While recent works (Zhang et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023a)
attempt to deal with the issue, they still exhibit limitations
when generalizing to unseen tasks and documents.
In this paper, we propose InstructDoc1 , the first largescale visual instruction tuning dataset that covers a wide
range of VDU tasks and datasets (12 diverse tasks created
from 30 openly available datasets). Each dataset has diverse instructions annotated by experts, following a unified
instruction schema, composed of user’s intent and answer
style, for VDU tasks. As shown in Figure 1, InstructDoc requires a rich set of abilities, including understanding document layout, visual representations of texts, and relation extraction of objects (e.g., graphs and charts) over open document types/formats with handcrafted instructions.
Furthermore, to enhance the generalization performance
on VDU tasks, we present a Instruction-based Document
reading and understanding model, InstructDr, which unifies the visual, text, and layout modalities of documents
by bridging the gap between a vision encoder and a large
language model (LLM) through a new bridging module
called Document-former. The Document-former converts
documents into a useful feature for the LLM. Experiments
show that InstructDr achieves the highest zero-shot performance among existing MLLMs and outperforms ChatGPT
on a wide range of VDU datasets with instructions.

We study the problem of completing various visual document understanding (VDU) tasks, e.g., question answering
and information extraction, on real-world documents through
human-written instructions. To this end, we propose InstructDoc, the first large-scale collection of 30 publicly available VDU datasets, each with diverse instructions in a unified format, which covers a wide range of 12 tasks and includes open document types/formats. Furthermore, to enhance the generalization performance on VDU tasks, we design a new instruction-based document reading and understanding model, InstructDr, that connects document images,
image encoders, and large language models (LLMs) through
a trainable bridging module. Experiments demonstrate that
InstructDr can effectively adapt to new VDU datasets, tasks,
and domains via given instructions and outperforms existing
multimodal LLMs and ChatGPT without specific training.

Introduction
Building document artificial intelligence (Document AI) capable of reading and comprehending real-world documents,
including webpages, office documents, mobile UIs, etc., has
been a long-cherished goal. Toward this goal, numerous
works on visual document understanding (VDU) have addressed a wide range of tasks, such as document question
answering (QA) (Mathew, Karatzas, and Jawahar 2021) and
information extraction (Jaume, Ekenel, and Thiran 2019).
Document data contain both textual and visual objects, with
content spread structurally across various locations depending on diverse document types and formats. To address this
complexity, previous works have proposed models that aim
to improve interactions among text/layout/visual modalities (Xu et al. 2021; Appalaraju et al. 2021). However, the
diversity of documents and tasks poses a challenge in developing a unified model that can comprehend intricate relationships between text and visual objects across a wide range
of document types, formats, and tasks.
To improve the generalizability and adaptivity of unseen
vision-language tasks, visual instruction tuning (Xu, Shen,
and Huang 2023; Liu et al. 2023a) has been introduced. This
approach involves training multimodal large language models (MLLMs) on a collection of images, task inputs, and in-

Related Work
Visual document understanding. Visual documents are
ubiquitous and used in diverse applications, including QA
on business documents (Mathew, Karatzas, and Jawahar
2021), information extraction on receipts (Jaume, Ekenel,
and Thiran 2019), and classification over large document
collections (Harley, Ufkes, and Derpanis 2015). Due to this
diversity, previous works have generally been domain/taskspecific, lacking the sharing of underlying data, model architectures, and objectives (Xu et al. 2020; Appalaraju
1
Our dataset and codes are publicly available at https://github.
com/nttmdlab-nlp/InstructDoc

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19071

