The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Node Classification on Graph Data with Graph and Label Noise
Yonghua Zhu1,2 , Lei Feng3 , Zhenyun Deng4 , Yang Chen1,2 , Robert Amor2 , Michael Witbrock1,2
1
NAOInstitute, University of Auckland, NZ
School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, NZ
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Cambridge, UK
yzhu970@aucklanduni.ac.nz, lfengqaq@gmail.com, zd302@cam.ac.uk, {yang.chen, r.amor, m.witbrock}@auckland.ac.nz
2

Abstract

the robust-constraint method attempts to preserve inherent
graph properties, such as low rank (Cheng, Miao, and Qiu
2020), sparsity (Ye and Ji 2021), and Laplacian (Runwal,
Kumar et al. 2022), to improve the denoising ability of node
representation. However, these methods focus on conducting local graph learning (Runwal, Kumar et al. 2022) to update node representation. Obviously, they don’t capture the
global information among nodes, which has been proven to
effectively improve the robustness of node classification via
introducing more edges beyond the primitive graph (Huang
et al. 2023). Moreover, these methods are parameterized by
back-propagation involving label information, leading to a
sensitivity to label noise.
It is critical to train reliable deep-learning models under label noise because accurate label annotation is timeconsuming and requires expert knowledge. It has been validated that deep learning models easily overfit to noisy labels with any ratio of corrupted labels (Zhang et al. 2021).
To address this issue, many approaches have been proposed
by training robust models with label noise, such as sample
selection method (Sukhbaatar et al. 2014), robust loss design method (Song, Kim, and Lee 2019), and robust regularization method (Srivastava et al. 2014). However, these
methods cannot be directly extended for node classification
in the graph data because of issues such as sparse labeling
(Dai, Aggarwal, and Wang 2021) and severe scarcity of label information caused by label noise. Recently, studies have
attempted to introduce more supervision information based
on the graph, e.g., using label propagation over graphs (Dai,
Aggarwal, and Wang 2021). However, with the messagepassing mechanism, label noise is easily back-propagated to
disturb the representation learning of other nodes. As a result, this makes these methods sensitive to the graph quality.
Studies have demonstrated that graph noise and label
noise widely exist in graph data simultaneously (Zhong et al.
2019). Most existing studies concentrate on dealing with either graph noise or label noise. Few works attempt to tackle
both in a unified framework. The primary challenges arise
due to the limited number of available labels for node classification, and both graph noise and label noise further intensify the scarcity of labels. Specifically, previous node classification methods first aggregate neighbor information in
the graph to make updated node representation more distinguishing, followed by the back-propagation process merely

Current research for node classification focuses on dealing
with either graph noise or label noise, but few studies consider both of them. In this paper, we propose a new robust
node classification method to simultaneously deal with graph
noise and label noise. To do this, we design a graph contrastive loss to conduct local graph learning and employ selfattention to conduct global graph learning. They enable us
to improve the expressiveness of node representation by using comprehensive information among nodes. We also utilize
pseudo graphs and pseudo labels to deal with graph noise and
label noise, respectively. Furthermore, We numerically validate the superiority of our method in terms of robust node
classification compared with all comparison methods.

Introduction
Node classification is a classic learning task in graph data
and has been widely used in real applications, such as citation networks, traffic networks, social networks, etc. (Wu
et al. 2020). In many node classification methods, node representation is updated by aggregating neighbors’ information, assuming that both graph and label information are
clean. As a result, these methods are vulnerable to either
graph noise (Fox and Rajamanickam 2019) or label noise
(Li, Yin, and Chen 2021).
Graph noise points to the noise in the graph, including missing-edges and noisy-edges. With the missingedges, models cannot aggregate enough intra-class neighbors, easily resulting in limited generalization; with noisyedges, models easily aggregate inter-class neighbors to
lose their discrimination (Bojchevski and Günnemann
2019). Current approaches for dealing with graph noise
include three categories, i.e., structure-learning method,
weight-learning method, and robust-constraint method. The
structure-learning method attempts to reconstruct a denoised graph for enhancing the effectiveness of the messagepassing, so that similar nodes’ representation can be aggregated to improve their expressiveness (Dai et al. 2022). The
weight-learning method specifies different weights to edges
to assign noisy edges with small weights in updating node
representations (Ye and Ji 2021). Different from the above
two methods denoising for the message-passing mechanism,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17220

