The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Language-Guided Transformer for Federated Multi-Label Classification
I-Jieh Liu1 , Ci-Siang Lin1,2 , Fu-En Yang1,2 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University
2
NVIDIA
{r11942087, d08942011, f07942077}@ntu.edu.tw frankwang@nvidia.com

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging paradigm that enables multiple users to collaboratively train a robust model
in a privacy-preserving manner without sharing their private
data. Most existing approaches of FL only consider traditional single-label image classification, ignoring the impact
when transferring the task to multi-label image classification.
Nevertheless, it is still challenging for FL to deal with user
heterogeneity in their local data distribution in the real-world
FL scenario, and this issue becomes even more severe in
multi-label image classification. Inspired by the recent success of Transformers in centralized settings, we propose a
novel FL framework for multi-label classification. Since partial label correlation may be observed by local clients during
training, direct aggregation of locally updated models would
not produce satisfactory performances. Thus, we propose
a novel FL framework of Language-Guided Transformer
(FedLGT) to tackle this challenging task, which aims to
exploit and transfer knowledge across different clients for
learning a robust global model. Through extensive experiments on various multi-label datasets (e.g., FLAIR, MSCOCO, etc.), we show that our FedLGT is able to achieve
satisfactory performance and outperforms standard FL techniques under multi-label FL scenarios. Code is available at
https://github.com/Jack24658735/FedLGT.

1

Glass

?

FedAvg
Liquid

?

Plant

Central Server
Local model upload

Local model upload
Global model broadcast

Client 1
Label: [Liquid, Glass]

Client K
Label: [Liquid, Plant]

Glass

Glass

Liquid

Plant

: High label correlation /

Liquid

Plant

: Low label correlation

Figure 1: Challenges in multi-label federated learning. Since
diverse label correlations are observed across clients, aggregating local models might not be sufficiently generalizable.

Introduction

referred to as data heterogeneity. Data heterogeneity across
different clients can be caused by various factors, such as
demographic diversity, data collection methods, and sensor
differences. In the presence of data heterogeneity, FedAvg
may struggle to effectively leverage the data diversity across
clients, resulting in degraded performance of the aggregated
global model.
Typically, data heterogeneity contains the aspects such as
label distribution skew or domain shift, presenting substantial obstacles in the progress of FL development. For instance, consider a scene understanding task in FL. In this
scenario, certain clients possess a larger volume of indoor
scene data, while others may have more outdoor scene data.
As a result, their local models tend to be biased towards their
respective scenes due to environmental variations in lighting, texture, etc., posing challenges in achieving a consensus during the model aggregation process (i.e., hard to obtain a robust global model). In addition, some clients may
have more data for specific classes, resulting in a class im-

Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm
that enables multiple clients to collaboratively perform
model training by leveraging their decentralized data. This
approach offers significant advantages over traditional centralized approaches, as it mitigates the risks of privacy disclosure and is efficient for large-scale machine learning tasks
without collecting large amounts of data on the server. FL
has been successfully applied in real-world studies including
health care, finance, and recommendation systems. As a pioneering work, the vanilla FL algorithm FedAvg (McMahan
et al. 2017) learns from multiple local clients in a privacypreserving manner, and the trained models or gradients are
sent to the central server. Then, the server performed an aggregation step to obtain a global model. However, user data
distribution often has non-IID (non-independent and identical distribution) characteristics in the real world, which is
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13882

