The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neuromorphic Event Signal-Driven Network for Video De-Raining
Chengjie Ge, Xueyang Fu * , Peng He, Kunyu Wang, Chengzhi Cao, Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China, China
cjge@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xyfu@ustc.edu.cn, {hp0618, kunyuwang, chengzhicao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks-based video de-raining methods commonly rely on dense intensity frames captured by
CMOS sensors. However, the limited temporal resolution of
these sensors hinders the capture of dynamic rainfall information, limiting further improvement in de-raining performance.
This study aims to overcome this issue by incorporating the
neuromorphic event signal into the video de-raining to enhance the dynamic information perception. Specifically, we
first utilize the dynamic information from the event signal as
prior knowledge, and integrate it into existing de-raining objectives to better constrain the solution space. We then design an optimization algorithm to solve the objective, and
construct a de-raining network with CNNs as the backbone
architecture using a modular strategy to mimic the optimization process. To further explore the temporal correlation of
the event signal, we incorporate a spiking self-attention module into our network. By leveraging the low latency and high
temporal resolution of the event signal, along with the spatial
and temporal representation capabilities of convolutional and
spiking neural networks, our model captures more accurate
dynamic information and significantly improves de-raining
performance. For instance, our network achieves a 1.24dB
improvement on the SynHeavy25 dataset compared to the previous state-of-the-art method, while utilizing only 39% of the
parameters.

Figure 1: Visualizations of some elements in our de-raining
model in successive frames.

Introduction
Videos captured by traditional vision sensors often suffer
degradations in rainy weather. Rain streaks can change the
intensity of video frames, obstructing and obscuring the
foreground and background information (Li et al. 2022b).
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown remarkable results in the field of video frames deraining (VFD). However, most existing CNN-based methods
heavily rely on dense intensity frames captured by CMOS
sensors, which have limited temporal resolution. The limitation of CMOS sensors poses a challenge in effectively
capturing dynamic rainfall information, which hinders further improvements in de-raining performance. This challenge is typically manifested as insufficient de-raining, leaving behind rain streak residue, or excessive de-raining, re-

sulting in texture loss. To address the existing challenge,
this study proposes a novel approach that incorporates the
neuromorphic signal generated by the event camera into
the video de-raining. The event camera is a bio-inspired vision sensor designed to detect and record spatial-temporal
changes for each pixel. Compared to CMOS-based cameras,
the event camera offers several advantages (Gallego et al.
2020), including low temporal latency (1µs vs. 1ms), high
dynamic range (140dB vs. 60dB), and low power consumption (10mW vs. 10W).
Based on the mechanism of the event camera, we
can record additional dynamic information through event
streams generated by rapid rain streaks and moving objects. These event streams provide us with nearly continuous views of external dynamic information, allowing us to
overcome the limitations of dynamic feature perception and

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1878

