The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

High-Quality Real-Time Rendering
Using Subpixel Sampling Reconstruction
Boyu Zhang1, 3 , Hongliang Yuan2, 3 *
1

University of California, Los Angeles
2
Xiaomi Cooperation
3
Tencent AI Lab
bobo8496@ucla.edu, hercules.yuan@gmail.com
Abstract

approaches to remove noise from images generated with
more than 1-spp. While (Chaitanya et al. 2017; Meng
et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2021; Thomas et al. 2022) attempt
to develop methods to accelerate the overall process by
working with low-sample data, they have yet to achieve
real-time frame rates at high resolutions, as 1-spp remains
time-consuming. Other approaches (Edelsten, Jukarainen,
and Patney 2019; Xiao et al. 2020; Işık et al. 2021) focus
on designing more efficient post-processing modules in
the image space to handle noisy images, but they tend to
produce aliased rendered pixels at low-sample images.
Additionally, the complex network structures of these works
impose heavy burdens on inference time.
To achieve real-time performance for the generation of
high-resolution, realistic images, we introduce a novel MC
sampling strategy, subpixel sampling. This strategy is designed to curtail the temporal demands of physically-based
rendering. Complementing this, we also propose a denoising method subpixel sampling reconstruction (SSR), which
is tailored to the subpixel sampling strategy.
Subpixel sampling. The subpixel sampling strategy generates images with less than 1-spp. To obtain this, we divide
each frame at the target resolution into consecutive, nonoverlapping tiles with size 2 × 2 and then compute only
one ray-traced pixel per tile (we refer to it as 1/4-spp). This
strategy allows us to use these reliable samples to interpolate the missing pixels with the GBuffers (OpenGL 1998) at
the target resolution. We developed a vulkan-based (Sellers
and Kessenich 2016) hybrid ray tracer to export datasets. By
utilizing subpixel sampling, the cost of rendering time can
be reduced by a third.
Subpixel sampling reconstruction. Our reconstruction
contains two parts: a temporal feature accumulator and a reconstruction network. The former warps previous frames to
align with the current frame at the target resolution and accumulates subpixel samples and GBuffers from the previous
frame based on the temporal accumulation factor, which is
computed according to the correlation of the current and previous frames, effectively expanding the perception field of
pixels. Once subpixel samples are collected, we move on to
the second component, our reconstruction network. This is
a multi-scale U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015)
with skip connections, which enables us to reconstruct the
desired high-resolution image.

Generating high-quality, realistic rendering images for realtime applications generally requires tracing a few samplesper-pixel (spp) and using deep learning-based approaches
to denoise the resulting low-spp images. Existing denoising
methods necessitate a substantial time expenditure when rendering at high resolutions due to the physically-based sampling and network inference time burdens. In this paper, we
propose a novel Monte Carlo sampling strategy to accelerate the sampling process and a corresponding denoiser, subpixel sampling reconstruction (SSR), to obtain high-quality
images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms previous approaches in denoising
quality and reduces overall time costs, enabling real-time rendering capabilities at 2K resolution.

Introduction
Rendering realistic images for virtual worlds is a key objective in many computer vision and graphics tasks (Huo and
Yoon 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023; Li et al.
2023; Li, Ngo, and Nagahara 2023), with applications in
animation production (Dahlberg, Adler, and Newlin 2019),
VR/AR world generation (Overbeck et al. 2018), virtual
dataset synthesis (Ge et al. 2022), etc. One widely used technique for this purpose is Monte Carlo (MC) sampling (Seila
1982), which is highly versatile but typically requires a large
number of samples to achieve accurate results. Despite the
relentless advancements in computational capabilities, the
temporal expenditure for executing realistic rendering remains a practical constraint, with high-quality images often taking hours to generate. Using low samples-per-pixel
(spp) can speed up this process but lead to visually distracting noise. To mitigate this issue, post-processing techniques
have been developed, known as MC denoising, which normally have lower time costs than physically-based renderers and are widely used in modern game engines(Chaitanya
et al. 2017; NVIDIA 2021; Xiao et al. 2020).
Most existing MC denoising methods (Edelsten,
Jukarainen, and Patney 2019; Xiao et al. 2020; Chaitanya
et al. 2017; Işık et al. 2021; Meng et al. 2020; Hasselgren
et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2021) employ deep learning-based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7006

