The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatio-Temporal Fusion for Human Action Recognition via Joint Trajectory
Graph
Yaolin Zheng1 , Hongbo Huang1, 2 , Xiuying Wang1, 2 , Xiaoxu Yan1 , Longfei Xu1
2

1
Computer School, Beijing Information Science & Technology University, Beijing, China
Institute of Computing Intelligence, Beijing Information Science & Technology University, Beijing, China
zhengyaolin574@bistu.edu.cn, hhb@bistu.edu.cn, wxiuying520@126.com, 2021020568@bistu.edu.cn,
2022020601@bistu.edu.cn

0

Abstract
……

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and Transformers
have been widely applied to skeleton-based human action
recognition, with each offering unique advantages in capturing spatial relationships and long-range dependencies. However, for most GCN methods, the construction of topological
structures relies solely on the spatial information of human
joints, limiting their ability to directly capture richer spatiotemporal dependencies. Additionally, the self-attention modules of many Transformer methods lack topological structure
information, restricting the robustness and generalization of
the models. To address these issues, we propose a Joint Trajectory Graph (JTG) that integrates spatio-temporal information into a uniform graph structure. We also present a Joint
Trajectory GraphFormer (JT-GraphFormer), which directly
captures the spatio-temporal relationships among all joint trajectories for human action recognition. To better integrate
topological information into spatio-temporal relationships,
we introduce a Spatio-Temporal Dijkstra Attention (STDA)
mechanism to calculate relationship scores for all the joints
in the JTG. Furthermore, we incorporate the Koopman operator into the classification stage to enhance the model’s representation ability and classification performance. Experiments
demonstrate that JT-GraphFormer achieves outstanding performance in human action recognition tasks, outperforming
state-of-the-art methods on the NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D
120, and N-UCLA datasets.

……

(a) The JTG with frame size N

10

5

8

10

6

15

4

20

2

0

5

10 15 20

12
10
8
6
4

10
30
50
70

(b) Visualization of Dijkstra
weights in STDA

0

Heatmap of Dijkstra
matrix of the original graph

2
10

30

50

70

0

Heatmap of Dijkstra
matrix of the JTG

(c) Heatmap of the
Dijkstra matrix

Figure 1: Visualization and Heatmaps. (a) Visualization depicting the Joint Trajectory Graph (JTG). (b) Visualization
of Dijkstra weights within the Spatio-Temporal Dijkstra Attention (STDA). The thicker curves denote higher correlation weights among interconnected joints. For illustrative
purposes, lower correlation weights are depicted using dotted lines and are selectively sampled. (c) Heatmaps showing
Dijkstra matrices for the original human joint graph and the
proposed JTG.

Introduction
Human action recognition aims to accurately identify and
classify different human actions from input videos or sequence data. As an important task in computer vision, human action recognition has been extensively researched and
widely applied in fields such as human-computer interaction, intelligent surveillance, and motion reconstruction.
In particular, skeleton-based methods are less affected by
changes in lighting conditions, background clutter, and occlusions. This robustness enhances the model’s ability to focus on motion-related information, making skeleton-based
methods increasingly popular.
Currently, two popular deep learning models, Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and Transformers, have
demonstrated strong performance in skeleton-based human

action recognition tasks. GCNs treat human joint data as
graph structures and employ convolutional operations based
on adjacency matrices to capture spatial dependencies between different body parts, thereby improving the accuracy
of action recognition (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Shi et al.
2019b; Ye et al. 2020). Additionally, Transformers have
demonstrated remarkable success due to their strong selfattention mechanisms and capability to capture long-range
dependencies (Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020).
Despite the promising performance of GCNs and Transformers, accurate and robust skeleton-based action recognition remains a challenging task. This is primarily due to
several factors. Firstly, conventional GCN methods do not
directly utilize spatio-temporal topology to capture more

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7579

