The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ROGP L : Robust Open-Set Graph Learning via Region-Based Prototype Learning
Qin Zhang1 , Xiaowei Li1 , Jiexin Lu1 , Liping Qiu1 , Shirui Pan2 , Xiaojun Chen1 * , Junyang Chen1
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China 2 School of Information and
Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia.
qinzhang@szu.edu.cn, {lixiaowei2022, lujiexin2022, qiuliping2021}@email.szu.edu.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au,
{xjchen, junyangchen}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

networks (Wong et al. 2021). The recent success of supervised GNNs is built upon two crucial cornerstones: that the
training and test data are drawn from an identical distribution, and that large-scale reliable high-quality labeled data
are available for training. However, in real-world applications, large-scale labeled data drawn from the same distribution as test data are usually unavailable.
Real-world applications normally are in open-set scenarios (Zhang et al. 2023a; Nimah et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022), the existence of new-emerged out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples, i.e.samples that do not belong to any known
classes, is prevalent. They are outliers if they occur in training (OOD noise), and open-set samples if they occur in
testing. Moreover, the manually generating clean labeled
data set would involve domain experts evaluating the quality of collected data and thus is very expensive and timeconsuming (Zhang, Luo, and Gu 2023). Alternatively, we
can collect data and labels based on web search (Yu et al.
2018), crowdsourcing (Fang, Yin, and Tao 2014; Li et al.
2017a) and user tags (Li et al. 2017b; Xiao et al. 2015).
These data and labels are cheap but inevitably noisy (Zhang,
Luo, and Gu 2023; Li et al. 2022).
The presence of OOD noise and IND noise ( indistribution samples with incorrect labels) can be detrimental to GNNs (Zhang et al. 2021), as they would cause the ambiguity problem, including the intra-class variety problem in
which samples with same class labels may contain objects of
different semantic categories, and the inter-class confusion
problem in which samples of different intent classes may
contain objects of similar semantic categories(Wang et al.
2023). The open-set unknown class samples occur during
testing further complicates this problem.
Thus, it is necessary to build robust open-set learning
models (Wu et al. 2021) that can learn from noisy data,
achieving classification of known class samples and identification of unknown open-set class samples during testing.
Previous works mainly concentrated on robust learning or
open-set learning separately, the problem of robust open-set
learning with complex noise has not been sufficiently explored so far (Huang, Wang, and Fang 2022; Zhang et al.
2023b), and it becomes even more difficult for non-IID
graph data.
In this paper, as shown in Fig. 1, for solving the problem of open-set graph learning with complex IND and OOD

Open-set graph learning is a practical task that aims to
classify the known class nodes and to identify unknown
class samples as unknowns. Conventional node classification
methods usually perform unsatisfactorily in open-set scenarios due to the complex data they encounter, such as outof-distribution (OOD) data and in-distribution (IND) noise.
OOD data are samples that do not belong to any known
classes. They are outliers if they occur in training (OOD
noise), and open-set samples if they occur in testing. IND
noise are training samples which are assigned incorrect labels. The existence of IND noise and OOD noise is prevalent, which usually cause the ambiguity problem, including
the intra-class variety problem and the inter-class confusion
problem. Thus, to explore robust open-set learning methods
is necessary and difficult, and it becomes even more difficult for non-IID graph data. To this end, we propose a unified framework named ROGP L to achieve robust open-set
learning on complex noisy graph data, by introducing prototype learning. In specific, ROGP L consists of two modules,
i.e., denoising via label propagation and open-set prototype
learning via regions. The first module corrects noisy labels
through similarity-based label propagation and removes lowconfidence samples, to solve the intra-class variety problem
caused by noise. The second module learns open-set prototypes for each known class via non-overlapped regions and
remains both interior and border prototypes to remedy the
inter-class confusion problem. The two modules are iteratively updated under the constraints of classification loss and
prototype diversity loss. To the best of our knowledge, the
proposed ROGP L is the first robust open-set node classification method for graph data with complex noise. Experimental
evaluations of ROGP L on several benchmark graph datasets
demonstrate that it has good performance.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017; Guo
et al. 2022; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Tan et al.
2023) have become a prominent technique to analyze graph
structured data in many real-world systems, such as traffic
state prediction (Zheng et al. 2020), disease classification
(Chereda et al. 2019), and user profile completion in social
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9350

