The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Evidential Uncertainty-Guided Mitochondria Segmentation for 3D EM Images
Ruohua Shi1 , Lingyu Duan1,2 , Tiejun Huang1,3 , Tingting Jiang1,4 *
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information
Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
{shiruohua,lingyu,tjhuang,ttjiang}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Recent advances in deep learning have greatly improved
the segmentation of mitochondria from Electron Microscopy
(EM) images. However, suffering from variations in mitochondrial morphology, imaging conditions, and image noise,
existing methods still exhibit high uncertainty in their predictions. Moreover, in view of our findings, predictions with
high levels of uncertainty are often accompanied by inaccuracies such as ambiguous boundaries and amount of false positive segments. To deal with the above problems, we propose a
novel approach for mitochondria segmentation in 3D EM images that leverages evidential uncertainty estimation, which
for the first time integrates evidential uncertainty to enhance
the performance of segmentation. To be more specific, our
proposed method not only provides accurate segmentation results, but also estimates associated uncertainty. Then, the estimated uncertainty is used to help improve the segmentation
performance by an uncertainty rectification module, which
leverages uncertainty maps and multi-scale information to refine the segmentation. Extensive experiments conducted on
four challenging benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed method over existing approaches.

(a) Input Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Segmentation w/o Rectify
100 %
80

86

w/o rectify
rectified

64
56
50
Dice

(d) Uncertainty

(e) Rectified Segmentation

mAP

(f) Performance

Figure 1: Illustration of the effectiveness of using uncertainty information to modify segmentation results.
have also shown advantages in mitochondria image segmentation (Franco-Barranco, Muñoz-Barrutia, and ArgandaCarreras 2022; Yuan et al. 2020, 2021).
Despite the advancements made by deep learning (DL)
models, they remain plagued by considerable uncertainty
within their predictions. This uncertainty originates from
various sources (Guo et al. 2017), including out-of-domain
inputs, data quality issues, and nuances of the training conditions. Within the EM images, this issue is exacerbated
by the variations in data quality caused by artifacts or deformations during the image acquisition process. Consequently, DL models might produce overconfident but erroneous predictions. These predictions output by the current
mitochondria segmentation framework impose limitations
on the practical applicability of these models, particularly in
3D cell reconstruction and subsequent functional analysis.
Therefore, it makes uncertainty estimation essential to prevent potentially disastrous decisions based on segmentation
results. This brings three key questions: How to represent
the uncertainty in EM image segmentation? What methodologies can be employed to accurately estimate this uncertainty? How can this uncertainty estimation be harnessed to
enhance the segmentation performance?
For the representation of the uncertainty, there are two

Introduction
Positioned at the heart of cellular metabolism, mitochondria
serve a key role in powering life through massive and varied metabolic functions (Annesley and Fisher 2019; Bock
and Tait 2020). Thanks to the Electron microscopy (EM)
technique, high-resolution images of mitochondria and other
cellular structures are now available, making them a valuable resource for studying cellular biology and connectomics (Casser et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2020; Lucchi et al.
2011). The utilization of deep learning algorithms in mitochondria segmentation has shown significant progress, as
demonstrated by state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods (Luo et al.
2021; Peng, Yi, and Yuan 2020; Peng and Yuan 2019;
Yuan et al. 2021). Most of these techniques employ the
U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) architecture
or its variations (Casser et al. 2020; Mekuč et al. 2020)
to address the unique challenges posed by EM image segmentation. Recently, transformer and self-attention (FrancoBarranco, Muñoz-Barrutia, and Arganda-Carreras 2022)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4847

