The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Panoptic Scene Graph Generation with Semantics-Prototype Learning
Li Li1 , Wei Ji1* , Yiming Wu2 , Mengze Li3 * , You Qin1 , Lina Wei4 , Roger Zimmermann1
1

National University of Singapore
2
The University of Sydney
3
Zhejiang University
4
Hangzhou City University
lili02@u.nus.edu, weiji0523@gmail.com, mengzeli@zju.edu.cn, e0962995@u.nus.edu

(a) Input Image

?
talking

ide
besng at
oki
loperson

on

on
standing on
on
standing on

on
standing on

Panoptic Scene Graph Generation (PSG) parses objects and
predicts their relationships (predicate) to connect human language and visual scenes. However, different language preferences of annotators and semantic overlaps between predicates lead to biased predicate annotations in the dataset, i.e.
different predicates for the same object pairs. Biased predicate annotations make PSG models struggle in constructing a clear decision plane among predicates, which greatly
hinders the real application of PSG models. To address the
intrinsic bias above, we propose a novel framework named
ADTrans to adaptively transfer biased predicate annotations
to informative and unified ones. To promise consistency and
accuracy during the transfer process, we propose to observe
the invariance degree of representations in each predicate
class, and learn unbiased prototypes of predicates with different intensities. Meanwhile, we continuously measure the
distribution changes between each presentation and its prototype, and constantly screen potentially biased data. Finally,
with the unbiased predicate-prototype representation embedding space, biased annotations are easily identified. Experiments show that ADTrans significantly improves the performance of benchmark models, achieving a new state-of-theart performance, and shows great generalization and effectiveness on multiple datasets. Our code is released at https:
//github.com/lili0415/PSG-biased-annotation.

on
standing on
on
standing on
standing on

person
train
beside
traffic light
entering
person person
person person

Abstract

on
standing on

road
(b) Biased/Unbiased Annotation

Figure 1: (a) Exemplar panoptic segmentation results of an
input image. (b) present annotation transfer process. Our
proposed method promotes the original dataset (annotations
in red) by identifying biased annotation and potentially positive samples, and then adaptively and accurately transferring
them to target triplet pairs (annotation in green).

and visual question answering (Teney, Liu, and van den Hengel 2017; Li et al. 2022b; Antol et al. 2015; Xiao et al. 2022;
Fang et al. 2023).
However, PSG methods currently suffer from suboptimal
performance due to biased and noisy information in generated scene graphs, stemming from the problem of biased annotations.
Exploring the inference mechanism of PSG and SGG
models, it is translating visual scenes to linguistic descriptions, i.e., mapping visual instances to subjects/objects, and
their relationships to predicates. We regard the problem
above as the semantic ambiguity between predicates, and
the contradictory mappings from visual to linguistics. There
are a lot of semantic overlaps and hierarchical relationships
among predicates, e.g., the superclass predicate on for its
subclass predicate standing on. Because of the semantic
overlaps and the inconsistent preferences of annotators, contradictory mappings from visual to linguistics unavoidably
exist in the training dataset, and deteriorate the long-tail distribution problem of the training dataset. As shown in Fig. 1,
with the difficulty of applying a unified standard for annotation, annotators tend to annotate general predicate labels
(e.g., “on” and “beside”) for simplicity instead of informative ones (e.g., “standing on” and “looking at”). As a result,
models cannot learn a consistent mapping from visual to semantics, instead, they entangle predicate labels and the prior
knowledge of long-tail distribution, leading to serious harm

Introduction
Panoptic Scene Graph Generation (PSG) (Yang et al. 2022)
aims to simultaneously detect instances and their relationships within visual scenes (Chang et al. 2023). Instead of
coarse bounding boxes used in Scene Graph Generation
(SGG) (Li et al. 2021b; Xu et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2021a; Chen et al. 2020b; Yao et al. 2022, 2021), PSG
proposed to construct more comprehensive scene graphs
with panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2019). PSG
methods have the potential to bridge the gap between visual scenes and human languages and thus has the ability
to contribute to related vision-language tasks, such as image
retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2022a,b; Lv et al.
2023), image captioning (Chen et al. 2020a; Wei et al. 2022),
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3145

