The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Overcome Curse-of-Dimensionality for Out-of-Distribution Detection?
Soumya Suvra Ghosal* , Yiyou Sun*, Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin – Madison
{sghosal, sunyiyou, sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

90s, including Beyer et al. (1999), as to whether the nearest
neighbor is meaningful in high dimensions. The key result of
(Beyer et al. 1999) states that in high dimensional spaces, the
difference between the minimum and the maximum distance
between a random reference point and a list of n random
data points x1 ,...,xn become indiscernible compared to the
minimum distance:


Dmax − Dmin
lim E
→ 0.
(1)
d→∞
Dmin

Machine learning models deployed in the wild can be challenged by out-of-distribution (OOD) data from unknown
classes. Recent advances in OOD detection rely on distance measures to distinguish samples that are relatively
far away from the in-distribution (ID) data. Despite the
promise, distance-based methods can suffer from the curseof-dimensionality problem, which limits the efficacy in highdimensional feature space. To combat this problem, we propose a novel framework, Subspace Nearest Neighbor (SNN),
for OOD detection. In training, our method regularizes the
model and its feature representation by leveraging the most relevant subset of dimensions (i.e. subspace). Subspace learning
yields highly distinguishable distance measures between ID
and OOD data. We provide comprehensive experiments and
ablations to validate the efficacy of SNN. Compared to the
current best distance-based method, SNN reduces the average
FPR95 by 15.96% on the CIFAR-100 benchmark.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models deployed in the wild face
risks from out-of-distribution (OOD) data – samples from
novel contexts and classes that were not taught to the model
during training. Identifying OOD samples is paramount for
safely operating machine learning models in uncertain environments. A safe system should be able to identify the
unknown data as OOD so that the control can be passed to
humans. This illuminates the importance of OOD detection,
which allows the learner to express ignorance and take further
precautions.
Recent solutions for OOD detection tasks often rely on distance measures to distinguish samples that are conspicuously
dissimilar from the in-distribution (ID) data (Lee et al. 2018b;
Tack et al. 2020; Sehwag, Chiang, and Mittal 2021; Sun et al.
2022). These methods leverage embeddings extracted from a
well-trained classifier and operate under the assumption that
test OOD samples are far away from the ID data in the feature
space. For example, Sun et al. (2022) recently showed that
non-parametric nearest neighbor distance is a strong indicator
function for OOD likelihood. Despite the promise, distance
measures can be sensitive to the dimensionality of the feature space. Those research questions have been raised in the
* Equal contributions
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

This phenomenon—recognized as one aspect of the “curse
of dimensionality” (Beyer et al. 1999; Hinneburg, Aggarwal, and Keim 2000; Aggarwal, Hinneburg, and Keim 2001;
Houle et al. 2010; Kriegel et al. 2009)—limits the efficacy
of distance-based OOD detection method for modern neural
networks. For example, let’s consider 50000 points sampled
randomly from a 2048 dimensional space bounded by [0, 1].
Given a test sample, to find the 10-th nearest neighbor, we
need a hyper-cube with a length of at least 0.99581 , which
covers the entire feature space. In other words, the highdimensional spaces can lead to instability of nearest neighbor
queries. Despite its importance, the problem has received
little attention in the literature on OOD detection. This begs
the following question:
How do we combat the curse-of-dimensionality for OOD
detection?
Targeting this important problem, we propose a new framework called Subspace Nearest Neighbor (SNN) for OOD
detection. Our key idea is to learn a feature subspace—a subset of relevant features—for distance-based detection. Our
method is motivated by the observation drawn in Houle et al.
(2010): irrelevant attributes in a feature space may impede
the separability of different distributions and thus have the
potential for rendering the nearest neighbor less meaningful.
In light of this, SNN regularizes the model and its feature representation by leveraging the most relevant subset of dimensions (i.e. subspace) for the class prediction. Geometrically,
this is equivalent to projecting the embedding to the selected
subspace, and the output for each class is derived using the
projected features. The subspaces are learned in a way that
maintains the discriminative power for classifying ID data.
1

19849

10
The calculation is done by 0.99582048 ≈ 50000
.

