The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ACAMDA: Improving Data Efficiency in Reinforcement Learning
Through Guided Counterfactual Data Augmentation
Yuewen Sun1, 2 , Erli Wang3 * , Biwei Huang4 , Chaochao Lu5 , Lu Feng3 , Changyin Sun6 ,
Kun Zhang1, 2
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
NEC Labs, China
4
University of California San Diego
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
6
Anhui University
yuewen.sun@mbzuai.ac.ae, wang erli@nec.cn, bih007@ucsd.edu, luchaochao@pjlab.org.cn, feng lu@nec.cn,
cysun@ahu.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu
Abstract

While traditional data augmentation techniques have successfully increased the diversity of offline data (Yang et al.
2022), they often overlook the impact of transition dynamics on policy optimization. In RL, the accuracy of policy
estimation depends on the precise estimation of potential future states, and this estimation is strongly influenced by the
actions taken and the observed current state. Unlike traditional augmentation techniques, which mainly focus on diversifying existing data without explicitly considering the
transition dynamics of states, actions, and next states, counterfactual technique offers a valuable solution to address this
limitation. They involve generating reachable data points by
manipulating input variables to observe potential outcomes.
Specifically, by manipulating the state and action variables
to observe potential next states, it offers a promising approach to improve the quality of data tailored to policy objectives (Lu et al. 2020; Pitis, Creager, and Garg 2020). This
ability helps reveal how different actions affect outcomes.

Data augmentation plays a crucial role in improving the data
efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL). However, the generation of high-quality augmented data remains a significant
challenge. To overcome this, we introduce ACAMDA (Adversarial Causal Modeling for Data Augmentation), a novel
framework that integrates two causality-based tasks: causal
structure recovery and counterfactual estimation. The unique
aspect of ACAMDA lies in its ability to recover temporal
causal relationships from limited non-expert datasets. The
identification of the sequential cause-and-effect allows the
creation of realistic yet unobserved scenarios. We utilize
this characteristic to generate guided counterfactual datasets,
which, in turn, substantially reduces the need for extensive
data collection. By simulating various state-action pairs under
hypothetical actions, ACAMDA enriches the training dataset
for diverse and heterogeneous conditions. Our experimental
evaluation shows that ACAMDA outperforms existing methods, particularly when applied to novel and unseen domains.

However, a challenge arises in how to accurately estimate
the transition dynamics. On the one hand, existing methods
often rely heavily on data-driven approaches that emphasize
statistical patterns over causality. Some counterfactual augmentation approaches focus on correlations and overlook
the causal relations when estimating the transition dynamics (Joshi and He 2021). This may lead to unreliable conclusions due to spurious correlations or chance. Furthermore,
ignoring causality compromises the quality of augmented
data, as it fails to capture the true causal mechanisms that
accurately represent system dynamics, leading to inadequate
and inexplicable guidance for counterfactual data augmentation, particularly in heterogeneous tasks. On the other hand,
ignoring model bias, which is the discrepancy between the
true values and estimates, may hinder counterfactual learning. Recent advances in counterfactual augmentation using
generative models aim to predict the outcomes of hypothetical actions (Lu et al. 2020). However, these models often
suffer from inaccurate predictions and unstable control performance due to imperfect representations, limited data, and
intrinsic uncertainties. Addressing both causality and model

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), an important approach for
sequential decision-making, aims to develop policies that
guide the agent to learn optimal actions through trial-anderror interactions with the environment. Despite many recent advances, RL suffers from the challenge of data inefficiency. The performance of the policy is highly dependent
on the quantity and quality of the training data, which limits practical scaling and hinders generalization (Kamthe and
Deisenroth 2018). To tackle this challenge, various data augmentation techniques have been developed to improve data
diversity by manipulating the empirical dataset (Laskin et al.
2020). For instance, data augmentation in hyperbolic space
can outperform benchmarks in speech, text, and visualization (Sawhney et al. 2021), while image operations can optimize control performance (Hendrycks et al. 2019).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15193

