The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hypothesis, Verification, and Induction:
Grounding Large Language Models with Self-Driven Skill Learning
Shaohui Peng1 , Xing Hu2, 4 , Qi Yi2, 3 , Rui Zhang2 , Jiaming Guo2 , Di Huang2 ,
Zikang Tian2, 5 , Ruizhi Chen1 , Zidong Du2, 4 , Qi Guo2 , Yunji Chen2, 5 , Ling Li1, 5, *
1

Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
2
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, USTC, Hefei, China
4
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies, SHIC, Shanghai, China
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS, Beijing, China
pengshaohui@iscas.ac.cn
Abstract

world, which is a solid step towards real-world applications
of artificial intelligence.
To address the grounding problem, existing studies try to
fine-tune the LLM to predict feasible actions (Carta et al.
2023; Li et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022) or utilize a set of
behavior APIs (i.e. low-level skills) that serve as a bridge
between the LLMs and the environment (Ichter et al. 2022;
Raman et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2022). On the one hand, finetuning LLMs is of low sample efficiency and may also damage the reasoning ability of LLMs. On the other hand, existing methods relying on behavior APIs often assume the APIs
are pre-defined by the environment (Liang et al. 2022) or
pre-trained using expert demonstrations (Ichter et al. 2022),
which not only costs huge human efforts to customize for every single task but also weakens the generality strengths of
LLMs. Therefore, how to autonomously ground the LLM
onto the environment still remains an open problem and is
the key challenge of LLM-based agents.
It is challenging to achieve the goal of autonomous
grounding that maps the LLM’s semantic plan to practical implementation, because of the following reasons: 1)
The prerequisite of grounding, obtaining successful experiences, is difficult because of the sparse rewards in the physical world. 2) Even obtaining rare success experiences, the
grounding is usually closely related to specific tasks without a shared API library, therefore is of low generality and
invaluable for general tasks. To address these issues, we produce intrinsic rewards based on LLM-generated subgoals
and their check functions, which increase successful experiences by alleviating the sparse reward issue. We then propose the language-aligned general skill learning methodology by forcing each skill to achieve a group of goals with
similar semantic descriptions. These skills show good generality in solving other or even more complex tasks.
In summary, we propose a Hypothesis, Verification, and
Induction (HYVIN) framework that intimately combines the
LLM and the reinforcement learning process within the following key stages: 1) Hypothesis: the LLM not only acts
as the planner by decomposing tasks into small subgoals but
also provides the check functions so that RL agents can evaluate whether they can complete these subgoals. Such intrin-

Large language models (LLMs) show their powerful automatic reasoning and planning capability with a wealth of
semantic knowledge about the human world. However, the
grounding problem still hinders the applications of LLMs in
the real-world environment. Existing studies try to fine-tune
the LLM or utilize pre-defined behavior APIs to bridge the
LLMs and the environment, which not only costs huge human
efforts to customize for every single task but also weakens
the generality strengths of LLMs. To autonomously ground
the LLM onto the environment, we proposed the Hypothesis,
Verification, and Induction (HYVIN) framework to automatically and progressively ground the LLM with self-driven skill
learning. HYVIN first employs the LLM to propose the hypothesis of sub-goals to achieve tasks and then verify the feasibility of the hypothesis via interacting with the underlying
environment. Once verified, HYVIN can then learn generalized skills with the guidance of these successfully grounded
subgoals. These skills can be further utilized to accomplish
more complex tasks that fail to pass the verification phase.
Verified in the famous instruction following task set, BabyAI,
HYVIN achieves comparable performance in the most challenging tasks compared with imitation learning methods that
cost millions of demonstrations, proving the effectiveness of
learned skills and showing the feasibility and efficiency of our
framework.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown their powerful
capability in automatic reasoning and planning with a wealth
of semantic knowledge about the human world (Wei et al.
2022, 2021; OpenAI 2023; Kojima et al. 2022). However,
there still remains a large gap in adopting LLMs to automatically solve problems in specific environments. This is
because of the misalignment between the LLM’s semantic
planning and the grounded-specific implementation, which
is also known as the grounding problem (Ichter et al. 2022;
Driess et al. 2023). Solving this problem can unlock the
LLMs’ capacity of understanding and affecting the real
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14599

