The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Approximate Adaptive Kernel Convolution on Graphs
Jaeyoon Sim1 , Sooyeon Jeon1 , InJun Choi1 , Guorong Wu2 , Won Hwa Kim1
1

Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea
2
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
{simjy98, jsuyeon, surung9898, wonhwa}@postech.ac.kr, guorong wu@med.unc.edu

Abstract

(together with non-linear activations) constitutes the fundamental Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf et al.
2017), and testing a newly developed GCN on classifying
node-wise labels has become a standard benchmark to validate the GCN model (Chen et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Xu
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021).
Within the architecture of conventional GCN and its variants, there is a fundamental issue: each convolution layer
gathers information within a direct neighborhood uniformly
across all nodes. When information aggregation from direct neighborhood is not sufficient, the convolution layers
are stacked to seek for useful information from a larger
neighborhood. Such an architecture with several convolution layers broadens the range of neighborhood for information aggregation uniformly, again, across the entire nodes in
the graph. Eventually, when the same information is shared
across all the nodes, it leads to “oversmoothed” representation of each node, not being able to characterize one from
another. This behavior can be easily interpreted from the
spectral perspective, as a filtering operation in the spectral
space will uniformly affect all nodes in the graph space.
Perhaps the most intuitive solution to the oversmoothing
is to use different ranges of neighborhood per node. However, it is difficult to design such a model with conventional
graph convolution, as it would require different number of
convolution layers for each node which is highly impractical. Several recent works tried to overcome this locality
issue. Methods in (Veličković et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2022)
leverage attention to capture long-range relationships among
nodes, authors in (Gao et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2022b) develop
pooling scheme to compress graphs, and authors in (Chen
et al. 2020) improve upon the vanilla GCN with skip connection of residuals as in ResNet (He et al. 2016).
Notably, GraphHeat (Xu et al. 2020) used a diffusion kernel to redefine distances between nodes as a heat diffusion
process among the nodes along the graph structure. It easily connects many local nodes within a range (i.e., scale)
even though they are not directly connected. Such an approach is quite effective when the homophily condition is
reasonably held even if the given edges in a graph may be
noisy. But still, the scale was defined as a hyperparameter
and the same range was arranged across the entire graph.
Later, a framework that trains on the scale according to a
target task was introduced with the gradient of a loss with re-

Various Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been successful in analyzing data in non-Euclidean spaces, however, they
have limitations such as oversmoothing, i.e., information becomes excessively averaged as the number of hidden layers
increases. The issue stems from the intrinsic formulation of
conventional graph convolution where the nodal features are
aggregated from a direct neighborhood per layer across the
entire nodes in the graph. As setting different number of hidden layers per node is infeasible, recent works leverage a
diffusion kernel to redefine the graph structure and incorporate information from farther nodes. Unfortunately, such approaches suffer from heavy diagonalization of a graph Laplacian or learning a large transform matrix. In this regards,
we propose a diffusion learning framework, where the range
of feature aggregation is controlled by the scale of a diffusion kernel. For efficient computation, we derive closed-form
derivatives of approximations of the graph convolution with
respect to the scale, so that node-wise range can be adaptively
learned. With a downstream classifier, the entire framework is
made trainable in an end-to-end manner. Our model is tested
on various standard datasets for node-wise classification for
the state-of-the-art performance, and it is also validated on
a real-world brain network data for graph classifications to
demonstrate its practicality for Alzheimer classification.

Introduction
Graph Neural Network (GNN) has been heavily recognized
in machine learning and computer vision with various practical applications such as text classification (Huang et al.
2019), neural machine translation (Bastings et al. 2017), 3D
shape analysis (Wei et al. 2020; Verma et al. 2018), semantic
segmentation (Qi et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2021), social information systems (Lin et al. 2021) and speech recognition (Liu
et al. 2016). At the heart of these GNN models lies the graph
convolution, which develops useful representation of each
node with a filtering operation on the graph. Given a graph
comprised of a set of nodes/edges and signal defined on its
nodes, in (Kipf et al. 2017), a convolutional layer was introduced as a linear combination of the signal within a direct
neighborhood of each node using the topology of the graph,
and its equivalence with spectral filtering (Hammond et al.
2011) has been shown. Stacking these convolutional layers
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4882

