The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MaxEnt Loss: Constrained Maximum Entropy
for Calibration under Out-of-Distribution Shift
Dexter Neo, Stefan Winkler, Tsuhan Chen
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
e0534450@u.nus.edu, {winkler, tsuhan}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We present a new loss function that addresses the out-ofdistribution (OOD) network calibration problem. While many
objective functions have been proposed to effectively calibrate models in-distribution (ID), our findings show that they
do not always fare well OOD. Based on the Principle of
Maximum Entropy, we incorporate helpful statistical constraints observed during training, delivering better model calibration without sacrificing accuracy. We provide theoretical
analysis and show empirically that our method works well
in practice, achieving state-of-the-art calibration on both synthetic and real-world benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/dexterdley/MaxEnt-Loss.

Figure 1: Uncalibrated models (left) make overconfident
OOD misdiagnoses, resulting in dire consequences. Wellcalibrated models (right) exhibit lower confidence, reflecting their uncertainty for OOD samples.

Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning have given rise to large
neural networks with strong recognition performance in
fields such as computer vision and natural language processing. Neural networks are increasingly used in areas where
safety is a concern, such as self-driving cars (Bojarski et al.
2016), medical prognosis (Esteva et al. 2017; Bandi et al.
2019) and facial expression recognition (Vonikakis, Neo,
and Winkler 2021; Neo, Chen, and Winkler 2023; Neo and
Chen 2023b). Despite their popularity, deep neural networks
have a tendency to be poorly calibrated.
Calibration refers to the model’s correctness with regard
to its predicted probabilities. In other words, models tend to
overconfidently misclassify samples and erroneously recognize correct classes with low confidence. This often creates
mistrust due to the mismatch between model correctness and
confidence. For severe cases, uncalibrated models can cause
harm, resulting in serious consequences such as overconfidently misidentifying cancerous cells (see Figure 1). This
is especially common when uncalibrated models encounter
samples that are out-of-distribution (OOD) from the training
set. Ideally, a well-calibrated classifier should behave unconfidently and predict low probabilities whenever it misclassifies samples. Furthermore, we would like our models to not
only remain accurate and well-calibrated in-distribution (ID)
but to also provide further robustness against OOD shifts for
safe deployment (Thulasidasan et al. 2019; Kumar, Liang,
and Ma 2019).

The current hypothesis as to why modern neural networks
are miscalibrated is that these large models with millions
of parameters have the capacity to learn and overfit to the
given training data (Guo et al. 2017). This is especially true
if model training is done using the cross-entropy (CE) loss,
since the CE loss can only be fully minimized when probabilities P̂ are equal to the one-hot ground truth y. This means
that even though the accuracy is at 100%, CE loss can still
be positive and minimized further by increasing the confidence of the predicted probabilities, resulting in overfitting
and miscalibration. While many techniques have been proposed to address calibration, a category of methods include
objective functions that pair CE loss with auxiliary terms.
Specifically, objective functions such as Focal, Inverse Focal
and Poly loss (Lin et al. 2017; Wang, Feng, and Zhang 2021;
Leng et al. 2022) add an additional penalty term to control
the confidence of predictions. Other objective functions such
as AvUC and Soft-AvUC loss introduce a differentiable utility term based on accuracy and uncertainty (Krishnan and
Tickoo 2020; Karandikar et al. 2021).
Contrary to these methods, we follow the work of
Mukhoti et al. (2020) and further explore the Principle of
Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) (Jaynes 1957). We propose
a novel regularization technique in the form of a general
loss function for improving calibration based on constrained
maximum entropy. Our method works by introducing additional constraints that complement loss functions typically
used in supervised learning. We provide systematic comparisons of model accuracy and calibration for image classifi-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21463

