The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Effectiveness of Constant Stepsize in Markovian LSA and Statistical Inference
Dongyan (Lucy) Huo1 , Yudong Chen2 , Qiaomin Xie3
1

School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University
2
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
3
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison
dh622@cornell.edu, yudong.chen@wisc.edu, qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu

Abstract

et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2022; Liu, Chen, and
Shang 2023). This approach is computationally cheap and
scales well with the size and dimension of the dataset: SA
updates are computed iteratively, without storing or multiple
passes over the dataset. In comparison, classical inference
techniques, such as bootstrapping, often require storing the
entire dataset and repeating the estimation procedure, which
may have prohibitive computational costs.
The aforementioned works on using SA for inference
have focused on the diminishing stepsize paradigm, for
which a mature convergence theory exists, ensuring the
asymptotic correctness of the inference results. In contrast,
constant-stepsize SA lacks last-iterate almost sure convergence: recent works have shown that the iterates converge
only in distribution; moreover, the limit distribution may
have a nonzero asymptotic bias due to the nonlinearity of the
SA updates (Dieuleveut, Durmus, and Bach 2020) or the underlying Markovian data (Huo, Chen, and Xie 2023a), and
this bias cannot be eliminated by iterate averaging. Partly
due to these considerations, inference with constant stepsize
SA iterates has been largely overlooked in the literature.
We study the effectiveness of statistical inference using
constant-stepsize SA iterates. We focus on linear stochastic
approximation (LSA), i.e., θt+1 = θt + α(A(xt )θt + b(xt )),
with a constant stepsize α and Markovian data (xt )t≥0 .
We first establish a Central Limit Theorem (CLT) for averaged Markovian LSA iterates. Built upon the CLT, we
outline an inference procedure using averaged iterates and
batch-mean covariance estimates. Our procedure leverages
the fast mixing property of constant-stepsize updates for better covariance estimation and employs Richardson-Romberg
(RR) extrapolation for bias reduction. We study two stepsize schemes in RR extrapolation. We further prove that with
Markovian data, the asymptotic bias may vanish in several
important settings, in which case inference with constantstepsize LSA iterates is effective even without RR extrapolation. We conduct extensive experiments to benchmark our
procedure against conventional inference approaches. Our
results demonstrate superior and robust performance of the
constant stepsize paradigm, which enjoys fast convergence,
good coverage properties, and easy parameter tuning.1

In this paper, we study the effectiveness of using a constant
stepsize in statistical inference via linear stochastic approximation (LSA) algorithms with Markovian data. After establishing a Central Limit Theorem (CLT), we outline an inference procedure that uses averaged LSA iterates to construct confidence intervals (CIs). Our procedure leverages the
fast mixing property of constant-stepsize LSA for better covariance estimation and employs Richardson-Romberg (RR)
extrapolation to reduce the bias induced by constant stepsize and Markovian data. We develop theoretical results for
guiding stepsize selection in RR extrapolation, and identify
several important settings where the bias provably vanishes
even without extrapolation. We conduct extensive numerical experiments and compare against classical inference approaches. Our results show that using a constant stepsize enjoys easy hyperparameter tuning, fast convergence, and consistently better CI coverage, especially when data is limited.

Introduction
Stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms use stochastic updates to iteratively approximate the solution to fixed-point
equations. SA has wide applications, such as the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm for loss minimization
and the Temporal Difference (TD) learning algorithm in reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton 1988). Classical works
on SA typically assume the stepsize
αt is squareP sequence P
summable and diminishing, i.e., t αt = ∞, t αt2 < ∞,
under which asymptotic almost-sure convergence is well
studied (Robbins and Monro 1951; Blum 1954; Borkar and
Meyn 2000). Constant stepsize has gained popularity recently, particularly among practitioners, due to its fast initial convergence and easy hyperparameter tuning. A growing
line of works studies the convergence properties of SA under
constant stepsize, establishing upper bounds on the meansquared error (MSE) (Lakshminarayanan and Szepesvári
2018; Srikant and Ying 2019; Mou et al. 2020, 2021) as well
as weak convergence results (Dieuleveut, Durmus, and Bach
2020; Yu et al. 2021; Huo, Chen, and Xie 2023a).
Recent works have explored using SA and SGD iterates
to perform statistical inference, e.g., constructing confidence
intervals (CIs) around a point estimate (Li et al. 2018; Chen

1
An extended paper with appendix can be found at Huo, Chen,
and Xie (2023b).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20447

