The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAM-PARSER: Fine-Tuning SAM Efficiently by Parameter Space Reconstruction
Zelin Peng* , Zhengqin Xu* , Zhilin Zeng, Xiaokang Yang, Wei Shen†
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zelin.peng, fate311, bernardeschi, xkyang, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) New Parameters

Segment Anything Model (SAM) has received remarkable
attention as it offers a powerful and versatile solution for
object segmentation in images. However, fine-tuning SAM
for downstream segmentation tasks under different scenarios remains a challenge, as the varied characteristics of different scenarios naturally requires diverse model parameter
spaces. Most existing fine-tuning methods attempt to bridge
the gaps among different scenarios by introducing a set of
new parameters to modify SAM’s original parameter space.
Unlike these works, in this paper, we propose fine-tuning
SAM efficiently by parameter space reconstruction (SAMPARSER), which introduces nearly zero trainable parameters during fine-tuning. In SAM-PARSER, we assume that
SAM’s original parameter space is relatively complete, so
that its bases are able to reconstruct the parameter space of a
new scenario. We obtain the bases by matrix decomposition,
and fine-tuning the coefficients to reconstruct the parameter
space tailored to the new scenario by an optimal linear combination of the bases. Experimental results show that SAMPARSER exhibits superior segmentation performance across
various scenarios, while reducing the number of trainable parameters by approximately 290 times compared with current
parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods.

Parameter Space

SAM’s Parameter Space

Fine-tuning
(b) Reconstruction
SAM’s Parameter Space

Parameter Space

Figure 1: Comparative Overview: Previous Methods vs.
SAM-PARSER. (a) Previous parameter-efficient fine-tuning
methods adapt SAM to different scenarios via adding new
parameters. (b) Our SAM-PARSER adapts SAM to various scenarios through parameter space reconstruction, with
nearly zero trainable parameters introduced.

spaces. Furthermore, given the vast number of parameters
in SAM, direct fine-tuning of its original parameter space
seems less feasible.
Recent methods tackle these challenges by adopting
a parameter-efficient fine-tuning paradigm, inspired by
the prominent fine-tuning strategies in Natural Language
Processing (NLP), i.e., LoRA (Hu et al. 2022) and
Adapter (Houlsby et al. 2019). As shown in Fig. 1, their
common idea is to learn the distinct characteristics by introducing a set of new trainable parameters, thereby shifting
the original parameter space to satisfy various downstream
scenarios, leading to competitive performance for adapting
SAM to new scenarios (Ma and Wang 2023; Chen et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023a). Considering that the original parameter space of SAM is already very huge, we raise a question by the light of nature: Is there any way to adapt SAM
to new varied scenarios without introducing new trainable
parameters?
In this paper, to offer a solution to this question, we
propose fine-tuning SAM efficiently by parameter space
reconstruction (SAM-PARSER). Since the original parameter space of SAM is huge, we can assume that its bases
are foundational, which are capable of reconstructing the
parameter space tailored to varied downstream scenarios. Specifically, we utilize a widely-accepted matrix de-

Introduction
The recent unveiling of foundation models (Brown et al.
2020; Kirillov et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b) has shown
unprecedented performance and potential across various domains in artificial intelligence. Among these, Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023) is one of the most
noteworthy foundation models in computer vision, which
contains a vast number of parameters and is pre-trained
on a large-scale segmentation dataset, i.e., SA-1B. Consequently, SAM exhibits its capability in precise object segmentation across various images (He et al. 2023a; Ji et al.
2023). The effectiveness of SAM has generated significant
interest in fine-tuning it for downstream scenarios (Zhang
and Liu 2023; Ma and Wang 2023). However, this is a challenging task because the diverse characteristics inherent in
different scenarios often necessitate varied model parameter
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4515

