The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Inductive Robustness: Distilling and Fostering Wave-Induced Resonance
in Transductive GCNs against Graph Adversarial Attacks
Ao Liu1 , Wenshan Li2 * , Tao Li1 , Beibei Li1 , Hanyuan Huang1 , Pan Zhou3
1

Sichuan University
Chengdu University of Information Technology
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{liuao, huanghanyuan}@stu.scu.edu.cn, helenali@cuit.edu.cn, {litao, libeibei}scu.edu.cn, panzhou@hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

served that perturbed graphs derived from GCNs serving as surrogate models have the potential to compromise the outputs of inductive GNNs when transferred. In
real-world applications, where trust and accuracy are nonnegotiable (Chen et al. 2021; Nadal et al. 2021; Zhao et al.
2022; Berberidis and Giannakis 2019; Xiao, Chen, and Shi
2019), such vulnerabilities can significantly jeopardize public trust (Kreps and Kriner 2020), distort human decisionmaking (Walt, Jack, and Christof 2019), and threaten human
well-being (Samuel et al. 2019). Addressing the vulnerabilities introduced by transductive GCNs into the GNNs’ community is of paramount importance.
Distinct from discrete feature data like images or text,
graph data comprises a connected set of features through
its topological structure. This interconnectedness naturally
encourages the adoption of a global input-output mechanism to establish a learning channel from features to labels, a paradigm referred as transductive learning (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016; Bruna et al. 2013), with GCNs epitomizing this approach. This very transductive nature of GCNs offers adversaries an ideal environment for launching attacks (Liu et al.
2022). Leveraging this global input-output pattern, given
sufficient computation, adversaries can invariably devise
perturbations that are both concealment and effective (Sun
et al. 2022). Given that adversaries exploit vulnerabilities
inherent to transductive models to compromise the GNNs’
communities, the formulation of a more robust transductive
model has ascended as the prevailing defensive approach.
To defense adversarial attacks, early research predominantly sought to fortify GCN’s tolerance to perturbations
by adversarial training through random edge drops (Dai
et al. 2018). Recently, a shift towards self-supervised training methods has been observed. These techniques sidestep
the trap set by adversaries, which bait the model into misclassifying specific inputs. Instead of singularly focusing on
enhancing the model’s robustness to a given label space,
they aim to expand the GCN’s overall robustness to potential perturbed graphs. Key representatives of these research
endeavors include: (1) In RGCN (Zhu et al. 2019), the Gaussian distributions are employed to replace the node hidden
representations across each GCN layer, aiming to mitigate
the adversarial modifications’ impact. (2) By introducing a
singular value decomposition (SVD) filter before the GCN

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently been shown to
be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where slight perturbations in the graph structure can lead to erroneous predictions.
However, current robust models for defending against such
attacks inherit the transductive limitations of graph convolutional networks (GCNs). As a result, they are constrained
by fixed structures and do not naturally generalize to unseen
nodes. Here, we discover that transductive GCNs inherently
possess a distillable robustness, achieved through a waveinduced resonance process. Based on this, we foster this resonance to facilitate inductive and robust learning. Specifically,
we first prove that the signal formed by GCN-driven message passing (MP) is equivalent to the edge-based Laplacian
wave, where, within a wave system, resonance can naturally
emerge between the signal and its transmitting medium. This
resonance provides inherent resistance to malicious perturbations inflicted on the signal system. We then prove that merely
three MP iterations within GCNs can induce signal resonance between nodes and edges, manifesting as a coupling
between nodes and their distillable surrounding local subgraph. Consequently, we present Graph Resonance-fostering
Network (GRN) to foster this resonance via learning node
representations from their distilled resonating subgraphs. By
capturing the edge-transmitted signals within this subgraph
and integrating them with the node signal, GRN embeds these
combined signals into the central node’s representation. This
node-wise embedding approach allows for generalization to
unseen nodes. We validate our theoretical findings with experiments, and demonstrate that GRN generalizes robustness
to unseen nodes, whilst maintaining state-of-the-art classification accuracy on perturbed graphs. Appendices can be
found on arXiv version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08651

Introduction
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs), through the
capabilities afforded by inductive learning, have emerged as
the most potent instruments for node classification tasks.
Nevertheless, earlier transductive models, such as graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017),
have inadvertently introduced vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks within the GNN framework. It has been ob* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13855

