The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AGS: Affordable and Generalizable Substitute Training for Transferable
Adversarial Attack
Ruikui Wang1,2 , Yuanfang Guo1,2 * , Yunhong Wang2
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
{rkwang, andyguo, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

𝒙𝒂𝒅𝒗 adversary 𝒛 projection vector 𝒕𝒊 ∙ image transformation
𝒙 input image 𝒑 predicted p-vector 𝒉 hidden representation
ℒ
𝑓𝑐
𝑔𝝓 (∙)
𝒙 𝑓𝜃 (∙) 𝒉
𝒑 CE 𝒍𝒂𝒃𝒆𝒍 𝒕𝟏 (𝒙) 𝑓𝜃 (∙) 𝒉𝟏
(a) classical supervised learning
𝒙𝒂𝒅𝒗 𝑓𝜃 (∙) 𝒉𝒂
𝑔𝝓 (∙)
𝑔 (∙)
𝒕 (𝒙) 𝑓 (∙) 𝒉𝟏
𝒛𝟏

Abstract
In practical black-box attack scenarios, most of the existing transfer-based attacks employ pretrained models (e.g.
ResNet50) as the substitute models. Unfortunately, these substitute models are not always appropriate for transfer-based
attacks. Firstly, these models are usually trained on a largescale annotated dataset, which is extremely expensive and
time-consuming to construct. Secondly, the primary goal of
these models is to perform a specific task, such as image classification, which is not developed for adversarial attacks. To
tackle the above issues, i.e., high cost and over-fitting on taskspecific models, we propose an Affordable and Generalizable
Substitute (AGS) training framework tailored for transferbased adversarial attack. Specifically, we train the substitute
model from scratch by our proposed adversary-centric constrastive learning. This proposed learning mechanism introduces another sample with slight adversarial perturbations
as an additional positive view of the input image, and then
encourages the adversarial view and two benign views to
interact comprehensively with each other. To further boost
the generalizability of the substitute model, we propose adversarial invariant learning to maintain the representations
of the adversarial example invariants under augmentations
with various strengths. Our AGS model can be trained solely
with unlabeled and out-of domain data and avoid overfitting
to any task-specific models, because of its inherently selfsupervised nature. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our AGS achieves comparable or superior performance compared to substitute models pretrained on the complete ImageNet training set, when executing attacks across a diverse
range of target models, including ViTs, robustly trained models, object detection and segmentation models. Our source
codes are available at https://github.com/lwmming/AGS.

𝟏

𝒕𝟐 (𝒙)

𝜃

𝝓

forward
backward
𝒛𝟏

𝒛𝒂 ℒACCL

ℒCL
𝒕𝟐 (𝒙)
𝒛𝟐

𝑔𝝓 (∙)
𝑓𝜃 (∙) 𝒉𝟐
𝒛𝟐
𝑔𝝓 (∙)
𝑓𝜃 (∙) 𝒉𝟐
(b) classical contrastive learning (c) adversary-centric contrastive learning

Figure 1: Conceptual functioning pipelines of different substitute training schemes, whose backgrounds are best viewed
in distinctive colors.
DNN-based applications, such as face recognition application (Vakhshiteh, Ramachandra, and Nickabadi 2020), autonomous driving (Kumar et al. 2021), etc. Consequently,
research on adversarial example is necessary and imperious.
Actually, the key property that allows the adversarial
examples to be practically applied is the transferability
(Szegedy et al. 2014), referring to adversarial examples generated on one model can successfully deceive other models even with different architectures. Nowadays, a growing number of methods (Dong et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2019;
Huang et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2022a; Yang et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022b; Huang and Kong 2022) have been proposed
to boost the transferability of adversarial examples. As
shown in Fig. 1(a), the substitute models employed in these
methods are typically pretrained on a large-scale annotated
dataset, e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015). Unfortunately, constructing such datasets costs significant human
efforts and time, which is often prohibitive to afford. Meanwhile, the employed substitute models are usually optimized
for specific tasks. For instance, ResNet50 (He et al. 2016a),
a commonly used substitute model, is optimized with the
cross-entropy loss to primarily fulfill image classification
tasks. Consequently, the adversarial examples crafted on
ResNet50 tend to overfit to the task-specific models.
The aforementioned issues tend to limit the practical applicability of the transfer-based black-box attacks. Recently,
several literatures (Li, Guo, and Chen 2020; Ban and Dong
2022; Sun et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023; Malik et al. 2022) have
sought to overcome these limitations by harnessing selfsupervised models (Chen et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021)

Introduction
In recent years, a wide range of computer vision tasks (He
et al. 2016b; Ren et al. 2015) have been revolutionized by
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Despite the impressive capabilities of DNNs, they are exceedingly vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e., the imperceptible perturbation injected on the input can easily alter the model’s decision. This
phenomenon raises security concerns in current deployed
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5553

