The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Closure Certificates
Alireza Nadali, Vishnu Murali, Ashutosh Trivedi, Majid Zamani
University of Colorado Boulder
{a nadali, vishnu.murali, ashutosh.trivedi, majid.zamani}@colorado.edu

Abstract

neural network based certificates to capture liveness properties (“something good eventually happens”) by approximating the transitive closure of state transitions. We dub these
certificates neural closure certificates.

Notions of transition invariants and closure certificates have
seen recent use in the formal verification of controlled dynamical systems against ω-regular properties. The existing
approaches face limitations in two directions. First, they require a closed-form mathematical expression representing the
model of the system. Such an expression may be difficult to
find, too complex to be of any use, or unavailable due to
security or privacy constraints. Second, finding such invariants typically rely on optimization techniques such as sum-ofsquares (SOS) or satisfiability modulo theory (SMT) solvers.
This restricts the classes of systems that need to be formally
verified. To address these drawbacks, we introduce a notion
of neural closure certificates. We present a data-driven algorithm that trains a neural network to represent a closure certificate. Our approach is formally correct under some mild assumptions, i.e., one is able to formally show that the unknown
system satisfies the ω-regular property of interest if a neural
closure certificate can be computed. Finally, we demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach with relevant case studies.

Neural Barrier Certificates for Safety. A key contribution in the use of neural networks as a verification tool has
been that of neural barrier certificates (Zhao et al. 2020)
to demonstrate the safety of dynamical systems. We say
that a dynamical system is safe with respect to a set of unsafe states, if it never reaches these states as it evolves. To
address the problem of safety verification, Prajna and Jadbabaie (2004) proposed a notion of barrier certificates.
A barrier certificate is real-valued function that is nonpositive over the initial states, positive over the unsafe states
and non-increasing over the evolution of the system. These
conditions together ensure that the system is safe. Observe
that a barrier certificate is a functional inductive state invariant. Every initial state has a barrier value which is nonpositive. Furthermore, given any state with a nonpositive barrier
value, all of its successors must also be nonpositive via an
inductive proof. Lastly, as the unsafe states do not have a
nonpositive barrier value, they cannot be reached from the
initial states. As the search for a barrier certificate involves
finding a function that satisfies the above constraints, there
has been a widespread adoption of novel techniques and approaches to make use of neural networks to represent such
certificates (Abate et al. 2021; Dawson, Gao, and Fan 2023;
Nadali, Trivedi, and Zamani 2023).

Introduction
The recent advances in deep learning and neural networks
have revolutionized the capability in perception and natural language processing (Voulodimos et al. 2018; Otter,
Medina, and Kalita 2020). As a result, control and robotics
applications in modern critical infrastructure are progressively incorporating deep neural networks into their operations, leading to the grand challenge of ensuring safety
in learning-enabled cyber-physical systems. Examples of
safety-critical such systems include implantable medical devices, autonomous vehicles, and surgical robots.
In response to this overarching challenge, substantial efforts have been directed (Haesaert, Van den Hof, and Abate
2017; Ratschan 2017; Nejati et al. 2023) towards adapting successful classical formal and statistical approaches
to verify systems with unknown dynamics. Among these
approaches, neural network based barrier certificates have
shown considerable promise. These certificates capture state
invariants providing a certificate for safety (“nothing bad
happens”). We extend this line of research by developing

Beyond Safety. While neural barrier certificates have seen
significant success in ensuring the safety of systems, they are
inadequate in certifying an important class of specifications
known as liveness. A system satisfies a liveness property if
something good eventually happens (Alpern and Schneider
1987). An example of such a property is to ensure that a system visits a set of states infinitely often. While safety can
be demonstrated using an inductive argument, one needs to
develop a well-foundedness argument (Cook 2009) to establish liveness. To address this question, Podelski and Rybalchenko (2004) proposed a notion of transition invariants.
A transition invariant is a set of pairs of states such that
it may be possible to reach the second element from the
first. This represents a superset of the transitive closure of
the transition relation that represents the evolution of the

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21446

