The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Diverse and Aligned Audio-to-Video Generation via
Text-to-Video Model Adaptation
Guy Yariv1,2 , Itai Gat3 , Sagie Benaim1 , Lior Wolf4 , Idan Schwartz4,2,∗ , Yossi Adi1 *
1

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
2
NetApp,
3
Technion,
4
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
We consider the task of generating diverse and realistic videos
guided by natural audio samples from a wide variety of semantic classes. For this task, the videos are required to be
aligned both globally and temporally with the input audio:
globally, the input audio is semantically associated with the
entire output video, and temporally, each segment of the input audio is associated with a corresponding segment of that
video. We utilize an existing text-conditioned video generation model and a pre-trained audio encoder model. The proposed method is based on a lightweight adaptor network,
which learns to map the audio-based representation to the input representation expected by the text-to-video generation
model. As such, it also enables video generation conditioned
on text, audio, and, for the first time as far as we can ascertain,
on both text and audio. We validate our method extensively on
three datasets demonstrating significant semantic diversity of
audio-video samples and further propose a novel evaluation
metric (AV-Align) to assess the alignment of generated videos
with input audio samples. AV-Align is based on the detection
and comparison of energy peaks in both modalities. In comparison to recent state-of-the-art approaches, our method generates videos that are better aligned with the input sound, both
with respect to content and temporal axis. We also show that
videos produced by our method present higher visual quality and are more diverse. Code and samples are available at:
https://pages.cs.huji.ac.il/adiyoss-lab/TempoTokens/.

Figure 1: Generated video frames (above) and input audio
signal (below the frames) employing our technique. The input to our model is an audio recording from which a representation is extracted. This representation maintains crucial temporal attributes and is then mapped into a textbased latent space representation incorporating both local
and global audio context. Subsequently, this latent representation is fed into a pre-trained text-to-video diffusion generative model, ensuring the synchronized generation of video
which is closely aligned with the input audio.

prior work did not consider audio in the generation process.
For instance, the action of ‘playing drums’ or the ‘motion of
waves’ can be distinctively associated with a naturally occurring sound. Moreover, audio is comprised of structural
components such as pitch and envelope that provide important cues for the type of scene and motion depicted.
We tackle the problem of generating diverse and realistic videos guided by natural audio samples. Our generated
videos capture diverse and real-life settings from a wide variety of semantic classes and are aligned both globally and
temporally with the input audio. Globally, the input audio
is semantically associated with the entire output video, and
temporally, each segment of the input audio is associated
with a corresponding segment of that video. An example
generation video can be seen in Figure 1.
Prior work on audio-guided video generation was mainly
focused on either global information in the videos (i.e., capturing the semantic class) or specific scenes (e.g., speech).

Introduction
Neural generative models have changed the way we create
and consume digital content. From generating high-quality
images and videos (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach
et al. 2022), speech and audio (Wang et al. 2023a; Sheffer
and Adi 2023; Copet et al. 2023; Kreuk et al. 2022; Hassid
et al. 2023), through generating long textual spans (Touvron
et al. 2023a,b; Brown et al. 2020), these models have shown
impressive results.
In the context of video generation, progress has been more
elusive, with recent work making progress in generating
short videos conditioned on text (Singer et al. 2022; Ho et al.
2022). Although audio is tightly connected to videos (e.g.,
providing important cues for motion in a scene), most of the
* Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6639

