The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Encoding Constraints as Binary Constraint Networks Satisfying BTP
Ruiwei Wang
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
wangruiwei@u.nus.edu

Abstract

For example, the Multi-valued Decision Diagram (MDD)
can be exponentially smaller than its table representation. As
such (Wang and Yap 2022b) proposed binary encodings to
encode MDD constraints as BCTs. They showed that BCT is
strictly more succinct than many ad-hoc constraints (Wang
and Yap 2022a, 2023). Then a question that arises is can we
define more succinct constraint representations with other
tractable classes?
Usually, the tractable classes of CNs can be classified
as language classes, structural classes and hybrid classes
(Carbonnel and Cooper 2016). Language classes restrict the
language of constraint relations. For example, the largest
tractable language class restricts that all constraint relations
are preserved by a weak near-unanimity (WNU) operation
(Bulatov 2017; Zhuk 2017). Then structural classes restrict
the structure of constraint graphs, such as bounded fractional
hypertree width (Grohe and Marx 2014). Hybrid classes simultaneously consider both constraint relations and graphs,
such as the classes defined by forbidden patterns (Cohen
et al. 2012; Cooper and Živný 2016). Different from most
previous works, which are mainly about the time complexity
of CSPs and focus on the CSP dichotomy conjecture (Feder
and Vardi 1998), we will investigate the tractable classes
from a constraint modelling perspective.
In the paper, we first show that it is unlikely to improve the
succinctness of BCT by directly using known tractable structural and language classes. Then we investigate the modelling power of the class of BTPNs. To be specific, we prove
that the consistency checker (Bessiere et al. 2009) of the
BTPN constraint can be computed by polysize monotone
circuit, thus, some global constraints cannot be encoded as
polysize BTPN, such as Circuit (Beldiceanu and Contejean
1994), Channelling (Cheng et al. 1999) and Linear (Yuanlin
and Yap 2000) constraints. Meanwhile, we introduce a binary encoding to transform the DNNF constraint (Gange and
Stuckey 2012) into polysize BTPN, and show that BTPN is
strictly more succinct than the DNNF constraint and all 14
ad-hoc constraints discussed in (Wang and Yap 2023), such
as the context-free grammar (Quimper and Walsh 2006),
BCT and smart table (Mairy, Deville, and Lecoutre 2015)
constraints. Moreover, we prove that it is NP-hard to minimizing the size of the BTPN encoding a constraint. In addition, we also show that BTPN is as powerful as DNNF in
terms of computing operations and queries.

Recently, the Binary Constraint Tree (BCT), a tree structured
Binary Constraint Network (BCN), has been shown to be
more succinct than various ad-hoc constraints. In this paper,
we investigate the modelling power of a well-known tractable
hybrid class generalizing BCT, i.e. the class of BCNs satisfying Broken Triangle Property (BTP) called BTP Networks
(BTPNs). We show that the consistency checker of BTPN
can be computed by polysize monotone circuit, thus, some
global constraints cannot be encoded as polysize BTPN, such
as the AllDifferent and Linear constraints. Then our study reveals that BTPN is strictly more succinct than the DNNF constraint and all 14 ad-hoc constraints discussed in (Wang and
Yap 2023), such as the context-free grammar, BCT and smart
table constraints. Furthermore, we also show that BTPN is as
powerful as DNNF in terms of computing various operations
and queries. In addition, we prove that it is NP-hard to determine the minimum sized BTPN encoding a constraint.

1

Introduction

Many tractable classes (Carbonnel and Cooper 2016) of
Constraint Networks (CNs) have been proposed to study
the tractability of Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs).
However, there is less work on encoding constraints with
the tractable classes. Recently, (Wang and Yap 2022b, 2023)
showed that Binary Constraint Tree (BCT) can be used to
model various ad-hoc constraints in polysize, where BCT
is the class of tree structured Binary CNs (BCNs) (Freuder
1982). In this paper, we investigate the class of BCNs satisfying Broken Triangle Property (BTP) called BTP Networks
(BTPNs), which is a well-known tractable hybrid class generalizing BCT (Cooper, Jeavons, and Salamon 2010).
(Dechter 1990) showed that the expressiveness of BCNs
can be significantly improved with hidden variables. In addition, various binary encodings with hidden variables have
been proposed to encode table constraints (Yap, Xia, and
Wang 2020) as BCNs, such as the dual encoding (Dechter
and Pearl 1989), hidden variable encoding (Rossi, Petrie,
and Dhar 1990), double encoding (Stergiou and Walsh 1999)
and bipartite encoding (Wang and Yap 2020). Although all
constraint relations can be represented as table constraints,
the tabulation of constraints may cause exponential blowup.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8172

