The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond OOD State Actions: Supported Cross-Domain
Offline Reinforcement Learning
Jinxin Liu* , Ziqi Zhang* , Zhenyu Wei, Zifeng Zhuang, Yachen Kang, Sibo Gai, Donglin Wang†
School of Enginneering, Westlake University

Offline data (differ in transition dynamics):

Abstract

target domain

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn a policy
using only pre-collected and fixed data. Although avoiding
the time-consuming online interactions in RL, it poses challenges for out-of-distribution (OOD) state actions and often
suffers from data inefficiency for training. Despite many efforts being devoted to addressing OOD state actions, the latter (data inefficiency) receives little attention in offline RL.
To address this, this paper proposes the cross-domain offline RL, which assumes offline data incorporate additional
source-domain data from varying transition dynamics (environments), and expects it to contribute to the offline data efficiency. To do so, we identify a new challenge of OOD transition dynamics, beyond the common OOD state actions issue,
when utilizing cross-domain offline data. Then, we propose
our method BOSA, which employs two support-constrained
objectives to address the above OOD issues. Through extensive experiments in the cross-domain offline RL setting,
we demonstrate BOSA can greatly improve offline data efficiency: using only 10% of the target data, BOSA could
achieve 74.4% of the SOTA offline RL performance that uses
100% of the target data. Additionally, we also show BOSA
can be effortlessly plugged into model-based offline RL and
noising data augmentation techniques (used for generating
source-domain data), which naturally avoids the potential dynamics mismatch between target-domain data and newly generated source-domain data.

100%

learn
CQL score:63.9

learn

10%

source domain

agent

learn

10%

cross-domain
CQL score:26.8 offline RL

CQL score:32.5

ours score:60.6

Figure 1: (left) The vanilla single-domain offline RL setting.
(right) Our cross-domain offline RL, which learns a policy
from offline cross-domain data, consists of limited targetdomain data and plenty of source-domain data. Scores in
this diagram are averaged over 9 D4RL Mujoco tasks, which
serve as the target domain.

Levine 2021, Fujimoto and Gu 2021]. Yet, such offline solutions tend to perform well when plenty of pre-collected
training data is available and the testing environment keeps
consistent with the data-collecting environment. However,
collecting large-scale offline data for a domain-specific environment is still labor-intensive and expensive. Additionally, once we reduce the offline training data, the final performance drops quickly (Figure 1 left and Figure 2). Thus,
although that advanced offline RL methods tend to be saturated with abundant data, the underlying offline data inefficiency makes them difficult to use for data-scarce scenarios.
Motivated by the sample-efficient domain adaptation, this
paper investigates the cross-domain offline RL. Specifically,
we assume the agent can access a large amount of sourcedomain offline data from one or multiple separate source
environments, and we are interested in adapting the learning policy with limited target-domain offline data (as shown
in Figure 1 right). We also emphasize that such an additional
source-domain data assumption can be naturally satisfied in
practice. For example, it is common to have a large amount
of data on driving behaviors in city roads (source domain),
while only having a few samples in mountain environments
(target domain) for autonomous driving tasks.
However, prior offline RL methods often work poorly
in the cross-domain setting, particularly for source-domain
data with large transition dynamics differences. As we show

Introduction
Data-driven offline reinforcement learning (RL) holds the
promise to learn a control policy from fixed and static
dataset [Levine et al. 2020] while avoiding the costly and
time-consuming online data acquisition in standard RL.
Nevertheless, a notorious challenge in offline RL is the presence of extrapolation error, which tends to drive the learning policy towards OOD state actions and yields collapsed
behaviors [Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019]. Many recent works have been dedicated to tackling this challenge,
leveraging policy regularization, value conservation, or supervised regression [Chen et al. 2021, Kostrikov, Nair, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13945

