The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Jointly Improving the Sample and Communication Complexities in Decentralized
Stochastic Minimax Optimization
Xuan Zhang1 , Gabriel Mancino-Ball2 , Necdet Serhat Aybat1 , Yangyang Xu2
1

Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
2
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180
xxz358@psu.edu, gabriel.mancino.ball@gmail.com, nsa10@psu.edu, xuy21@rpi.edu

Abstract

et al. 2021) and potential data privacy violations (Verbraeken
et al. 2020); hence, decentralized methods have emerged as
a practical alternative to overcome these issues.
In a decentralized setting, only agent-i has access to fi
and its stochastic gradient oracle; thus, in order for the M
agents to collaboratively solve (1), each agent-i will make a
local copy, denoted as (xi , yi ), of the primal-dual variable
(x, y) and communicate the local variables and gradient information with its immediate (1-hop) neighbors. In this way,
(1) can be reformulated equivalently into the following problem in a decentralized format:

We propose a novel single-loop decentralized algorithm,
DGDA-VR, for solving the stochastic nonconvex stronglyconcave minimax problems over a connected network of
agents, which are equipped with stochastic first-order oracles to estimate their local gradients. DGDA-VR, incorporating variance reduction, achieves O(ϵ−3 ) oracle complexity and O(ϵ−2 ) communication complexity without resorting to multi-communication rounds – both are optimal, i.e.,
matching the lower bounds for this class of problems. Since
DGDA-VR does not require multiple communication rounds,
it is applicable to a broader range of decentralized computational environments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first distributed method using a single communication round
in each iteration to jointly optimize the oracle and communication complexities for the problem considered here.

1 X
fi (xi , yi )
{xi }i∈V {yi }i∈V |V|
i∈V
min

s.t. xi = xj ,

Introduction
M

x∈Rd y∈R

1 X
fi (x, y),
M i=1

(2)

yi = yj , ∀ (i, j) ∈ E.

Consensus among the agents is then enforced through the
use of a mixing matrix encoding the topology of G.
Although there are decentralized algorithms for stochastic nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax problems, the existing work (Liu et al. 2020; Chen, Ye, and Luo 2022) requires multi-communication rounds at each iteration; hence,
they can be analyzed as a centralized algorithm with inexact
gradients. In a multi-agent setting, methods requiring multicommunication rounds per iteration are not desired as they
require more strict coordination among the agents while single round communication methods are much easier to implement. We will design a decentralized algorithm for (1)
or equivalently (2) that only requires a single communication round per iteration. Although another recent work (Xian
et al. 2021) also proposed a decentralized algorithm for the
same setting with a single round of communication per iteration, we noticed that its proof has a fundamental issue and
the claimed complexity results do not hold — we explain
this problem in detail when we compare our results with the
existing work below. In addition, the communication complexity of the algorithm in (Xian et al. 2021) is intrinsically
of the same order with its oracle complexity; hence, it cannot
be optimal. In contrast, the method we propose can achieve
an optimal complexity result for both oracle complexity and
communication complexity in terms of its dependence on a
given tolerance ϵ > 0 for ϵ-stationarity, defined below.

This paper considers a connected network G = (V, E) of M
agents which cooperatively solve
min max
f (x, y) ≜
m

max

(1)

where fi : Rd × Rm → R is smooth and possibly nonconvex in x ∈ Rd and are strongly-concave in y ∈ Rm for
i = 1, 2, ..., M . Furthermore, each agent-i can only access
˜ i rather than exact gradiunbiased stochastic gradients ∇f
˜ i }i∈V have finite varients ∇fi , and we assume that {∇f
ances, uniformly bounded by some σ > 0. The set V =
{1, 2, . . . , M } indexes the M agents and (i, j) ∈ E ⊆ V ×V
only if agent i can send information to agent j. Minimax optimization has garnered recent interest due to applications
in many machine learning settings such as adversarial training (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2020), distributionally robust optimization (Namkoong and Duchi 2016; Xian
et al. 2021), reinforcement learning (Zhang et al. 2021c),
and fair machine learning (Nouiehed et al. 2019). The problem in (1) arises naturally when the data is physically distributed among many agents or is too large to store on a single computing device (Xin, Khan, and Kar 2021a). It is well
known that centralized methods suffer from communication
bottlenecks on the parameter server (Lian et al. 2017; Xian

Contributions. Our contributions are two-fold. First, we
propose a decentralized stochastic gradient-type method,
called DGDA-VR, for solving (1) or equivalently (2). At ev-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20865

