The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exact Policy Recovery in Offline RL with Both Heavy-Tailed Rewards and Data
Corruption
Yiding Chen 1 , Xuezhou Zhang 2 , Qiaomin Xie 1 , Xiaojin Zhu 1
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
Boston University
ychen695@wisc.edu, xuezhouz@bu.edu, qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu, jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

subGaussian tails (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020). However, there is growing evidence indicating that the subGaussianity assumption may not hold for many real-world scenarios (Arnold 2014; Liebeherr, Burchard, and Ciucu 2012;
Borak, Härdle, and Weron 2005), challenging the applicability of algorithms designed solely for sub-Gaussian settings.
In terms of data corruption in RL, prior work (Zhang et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022) showed that one can apply pessimistic value iteration (PEVI) with robust mean estimation
to partially handle data corruption in offline RL, resulting in
a policy
π̂ with

 suboptimality upper bound SubOpt(π̂) ≤
poly(H,σ)
√
Õ
+ O(Hσ). Such an upper bound involves a
N
term diminishing with sample size N and an irreducible bias
term involves the corruption level . This implies that PEVI
returns a suboptimal policy even with infinite data.
In this paper, we address the challenge of policy recovery
in the presence of both heavy-tailed reward distributions and
data corruption. We establish that Trimmed-mean
estimation


γ
γ
1+γ
+ σN − 1+γ
achieves the optimal error rate of O σ
for the robust mean estimation problem when confronted
data corruption and heavy-tailed distribution. When using
Trimmed-mean estimation as a subroutine, PEVI generates
a nearly optimal policy. In particular, by utilizing the propγ
erty of action gap, we show that O(Hσ 1+γ + H) < ∆A
min
is sufficient for the policy to achieve the optimal value even
under corruption. We summarize our contributions as follows:

We study offline reinforcement learning (RL) with heavytailed reward distribution and data corruption: (i) Moving
beyond subGaussian reward distribution, we require only a
bounded (1 + γ)-th moment for γ ∈ (0, 1]; (ii) We allow corruptions where an attacker can arbitrarily modify -fraction
of the rewards and transitions in the dataset. We first derive
a sufficient optimality condition for generalized Pessimistic
Value Iteration (PEVI), which allows various estimators with
proper confidence bounds and can be applied to multiple
learning settings. In order to handle the data corruption and
heavy-tailed reward setting, we prove that the trimmed-mean
γ 
estimation achieves a minimax optimal error rate O σ 1+γ
for robust mean estimation under heavy-tailed distributions.
In the PEVI algorithm, we plug in the trimmed mean estimation and the confidence bound to solve the robust offline
RL problem. Standard analysis reveals that data corruption
γ

induces a bias term O Hσ 1+γ + H in the suboptimality
gap, which gives the false impression that any data corruption prevents optimal policy learning. By using the optimality
condition for the generalized PEVI, we show that as long as
the bias term is less than the “action gap”, the policy returned
by PEVI achieves the optimal value given sufficient data.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies sequential decisionmaking in a potentially unknown environment (Sutton and
Barto 2018). The success of RL requires sufficient interactions with the environment. Unlike RL with online interactions, offline RLs (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019;
Laroche, Trichelair, and Des Combes 2019) utilize batch
datasets without further interactions with the environment,
which is preferred when there are abundant data generated
by high-performing policies. However, offline RL becomes
more challenging under data corruption (Eykholt et al. 2018;
Neff 2016; Ma et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020) and heavytailed reward distributions (Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi, and Lugosi 2013; Dubey et al. 2020), which is the topic of this paper.
Previous studies have primarily focused on problems under certain concentration assumptions, typically requiring
that the rewards are bounded or follow distributions with

1. We show that a modified version of Trimmed-Mean estimation achieves minimax-optimal error guarantee for
robust mean estimation problems with heavy-tailed distribution and data corruption. Importantly, we only require the distribution to have bounded (1 + γ)-th centered moment and allow the variance of the distribution
to be infinite. Unlike the truncated empirical mean estimation in (Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi, and Lugosi 2013), the
trimmed mean estimator considered in our paper is both
translation-invariant and robust to data corruption. As a
result, we show that reward distribution with bounded
(1 + γ)-th moment is sufficient to ensure the success of
policy learning, which is a much weaker concentration
assumption than the subGaussian or bounded variance
assumption typically used in the literature.

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11416

