The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SCP: Spherical-Coordinate-Based Learned Point Cloud Compression
Ao Luo1,2 , Linxin Song2 , Keisuke Nonaka1 , Kyohei Unno1 ,
Heming Sun3 , Masayuki Goto2 , Jiro Katto2
1

KDDI Research, Inc.
2
Waseda University
3
Yokohama National University
xao-luo@kddi.com, songlx.imse.gt@ruri.waseda.jp,
ki-nonaka@kddi.com, ky-unno@kddi.com,
sun-heming-vg@ynu.ac.jp, masagoto@waseda.jp, katto@waseda.jp
Abstract

sic G-PCC, a Cylindrical-coordinate-based method (Sridhara, Pavez, and Ortega 2021) suggests transforming the
Cartesian-coordinate positions into Cylindrical coordinates
for G-PCC to compress. In the Cylindrical coordinates,
when splitting θ coordinate for Octree construction, points
from the same chain (points acquired by the same laser
beam) tend to be grouped into the same voxel, as shown in
Fig. 1(b)-left. Thus, these points have more relevant information in their context for compressing. Consequently, this
method improves the performance of G-PCC. In the meanwhile, Cylinder3D (Zhu et al. 2021) also took the use of
Cylindrical coordinates in the point cloud segmentation task.
Concurrently, learned point cloud compression methods are
emerging, using deep learning techniques to compress point
clouds. Former work such as OctSqueeze (Huang et al.
2020), VoxelDNN (Nguyen et al. 2021a), VoxelContextNet (Que, Lu, and Xu 2021), and OctFormer (Cui et al.
2023) employ information of ancient voxels for prediction
of the current one. Advancing these approaches, OctAttention (Fu et al. 2022), SparsePCGC (Wang et al. 2022), and
EHEM (Song et al. 2023) harness the voxels in the same
level as the current one to minimize the redundancy.
Nevertheless, the aforementioned learned methods overlook a crucial feature of spinning LiDAR point clouds.
Fig. 1(a) visualizes a spinning LiDAR point cloud. This
LiDAR generates numerous circular-shaped point chains
within the point clouds, leading to high redundancy. The
predictive geometry in G-PCC utilizes spherical coordinates
for encoding point chains, but it solely uses the information
of points within the same chain as references, disregarding
other neighboring points. The Cylindrical coordinates (Sridhara, Pavez, and Ortega 2021) inadequately represent point
clouds since points in the same chain have different z coordinates, causing separation in different voxels, as shown in
Fig. 1(b)-right. Fortunately, inspired by predictive geometry,
we find these points share the same azimuthal angle, leading to the use of Spherical coordinates where the azimuthal
angle replaces the z coordinate. This transformation allows
points in the same chain to be split in the same voxel, concentrating the relevant information, as shown in Fig. 1(c).
In this paper, we focus on the spinning LiDAR point
cloud, which is called LiDAR PC for abbreviation. To
fully leverage the circular-shaped azimuthal-angle-invariant
point chains in LiDAR PCs, we introduce a model-agnostic

In recent years, the task of learned point cloud compression
has gained prominence. An important type of point cloud,
the spinning LiDAR point cloud, is generated by spinning
LiDAR on vehicles. This process results in numerous circular shapes and azimuthal angle invariance features within
the point clouds. However, these two features have been
largely overlooked by previous methodologies. In this paper, we introduce a model-agnostic method called SphericalCoordinate-based learned Point cloud compression (SCP),
designed to leverage the aforementioned features fully. Additionally, we propose a multi-level Octree for SCP to mitigate
the reconstruction error for distant areas within the Sphericalcoordinate-based Octree. SCP exhibits excellent universality,
making it applicable to various learned point cloud compression techniques. Experimental results demonstrate that SCP
surpasses previous state-of-the-art methods by up to 29.14%
in point-to-point PSNR BD-Rate.

Introduction
LiDAR point clouds play a crucial role in numerous realworld applications, including self-driving vehicles (Li et al.
2020; Fernandes et al. 2021; Silva et al. 2023), robotics (He
et al. 2021b, 2020; Wang et al. 2019) and 3D mapping (Choe
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021). However, the transmission and
storage of these point clouds present significant challenges.
A typical large point cloud may contain up to a million
points (Quach, Valenzise, and Dufaux 2019), making direct
storage highly inefficient.
In an effort to mitigate the transmission and storage
costs associated with point clouds, MPEG introduced a
hand-crafted compression standard known as Geometrybased Point Cloud Compression (G-PCC) (ISO/IEC JTC
1/SC 29/WC 7 2021). This standard employs different geometric structures, including the Octree (Jackins and Tanimoto 1980) and predictive geometry (ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC
29/WC 7 2019), to compress point clouds. The Octree-based
entropy model is a widely adopted approach in both GPCC and learned methods for representing and compressing point clouds. Simultaneously, another geometric structure, predictive geometry, capitalizes on the chain structure formed by each LiDAR laser beam. It predicts the
position of the next point based on the angles and distances of preceding points on the chain. Other than ba-

3954

