The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Proxyformer: Nyström-Based Linear Transformer with Trainable Proxy Tokens
Sangho Lee, Hayun Lee, Dongkun Shin*
Sungkyunkwan University
ilena7440@skku.edu, lhy920806@skku.edu, dongkun@skku.edu

Abstract

60

Transformer-based models have demonstrated remarkable
performance in various domains, including natural language
processing, image processing and generative modeling. The
most significant contributor to the successful performance of
Transformer models is the self-attention mechanism, which
allows for a comprehensive understanding of the interactions
between tokens in the input sequence. However, there is a
well-known scalability issue, the quadratic dependency (i.e.
O(n2 )) of self-attention operations on the input sequence
length n, making the handling of lengthy sequences challenging. To address this limitation, there has been a surge
of research on efficient transformers, aiming to alleviate the
quadratic dependency on the input sequence length. Among
these, the Nyströmformer, which utilizes the Nyström method
to decompose the attention matrix, achieves superior performance in both accuracy and throughput. However, its landmark selection exhibits redundancy, and the model incurs
computational overhead when calculating the pseudo-inverse
matrix. We propose a novel Nyström method-based transformer, called Proxyformer. Unlike the traditional approach
of selecting landmarks from input tokens, the Proxyformer
utilizes trainable neural memory, called proxy tokens, for
landmarks. By integrating contrastive learning, input injection, and a specialized dropout for the decomposed matrix,
Proxyformer achieves top-tier performance for long sequence
tasks in the Long Range Arena benchmark.

58

Proxyformer
Orthoformer

LRA Score

Transformer

Nystromformer
BigBird

56

Luna
Performer

54

Reformer

Linformer

52

50
Set Transformer
(ISAB)
48
0

20

40

60

80

100

Samples / sec

Figure 1: Performance on the Long Range Arena (LRA)
benchmark (y axis), inference throughput (samples/sec) at a
single GTX3090 GPU (x axis), and memory footprint (size
of the circles) of various models on 4096 sequence length.

effectively understand interactions between tokens in the input sequence, model long-range dependencies, and capture
contextual information from the entire sequence. However,
a well-known scalability issue arises from the quadratic dependency (i.e., O(n2 )) of self-attention operations on the
input sequence length n, leading to slow and memoryintensive processing for long sequence inputs.
To tackle the scalability challenge, several Efficient Transformers (Tay et al. 2022) have been recently introduced,
aiming to reduce the quadratic dependency to a subquadratic level. For example, BigBird (Zaheer et al. 2020)
exploits the sparsity of attention to reduce the complexity
of attention operation. Reformer (Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020) learns the sparse attention pattern in a datadriven fashion. Linformer (Wang et al. 2020) leverages the
low-rankness of the attention map. Nyströmformer (Xiong
et al. 2021) decomposes the softmax matrix of self-attention
with the Nyström method (Wang and Zhang 2013). For an
efficient approximation, the decomposed matrix uses landmarks sampled from the input sequence.
Although these techniques have all demonstrated successful optimization of self-attention operations, they have

Introduction
Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al. 2017) such as
BERT (Kenton and Toutanova 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown
et al. 2020) have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance
in various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, including question answering (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), summarization (Miller 2019), and language modeling (Child et al.
2019). Recently, they have extended their influence to a wide
range of applications, including image processing (Touvron
et al. 2021) and generative modeling (Child et al. 2019). The
most significant factor contributing to the successful performance of Transformer models is the self-attention mechanism. This key component enables transformer models to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13418

