The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decentralized Scheduling with QoS Constraints: Achieving O(1) QoS Regret of
Multi-Player Bandits
Qingsong Liu1 , Zhixuan Fang1,2 *
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China
liu-qs19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zfang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2021) (See the latest survey (Boursier
and Perchet 2022) for reference). However, in broader network scenarios, this objective might result in some users being allocated only the worst resource, i.e., the maximal sum
of rewards assignment might starve some users (Fang et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2022). Thus, one severe drawback of this objective is that it has no individual performance guarantees. In
many applications, each user seeks to have a desired Quality
of Service (QoS), and the objective of the sum of rewards
fails to achieve this goal. This motivates our work.
While several very recent works (Bistritz et al. 2020; Shi
et al. 2021) focus on the fairness objectives (e.g., max-min
fairness, proportional fairness) among the accumulated rewards of players, which exhibit some level of QoS guarantees for all players (a fair allocation may prevent some players from getting their best arm to significantly improve the
allocation for less fortunate players), but obviously the policy with these fairness objectives does not promise to meet
all the player-specific QoS requirements. In fact, these fairness metrics and the sum of rewards are all specific instances
of a celebrated
P notion known as α-fairness (Mo and Walrand
/1 − α, where xn is the accumulated
2000): max n x1−α
n
reward of player n. This is because α → 1 yields proportional fairness, α = 0 yields sum of rewards, and α = ∞
yields the case of max-min fairness. Hence, these metrics
can be optimized in a similar manner (Bistritz and Leshem
2018), as there exists an optimal static allocation/matching
between the players and arms over the entire learning process, and the high-level idea of their algorithms is to identify
this optimal matching via elimination. Some bandit works
have studied corresponding objectives that can also potentially exhibit some level of fairness (Darak and Hanawal
2019; Bar-On and Mansour 2019). However, none of them
successfully achieve the decentralized cooperation among
players to guarantee stringent per-player QoS constraints.
In this work, we make progress in the aforementioned
problems for decentralized MP-MAB. Instead of optimizing the sum of rewards or fairness metrics, our objective is
to guarantee that the QoS, i.e., empirical average reward,
of each player is at least a certain value. We consider the
general but challenging setting where arm rewards can differ across players. Our model of decentralized MP-MAB involves new technical challenges that do not arise in the case
of optimizing the sum of rewards or fairness metrics. As pre-

We consider a decentralized multi-player multi-armed bandit
(MP-MAB) problem where players cannot observe the actions and rewards of other players and no explicit communication or coordination between players is possible. Prior
studies mostly focus on maximizing the sum of rewards of
the players over time. However, the total reward maximization learning may lead to imbalanced reward among players,
leading to poor Quality of Service (QoS) for some players. In
contrast, our objective is to let each player n achieve a predetermined expected average reward over time, i.e., achieving a predetermined level of QoS. We develop a novel decentralized MP-MAB algorithm to accomplish this objective
by leveraging the methodology of randomized matching. We
prove that our decentralized algorithm can ensure that all
players have an O(1) QoS regret. We also reveal an analog
between our MP-MAB model and the online wireless queuing systems, which builds a connection between QoS in MPMAB learning and stability in queuing theory.

Introduction
Decentralized multi-player multi-armed bandits (MP-MAB)
is a promising framework for solving various problems in
computer science and operations research, which has seen
emerging interest in recent years. In this framework, there
are N players competing for pulling K arms over T rounds.
Players cannot observe the actions and received rewards of
other players, and no explicit communication or coordination between players is possible. One primary motivation for
studying this framework is distributed resource allocation
(Hanawal and Darak 2018), as coordinating a large number of users in a centralized manner is infeasible and conflicts will arise when multiple users compete for the same
resource. The goal of MP-MAB algorithms is to provide a
decentralized way to learn how to share these resources optimally in an online manner.
Towards this goal, a common objective is the sum of rewards of the players over time, which has received the vast
majority of attention in the literature (Boursier and Perchet
2019; Wang et al. 2020a,b; Tibrewal et al. 2019b; Boursier
* Corresponding author: Zhixuan Fang.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13981

