The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Faster Stochastic Variance Reduction Methods for Compositional MiniMax
Optimization
Jin Liu1 , Xiaokang Pan1 , Junwen Duan1 , Hong-Dong Li1 , Youqi Li2 , Zhe Qu1 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China.
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
{liujin06, 224712176, jwduan, hongdong, zhe qu}@csu.edu.cn, liyouqi@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

(Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Gao, Li, and Huang 2022)
and risk-averse portfolio optimization (Zhang and Lan 2020;
Shapiro, Dentcheva, and Ruszczynski 2021). Due to the important growth of these two problems in machine learning
fields, the compositional minimax problem should be also
clearly discussed, which can be formulated as follows:

This paper delves into the realm of stochastic optimization for compositional minimax optimization—a pivotal challenge across various machine learning domains, including
deep AUC and reinforcement learning policy evaluation. Despite its significance, the problem of compositional minimax
optimization is still under-explored. Adding to the complexity, current methods of compositional minimax optimization
are plagued by sub-optimal complexities or heavy reliance on
sizable batch sizes. To respond to these constraints, this paper
introduces a novel method, called Nested STOchastic Recursive Momentum (NSTORM), which can achieve the optimal
sample complexity and obtain the nearly accuracy solution,
matching the existing minimax methods. We also demonstrate that NSTORM can achieve the same sample complexity
under the Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL)-condition—an insightful
extension of its capabilities. Yet, NSTORM encounters an issue with its requirement for low learning rates, potentially
constraining its real-world applicability in machine learning.
To overcome this hurdle, we present ADAptive NSTORM
(ADA-NSTORM) with adaptive learning rates. We demonstrate that ADA-NSTORM can achieve the same sample complexity but the experimental results show its more effectiveness. All the proposed complexities indicate that our proposed methods can match lower bounds to existing minimax
optimizations, without requiring a large batch size in each iteration. Extensive experiments support the efficiency of our
proposed methods.

min max f (g(x), y) ≜ Eζ f (Eξ [g(x; ξ)], y; ζ),

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where g(·) : X → Rd , f (·, ·) : (Rd , Y) → R, ξ ∈ Ξ,
ζ ∈ Ω, X and Y are convex and compact sets. Suppose that
f (g(x), y) is a strongly concave objective function with respect to y for all x ∈ X .
Numerous research studies have been dedicated to investigating the convergence analysis of minimax optimization
problems (Nemirovski et al. 2009; Palaniappan and Bach
2016; Lin, Jin, and Jordan 2020; Yang, Kiyavash, and He
2020; Chen et al. 2020; Rafique et al. 2022) across diverse scenarios. Various methodologies have been devised
to address these challenges. Approaches such as Stochastic Gradient Descent Ascent (SGDA) have been proposed
(Lin, Jin, and Jordan 2020), accompanied by innovations
like variance-reduced SGDA (Luo et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2020) that aim to expedite convergence rates. Moreover, the
application of Riemannian manifold-based optimization has
been explored (Huang, Gao, and Huang 2020) across different minimax scenarios, showcasing the breadth of methodologies available. However, all of these methods are only designed for the non-compositional problem. It indicates that
the stochastic gradient can be assumed as an unbiased estimation of the full gradient of both the two sub-problems. Because it is too difficult to get an unbiased estimation in compositional optimization, these methods cannot be directly
used to optimize the compositional minimax problem.
Recent efforts have yielded just two studies on the nonconvex compositional minimax optimization problem (1),
named Stochastic Compositional Gradient Descent Ascent
(SCGDA) (Gao et al. 2021) and Primal-Dual Stochastic
Compositional Adaptive (PDSCA) (Yuan et al. 2022). However, they only can obtain the sample complexity O(κ4 /ϵ4 )
for achieving the ϵ-accuracy solution, which limits the applicability in many machine learning scenarios. Consequently,
there is a pressing need to devise a more streamlined approach capable of tackling this challenge. In addition, some

Introduction
In recent years, minimax optimization theory has been considered more attractive due to the broad range of machine
learning applications, including generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017), adversarial training of deep
neural networks (Madry et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021; Qu
et al. 2023), robust optimization (Chen et al. 2017; Mohri,
Sivek, and Suresh 2019; Qu et al. 2022), and policy evaluation on reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 2018; Hu
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021). At the same time, many machine learning problems can be formulated as compositional
optimizations, for example, model agnostic meta-learning
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13927

