The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LogFormer: A Pre-train and Tuning Pipeline for Log Anomaly Detection
Hongcheng Guo1 , Jian Yang1 , Jiaheng Liu1 , Jiaqi Bai1 , Boyang Wang1 , Zhoujun Li1 * , Tieqiao
Zheng2 , Bo Zhang2 , Junran Peng1 , Qi Tian3
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Cloudwise Research, Beijing, China
3
Huawei, Beijing, China
{hongchengguo,jiaya,liujiaheng,bjq,wangboyang,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {steven.zheng,bowen.zhang}@cloudwise.com
BGL:
Unusual End of Program
data storage interrupt
rts: kernel terminated for reason 1004rts: bad message header: [...]
Thunderbird:
kernel: mptscsih: ioc0: attempting task abort! (sc=00000101bddee480)
Red Storm:
DMT 310 Command Aborted: SCSI cmd:2A LUN 2 DMT 310 T:299 a: [...]

Abstract
Log anomaly detection is a key component in the field of artificial intelligence for IT operations (AIOps). Considering
log data of variant domains, retraining the whole network for
unknown domains is inefficient in real industrial scenarios.
However, previous deep models merely focused on extracting
the semantics of log sequences in the same domain, leading
to poor generalization on multi-domain logs. To alleviate this
issue, we propose a unified Transformer-based framework for
Log anomaly detection (LogFormer) to improve the generalization ability across different domains, where we establish a
two-stage process including the pre-training and adapter-based
tuning stage. Specifically, our model is first pre-trained on the
source domain to obtain shared semantic knowledge of log
data. Then, we transfer such knowledge to the target domain
via shared parameters. Besides, the Log-Attention module is
proposed to supplement the information ignored by the logparing. The proposed method is evaluated on three public
and one real-world datasets. Experimental results on multiple
benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our LogFormer
with fewer trainable parameters and lower training costs.

Program Not Running
BGL:
rts panic! - stopping execution
Thunderbird:
pbs mom: Bad file descriptor (9) in tm request, job [job] not running
Spirit:
kernel: GM: LANai is not running. Allowing port=0 open for debugging
Liberty:
kernel: GM: LANai is not running. Allowing port=0 open for debugging

Figure 1: The same anomaly from multiple domains. The
top part denotes the “Unusual End of Program” anomaly
from three domains including BGL, Thunderbird, and Red
Storm while the bottom part is the “Program Not Running”
from four domains including BGL, Thunderbird, Spirit, and
Liberty.

et al. 2017) to gain templates in logs before detection, which
leads to the loss of semantics in raw log data.
Despite being different in morphology and syntax, logs of
multiple domains usually share similar semantic space. For
example, in Fig. 1, three sources (BGL, Thunderbird, Red
Storm) have the same anomaly called Unusual End of Program. However, existing methods mostly focus on a single
domain. When the components from a new domain are introduced, these methods lack the ability to accommodate such
unseen logs. Besides, we need to consider the continuous
iteration of log data when the system upgrades and it is costly
to retrain different models for different datasets.
In this paper, we address the problems above via a twostage solution called LogFormer. LogFormer is capable of
preserving the shared semantic knowledge between different
domains. Specifically, to avoid information loss due to parsing, Log-Attention module is to supplement the information
ignored by the log-paring for better performance. Then in
the first stage, we create a model based on the Log-Attention,
which is pre-trained on the source domain to obtain common
semantics of log sequences. Second, LogFormer uses a flexible component called Adapter to transfer knowledge from
the source domain to the target domain.

Introduction
With the rapid development of large-scale IT systems, numerous companies have an increasing demand for high-quality
cloud services. Anomaly detection (Breier and Branišová
2015) is critical to monitor data peculiarities for logs, which
describe detailed system events at runtime and the intention
of users in the large-scale services (Zhang et al. 2015). It is
error-prone to detect anomalous logs from a local perspective. In this case, some automatic detection methods based on
machine learning are proposed (Xu et al. 2010). Due to the
development of IT services, the volume of log data has grown
fast and traditional approaches are infeasible. Meanwhile, as
log messages are half-structured and have their semantics, it
is similar to natural language corpus. Therefore, many deep
learning methods based on language models (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997; Devlin et al. 2018) have been proposed
on log anomaly detection task (Zhang et al. 2016; Du et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2019; Meng et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2023a).
However, these models adopt parser (Du and Li 2016; He
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

135

