The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ISP-Teacher:Image Signal Process with Disentanglement Regularization for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Dark Object Detection
Yin Zhang* , Yongqiang Zhang* , Zian Zhang, Man Zhang, Rui Tian, Mingli Ding
School of Instrument Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
{yin.zhang.hit, yongqiang.zhang.hit, sieann.hit, man.zhang.hit, rui.tian.hit, mingli.ding.hit}@gmail.com

Abstract
Object detection in dark conditions has always been a great
challenge due to the complex formation process of low-light
images. Currently, the mainstream methods usually adopt domain adaptation with Teacher-Student architecture to solve
the dark object detection problem, and they imitate the dark
conditions by using non-learnable data augmentation strategies on the annotated source daytime images. Note that
these methods neglected to model the intrinsic imaging process, i.e. image signal processing (ISP), which is important for camera sensors to generate low-light images. To
solve the above problems, in this paper, we propose a novel
method named ISP-Teacher for dark object detection by exploring Teacher-Student architecture from a new perspective
(i.e. self-supervised learning based ISP degradation). Specifically, we first design a day-to-night transformation module that consistent with the ISP pipeline of the camera sensors (ISP-DTM) to make the augmented images look more
in line with the natural low-light images captured by cameras, and the ISP-related parameters are learned in a selfsupervised manner. Moreover, to avoid the conflict between
the ISP degradation and detection tasks in a shared encoder,
we propose a disentanglement regularization (DR) that minimizes the absolute value of cosine similarity to disentangle two tasks and push two gradients vectors as orthogonal
as possible. Extensive experiments conducted on two benchmarks show the effectiveness of our method in dark object
detection. In particular, ISP-Teacher achieves an improvement of +2.4% AP and +3.3% AP over the SOTA method
on BDD100k and SHIFT datasets, respectively. The code can
be found at https://github.com/zhangyin1996/ISP-Teacher.

Figure 1: Results of some Teacher-Student architecture
UDA methods on BDD100k. We found that AT and TDD get
worse results on day-to-night conditions, which even lower
than the baseline detector Faster-RCNN (41.1% AP). Our
proposed method outperforms other counterparts by a large
margin and always higher than SOTA method (Kennerley
et al. 2023) in any iteration.

ages like daytime images. At present, dark object detection
is still an urgent problem to be solved.
A simple way to solve this problem is to perform dark enhancement on low-light images firstly, and then send them
to an off-the-shelf detector for object classification and regression. Unfortunately, the enhanced images are visually
comfortable for humans but do not benefit to the high-level
task for machine vision (Cui et al. 2022b, 2021). To this end,
unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) has been proposed to
address this problem.
Recently, Teacher-Student architecture (Sohn et al. 2020)
has attracted lots of attention in semi-supervised object detection (Wang et al. 2023; Mi et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021)
and has also achieved excellent results in the field of domain adaptation object detection (Li et al. 2022; He et al.
2022; Kennerley et al. 2023). However, as shown in Figure 1, we found that the best Teacher-Student UDA methods
like AT (Li et al. 2022), TDD (He et al. 2022) achieve good
results on regular domain adaptive datasets (e.g. Cityscapes
to Foggy Cityscapes) but get poor results on day-to-night
conditions. They are even lower than the baseline detector

Introduction
Object detection has achieved remarkable success and
widely used in various fields such as security monitoring and
autonomous driving. However, these object detection models trained on high-quality daytime images often perform
poorly on low-light images, because these images taken under dark conditions suffer from various types of light and
undesirable noise (Cui et al. 2022a). Furthermore, annotating low-light images is also difficult, so it is impossible to
obtain high-quality annotation information of low-light im* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7387

