The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semantic-Guided Novel Category Discovery
Weishuai Wang1 , Ting Lei1 , Qingchao Chen2 , Yang Liu 1 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
wangweishuai@pku.edu.cn, ting lei@pku.edu.cn, qingchao.chen@pku.edu.cn, yangliu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Seen

The Novel Category Discovery problem aims to cluster an
unlabeled set with the help of a labeled set consisting of disjoint but related classes. However, existing models treat class
names as discrete one-hot labels and ignore the semantic understanding of these classes. In this paper, we propose a new
setting named Semantic-guided Novel Category Discovery
(SNCD), which requires the model to not only cluster the unlabeled images but also semantically recognize these images
based on a set of their class names. The first challenge we
confront pertains to effectively leveraging the class names of
unlabeled images, given the inherent gap between the visual
and linguistic domains. To address this issue, we incorporate
a semantic-aware recognition mechanism. This is achieved
by constructing dynamic class-wise visual prototypes as well
as a semantic similarity matrix that enables the projection of
visual features into the semantic space. The second challenge
originates from the granularity disparity between the classification and clustering tasks. To deal with this, we develop a
semantic-aware clustering process to facilitate the exchange
of knowledge between the two tasks. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the mutual benefits of the recognition and clustering tasks, which can be jointly optimized.
Experimental results on multiple datasets confirm the effectiveness of our proposed method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/wang-weishuai/Semantic-guided-NCD.

sheep

airplane

Homogeneous
Distribution

cluster2
(0.3112)

deer
Unseen

cluster3
cluster1
(0.4311)
?
(0.3410)
?
(a)Traditional NCD setting and performance

?

Seen
sheep

airplane

Truck
(0.3610)

deer
Unseen

?

?

Semantic-aware
Distribution

?

Cat
(0.3358)

Dog
(0.2994)

Dog/Truck/Cat
(b)Our SNCD setting and performance

Figure 1: (a) Traditional NCD approaches perform classagnostic clustering on unlabeled data, whose clustering results are homogeneous in distribution. (b) Our proposed approach, with a set of class names of unlabeled data as the
only additive input, could get reasonable clustering results
along with cluster categories. Moreover, the distribution of
clusters is semantically related, meaning that clusters with
closer semantic relations are more likely to be spatially proximate.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have surpassed human performance
in various computer vision tasks. However, most traditional
works focus on a closed-set setting, assuming training and
testing data share the same class set, which results in limited
generalization ability when the deep model is deployed in
the wild. To address this limitation, Novel Category Discovery (NCD) (Hsu, Lv, and Kira 2018; Hsu et al. 2019; Han,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2019; Han et al. 2020; Fini et al.
2021) attempts to train a network to cluster instances from
unlabeled data, by utilizing labeled instances from a disjoint
set of classes. The primary motivation behind this approach
is to leverage the available supervision from the labeled set
to learn powerful image representations that can be applied
to cluster unlabeled instances.

However, with the innate ability to comprehend the semantics of various types of instances, the human cognitive
system excels not only in clustering instances that we have
never seen before but also in associating them with previously known concepts (Tenenbaum et al. 2011). This remarkable capability empowers us to establish connections
even when confronted with novel situations. When introduced to a new concept like a lynx, our brain might come
up with other feline creatures such as domestic cats or larger
relatives like tigers and lions. This innate ability to form
associations with existing knowledge enables us to rapidly
comprehend and recognize novel concepts like the lynx.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel Semantic-guided
Novel Category Discovery (SNCD) setting, where an ad-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5607

