The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Teacher as a Lenient Expert: Teacher-Agnostic Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
Hyunjune Shin, Dong-Wan Choi *
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, South Korea
heounjunee@gmail.com, dchoi@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Student accuracy.

(a)

0.8
80

DAFL+DFAD
DAFL
DFAD

0.6
60
40
0.4
20
0.2
0

111
0

98

(b)

Peak accuracy.

Data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) aims to distill pretrained knowledge to a student model with the help of a generator without using original data. In such data-free scenarios,
achieving stable performance of DFKD is essential due to the
unavailability of validation data. Unfortunately, this paper has
discovered that existing DFKD methods are quite sensitive to
different teacher models, occasionally showing catastrophic
failures of distillation, even when using well-trained teacher
models. Our observation is that the generator in DFKD is
not always guaranteed to produce precise yet diverse samples using the existing representative strategy of minimizing both class-prior and adversarial losses. Through our empirical study, we focus on the fact that class-prior not only
decreases the diversity of generated samples, but also cannot completely address the problem of generating unexpectedly low-quality samples depending on teacher models. In
this paper, we propose the teacher-agnostic data-free knowledge distillation (TA-DFKD) method, with the goal of more
robust and stable performance regardless of teacher models.
Our basic idea is to assign the teacher model a lenient expert
role for evaluating samples, rather than a strict supervisor that
enforces its class-prior on the generator. Specifically, we design a sample selection approach that takes only clean samples verified by the teacher model without imposing restrictions on the power of generating diverse samples. Through
extensive experiments, we show that our method successfully
achieves both robustness and training stability across various teacher models, while outperforming the existing DFKD
methods.

Teacher 2 ( 99.2 % )

Teacher 1 ( 98.9 % )

1

94

10

20

DAFL

DFAD

95.46
94.43

30

40

50
60
Epochs.

CMI

PRE-DFKD

93.46
92.15

92.01

90

70
TA-DFKD

80

90

Teacher Acc.

94.43
90.69

93.79

91.36
91.08

Teacher 4

Teacher 5

86
(Unit : %)

82
Teacher 1

Teacher 2

Teacher 3

Figure 1: (a) Training curves of student models during distillation of two different well-trained teacher models on
MNIST when using one or both of class-prior (DAFL) and
adversarial learning (DFAD) losses. (b) Peak accuracies of
student models distilled from five different teacher models
on CIFAR10 when using different DFKD methods including our TA-DFKD method
studied (Yoo et al. 2019; Nayak et al. 2019), aiming to distill pretrained knowledge through the assistance of a generator, without the use of original data samples. The generator
is also trained based on the teacher model to generate synthetic samples, which are intended to be replacements of the
original samples in the distillation process.
A key challenge in DFKD arises from the unavailability of
validation data, making it impossible to accurately evaluate
the effectiveness of distillation. Therefore, it is crucial for
DFKD methods to ensure the stable and robust performance
no matter which teacher models are distilled. To this end, the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) DFKD methods incorporate the following three components into their training loss function for
the generator: class-prior, adversarial, and representation
losses. Class-prior, initially introduced by DAFL (Chen et al.
2019), aims to generate accurate samples that can be classified by the teacher model into a specific class. On the other
hand, the adversarial loss, first proposed by DFAD (Fang

Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015) is a powerful compression technique that transfers the
knowledge of a pretrained teacher model to a smaller student
model. Typically, KD methods require data samples that are
used to train the teacher model, in order to properly guide the
training of the student model. However, in real-world scenarios, it is neither always possible nor desirable to assume the
availability of training data. To address such practical issues,
data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) has been actively
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14991

