The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CrystalBox: Future-Based Explanations for Input-Driven Deep RL Systems
Sagar Patel1 , Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi1, 2 , Nina Narodytska2
1

University of California, Irvine
2
VMware Research
sagar.patel@uci.edu, sangeetha.aj@uci.edu, nina.narodytska@broadcom.com

Abstract

More recently, there is a growing interest in future-based
explainers, which generate explanations based on a controller’s forward-looking view. These explainers detail the
effects of a controller’s decisions using either future rewards (Juozapaitis et al. 2019) or goals (van der Waa et al.
2018; Yau, Russell, and Hadfield 2020; Cruz et al. 2021).
However, they necessitate either extensive alterations to the
agent (Juozapaitis et al. 2019) or precise environment modeling (van der Waa et al. 2018; Yau, Russell, and Hadfield
2020; Cruz et al. 2021), both of which pose significant challenges in input-driven environments. Controllers in this domain cannot tolerate performance degradation and are deployed in highly variable real-world conditions.
We present CrystalBox, a model-agnostic, posthoc explainability framework that generates high-fidelity futurebased explanations in input-driven environments. CrystalBox does not require any modifications to the controller;
hence, it is easily deployable and does not sacrifice controller performance. CrystalBox generates succinct explanations by decomposing the controller’s reward function into
individual components and using them as the basis for explanations. Reward functions in input-driven environments are
naturally decomposable, where the reward components represent key performance metrics. Hence, explanations generated by CrystalBox are meaningful to operators. For example, in DRL-based congestion control (Jay et al. 2019), there
are three reward components: throughput, loss, and latency.
We formulate the explainability problem as generating
decomposed future returns, given a state and an action.
We propose a streamlined model-agnostic supervised learning approach to estimate these returns using an on-policy
action-value function. Our solution generalizes across both
discrete and continuous control environments. We evaluate our framework on multiple real-world input-driven environments, showing its ability to generate succinct, highfidelity explanations efficiently. We demonstrate the usefulness of CrystalBox’s explanations by providing insights
when feature-based explainers find it challenging, and powering network observability and guided reward design.
In summary, we make the following key contributions:
• We propose a new notion of future-based explanations in
input-driven environments.
• We exploit the decomposable and dense reward functions
in input-driven environments and formulate a supervised

We present CrystalBox, a novel, model-agnostic, posthoc
explainability framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) controllers in the large family of input-driven environments which includes computer systems. We combine the
natural decomposability of reward functions in input-driven
environments with the explanatory power of decomposed returns. We propose an efficient algorithm to generate futurebased explanations across both discrete and continuous control environments. Using applications such as adaptive bitrate
streaming and congestion control, we demonstrate CrystalBox’s capability to generate high-fidelity explanations. We
further illustrate its higher utility across three practical use
cases: contrastive explanations, network observability, and
guided reward design, as opposed to prior explainability techniques that identify salient features.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) outperforms manual
heuristics in a broad range of input-driven tasks, including
congestion control (Jay et al. 2019), adaptive bitrate streaming (Mao, Netravali, and Alizadeh 2017), and network traffic optimization (Chen et al. 2018), among others. However,
due to the difficulty in interpreting, debugging, and trusting (Meng et al. 2020), network operators are often hesitant
to deploy them outside lab settings. The domain of explainable reinforcement learning (XRL) seeks to bridge this gap.
The field of Explainable Reinforcement Learning, which
facilitates human understanding of a model’s decisionmaking process (Burkart and Huber 2021), can be categorized into two main areas: feature-based and future-based.
The feature-based approach applies established techniques
from Explainable AI (XAI) in supervised learning to DRL,
adapting commonly used post-hoc explainers like saliency
maps (Zahavy, Ben-Zrihem, and Mannor 2016; Iyer et al.
2018; Greydanus et al. 2018; Puri et al. 2019) and model distillation (Bastani, Pu, and Solar-Lezama 2018; Verma et al.
2018; Zhang, Zhou, and Lin 2020) techniques. However,
these methods can fail to provide a comprehensive view or
explain specific behaviors, because they do not provide insight into the controller’s view of the future.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14563

