The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ConSequence: Synthesizing Logically Constrained Sequences for Electronic
Health Record Generation
Brandon Theodorou1, 2 , Shrusti Jain1 , Cao Xiao3 , Jimeng Sun1, 2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States
2
Medisyn Inc., Las Vegas, NV, United States
3
GE Healthcare, Seattle, WA, United States
bpt3@illinois.edu, jimeng@illinois.edu

Abstract

and temporal dependencies unique to an application domain.
For instance, in medicine, generative models should follow
logical constraints such as indications (the reason for using
a specific treatment for a disease) and contraindications (the
reason that makes a particular treatment inadvisable for that
disease) to create realistic sequential data.
To support domain-specific applications, generated samples must not only approximate the true underlying data
distribution but also encapsulate the relationships and dependencies encoded as rules derived from external knowledge. Failing to meet these constraints can hinder efficacy
and deter adoption. Various current approaches attempt to
ensure logical consistency in neural network outputs. These
methods encompass strategies such as integrating rule constraints into the loss function (Xu et al. 2018; Fischer et al.
2019), employing post-processing modules designed to rectify model output violations (Manhaeve et al. 2018; Hoernle et al. 2022; Ahmed et al. 2022), or directly adding
model components that ensure the final weights and outputs align with domain knowledge (Towell and Shavlik
1994; Avila Garcez and Zaverucha 1999; Giunchiglia and
Lukasiewicz 2021). Despite the existing effort in constraint
enforcement, sequential data generation still faces several
challenges in aligning with real-world knowledge.
• Inadequate treatment of temporal logical constraints.
Existing models struggle with temporal constraints, which
can be static or evolve across multiple time steps. These
constraints are key to enhancing accuracy and reliability in
sequential generation models. Yet, no existing models effectively manage these constraints as the information conditioning them may not be accessible at each time step.
• Efficiency and scalability. Sequential tasks typically encompass a multitude of time steps and entail a substantial
output dimensionality, underscoring the need for a streamlined approach to facilitate large-scale sequence generation. Current methods can be slow and computationally
demanding, impairing real-world generation speed (BondTaylor et al. 2021). Thus, an effective solution should not
only be asymptotically efficient but also maintain high
generation speeds for practical use.
• Difficulty in achieving full logical consistency. Realism
in sequential data generation is paramount, but logical inconsistencies can compromise it. Hence, encoding domain
knowledge without error is essential. For full trustworthi-

Generative models can produce synthetic patient records for
analytical tasks when real data is unavailable or limited.
However, current methods struggle with adhering to domainspecific knowledge and removing invalid data. We present
ConSequence, an effective approach to integrating domain
knowledge into sequential generative neural network outputs. Our rule-based formulation includes temporal aggregation and antecedent evaluation modules, ensured by an
efficient matrix multiplication formulation, to satisfy hard
and soft logical constraints across time steps. Existing constraint methods often fail to guarantee constraint satisfaction, lack the ability to handle temporal constraints, and hinder the learning and computational efficiency of the model.
In contrast, our approach efficiently handles all types of
constraints with guaranteed logical coherence. We demonstrate ConSequence’s effectiveness in generating electronic health records, outperforming competitors in achieving
complete temporal and spatial constraint satisfaction without compromising runtime performance or generative quality.
Specifically, ConSequence successfully prevents all rule
violations while improving the model quality in reducing its
test perplexity by 5% and incurring less than a 13% slowdown
in generation speed compared to an unconstrained model.

Introduction
Sequential data generation applications are used in various
fields, such as healthcare (Choi et al. 2017; Biswal et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Theodorou, Xiao, and Sun 2023),
finance (Assefa et al. 2020; Dogariu et al. 2022), natural
language processing (Gatt and Krahmer 2018; Dong et al.
2022; Reiter and Dale 1997), and computer vision (Tulyakov
et al. 2018; Yang, Srivastava, and Mandt 2022; Ho et al.
2022). In these applications, generative models demonstrate
the capability to produce synthetic data closely resembling
real-world datasets. Notably, language models have showcased remarkable achievements in domains like text generation (Chowdhery et al. 2022; Thoppilan et al. 2022; Brown
et al. 2020) and health record generation (Theodorou, Xiao,
and Sun 2023), primarily attributed to their adeptness in accurate next-token forecasting. Beyond mimicking real data,
generative models often require adhering to specific rules
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15355

