The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepBranchTracer: A Generally-Applicable Approach to Curvilinear Structure
Reconstruction Using Multi-Feature Learning
Chao Liu1,2 , Ting Zhao3 , Nenggan Zheng1, 2, 4, 5∗
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
College of Computer Science and Techology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
Independent Researcher
4
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
5
CCAI by MOE and Zhejiang Provincial Government(ZJU), Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
supermeliu@zju.edu.cn, tingzhao@gmail.com, zng@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Segmentation based on
Image Feature

Curvilinear structures, which include line-like continuous objects, are fundamental geometrical elements in image-based
applications. Reconstructing these structures from images
constitutes a pivotal research area in computer vision. However, the complex topology and ambiguous image evidence
render this process a challenging task. In this paper, we introduce DeepBranchTracer, a novel method that learns both
external image features and internal geometric characteristics
to reconstruct curvilinear structures. Firstly, we formulate the
curvilinear structures extraction as a geometric attribute estimation problem. Then, a curvilinear structure feature learning
network is designed to extract essential branch attributes, including the image features of centerline and boundary, and
the geometric features of direction and radius. Finally, utilizing a multi-feature fusion tracing strategy, our model iteratively traces the entire branch by integrating the extracted
image and geometric features. We extensively evaluated our
model on both 2D and 3D datasets, demonstrating its superior
performance over existing segmentation and reconstruction
methods in terms of accuracy and continuity.

Complicated connection patterns

Challenge 1
Integration of Image Feature and
Geometric Feature

(a)

Incorrect
topological structures

Reconstruction based on
Geometric Feature
Improvement of
accuracy and continuity

(c)
Tubular
model

(b)

Design by
hand-crafted features

Challenge 2
Complex parameterized models

Figure 1: Motivation.
Segmentation methods focus on learn⛻ᶏ◿ῐ䅺⺂䖅ℇⅳ
⠎㙃䖅廟㊦㤢⸐
ing image features but tend to misinterpret two adjacent
斿㾺
branches as an entity. Reconstruction methods capture the
geometric features of branches but rely on complex param◿ῐ䅺⺂ᴏ㇔ㅒ䅺⺂嚎⌉
eterized models. The integration of these two
features offers
䖅惎ⷻ
the potential to improve the continuity of results.

Introduction
Curvilinear structure is a line-like, elongated object with
varying intensities compared to their surroundings. The extraction of curvilinear structures aims to quantitatively identify these objects from image data, facilitating statistical
analyses of branch connections and distribution. This represents a pivotal research area in computer vision, particularly
for neuron branches and blood vessels in medical images
(Meijering 2010; Soomro et al. 2019), and roads in aerial
images (Chen et al. 2022). However, despite decades of research efforts dedicated to automating this process, extracting curvilinear structures in occlusion and ambiguous topology images still remains a challenging task.
Over the past few years, curvilinear structure extraction
has always been addressed as a segmentation-based problem. As an essential segmentation tool, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) can automatically extract image features
from diverse images (Li et al. 2017; Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015). However, unlike typical segmentation tasks,

搚嫰䖅⃡Ṗ䷔㚅

⛻ᶏ㇔ㅒ䷔㚅䖅惎ⷻ
curvilinear structure
extraction places heightened emphasis on the continuity and connectivity of the target, rather
than just its contour. Several studies have incorporated the
⃇䝯䊈⎍廟䷮⼨䖅㋑≈
prior structural 䌄䆷ㄗ䪢䆷
constraints into the network architectures or
loss functions to⃡Ṗ㤢⚌
enhance their effectiveness (Qi et al. 2023;
Zhou et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022a). Nevertheless,
a斿㾺
founㅌ⳦嬄㑵䖅⋃㑱㤢⚌
dational challenge remains across
these segmentation-based
ẞ屗ᶻ⳦弊⋗䅺⺂
methods. When confronted with two adjacent or tangled
branches, segmentation-based methods often tend to misinterpret them as a single entity, and will constitute a crucial
topological error, as depicted in Fig. 1(a).
In response to these challenges, reconstruction-based
methods have emerged to explicitly model the topological representation of curvilinear structures, as shown in
Fig. 1(b). These methods encompass both external image
features and internal geometric features, and can be categorized into two groups based on their reconstruction processes: global-first approaches and local-first approaches.

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3548

