The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Convolutional Neural Network Interpretable Framework
for Human Ventral Visual Pathway Representation
Mufan Xue1 , Xinyu Wu1 , Jinlong Li1 , Xuesong Li2 , Guoyuan Yang1,3 *
1

Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Sciences, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
3
School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
yanggy@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

van Gerven 2015). Comparable strategies have proven successful in understanding the human auditory cortex (Kell
et al. 2018) and motor cortex (Sussillo et al. 2015), highlighting the universality of CNN encoding models (Zhuang
et al. 2021; Konkle and Alvarez 2022). Nonetheless, the current understanding of the fundamental mechanisms within
the brain and model systems remains incomplete. Unraveling the nature of representational transformations and computations in the ventral visual pathway has long been a vital
aim in neuroscience. Importantly, the use of computational
models enables the simulation of visual hierarchical processing and facilitates the exploration of hypotheses that may not
be readily accessible in the human brain (Beguš, Zhou, and
Zhao 2023).

Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the best quantitative encoding models for capturing
neural activity and hierarchical structure in the ventral visual pathway. However, the weak interpretability of these
black-box models hinders their ability to reveal visual representational encoding mechanisms. Here, we propose a convolutional neural network interpretable framework (CNNIF) aimed at providing a transparent interpretable encoding
model for the ventral visual pathway. First, we adapt the
feature-weighted receptive field framework to train two highperforming ventral visual pathway encoding models using
large-scale functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
in both goal-driven and data-driven approaches. We find that
network layer-wise predictions align with the functional hierarchy of the ventral visual pathway. Then, we correspond feature units to voxel units in the brain and successfully quantify
the alignment between voxel responses and visual concepts.
Finally, we conduct Network Dissection along the ventral visual pathway including the fusiform face area (FFA), and discover variations related to the visual concept of ‘person’. Our
results demonstrate the CNN-IF provides a new perspective
for understanding encoding mechanisms in the human ventral
visual pathway, and the combination of ante-hoc interpretable
structure and post-hoc interpretable approaches can achieve
fine-grained voxel-wise correspondence between model and
brain. The source code is available at: https://github.com/BITYangLab/CNN-IF.

To date, CNNs have been predominantly regarded as
black-box models, posing a significant challenge in terms of
interpretability. The inherent inability to delve into the internal workings of these models impedes our progress in comprehending the fundamental mechanisms by which they encode visual representations (Ribeiro et al. 2022). Despite ongoing efforts from researchers to enhance the interpretability
of CNNs, such as utilizing Grad-CAM (Gradient-weighted
Class Activation Mapping) (Selvaraju et al. 2017) and LRP
(Layer-wise Relevance Propagation) (Bach et al. 2015),
striking a balance between accuracy and interpretability remains a major obstacle. With the emergence of large-scale
brain imaging datasets (Chang et al. 2019; Allen et al. 2022),
both goal-driven and data-driven approaches have the potential to provide advanced encoding models for the ventral visual pathway (Qiao et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2022). This creates
a further appetite for model interpretability. The goal-driven
approach is to characterize voxel responses through the feature space trained on high-level tasks, and the data-driven
approach is to directly train the model with fMRI data to
characterize voxel responses (Cadena et al. 2019; Xiao et al.
2022). It is essential to note that biological visual learning
is a process of differentiation, wherein the learning involves
discerning differences in existing visual features present in
visual inputs rather than constructing new features for each
new category (Konkle and Alvarez 2022). This highlights
the need to strike a balance between predictive performance
and interpretability. Overemphasizing the predictive performance of CNN models may lead to high accuracy in voxel
response prediction but often at the cost of understanding

Introduction
The ventral visual pathway is a remarkable feat of nature,
capable of processing complex visual stimuli with predominant efficiency and accuracy. Recently, CNNs have emerged
as optimal quantitative encoding models for capturing neural activities and hierarchical structures in the ventral visual
pathway (Yamins et al. 2014; Kriegeskorte 2015; Schrimpf
et al. 2018; Cadena et al. 2019; Schrimpf et al. 2020; Storrs
et al. 2021). These models provide a hierarchical correspondence to the early visual cortex (V1-V4) and inferior temporal (IT) (Khosla et al. 2022): early CNN layers predict
V1 best, while intermediate and late layers predict V4 and
IT best (Yamins et al. 2014; Cichy et al. 2016; Güçlü and
* Corresponding author: Guoyuan Yang
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6413

