The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AACP: Aesthetics Assessment of Children’s Paintings Based on
Self-Supervised Learning
Shiqi Jiang1, 3 , Ning Li1 , Chen Shi1 , Liping Guo2 , Changbo Wang1 , Chenhui Li1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Faculty of Education, East China Normal University
3
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, East China Normal University
{52265901032, 51215901058, 52205901019}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
lpguo@pie.ecnu.edu.cn, {cbwang, chli}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The Aesthetics Assessment of Children’s Paintings (AACP)
is an important branch of the image aesthetics assessment
(IAA), playing a significant role in children’s education. This
task presents unique challenges, such as limited available
data and the requirement for evaluation metrics from multiple perspectives. However, previous approaches have relied
on training large datasets and subsequently providing an aesthetics score to the image, which is not applicable to AACP.
To solve this problem, we construct an aesthetics assessment
dataset of children’s paintings and a model based on selfsupervised learning. 1) We build a novel dataset composed
of two parts: the first part contains more than 20k unlabeled
images of children’s paintings; the second part contains 1.2k
images of children’s paintings, and each image contains eight
attributes labeled by multiple design experts. 2) We design
a pipeline that includes a feature extraction module, perception modules and a disentangled evaluation module. 3) We
conduct both qualitative and quantitative experiments to compare our model’s performance with five other methods using
the AACP dataset. Our experiments reveal that our method
can accurately capture aesthetic features and achieve stateof-the-art performance.

Introduction
Aesthetics education plays a crucial role in the holistic development of children as it fosters the development of aesthetic skills, stimulates creativity, improves cultural literacy,
and enhances social skills (Denac 2014). Children’s painting is a way for children to express their emotions, feelings and understanding of things. It is a reflection of their
cognitive and emotional development, as well as their ability to perceive and interpret the world around them (Robson and Rowe 2012; Chang 2005). Aesthetics assessment
of children’s paintings is a crucial component of aesthetics education, as it provides a way to measure and perceive
the aesthetic qualities of children’s paintings from multiple
perspectives. By analyzing quantitative attributes, such as
composition and color, researchers can gain a more comprehensive understanding of the cognitive processes and artistic
abilities of children.

Figure 1: Examples of images and annotations in the proposed dataset with the ground truth (and predicted) scores at
the bottom. We assess the aesthetics of children’s paintings
from 8 attributes.
Traditionally, the aesthetics assessment of children’s
paintings was performed by experts in the field of art or
design, who would evaluate the content, colors, and other
aspects to infer the meaning or message behind the painting (Sali, Akyol, and Baran 2014). However, such methods
are inherently subjective and may be influenced by personal
bias or preconceived notions. In addition, their assessment
metric is relatively single and potentially insufficient to capture the full range of potential meanings in children’s paintings.
In recent years, researchers have explored the application

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2534

