The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MICA: Towards Explainable Skin Lesion Diagnosis via Multi-Level
Image-Concept Alignment
Yequan Bie1 , Luyang Luo1 , Hao Chen1,2,3 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
HKUST Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute
ybie@connect.ust.hk, cseluyang@ust.hk, jhc@cse.ust.hk
Abstract

𝑪𝑨𝑽

Black-box deep learning approaches have showcased significant potential in the realm of medical image analysis. However, the stringent trustworthiness requirements intrinsic to
the medical field have catalyzed research into the utilization
of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), with a particular focus on concept-based methods. Existing concept-based
methods predominantly apply concept annotations from a
single perspective (e.g., global level), neglecting the nuanced
semantic relationships between sub-regions and concepts embedded within medical images. This leads to underutilization
of the valuable medical information and may cause models to
fall short in harmoniously balancing interpretability and performance when employing inherently interpretable architectures such as Concept Bottlenecks. To mitigate these shortcomings, we propose a multi-modal explainable disease diagnosis framework that meticulously aligns medical images
and clinical-related concepts semantically at multiple strata,
encompassing the image level, token level, and concept level.
Moreover, our method allows for model intervention and offers both textual and visual explanations in terms of humaninterpretable concepts. Experimental results on three skin
image datasets demonstrate that our method, while preserving model interpretability, attains high performance and label
efficiency for concept detection and disease diagnosis. The
code is available at https://github.com/Tommy-Bie/MICA.

1

regression
structure
dots and
globules
blue-whitish
veil
Image level

Blue-Whitish Veil
Label: present
Predict: present
Token level

Concept level

Figure 1: Our method learns image and concept semantic
correspondences at the image, token, and concept levels.

(XAI). Within XAI, several approaches have been proposed
to explain the neural networks using saliency map (Zhou
et al. 2016; Selvaraju et al. 2017) highlighting the contribution of each pixel or region in the model’s prediction, while
others leverage inspection of the learned features (AbbasiAsl and Yu 2017), feature interactions (Tsang, Cheng, and
Liu 2017), and influence functions (Koh and Liang 2017) to
explain the models. However, the reliability of these posthoc analyses, which offer explanations for a trained AI
model, has been under considerable scrutiny recently. Some
studies (Laugel et al. 2019; Rudin 2019) have shown that
post-hoc explanation techniques often yield inconsistent results across different runs and are sensitive to slight changes
in the input, making the post-hoc methods misleading as
they could provide explanations that do not accurately reflect the model’s decision-making process.
Thus, ante-hoc explainable methods have garnered researchers’ interest, with a particular emphasis placed on
concept-based methods. These methods aim to integrate interpretability into machine learning models by linking their
predictions to human-understandable concepts (Koh et al.
2020; Yuksekgonul et al. 2023; Fang et al. 2020; Yan et al.
2023). For example, the Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM)
(Koh et al. 2020) first predicts an intermediate set of predefined concepts and then uses these concepts to predict
the final output. Yan et al. (2023) introduced a human-inthe-loop framework to eliminate confounding factors and
improve model performance. These inherently interpretable
methods offer concept-based explanations, which are gener-

Introduction

Black-box deep learning methods have surfaced as powerful instruments in medical image analysis, offering significant potential to revolutionize healthcare diagnostics and
treatments (Kermany et al. 2018; Esteva et al. 2017). These
methods excel at handling the extensive and intricate data inherent to the medical field, rendering them suitable for many
tasks (Litjens et al. 2017). Despite the encouraging performance, their end-to-end prediction nature leads to a lack of
transparency, raising critical issues of trust and interpretability in high-stakes domains like healthcare (Rudin 2019).
The healthcare field, with its rigorous demands for trustworthiness, requires models that not only perform well but
are also understandable and trustable by practitioners, which
necessitates research into Explainable Artificial Intelligence
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

837

