The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Detection-Based Intermediate Supervision For Visual Question Answering
Yuhang Liu* 1,2,4 , Daowan Peng* 1,2 , Wei Wei†1,2 , Yuanyuan Fu2,3 , Wenfeng Xie2,3 , Dangyang Chen2,3
1

CCIIP Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL)
3
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance Company of China, Ltd.
4
ByteDance Inc.
liuyuhang.ysy@bytedance.com, {pengdw, weiw}@hust.edu.cn, fuyuanyuan83@gmail.com, {xiewenfeng801,
chendangyang273}@pingan.com.cn
Abstract

the right answer. One of the challenges in compositional visual question answering lies in modeling the reasoning process. From this perspective, VQA models can be divided into
two categories, i.e., holistic and modular. Holistic models
(Hu et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020) generate
answers for all types of questions through a unified multimodal fusion model, and the reasoning process is implicitly
performed during the encoding and fusion stages. Despite
the effectiveness, holistic models cannot reflect the intermediate reasoning process. On the contrary, modular model,
i.e., neural module network (NMN) (Andreas et al. 2016; Hu
et al. 2018; Hudson and Manning 2018; Chen et al. 2021),
has been a mainstream approach due to its explicit reasoning procedure and interpretable characteristics. Specifically,
NMN parses questions into predefined reasoning modules
and composes these modules into an executive program,
thus deconstructing complex questions into several easy-tosolve problems. During the process of multi-hop visual/logical reasoning and answering generation, the intermediate
status and results can be explicitly reflected from each module. Moreover, in order to restrict the reasoning process of
NMN models, extra intermediate supervisions (Chen et al.
2021; Zhao et al. 2021) are proposed to improve the answer
prediction performance, which restricts models to focus on
pivotal objects via Intersection over Union (IoU) constraint
between predicted bounding boxes and ground truth ones.
Despite the significant improvement in the accuracy metric, there are several shortcomings in the IoU-based intermediate supervisions of previous methods. For example,
MMN (Chen et al. 2021) directly exploits the ground-truth
scene graph paths corresponding to questions for intermediate result generation, which ignores other potentially correct intermediate objects and hinders the model to fully learn
cross-modal alignment and reasoning process. As Figure 1
(a) shows, MMN adopts the leftmost pillow to supervise
the first step result (i.e., Select(pillow)), while our proposed
DIS method takes into account all possible correct results.
Such comprehensive supervisions alleviate the missing-inthe-middle problem, thus facilitating the model to generate
correct answers. Besides, previous IoU-based intermediate
supervisions are possible to introduce noise signals due to
the bounding-box overlap problem, which induces the model
to focus on irrelevant objects. This is exemplified in Figure 1
(b). In the first reasoning step, the model is required to focus

Recently, neural module networks (NMNs) have yielded ongoing success in answering compositional visual questions,
especially those involving multi-hop visual and logical reasoning. NMNs decompose the complex question into several
sub-tasks using instance-modules from the reasoning paths
of that question and then exploit intermediate supervisions
to guide answer prediction, thereby improving inference interpretability. However, their performance may be hindered
due to sketchy modeling of intermediate supervisions. For
instance, (1) a prior assumption that each instance-module
refers to only one grounded object yet overlooks other potentially associated grounded objects, impeding full cross-modal
alignment learning; (2) IoU-based intermediate supervisions
may introduce noise signals as the bounding box overlap issue might guide the model’s focus towards irrelevant objects.
To address these issues, a novel method, Detection-based
Intermediate Supervision (DIS), is proposed, which adopts a
generative detection framework to facilitate multiple grounding supervisions via sequence generation. As such, DIS offers more comprehensive and accurate intermediate supervisions, thereby boosting answer prediction performance. Furthermore, by considering intermediate results, DIS enhances
the consistency in answering compositional questions and
their sub-questions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed DIS, showcasing both improved
accuracy and state-of-the-art reasoning consistency compared
to prior approaches.

Introduction
Compositional visual question answering (VQA) (Hudson
and Manning 2019b; Chen et al. 2021; Jing et al. 2022b) has
been an emerging research topic in multimodal domain, and
received increasing attention from both computer vision and
the language processing communities. Specifically, given input images and questions, it is required to generate answers
for the questions according the content of images. Generally, compositional questions involve multiple visual entities or concepts (i.e., objects, attributes, and relations), and
the models demand a rich set of abilities (semantic understanding, object detections, visual/logical reasoning) to get
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14061

