The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contributing Dimension Structure of Deep Feature for Coreset Selection
Zhijing Wan1,2 , Zhixiang Wang3,4 , Yuran Wang1,2 , Zheng Wang1,2 * ,
Hongyuan Zhu5 , Shin’ichi Satoh4,3
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
3
The University of Tokyo, Japan
4
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
5
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
a

Abstract
Coreset selection seeks to choose a subset of crucial training
samples for efficient learning. It has gained traction in deep
learning, particularly with the surge in training dataset sizes.
Sample selection hinges on two main aspects: a sample’s representation in enhancing performance and the role of sample
diversity in averting overfitting. Existing methods typically
measure both the representation and diversity of data based
on similarity metrics, such as L2-norm. They have capably
tackled representation via distribution matching guided by
the similarities of features, gradients, or other information between data. However, the results of effectively diverse sample
selection are mired in sub-optimality. This is because the similarity metrics usually simply aggregate dimension similarities without acknowledging disparities among the dimensions
that significantly contribute to the final similarity. As a result,
they fall short of adequately capturing diversity. To address
this, we propose a feature-based diversity constraint, compelling the chosen subset to exhibit maximum diversity. Our
key lies in the introduction of a novel Contributing Dimension Structure (CDS) metric. Different from similarity metrics that measure the overall similarity of high-dimensional
features, our CDS metric considers not only the reduction
of redundancy in feature dimensions, but also the difference
between dimensions that contribute significantly to the final
similarity. We reveal that existing methods tend to favor samples with similar CDS, leading to a reduced variety of CDS
types within the coreset and subsequently hindering model
performance. In response, we enhance the performance of
five classical selection methods by integrating the CDS constraint. Our experiments on three datasets demonstrate the
general effectiveness of the proposed method in boosting existing methods.

1

CDS metric
(Sec. 3)

Full dataset

GC+L2
GC+CDS

c

Constraint

Coreset

d

(1,1)

(1,0)

C-dim 2

2

Measurer

1

(0,0)
(1,1)

0
0.1
1
10
30
50

Improvement(%)

b

Encoder

CDS constraint
(Sec. 4)

C-dim 1

Sampling rate (%)

Improvement
over Graph Cut

Feature-based
(previous)

CDS
(our proposed)

Figure 1: Our method and motivation. (a) We combine the
proposed CDS metric and constraint with the current coreset
selection pipeline. (b) CDS metric and constraint enhance
the performance of SOTA—GC (Iyer et al. 2021). Although
replacing the CDS metric with L2 distance employed by previous feature-based methods can improve GC, integrating
our proposed CDS metric is more effective since it can capture more diverse, informative samples. (c) Previous featurebased methods using L2 metric could treat three distinct
samples as equivalent, while (d) our CDS metric effectively
distinguishes these samples by pruning the feature space and
representing the space in different partitions. Note that here,
we set the pruned dimension (C-dim) to 2 for demonstration.

and Bayesian inference (Campbell and Broderick 2018).
However, they are designed for specific models and problems, and have limited applications in deep learning.
Recently, with the rapid development of deep learning (Xie et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023; Yuan et al.
2023), research on coreset selection for deep learning has
emerged, including geometry-based methods (Sener and
Savarese 2017; Agarwal et al. 2020), uncertainty-based
methods (Coleman et al. 2019), submodularity-based methods (Kothawade et al. 2022; Rangwani et al. 2021), gradient matching-based methods (Mirzasoleiman, Bilmes, and
Leskovec 2020; Killamsetty et al. 2021a) and others (Toneva
et al. 2018; Swayamdipta et al. 2020). They typically rely
on a pre-trained model to obtain information, e.g., features,

Introduction

Coreset selection is a long-standing learning problem that
aims to select a subset of the most informative training
samples for data-efficient learning (Das et al. 2021; Wan
et al. 2023a). Early coreset selection methods were designed
to accelerate the learning and clustering of machine algorithms, such as k-means and k-medians (Har-Peled and
Kushal 2007), support vector machines (Tsang et al. 2005),
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9080

