The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dual-Window Multiscale Transformer for Hyperspectral
Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Fulin Luo1 , Xi Chen1 , Xiuwen Gong2 , Weiwen Wu3 , Tan Guo4 *
1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University
2
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Sun-Yat-sen University
4
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
luoflyn@163.com, chenxi2000cd@gmail.com, gongxiuwen@gmail.com,
wuweiw7@mail.sysu.edu.cn, guot@cqupt.edu.cn
RGB Image

Abstract
Coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) system
is an effective manner for hyperspectral snapshot compressive imaging. The core issue of CASSI is to solve the inverse
problem for the reconstruction of hyperspectral image (HSI).
In recent years, Transformer-based methods achieve promising performance in HSI reconstruction. However, capturing
both long-range dependencies and local information while
ensuring reasonable computational costs remains a challenging problem. In this paper, we propose a Transformer-based
HSI reconstruction method called dual-window multiscale
Transformer (DWMT), which is a coarse-to-fine process,
reconstructing the global properties of HSI with the longrange dependencies. In our method, we propose a novel UNet architecture using a dual-branch encoder to refine pixel
information and full-scale skip connections to fuse different features, enhancing the extraction of fine-grained features. Meanwhile, we design a novel self-attention mechanism called dual-window multiscale multi-head self-attention
(DWM-MSA), which utilizes two different-sized windows
to compute self-attention, which can capture the long-range
dependencies in a local region at different scales to improve the reconstruction performance. We also propose a
novel position embedding method for Transformer, named
con-abs position embedding (CAPE), which effectively enhances positional information of the HSIs. Extensive experiments on both the simulated and the real data are conducted
to demonstrate the superior performance, stability, and generalization ability of our DWMT. Code of this project is at
https://github.com/chenx2000/DWMT.

HDNet
594.4 nm

CST
594.4 nm

DWMT (ours)
594.4 nm

648.1 nm

648.1 nm

648.1 nm

594.4 nm

594.4 nm

594.4 nm

648.1 nm

648.1 nm

648.1 nm

Measurement

RGB Image

Measurement

Figure 1: Real HSI reconstructed results of our DWMT compared with three end-to-end trained methods on two (out of
28) spectral channels of Scene 1 and Scene 3.

(Schechner and Nayar 2002) typically is captured with hyperspectral imager that is a very expensive equipment. To
reduce the imaging costs, the snapshot compressive imaging
(SCI) systems are developed to capture HSIs, using a 2D
measurement to reconstruct a 3D HSI with a computational
spectral imaging algorithm (Yuan, Brady, and Katsaggelos
2021). This significantly improves imaging efficiency and
enables capturing dynamic scenes. Among these systems,
coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) (Gehm
et al. 2007) has shown impressive performance. CASSI
modulates the HSI signals of different wavelengths through
the coded aperture and disperser, and then combines all the
modulated signals to achieve 2D measurement. The core
task of CASSI is to address the ill-posed inverse problem,
recovering a 3D HSI from the 2D measurement.
The traditional methods (Yuan 2016; Liu et al. 2018;

Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSI) consist of multiple contiguous
spectral bands, providing richer spatial and spectral information compared with RGB images. Since HSI can reveal the
spectral properties of object, it has been widely used in computer vision (CV) tasks such as image classification (Guo
et al. 2023), change detection (Luo et al. 2023), and medical
image processing (Meng et al. 2020). Therefore, it is highly
valuable to explore efficient and cost-effective hyperspectral imaging techniques. The traditional hyperspectral image
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3972

