The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transfer and Alignment Network for Generalized Category Discovery
Wenbin An1,3 , Feng Tian2,3 * , Wenkai Shi1,3 , Yan Chen2 , Yaqiang Wu4 , Qianying Wang4 * , Ping Chen5
1

School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analytics
4
Lenovo Research
5
Department of Engineering, University of Massachusetts Boston
{wenbinan,kkkkkkai0611}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {fengtian,chenyan}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
{wuyqe,wangqya}@lenovo.com,Ping.Chen@umb.edu
Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) is a crucial realworld task that aims to recognize both known and novel categories from an unlabeled dataset by leveraging another labeled
dataset with only known categories. Despite the improved
performance on known categories, current methods perform
poorly on novel categories. We attribute the poor performance
to two reasons: biased knowledge transfer between labeled
and unlabeled data and noisy representation learning on the
unlabeled data. The former leads to unreliable estimation of
learning targets for novel categories and the latter hinders models from learning discriminative features. To mitigate these
two issues, we propose a Transfer and Alignment Network
(TAN), which incorporates two knowledge transfer mechanisms to calibrate the biased knowledge and two feature alignment mechanisms to learn discriminative features. Specifically,
we model different categories with prototypes and transfer
the prototypes in labeled data to correct model bias towards
known categories. On the one hand, we pull instances with
known categories in unlabeled data closer to these prototypes
to form more compact clusters and avoid boundary overlap
between known and novel categories. On the other hand, we
use these prototypes to calibrate noisy prototypes estimated
from unlabeled data based on category similarities, which
allows for more accurate estimation of prototypes for novel
categories that can be used as reliable learning targets later.
After knowledge transfer, we further propose two feature alignment mechanisms to acquire both instance- and category-level
knowledge from unlabeled data by aligning instance features
with both augmented features and the calibrated prototypes,
which can boost model performance on both known and novel
categories with less noise. Experiments on three benchmark
datasets show that our model outperforms SOTA methods, especially on novel categories. Theoretical analysis is provided
for an in-depth understanding of our model in general. Our
code and data are available at https://github.com/Lackel/TAN.

Figure 1: Average accuracy on three benchmark datasets
compared to the SOTA method DPN. Accuracy for novel
categories (Novel), known categories (Known) and their harmonic mean (H-score) over three runs are reported.

and test data are from the same set of pre-defined categories
(Cao, Brbic, and Leskovec 2021). However, many practical
problems such as intent detection (Lin, Xu, and Zhang 2020)
and relation extraction (Hogan, Li, and Shang 2023) are
open-world, where the well-trained models may encounter
unlabeled data containing unseen novel categories. To meet
the open-world demands, Generalized Category Discovery
(GCD) was widely studied in both NLP (Zhang et al. 2021a;
An et al. 2023c) and CV fields (Vaze et al. 2022; Wen, Zhao,
and Qi 2022). GCD requires models to recognize both known
and novel categories from encountered unlabelled data based
on a set of labeled data with only known categories, which
can adapt models to the increasing number of categories
without any additional labeling cost.
Most existing works (Zhang et al. 2021b; An et al. 2023c;
Shi et al. 2023) adopt a two-stage approach to address GCD:
pre-training on labeled data and then transferring the pretrained model for pseudo-label training on unlabeled data.
Even though these methods have achieved good performance
on known categories, they usually perform poorly on novel
categories due to the lack of supervision (yellow bar in Fig. 1),
which limits their applications in the real world. We attribute
the poor performance to two reasons: Biased knowledge
transfer and Noisy representation learning. First, models
pretrained on labeled data with only known categories tend to
be over-confident and biased towards known categories, so instances with novel categories in unlabeled data can be easily

Introduction
Despite remarkable breakthroughs achieved by modern deep
learning systems, the majority of models are designed under
a close-world setting, based on the assumption that training
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10856

