The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spectrum Translation for Refinement of Image Generation (STIG)
Based on Contrastive Learning and Spectral Filter Profile
Seokjun Lee1, 2 , Seung-Won Jung2 , Hyunseok Seo1 *
1

Biomedical Research Division, Korea Institute of Science and Technology
2
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University
ykykyk112@kist.re.kr, swjung83@korea.ac.kr, seo@kist.kr

CycleGAN

Abstract

DDPM

StarGAN

Currently, image generation and synthesis have remarkably
progressed with generative models. Despite photo-realistic
results, intrinsic discrepancies are still observed in the frequency domain. The spectral discrepancy appeared not only
in generative adversarial networks but in diffusion models.
In this study, we propose a framework to effectively mitigate
the disparity in frequency domain of the generated images
to improve generative performance of both GAN and diffusion models. This is realized by spectrum translation for the
refinement of image generation (STIG) based on contrastive
learning. We adopt theoretical logic of frequency components in various generative networks. The key idea, here, is
to refine the spectrum of the generated image via the concept of image-to-image translation and contrastive learning
in terms of digital signal processing. We evaluate our framework across eight fake image datasets and various cuttingedge models to demonstrate the effectiveness of STIG. Our
framework outperforms other cutting-edges showing significant decreases in FID and log frequency distance of spectrum.
We further emphasize that STIG improves image quality by
decreasing the spectral anomaly. Additionally, validation results present that the frequency-based deepfake detector confuses more in the case where fake spectrums are manipulated
by STIG.

Real (Image / Spectrum)

Fake (Image / Spectrum)

Figure 1: Spectral discrepancies between the real and generated image in various generative networks. CycleGAN (Zhu
et al. 2017) and StarGAN (Choi et al. 2018), which include
the transposed convolution layer (row 1 and row 2), produce the grid-based aliasing in the spectrum of the generated image. On the other hand, DDPM (row 3) (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020) includes another type of discrepancy, the
lack of high-frequency components.

Introduction
In recent years, image generation and synthesis have noticeably progressed with various generative approaches (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Song et al. 2021). Further, many studies have shown ways
to make the generative model produce more photo-realistic
images which are not distinguishable by the human visual
system (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020;
Choi et al. 2020; Nichol et al. 2021). In spite of their remarkable success, it is easy to find apparent discrepancies
in the frequency spectrum of generated images. First, an
upsampling operation in the most generative network can
have aliasing on the spectrum (i.e., checkerboard artifact in
image domain) and insufficient high-frequency components
(Zhang, Karaman, and Chang 2019; Frank et al. 2020). In

addition, the spectral disparity has been reported in the diffusion model, which currently stands out in image generation
and synthesis fields. Researchers note that generated images
from the diffusion model have insufficient high-frequency
components (Yang et al. 2023). Therefore, spectrum discrepancy has been an intrinsic challenge of the generative models. We visualized examples of these discrepancies in Fig. 1.
To close gaps in the frequency domain, several studies
suggest approaches that modify the generative network architecture or objective function providing more guidelines
for the real spectrum (Durall, Keuper, and Keuper 2020;
Jung and Keuper 2021; Jiang et al. 2021). Although they
can restore the distortion in the power spectrum, there is
still room for improvement in terms of frequency domain.
To overcome these partial success of the conventional methods, we analyze the current generative networks in the frequency domain. We first check the spectrum profiles of the

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2929

