The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FairTrade: Achieving Pareto-Optimal Trade-Offs between Balanced Accuracy and
Fairness in Federated Learning
Maryam Badar, Sandipan Sikdar, Wolfgang Nejdl, Marco Fisichella
L3S Research Center, Leibniz University, Hannover, Germany
{badar, sandipan.sikdar, nejdl, mfisichella}@l3s.de

Abstract

most of these methods ignore the presence of class imbalance in the data (Younis and Fisichella 2022), which can be
a crucial source of bias (Dullerud et al. 2021). Moreover,
in a decentralized set-up as in FL where the training data
spans diverse clients, class imbalance is commonplace (Ramaswamy et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021). Consequently, the
performance measured in terms of accuracy as reported by
these methods, is not representative of the true performance.
As an illustrative example, consider a dataset with 80% positive samples and 20% negative samples. Each sample (x)
is associated with a sensitive attribute S ∈ M, F . Consider a classifier f which always predicts a positive class
i.e., f (x) = 1. For such a classifier, accuracy is 0.80 and
discrimination measured in terms of the difference in probability of being assigned the positive class (aka demographic
parity) is 0 as f always predicts 1 irrespective of the sensitive attribute. In fact, the low discrimination score achieved
here is not at all reflective of the model’s discrimination
mitigation capability. The true performance of a classifier
in such a scenario is revealed through balanced accuracy,
which for the classifier in the above example is 0.5. Our experiments on several real-world datasets show that the stateof-the-art (SoTA) discrimination mitigation methods in FL
can achieve a balanced accuracy as low as 0.5 rendering the
low discrimination score achieved in those cases inconsequential. To address this, we propose FairTrade which utilizes multi-objective optimization (MOO) to jointly maximize balanced accuracy and minimize discrimination. Given
these objectives need not necessarily be differentiable or
expensive to compute, we further utilize Bayesian optimization to achieve our goal. Experiments on a range of
real-world datasets show that FairTrade achieves the best
performance-fairness tradeoff. We also find our method to be
more efficient, achieving convergence in fewer communication rounds compared to the baseline methods. Our model
also seamlessly adapts to other notions of fairness (e.g.,
causal fairness) demonstrating its generalizability.
To summarize the key contributions, we highlight the importance of evaluating discrimination mitigation methods using
balanced accuracy rather than accuracy alone. We further introduce a metric-agnostic design that accommodates a variety of fairness notions, ensuring applicability across different FL contexts. Notably, FairTrade guarantees zero privacy
leakage, as global and local updates are exchanged between

As Federated Learning (FL) gains prominence in distributed
machine learning applications, achieving fairness without
compromising predictive performance becomes paramount.
The data being gathered from distributed clients in an FL environment often leads to class imbalance. In such scenarios,
balanced accuracy rather than accuracy is the true representation of model performance. However, most state-of-the-art
fair FL methods report accuracy as the measure of performance, which can lead to misguided interpretations of the
model’s effectiveness to mitigate discrimination. To the best
of our knowledge, this work presents the first attempt towards
achieving Pareto-optimal trade-offs between balanced accuracy and fairness in a federated environment (FairTrade). By
utilizing multi-objective optimization, the framework negotiates the intricate balance between model’s balanced accuracy and fairness. The framework’s agnostic design adeptly
accommodates both statistical and causal fairness notions, ensuring its adaptability across diverse FL contexts. We provide empirical evidence of our framework’s efficacy through
extensive experiments on five real-world datasets and comparisons with six baselines. The empirical results underscore
the potential of our framework in improving the trade-off between fairness and balanced accuracy in FL applications.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a transformative
strategy for distributed machine learning (ML) systems. By
allowing local data storage and global model improvements
without compromising data privacy, it presents a sustainable
approach for model training and evaluation (Kairouz et al.
2021; Fisichella, Lax, and Russo 2022). However, one critical challenge that often goes unaddressed in such setups
is ensuring fair and accurate model outcomes (Emelianov,
Gast, and Gummadi 2022).
While there exists several methods in the literature to enhance fairness of ML models in a traditional centralized
setup (Mehrabi et al. 2021), they cannot be directly deployed
to FL settings owing to its distributed nature. Recently, few
methods (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; Du et al. 2021; Cui 2021;
Ezzeldin et al. 2023; Zeng, Chen, and Lee 2021) have been
proposed to address the issue of fairness in FL. However,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10962

