The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Role of Over-Parameterization in Machine Learning
- the Good, the Bad, the Ugly
Fanghui Liu
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
fanghui.liu@warwick.ac.uk

Statement - New Faculty Highlights

the constant step-size SGD setting incurs no loss in convergence rate when compared to the exact minimumnorm interpolator, as a theoretical justification of using
SGD in practice. Besides, extension our result from twolayer NNs to shallow Transformers can be found in (Wu
et al. 2023).
• A3: Based on our generalization results, we are able
to analyse the function approximation in deep RL beyond “linear” regime, e.g., NTK, Eluder dimension. This
scheme is powerful in practice, e.g., deep Q-network
(DQN) using DNNs for function approximation. Our
work (Liu, Viano, and Cevher 2022) transforms the estimation of temporal difference error to a generalization guarantees problem under the non-iid setting. We
demonstrate that the sublinear regret can be achieved for
deep neural function approximation with reasonably finite width and depth in practice. This result is achieved
under Besov spaces and Barron spaces, which is beyond
the “linear” regime for better understanding nonlinearlity
in deep RL. These results could also motivate practitioners to consider different architectures of implementations
of deep RL.

The conventional wisdom of simple models in machine learning misses the bigger picture, especially overparameterized neural networks (NNs), where the number of
parameters are much larger than the number of training data.
The target of my research is to explore the mystery behind
over-parameterized NNs from a theoretical side by addressing the following three questions:
• Q1: Over-parameterization helps or hurts robustness in
NNs?
• Q2: Why over-parameterized NNs generalize well under
SGD training?
• Q3: How does deep RL work well for function approximation beyond “linear” regime?
My research is able to address the above three questions
as below.
• A1: A large numbers of literature in this community
have a contradicting conclusion on the fundamental question: over-parameterization helps or hurts robustness?
Our work (Zhu et al. 2022) aims to investigate this apparent contradiction in theory, and to close the gap as
much as possible. We demonstrate the good in width, the
bad depth, the ugly in initialization regarding the average
robustness of DNNs: in the over-parameterized regime,
width helps robustness (good); depth (bad) helps robustness under LeCun initialization but hurts the robustness
He-initialization and NTK initialization (ugly).
• A2: Regarding generalization of over-parameterized
models, our work (Liu, Suykens, and Cevher 2022) aims
to understand over-parameterized two-layer neural networks trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
which coincides with practical neural networks training,
and accordingly bridges the theoretical gap of previous
work depending on the closed-form solution. Our results
are able to characterize the double descent behavior by
the unimodality of variance and monotonic decrease of
bias, which provides a theoretical justification to understand why over-parameterized model can generalize well
under SGD training. Furthermore, our finding shows that

Acknowledgments
My talk for AAAI New Faculty Highlights 2004 was supported by University of Warwick. The presented work is theoretical and generally will have no negative societal impacts.

References
Liu, F.; Suykens, J. A.; and Cevher, V. 2022. On the Double
Descent of Random Features Models Trained with SGD. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Liu, F.; Viano, L.; and Cevher, V. 2022. Understanding Deep
Neural Function Approximation in Reinforcement Learning
via ϵ-Greedy Exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Wu, Y.; Liu, F.; Chrysos, G. G.; and Cevher, V. 2023. On
the convergence of shallow Transformers. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Zhu, Z.; Liu, F.; Chrysos, G. G.; and Cevher, V. 2022. Robustness in deep learning: The good (width), the bad (depth),
and the ugly (initialization). In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22674

