The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoding AI’s Nudge: A Unified Framework to Predict Human Behavior in
AI-Assisted Decision Making
Zhuoyan Li, Zhuoran Lu, Ming Yin
Purdue University, USA
li4178@purdue.edu, lu800@purdue.edu, mingyin@purdue.edu

Abstract

the decision maker with an AI model’s decision recommendation on a task (Passi and Vorvoreanu 2022; Wang, Liang,
and Yin 2023), though it is found that such assistance sometimes foster a degree of over-reliance on the AI recommendation (Ma et al. 2023). In contrast, the delayed recommendation paradigm, another form of AI assistance where humans are first required to deliberate on a task before receiving the AI model’s decision recommendation, has the potential to mitigate this over-reliance, but possibly at the cost of
increased under-reliance (Buçinca, Malaya, and Gajos 2021;
Fogliato et al. 2022). Thus, to best utilize diverse forms of
AI assistance and to determine when and how to present the
most suitable type of AI assistance to humans, it is critical
to quantitatively understand and predict how these AI assistance influences humans on different decision making tasks.

With the rapid development of AI-based decision aids, different forms of AI assistance have been increasingly integrated
into the human decision making processes. To best support
humans in decision making, it is essential to quantitatively
understand how diverse forms of AI assistance influence humans’ decision making behavior. To this end, much of the
current research focuses on the end-to-end prediction of human behavior using “black-box” models, often lacking interpretations of the nuanced ways in which AI assistance impacts the human decision making process. Meanwhile, methods that prioritize the interpretability of human behavior predictions are often tailored for one specific form of AI assistance, making adaptations to other forms of assistance difficult. In this paper, we propose a computational framework
that can provide an interpretable characterization of the influence of different forms of AI assistance on decision makers
in AI-assisted decision making. By conceptualizing AI assistance as the “nudge” in human decision making processes,
our approach centers around modelling how different forms
of AI assistance modify humans’ strategy in weighing different information in making their decisions. Evaluations on behavior data collected from real human decision makers show
that the proposed framework outperforms various baselines
in accurately predicting human behavior in AI-assisted decision making. Based on the proposed framework, we further
provide insights into how individuals with different cognitive
styles are nudged by AI assistance differently.

A few existing studies have worked on modeling and predicting human behavior in AI-assisted decision making (Kumar et al. 2021; Bansal et al. 2021), but they come with several limitations. For example, some research focuses on predicting humans’ interaction with AI assistance in an end-toend manner using black-box models (Subrahmanian and Kumar 2017). While these methods can be effortlessly adapted
to various forms of AI assistance, the black-box nature of the
model makes it challenging to unpack the cognitive mechanisms driving humans’ decision behavior under AI influence. Meanwhile, other studies that aim for interpretability
propose computational models based on economics or psychology theories. For instance, Wang, Lu, and Yin (2022)
employed the Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT) to understand how humans decide whether to adopt AI recommendations by analyzing the utility and cost of different decision options. However, these models are typically tailored
for one specific form of AI assistance, making generalizations to other forms of AI assistance a challenging task that
requires significant methodology adaptation.

Introduction
As AI technology advances, AI models are increasingly integrated into the human decision making process spanning
various domains from healthcare to finance. This has created
a new paradigm of human-AI collaboration—Given a decision making task, AI provides assistance to humans while
humans make the final decisions. To fully unlock the potential of AI-based decision aids in enhancing human decision making, a growing line of research has been developed
in the human-computer interaction community to develop
different forms of AI assistance to better support decision
makers (Lai et al. 2023). Each form of AI assistance shows
different impacts on human decision makers. For instance,
the most intuitive type of AI assistance is to directly provide

The absence of a unified computational framework to
quantitatively characterize how diverse forms of AI assistance influence human decision making processes in an interpretable way impedes the further intelligent utilization of
AI assistance. As such, decision makers often have to interact with the default forms of AI assistance instead of benefiting from personalized and intelligent AI assistance that can
best support them. Therefore, in this study, we aim to bridge

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10083

