The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

COMBH ELPER: A Neural Approach to Reduce Search Space for Graph
Combinatorial Problems
Hao Tian1 , Sourav Medya2 , Wei Ye1,*
1

College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago, IL, USA
{2133036, yew}@tongji.edu.cn, medya@uic.edu

Abstract

In recent years, machine learning (ML) methods, especially neural approaches, have been applied to design effective heuristics for CO problems (Khalil et al. 2017; Li,
Chen, and Koltun 2018; Manchanda et al. 2020; Barrett et al.
2020). These neural approaches boost the performance of
heuristics by exploiting the expressiveness of GNNs (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Gilmer et al. 2020) and generate high-quality solutions in
practice. However, they often consist of complex models
with a large number of parameters. They predict the probability of each node being included in the final solution and
add the best node (i.e., the node with the largest probability)
to the current solution. Such process is repeated until the final solutions are obtained. Thus, they can still suffer from
the efficiency issue of the search space being large.
To address the efficiency issue, an intuitive idea is to reduce the size of the search space for the CO problems. For
example, (Grassia et al. 2019; Lauri et al. 2020; Fitzpatrick,
Ajwani, and Carroll 2021) view the CO problem as a classification task. They train a linear classifier such as logistic
regression (Cox 1958) to identify bad candidates (nodes or
edges) unlikely to be included in the solution and prune them
from the search space. In our work, we build upon such idea
and propose a novel framework called COMBH ELPER to
address the efficiency issue of existing CO algorithms based
on node selection. Instead of training a linear model for classification, we adopt a non-linear neural model, i.e., a GNN
model, which fully exploits the graph structural information
and has shown remarkable performance on node classification tasks. In particular, we train a GNN model to identify
the good candidates (i.e., nodes) that are likely to be included in the solution and prune the bad or unlikely ones
from the search space. Moreover, we apply two modules
to further enhance the GNN model. The first one is a KD
module used to compress the GNN model and reduce the
inference time. The other one is a problem-specific boosting module, which is designed to improve the performance
of node classification so that the search space for specific
CO problems is pruned more precisely. Afterwards, we execute traditional CO algorithms on the reduced search space,
which can accelerate the process of finding the solution set.
We briefly summarize our contributions as follows:

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problems over graphs appear routinely in many applications such as in optimizing traffic, viral marketing in social networks, and matching for job
allocation. Due to their combinatorial nature, these problems
are often NP-hard. Existing approximation algorithms and
heuristics rely on the search space to find the solutions and become time-consuming when this space is large. In this paper,
we design a neural method called COMBH ELPER to reduce
this space and thus improve the efficiency of the traditional
CO algorithms based on node selection. Specifically, it employs a Graph Neural Network (GNN) to identify promising
nodes for the solution set. This pruned search space is then
fed to the traditional CO algorithms. COMBH ELPER also
uses a Knowledge Distillation (KD) module and a problemspecific boosting module to bring further efficiency and efficacy. Our extensive experiments show that the traditional CO
algorithms with COMBH ELPER are at least 2 times faster
than their original versions.

Introduction
CO problems over graphs arise in many applications such as
social networks (Chaoji et al. 2012), transportation (James,
Yu, and Gu 2019), health-care (Wilder et al. 2018), and biology (Hossain et al. 2020). Due to their combinatorial nature, these problems are often NP-hard, and thus the design
of optimal polynomial-time algorithms is infeasible. Traditional CO algorithms such as approximation algorithms
and heuristics (Hochba 1997; Papadimitriou and Steiglitz
1998; Vazirani 2001; Williamson and Shmoys 2011) are
usually used to solve such problems in practice. Approximation algorithms take polynomial time and provide theoretical
bounds on the quality of the solutions. On the other hand, the
design of heuristics lacks provable guarantees and requires
empirical expertise in specific CO problems. Although some
of these algorithms (Andrade, Resende, and Werneck 2012;
Mari 2017; Hoos and Stützle 2004) can find (nearly) optimal solutions or approximate high-quality solutions, they
have one common bottleneck in terms of efficiency. Since
the efficiency of generating solutions relies on the size of
the search space, it becomes time-consuming to obtain the
solution when the size of the search space is large.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel framework called COMBH ELPER to
improve the efficiency of existing graph CO algorithms

20812

