The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data-Efficient Graph Learning
Kaize Ding
Northwestern University
kaize.ding@northwestern.edu

My research strives to develop fundamental graph-centric
learning algorithms to reduce the need for human supervision in low-resource scenarios. The focus is on achieving effective and reliable data-efficient learning on graphs, which
can be summarized into three facets:

graph contrastive learning, including (Ding et al. 2023b,
2024; Liu* et al. 2023). For example, I designed a simple yet effective graph contrastive learning model S3 CL (Ding et al. 2023b) to elicit global structural and semantic knowledge from the input graph, which can address the “global unawareness” of existing graph contrastive learning methods; and (2) graph generative modeling, such as (Ding et al. 2019). Utilizing input graph
reconstruction as a self-supervision pretext, I developed
the first graph generative model Dominant (Ding et al.
2019) for graph anomaly detection. It can conduct both
structure and feature reconstruction to capture the patterns of the majority nodes in a self-supervised fashion.

• Graph Weakly-supervised Learning: Existing Graph
ML algorithms are mainly developed for the supervised
or semi-supervised setting. However, weakly-supervised
Graph ML, especially when dealing with incomplete,
inaccurate, and indirect supervision signals, remains
understudied. To address this, I proposed a series of
works (Ding, Li, and Liu 2019; Ding et al. 2022, 2024,
2023a) that focus on learning with the aforementioned
three types of weak supervision. For example, I developed a novel graph self-training framework – Meta Propagation Networks (Ding et al. 2022), which is able to
adjust its label propagation strategy and leverage large
receptive fields for inferring accurate pseudo labels on
unlabeled nodes. By augmenting the scarce training data
with these pseudo labels, one can learn a label-efficient
GNN with only a few labels per class.
• Graph Few-shot Learning: Despite that humans are capable of learning new tasks rapidly by utilizing what they
learned in the past, current AI algorithms cannot rapidly
generalize from a few examples. To bridge this gap between Graph ML models and humans, I have developed a
series of graph few-shot learning algorithms (Ding et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022). For example,
to handle the never-before-seen node classes, I proposed
Graph Prototypical Networks (GPN) (Ding et al. 2020)
to extrapolate the meta-knowledge from many-shot seen
node classes to few-shot unseen node classes using graph
meta-learning. By leveraging the graph property information, GPN supports estimating the informativeness of
each labeled node and derives highly robust and representative class prototypes for classifying those neverbefore-seen node classes with even a few labeled nodes.
• Graph Self-supervised Learning: My research also investigates graph self-supervised learning to alleviate the
demand for massive labeled data and provide sufficient
supervision, which can be categorized into two lines: (1)

References
Ding, K.; Li, J.; Bhanushali, R.; and Liu, H. 2019. Deep
Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks. In SDM.
Ding, K.; Li, J.; and Liu, H. 2019. Interactive anomaly detection on attributed networks. In WSDM.
Ding, K.; Nouri, E.; Zheng, G.; Liu, H.; and White, R. 2024.
Toward Robust Graph Semi-Supervised Learning against
Extreme Data Scarcity. TNNLS.
Ding, K.; Wang, J.; Caverlee, J.; and Liu, H. 2022. Meta
Propagation Networks for Few-shot Semi-supervised Learning on Graphs. In AAAI.
Ding, K.; Wang, J.; Li, J.; Caverlee, J.; and Liu, H. 2023a.
Robust Graph Meta-learning for Weakly-supervised Fewshot Node Classification. TKDD.
Ding, K.; Wang, J.; Li, J.; Shu, K.; Liu, C.; and Liu, H.
2020. Graph prototypical networks for few-shot learning
on attributed networks. In CIKM.
Ding, K.; Wang, Y.; Yang, Y.; and Liu, H. 2023b. Eliciting
Structural and Semantic Global Knowledge in Unsupervised
Graph Contrastive Learning. In AAAI.
Liu*, Y.; Ding*, K.; Liu, H.; and Pan, S. 2023. GOOD-D:
On Unsupervised Graph Out-Of-Distribution Detection. In
WSDM.
Wang, S.; Ding, K.; Zhang, C.; Chen, C.; and Li, J. 2022.
Task-adaptive few-shot node classification. In KDD.
Xu, Z.; Ding, K.; Wang, Y.-X.; Liu, H.; and Tong, H. 2022.
Generalized Few-Shot Node Classification. In ICDM.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22663

