The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Detect Any Keypoints: An Efficient Light-Weight Few-Shot Keypoint Detector
Changsheng Lu1 , Piotr Koniusz2,1
1

The Australian National University
2
Data61/CSIRO
changshengluu@gmail.com, piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

(a) Existing FSKD approach
N SKPs
N Modulated features

Support image
& keypoints

Abstract
Recently the prompt-based models have become popular
across various language and vision tasks. Following that
trend, we perform few-shot keypoint detection (FSKD) by
detecting any keypoints in a query image, given the prompts
formed by support images and keypoints. FSKD can be applied to detecting keypoints and poses of diverse animal
species. In order to maintain flexibility of detecting varying number of keypoints, existing FSKD approaches modulate query feature map per support keypoint, then detect the
corresponding keypoint from each modulated feature via a
detection head. Such a separation of modulation-detection
makes model heavy and slow when the number of keypoints
increases. To overcome this issue, we design a novel lightweight detector which combines modulation and detection
into one step, with the goal of reducing the computational
cost without the drop of performance. Moreover, to bridge
the large domain shift of keypoints between seen and unseen species, we further improve our model with mean feature based contrastive learning to align keypoint distributions,
resulting in better keypoint representations for FSKD. Compared to the state of the art, our light-weight detector reduces
the number of parameters by 50%, training/test time by 50%,
and achieves 5.62% accuracy gain on 1-shot novel keypoint
detection in the Animal pose dataset. Our model is also robust
to the number of keypoints and saves memory when evaluating a large number of keypoints (e.g., 1000) per episode.

Enc.

Modulation

Predicted keypoints

Detection

(b) Our lightweight FSKD approach
Non-Linear Conv. kernels
KG

Query

Enc.

Non-parametric
Heatmaps
Detection
Simul. Modul. & Det.

Upsample
& Fuse Mean Feature
based CL

Figure 1: Comparison of FSKD methods. Existing methods
perform feature modulation per support keypoint prototype
(SKP) followed by a detection step. In contrast, our model
uses conditionally generated kernels and a non-parametric
detection module to conduct simultaneous modulation and
detection. Our model avoids generating the expensive “modulated” feature maps, thus significantly reducing the number
of parameters, memory usage & computational time.
methods fail to detect keypoints desired by users. Moreover,
due to the diversity of animal species, one cannot collect
data samples of all species, which justifies research on fewshot keypoint detection (FSKD): having trained the model
on a diverse dataset, one can use some similarity measure
to rapidly recognize novel/base keypoints in unseen species
given only one or a few labeled samples.
Recent works on detecting keypoints from few samples
can be broadly divided into two categories. The first category, class-specific few-shot keypoint detection (He et al.
2023; Yao et al. 2021), uses a large number of unlabeled
datapoints and few labeled samples to perform landmark localization. Such a family of methods works with specific
keypoint types but is unable to handle varying number of
keypoints over diverse unseen species.
In contrast, the second category is based on the general
few-shot keypoint detection (Lu and Koniusz 2022; Bohdal
et al. 2023; Lu, Zhu, and Koniusz 2023) inspired by few-shot
learning (Sung et al. 2018; Koch et al. 2015). Such FSKD
methods use episodes for training and evaluation. Our work
falls into this category as it offers the flexibility of detecting
any keypoints in a query image given the prompts of support keypoints. However, there exist two important issues
that hinder FSKD, which are i) the scalability issue w.r.t. the
number of keypoints per episode and ii) the large domain

Introduction
Keypoint detection is a critical research topic in computer
vision. As it can provide concise semantic and structural
information, it has many applications in pose estimation
of humans (Cao et al. 2019b) and animals (Pereira et al.
2019), behavior analysis (Graving et al. 2019), face alignment (Kowalski, Naruniec, and Trzcinski 2017), and finegrained image classification (Tang, Wertheimer, and Hariharan 2020), etc. Over the past decade, the deep keypoint detection evolved significantly. However, the fully-supervised
keypoint detectors are limited by the training data, and recognize only specific body parts and species, failing to generalize to unseen species. Semi-supervised methods suffer
from similar issues and require several hundreds or thousands of labels for training on new class, and unsupervised
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3882

