The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Group Re-identification via Adaptive Clustering-Driven
Progressive Learning
Hongxu Chen1 , Quan Zhang1 , Jian-Huang Lai1,2,3,4 * , Xiaohua Xie1,2,3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Pazhou Lab (HuangPu), Guangdong 510000, China
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{chenhx87, zhangq48}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Existing methods

Abstract
Group re-identification (G-ReID) aims to correctly associate
groups with the same members captured by different cameras.
However, supervised approaches for this task often suffer
from the high cost of cross-camera sample labeling. Unsupervised methods based on clustering can avoid sample labeling,
but the problem of member variations often makes clustering
unstable, leading to incorrect pseudo-labels. To address these
challenges, we propose an adaptive clustering-driven progressive learning approach (ACPL), which consists of a group
adaptive clustering (GAC) module and a global dynamic prototype update (GDPU) module. Specifically, GAC designs the
quasi-distance between groups, thus fully capitalizing on both
individual-level and holistic information within groups. In the
case of great uncertainty in intra-group members, GAC effectively minimizes the impact of non-discriminative features
and reduces the noise in the model’s pseudo-labels. Additionally, our GDPU devises a dynamic weight to update the prototypes and effectively mine the hard samples with complex
member variations, which improves the model’s robustness.
Extensive experiments conducted on four popular G-ReID
datasets demonstrate that our method not only achieves stateof-the-art performance on unsupervised G-ReID but also performs comparably to several fully supervised approaches.

…
…

Clustering

Person-level Samples
Group-level Samples
Misclassified Samples
Different Clusters

…

Train

ACPL (Our method)
Images
GAC

…

…
GDPU&Train

Figure 1: We compare existing methods with ACPL. Different colors represent the identities belonging to different
groups. Existing clustering methods based on group features
may create wrong labels with member changes, whereas our
approach performs GAC to handle non-discriminative member features and
we exTrain
… get high-quality labels. Additionally,
plore hard samples during training …
with GDPU.

Introduction

of labeled data. Moreover, existing pure unsupervised methods are mainly based on hand-crafted features (Cai, Takala,
and Pietikainen 2010; Zhu, Chu, and Yu 2016), and these
methods exhibit subpar performance. Motivated by the popular method of unsupervised person re-identification (person
ReID), which is driven by learning from pseudo-labels generated by clustering (Ester et al. 1996; Zhang et al. 2022c;
Dai et al. 2022; Lan et al. 2023), we apply the same clustering methods to unsupervised G-ReID. However, the performances are not satisfactory. The main reasons for this limitation are as follows (the upper part of Fig.1): 1) Member
variations can lead to distortions in the spatial distribution
of group features, resulting in considerable instability when
performing certain clustering. 2) During training, the utilization of a fixed momentum factor in memory bank updates
may further limit the model’s ability to adequately explore
hard samples with complex member changes.
To address these problems, we propose our adaptive
clustering-driven progressive learning (ACPL) method, as
shown in the lower part of Fig.1. Specifically, we first pro-

Group re-identification (G-ReID) focuses on associating the
group images containing the same members captured by different cameras. G-ReID usually deals with groups of 2 to
6 members, and considers group images with at least 60%
of the same members as the same group class (Yan et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2023). G-ReID plays an increasingly critical role in ensuring the safety of citizens by detecting and
preventing heinous crimes such as child trafficking and kidnapping (Zhang et al. 2022a,b). In addition to the difficulty
of expensive dataset labeling, the task of G-ReID is also
challenged by the member variation, which means that the
number of intra-group members may change due to members leaving or occlusion.
While supervised methods (Xu et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2022a,b; Yan et al. 2020) dominate in existing
approaches for the G-ReID task, they require a large amount
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1054

