The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TAU: Trajectory Data Augmentation with Uncertainty for Next POI
Recommendation
Zhuang Zhuang1, 2 , Tianxin Wei3 , Lingbo Liu4 , Heng Qi1, 2 * , Yanming Shen1, 2 , Baocai Yin1, 2
1

2

Dalian University of Technology, China
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence (Dalian University of Technology), Ministry of Education,
Dalian, China
3
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, USA
4
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
zhuang97@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {hengqi, shen, ybc}@dlut.edu.cn, twei10@illinois.edu, lingbo.liu@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

Park

Next Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation has been
proven effective at utilizing sparse, intricate spatial-temporal
trajectory data to recommend subsequent POIs to users.
While existing methods commonly alleviate the problem of
data sparsity by integrating spatial-temporal context information, POI category features, and social relationships, they
largely overlook the fact that the trajectory sequences collected in the datasets are often incomplete. This oversight
limits the model’s potential to fully leverage historical context. In light of this background, we propose Trajectory Data
Augmentation with Uncertainty (TAU) for Next POI Recommendation. TAU is a general graph-based trajectory data augmentation method designed to complete user mobility patterns by marrying uncertainty estimation into the next POI
recommendation task. More precisely, TAU taps into the
global transition pattern graph to identify sets of intermediate nodes located between every pair of locations, effectively
leveraging edge weights as transition probabilities. During
trajectory sequence construction, TAU selectively prompts
intermediate nodes, chosen based on their likelihood of occurrence as pseudo-labels, to establish comprehensive trajectory sequences. Furthermore, to gauge the certainty and impact of pseudo-labels on the target location, we introduce a
novel confidence-aware calibration strategy using evidence
deep learning (EDL) for improved performance and reliability. The experimental results clearly indicate that our TAU
method achieves consistent performance improvements over
existing techniques across two real-world datasets, verifying
its effectiveness as the state-of-the-art approach to the task.

Restaurant
Office
Theater
Gym
User 2

Bar
User 1

Shopping
Home

15:00

17:00

19:00

21:00

23:00

(a) Actual (complete) User #1 mobility trajectory
(b) Observed (uncomplete) User #1 mobility trajectory

Figure 1: A simplified example demonstrating the operational principle of TAU from a temporal perspective. Solid
lines indicate travel trajectories that can be observed in the
dataset, while dashed lines represent potential trajectories
that might be missing from the dataset.

Barabasi 2008; Feng et al. 2017) by comprehending their
preferences. In response to this, the next Point-of-Interest
(POI) recommendation has emerged as a fundamental ingredient in smart city applications, encompassing the prediction of a particular user’s next probable POI visit based
on his/her historical trajectories (Xi et al. 2019; Kim et al.
2021; Zhuang et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2023a). It not only enhances travel experiences (Gao et al. 2022) by presenting
more delightful options aligned with users’ past preferences
but also empowers businesses to achieve precise advertising
delivery, thus facilitating their promotional efforts.
A user’s trajectory is formed by sequences of checkins arranged in chronological order, enabling us to draw a
comparison with word sequences (i.e., sentences) in language models for modeling. Existing solutions for modeling sequential data commonly include approaches based on
Markov chains, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), and

Introduction
With the rapid growth of the mobile internet, individuals
are increasingly sharing their experiences and insights on
Location-Based Social Network (LBSN) platforms, such as
Gowalla, Foursquare, or Yelp. This phenomenon has become a pervasive trend, leading to the accumulation of a
substantial volume of spatial-temporal updates (e.g., checkin records). These updates serve as the foundation for predicting users’ future movements (Gonzalez, Hidalgo, and
* Corresponding author: hengqi@dlut.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22565

