The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Temporal Graph Contrastive Learning for Sequential Recommendation
Shengzhe Zhang1 , Liyi Chen1 , Chao Wang2, 3 , Shuangli Li1 , Hui Xiong3, 4 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute
3
The Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
The Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{szowen.contact, liyichencly, chadwang2012}@gmail.com, lsl1997@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xionghui@ust.hk
2

Abstract

poral data, often laden with noise, further obfuscates the precise mapping of user-item interactions (Wang et al. 2019).
Predominantly, SR models in existing literature either utilize sequential modeling for encoding user interaction sequences (Hidasi and Karatzoglou 2018; Kang and McAuley
2018; Sun et al. 2019) or transform these sequences into
graph structures for enhanced item correlation mining (Wu
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020). Recent advancements underscore the significance of employing specific temporal features, revealing that such features can substantially augment model performance. For instance, TiSASRec (Li, Wang, and McAuley 2020) introduces a time
interval-aware self-attention mechanism, enabling superior
modeling of item correlations. Likewise, TGSR (Fan et al.
2021) designs a temporal interaction bipartite graph paired
with a collaborative transformer network, adeptly mapping
user interest trajectories. MOJITO (Tran et al. 2023) deploys
attention blocks to encode varied temporal dimensions, enriching the understanding of user interest evolution.
Despite these advancements, challenges persist in leveraging specific temporal information in SR. First, the multifaceted nature of temporal data, whether expressed in absolute or relative terms, poses integration complexities (Tran
et al. 2023). Hence, it’s difficult to appropriately and effectively exploit multi-type temporal information in sequential
recommendations. Second, diverse changes at which user
interests evolve complicate the deciphering of global interest transition patterns (Wang et al. 2020, 2021b). Learning global transition patterns of user interests is important
and difficult. Third, unpredictable and diverse user behaviors tend to introduce noisy information (Wu et al. 2019),
requiring robust and accurate temporal integration in SR.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose
a Temporal Graph Contrastive Learning method for Sequential Recommendation (TGCL4SR) which leverages not only
local interaction sequential information but also global temporal graphs to comprehend item correlations and analyze
user behaviors. Specifically, to fully leverage global interactions to explore item correlations, we first design a Temporal Item Transition Graph (TITG), which builds edges between items from adjacent interactions within a sequence
and takes corresponding timestamps and users as edge attributes. Besides, due to the noise and the large scale of the
proposed temporal graph, we augment the TITG by dual

Sequential recommendation is a crucial task in understanding users’ evolving interests and predicting their future behaviors. While existing approaches on sequence or graph
modeling to learn interaction sequences of users have shown
promising performance, how to effectively exploit temporal
information and deal with the uncertainty noise in evolving
user behaviors is still quite challenging. To this end, in this
paper, we propose a Temporal Graph Contrastive Learning
method for Sequential Recommendation (TGCL4SR) which
leverages not only local interaction sequences but also global
temporal graphs to comprehend item correlations and analyze user behaviors from a temporal perspective. Specifically,
we first devise a Temporal Item Transition Graph (TITG) to
fully leverage global interactions to understand item correlations, and augment this graph by dual transformations based
on neighbor sampling and time disturbance. Accordingly, we
design a Temporal item Transition graph Convolutional network (TiTConv) to capture temporal item transition patterns
in TITG. Then, a novel Temporal Graph Contrastive Learning
(TGCL) mechanism is designed to enhance the uniformity of
representations between augmented graphs from identical sequences. For local interaction sequences, we design a temporal sequence encoder to incorporate time interval embeddings
into the architecture of Transformer. At the training stage, we
take maximum mean discrepancy and TGCL losses as auxiliary objectives. Extensive experiments on several real-world
datasets show the effectiveness of TGCL4SR against state-ofthe-art baselines of sequential recommendation.

1

Introduction

Sequential recommendation (SR) aims to forecast subsequent interactions of users by analyzing their historical behaviors in a chronological sequence. Employed extensively
across online platforms, SR models capitalize on sequential dependencies of interactions, thus offering potential advantages in grasping item correlations and tracking user
interest evolution over non-temporal recommendation systems (Tang and Wang 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2023). However, the inherent unpredictability and intricacy
of sequential behaviors amplify the challenges in SR. Tem* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9359

