The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Brain-Inspired Way of Reducing the Network Complexity via
Concept-Regularized Coding for Emotion Recognition
Han Lu1 , Xiahai Zhuang2 , Qiang Luo1, 3 *
1

Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University
{hlu20, zxh, qluo}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

learning community, as it holds promise for various applications, such as human-computer interaction and mental health
assessment. Computer scientists have attempted to endow
computers with the capability of FER by devising different
algorithms, such as CNN (Li, Deng, and Du 2017a; Pons
and Masip 2017; Zeng, Shan, and Chen 2018) and Transformer (Li et al. 2021a; Xue, Wang, and Guo 2021), and
have made remarkable progress in this field. The current
techniques have demonstrated that increasing the network
size is not the only way to improve FER performance. It is
natural to ask whether it is possible to design brain-inspired
FER algorithms based on the neural computation of emotion
recognition in the human brain.
It has long been believed that the neural representations
of emotion concepts are formed and maintained in the highlevel brain regions, such as the prefrontal cortex, the amygdala, and the hippocampus (Rolls 2023; Camacho et al.
2023). However, recent evidence suggests that the brain’s visual pathway also encodes the emotion concepts to facilitate
efficient emotion recognition (Brooks and Freeman 2018;
Kragel et al. 2019; Brooks et al. 2019), which can be both
fast and energy-saving. Therefore, the concept-regularized
coding in the visual pathway provides a brain-inspired way
of elevating the efficiency and reducing the complexity of
the artificial neural network for emotion recognition.
In light of the concept-regularized coding, we proposed
a brain-inspired network for emotion recognition with reduced complexity and enhanced interpretability. As depicted
in Figure 1, our framework contains two pathways, named
the conceptual pathway and the perceptual pathway. The
former models the representation of emotional concepts in
high-level brain regions. The latter employs a simple CNN
to model the process of visual perception, as considerable
evidence indicates that CNNs currently offer the best quantitative models of the hierarchical response patterns within
the visual system (Kriegeskorte 2015; Zhuang et al. 2021;
Kanwisher, Khosla, and Dobs 2023). The conceptual pathway shapes the visual emotion perception in the perceptual
pathway by providing emotional concepts. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to utilize concept-regularized
coding in the brain to advance the FER algorithms. It is
worth noting that, when modeling the conceptual pathway,
we adopted a disentangled form to extract abstract emotional
concepts (captured by emotion features in our model) from

The human brain can effortlessly and reliably perceive emotions, whereas existing facial emotion recognition (FER)
methods suffer from drawbacks such as complex model structures, high storage requirements, and poor interpretability. Inspired by the role of emotion concepts in visual perception
coding within the human brain, we propose a dual-pathway
framework emulating the neural computation of emotion
recognition. Specifically, these two pathways are designed to
model the representation of emotion concepts in the brain and
the visual perception process, respectively. For the former, we
adopt a disentangled approach to extract emotion concepts
from complex facial geometric attributes; for the latter, we
employ an emotional confidence evaluation strategy to determine which concept is optimal for regularizing the perceptual coding. The proposed concept-regularized coding strategy endows the framework with flexibility and interpretability, as well as good performances on several benchmarking
FER datasets.

Introduction
The recent proliferation of large-scale models (e.g., GPT-4)
has swept across the entire deep learning community. These
large-scale models have also achieved impressive performance in vision tasks (Ding et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023).
However, they suffer from issues such as prohibitively high
memory and computational costs, as well as poor interpretability. For human beings, vision perception tasks can be
conducted rapidly and seemingly effortlessly (Schiller 1995;
Freeman and Simoncelli 2011; DiCarlo, Zoccolan, and Rust
2012). This remarkable ability implies the essential collaboration among multiple brain regions and the visual cortex during visual perception (Lumer and Rees 1999; CelaConde et al. 2004; Lee, Yeung, and Barense 2012). In this
work, we take emotion recognition as an example to exploit
the biological plausibility of the human brain to build up
intelligent systems with reduced complexity and biological
interpretability.
Facial emotion recognition (FER) aims to discern and interpret emotions displayed on other people’s faces. In recent years, FER has received increasing interest in the deep
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

556

