The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semantic Segmentation in Multiple Adverse Weather Conditions
with Domain Knowledge Retention
Xin Yang1 , Wending Yan2 , Yuan Yuan2 , Michael Bi Mi2 , Robby T. Tan1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
e0674612@u.nus.edu, {yan.wending,yuanyuan10@huawei}.com, michaelbimi@yahoo.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Semantic segmentation’s performance is often compromised
when applied to unlabeled adverse weather conditions. Unsupervised domain adaptation is a potential approach to enhancing the model’s adaptability and robustness to adverse
weather. However, existing methods encounter difficulties
when sequentially adapting the model to multiple unlabeled
adverse weather conditions. They struggle to acquire new
knowledge while also retaining previously learned knowledge. To address these problems, we propose a semantic segmentation method for multiple adverse weather conditions
that incorporates adaptive knowledge acquisition, pseudolabel blending, and weather composition replay. Our adaptive
knowledge acquisition enables the model to avoid learning
from extreme images that could potentially cause the model
to forget. In our approach of blending pseudo-labels, we not
only utilize the current model but also integrate the previously
learned model into the ongoing learning process. This collaboration between the current teacher and the previous model
enhances the robustness of the pseudo-labels for the current
target. Our weather composition replay mechanism allows the
model to continuously refine its previously learned weather
information while simultaneously learning from the new target domain. Our method consistently outperforms the stateof-the-art methods, and obtains the best performance with
averaged mIoU (%) of 65.7 and the lowest forgetting (%) of
3.6 against 60.1 and 11.3 (Hoyer et al. 2023), on the ACDC
datsets for a four-target continual multi-target domain adaptation.

Image

MIC on T1 → T1 after T2 → T1 after T3

Ground Truth

Ours on T1 → T1 after T2 → T1 after T3

Figure 1: The illustration of our method, where the model
adapts to each target domain sequentially. MIC (Hoyer et al.
2023) fails to retain previously learned knowledge, as its performance on the first target gradually deteriorates, e.g., the
sky and the side walk in Target 1 are disappearing after the
method learns Targets 2 and 3. Our method retain previously
learned knowledge while adapting to new targets.

to acquire all information from the new target, without considering whether this information might lead to a forgetting
of previously learned knowledge. Moreover, as mentioned in
(Kalb and Beyerer 2023), domain shifts across distinct adverse weather conditions are primarily induced by the deteriorated information within low-level features extracted from
the early convolutional layers. Consequently, there is a necessity to develop a method that takes this factor into consideration to effectively address the challenges posed by adverse weather conditions in domain adaptation.
In this paper, we present a semantic segmentation method
that sequentially adapts the model to multiple unlabeled adverse weather domains, by progressively learning a new domain at a time while retaining the previous learned knowledge. Our method conceives three novel concepts: adaptive
knowledge acquisition, pseudo-label blending, and weather
composition replay.
In contrast to single-target unsupervised domain adaptation, our sequential domain adaptation aims to both learn
from the new target and retain previously acquired knowledge simultaneously. Because of this, our model needs to
identify potentially detrimental input regions that could introduce significant domain gaps and lead to forgetting of
previously learned knowledge (Yang et al. 2022a; Kalb
and Beyerer 2023). To achieve this, we introduce adaptive

Introduction
Semantic segmentation methods face challenges in adverse
weather conditions, as these conditions significantly degrade
images. Adapting models to multiple adverse weather conditions in an unsupervised and successive manner causes additional difficulties due to substantial domain gaps among
various weather conditions, and potentially leads to forgetting previously learned knowledge.
Continual unsupervised domain adaptation emerges as a
potential solution to address these challenges by adapting
the model from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled
target domains in a sequential manner, e.g., ((Lin et al. 2022;
Saporta et al. 2022)). However, these methods are designed
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6558

