The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SPGroup3D: Superpoint Grouping Network for Indoor 3D Object Detection
Yun Zhu1 , Le Hui2 , Yaqi Shen1 , Jin Xie1 *
1

2

PCA Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
zhu.yun@njust.edu.cn, huile@nwpu.edu.cn, syq@njust.edu.cn, csjxie@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Current 3D object detection methods for indoor scenes
mainly follow the voting-and-grouping strategy to generate
proposals. However, most methods utilize instance-agnostic
groupings, such as ball query, leading to inconsistent
semantic information and inaccurate regression of the
proposals. To this end, we propose a novel superpoint
grouping network for indoor anchor-free one-stage 3D
object detection. Specifically, we first adopt an unsupervised
manner to partition raw point clouds into superpoints, areas
with semantic consistency and spatial similarity. Then,
we design a geometry-aware voting module that adapts
to the centerness in anchor-free detection by constraining
the spatial relationship between superpoints and object
centers. Next, we present a superpoint-based grouping
module to explore the consistent representation within
proposals. This module includes a superpoint attention
layer to learn feature interaction between neighboring
superpoints, and a superpoint-voxel fusion layer to propagate
the superpoint-level information to the voxel level. Finally,
we employ effective multiple matching to capitalize on the
dynamic receptive fields of proposals based on superpoints
during the training. Experimental results demonstrate our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on ScanNet
V2, SUN RGB-D, and S3DIS datasets in the indoor
one-stage 3D object detection. Source code is available at
https://github.com/zyrant/SPGroup3D.

(a) mis-semantic
/

proposal

(c) ours

(b) mis-instance

seed (table)

seed (chair 1)

vote (table)

seed (chair 2)

vote (chair 1)

vote (chair 2)

Figure 1: Different types of grouping strategy: (a) semanticagnostic grouping; (b) semantic-aware grouping (Wang et al.
2022a); (c) our superpoint-based grouping. The proposal
corresponding to the table is shown in red, and the two
chairs are blue and green, respectively. For superpoint-based
grouping, we represent different superpoints with different
colors, and the features with the same superpoint will be
grouped.
used to learn the point-wise center offsets and aggregate the
points that vote to instance-agnostic local region, respectively. The conventional voting tends to push all proposals
close to the object centers. It may not suitable for FCOSlike (Tian et al. 2019; Rukhovich, Vorontsova, and Konushin
2022) detection methods since the distances from the proposals to the object centers play a crucial role in determining
the quality of proposals. Besides, the commonly used grouping module can be categorized into two types: semanticagnostic and semantic-aware. The former, such as VoteNet
and its subsequent works (Qi et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2021;
Liang, An, and Ma 2022; Sun et al. 2022), groups the scenes
based on the distance between coordinates. However, this
approach fails in clustering indoor scenes when various
instances are close but belong to different categories, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). The latter one, such as CAGroup3D
(Wang et al. 2022a), which additionally considers semantics,
still suffers from a similar issue when instances of the same
category are close to each other, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In
summary, the conventional voting and the instance-agnostic
grouping introduce more noise and outliers to the proposals,
leading to performance bottlenecks in bottom-up methods.
In this paper, we propose a superpoint grouping network
for indoor anchor-free one-stage 3D object detection (SP-

Introduction
As one of the basic tasks of 3D scene understanding, the
goal of 3D object detection is to estimate the oriented 3D
bounding boxes and semantic labels of objects in point
clouds. It has been used in many application scenarios, such
as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotics.
Since indoor scenarios have more complex geometry and
occlusion than outdoor scenarios (Chen et al. 2022; He
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023; Feng et al. 2023), it remains
challenging to cluster the scenes and get the proposals
accurately.
Previous state-of-the-art 3D object detection methods
mainly follow the bottom-up paradigm, involving two key
components: voting and grouping. These components are
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7811

