The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Situation-Dependent Causal Influence-Based Cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Xiao Du, Yutong Ye, Pengyu Zhang, Yaning Yang, Mingsong Chen, Ting Wang*
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University
{52265902007, 52205902007, pengyu.zhang, 52215902011}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {mschen, twang}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

where centralized training allows agents to access information about other agents. However, due to partial observability, during the execution phase, only local behaviorobservation information can be relied upon. Both policybased and value-based approaches have been introduced for
CTDE, such as MADDPG (Lowe et al. 2017), COMA (Foerster et al. 2018), MAAC (Iqbal and Sha 2019), and QMIX
(Rashid et al. 2018). Although global information can be accessed during the centralized training phase, these methods
make an assumption that decentralized policies remain independent of each other such that the joint policy can be
expressed as a product of independent policies. Thus, two
pivotal challenges stem from the above issues. Firstly, the
complete independence of agents’ policies disregards the influence of other agents, thereby restricting the agents from
learning coordinated behavior. Secondly, optimizing decentralized strategies for multiple agents solely based on taskdependent dense reward signals often proves inefficient, particularly when these reward signals are stochastic or sparse.
Some studies (Liu et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2019) suggest that
to alleviate the non-stationary issue and achieve collaboration between agents, it is imperative for agents to consider
their impact on the behavior of other agents when making
decisions. Other works (Chen et al. 2021; Mahajan et al.
2019; Kim et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022) propose to quantify
the correlation of agent behaviors through mutual information (MI), so as to maximize the correlation of agent behaviors to enhance collaboration. MI has been identified as an
effective intrinsic reward in promoting coordination in these
works. Unfortunately, effectively coordinating the simultaneous actions of multi-agents in these approaches remains
a challenging and intractable issue. To this end, the primary
objective of this study is to address this challenge from a
causal inference perspective.

Learning to collaborate has witnessed significant progress
in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). However,
promoting coordination among agents and enhancing exploration capabilities remain challenges. In multi-agent environments, interactions between agents are limited in specific
situations. Effective collaboration between agents thus requires a nuanced understanding of when and how agents’
actions influence others. To this end, in this paper, we propose a novel MARL algorithm named Situation-Dependent
Causal Influence-Based Cooperative Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (SCIC), which incorporates a novel Intrinsic
reward mechanism based on a new cooperation criterion measured by situation-dependent causal influence among agents.
Our approach aims to detect inter-agent causal influences
in specific situations based on the criterion using causal intervention and conditional mutual information (CMI) . This
effectively assists agents in exploring states that can positively impact other agents, thus promoting cooperation between agents. The resulting update links coordinated exploration and intrinsic reward distribution, which enhance overall collaboration and performance. Experimental results on
various MARL benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
our method compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Along with the rapid development of deep reinforcement
learning (RL), MARL has attracted increasing attention in
recent years and witnessed significant in real-world problems such as traffic light control (Wu et al. 2020), coordination of autonomous vehicles (Kiran et al. 2022), and robotics
control (Wang et al. 2023), which can be effectively modeled as multi-agent game models. The most original MARL
training method is the complete independent training of each
agent, in which other agents are treated as part of the environment without any coordinated interaction between the
behaviors of agents. Nonetheless, this training method suffers from the dilemma within a non-stationarity environment.
The Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) emerges as a widely adopted solution for mitigating the challenges posed by non-stationary environments,

In the context of control, if an agent can control other
agents, it signifies that the agent can impact other agents
through its actions. However, there is an underappreciated
aspect hidden in this seemingly obvious observation, which
is that the causal effects of behavior are state-dependent.
Considering the multi-robot navigation scenario, when the
current position of robot a is close to robot b and aligned
with the current direction of movement of robot b, then robot
a evidently exerts a strong influence on robot b, irrespective
of the next action of robot a. Conversely, if robot a is situ-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17362

