The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parameterized Projected Bellman Operator
Théo Vincent12 * , Alberto Maria Metelli3 , Boris Belousov1 ,
Jan Peters1245 , Marcello Restelli3 , Carlo D’Eramo246
1
German Research Center for AI (DFKI), Germany
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
3
Department of Electronics, Computer Science, and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy
4
Hessian.ai, Germany
5
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
6
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
2

Abstract

1989; Bertsekas 2019). Intuitively, the dependence of the
empirical version of value iteration on the samples has an
impact on the efficiency of the algorithms and on the quality of the obtained estimated value function, which becomes accentuated when solving continuous problems that
require function approximation, e.g., approximate value iteration (AVI) (Munos 2005; Munos and Szepesvári 2008).
Moreover, in AVI approaches, costly function approximation steps are needed to project the output of the Bellman
operator back to the considered value function space.
In this paper, we introduce the projected Bellman operator (PBO), which consists of a function Λ : Ω → Ω defined
on the parameters ω ∈ Ω of the value function approximator
Qω . Contrary to the standard (empirical) Bellman operator
Γ, which acts on the value functions Qk to compute targets
that are then projected to obtain Qk+1 , our PBO Λ acts on
the parameters of the value function to directly compute updated parameters ωk+1 = Λ(ωk ) (Figure 1). The advantages
of our approach are twofold: (i) PBO is applicable for an arbitrary number of iterations without using further samples,
and (ii) the output of PBO always belongs to the considered
value function space as visualized in Figure 2, thus avoiding
the costly projection step which is required when using the
Bellman operator coupled with function approximation. We
show how to estimate PBO from transition samples by leveraging a parametric approximation which we call parameterized PBO, and we devise two algorithms for offline and online RL to learn it. Starting from initial parameters ω0 , AVI
approaches obtain consecutive approximations of the value
function Qωk by applying the Bellman operator iteratively
over samples (Figure 2b). Instead, we make use of the samples to learn the PBO only. Then, starting from initial parameters ω0 , PBO can produce a chain of value function parameters of arbitrary length (as shown with the blue lines in
Figure 2a) without requiring further samples. This means an

Approximate value iteration (AVI) is a family of algorithms
for reinforcement learning (RL) that aims to obtain an approximation of the optimal value function. Generally, AVI algorithms implement an iterated procedure where each step
consists of (i) an application of the Bellman operator and
(ii) a projection step into a considered function space. Notoriously, the Bellman operator leverages transition samples,
which strongly determine its behavior, as uninformative samples can result in negligible updates or long detours, whose
detrimental effects are further exacerbated by the computationally intensive projection step. To address these issues, we
propose a novel alternative approach based on learning an approximate version of the Bellman operator rather than estimating it through samples as in AVI approaches. This way,
we are able to (i) generalize across transition samples and (ii)
avoid the computationally intensive projection step. For this
reason, we call our novel operator projected Bellman operator (PBO). We formulate an optimization problem to learn
PBO for generic sequential decision-making problems, and
we theoretically analyze its properties in two representative
classes of RL problems. Furthermore, we theoretically study
our approach under the lens of AVI and devise algorithmic
implementations to learn PBO in offline and online settings
by leveraging neural network parameterizations. Finally, we
empirically showcase the benefits of PBO w.r.t. the regular
Bellman operator on several RL problems.

Introduction
Value-based reinforcement learning (RL) is a popular class
of algorithms for solving sequential decision-making problems with unknown dynamics (Sutton and Barto 2018). For
a given problem, value-based algorithms aim at obtaining
the most accurate estimate of the expected return from each
state, i.e., a value function. For instance, the well-known
value-iteration algorithm computes value functions by iterated applications of the Bellman operator (Bellman 1966),
of which the true value function is the fixed point. Although
the Bellman operator can be applied in an exact way in dynamic programming, it is typically estimated from samples
at each application when dealing with problems with unknown models, i.e., empirical Bellman operator (Watkins

Figure 1: PBO Λ (left) operates on value function parameters
as opposed to AVI (right), that uses the empirical Bellman
operator Γ followed by the projection operator Πproj .

* Correspondence to: theo.vincent@dfki.de

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15402

