The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ConVQG: Contrastive Visual Question Generation with Multimodal Guidance
Li Mi* , Syrielle Montariol* , Javiera Castillo-Navarro* , Xianjie Dai,
Antoine Bosselut and Devis Tuia
EPFL, Switzerland
{li.mi, antoine.bosselut, devis.tuia}@epfl.ch

Image Input

Abstract

negative Image-based Question
What is the person doing?

Asking questions about visual environments is a crucial way
for intelligent agents to understand rich multi-faceted scenes,
raising the importance of Visual Question Generation (VQG)
systems. Apart from being grounded to the image, existing
VQG systems can use textual constraints, such as expected
answers or knowledge triplets, to generate focused questions.
These constraints allow VQG systems to specify the question
content or leverage external commonsense knowledge that
can not be obtained from the image content only. However,
generating focused questions using textual constraints while
enforcing a high relevance to the image content remains a
challenge, as VQG systems often ignore one or both forms
of grounding. In this work, we propose Contrastive Visual
Question Generation (ConVQG), a method using a dual contrastive objective to discriminate questions generated using
both modalities from those based on a single one. Experiments on both knowledge-aware and standard VQG benchmarks demonstrate that ConVQG outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods and generates image-grounded, text-guided,
and knowledge-rich questions. Our human evaluation results
also show preference for ConVQG questions compared to
non-contrastive baselines.

Text Input
Knowledge triplet /
Answer / Caption /
Fact sentence

Jacket is used for
protecting people
from the chill.

Image-grounded Text-guided
Question

positive

What is the person wearing
on top that can protect him
from the chill?
Text-guided Question

negative What is used for protecting
them from the chill?

Figure 1: ConVQG at a glance. An image and a text input
are processed through a multimodal module , leading to the
embedding Qit . Pre-trained modules (detailed in Fig. 2) produce image-only and text-only question embeddings (Qi and
Qt ). A contrastive loss is then optimized to make Qit close
to the real question embedding Qgt and far from the single modality ones. By design, ConVQG generates questions
that are image-grounded (in green) and that meet the requirements of the text constraint (in yellow).

scenes, with many salient elements that can be elaborated
upon by asking focused questions.
Early VQG systems tend to generate generic questions
not exploiting the rich semantic content of the specific images. For example, the question “What is the person doing?”
can be asked for any image containing a person. To make
the question more focused, existing VQG systems exploit
textual constraints, such as expected answers or knowledge
triplets, as guidance. However, generating questions that are
guided by a textual constraint while enforcing high relevance to the image content remains a challenge, since VQG
systems often ignore one or both forms of grounding.
To tackle these challenges, we propose Contrastive Visual
Question Generation (ConVQG), a system that generates
questions that (1) are based on details unique to a specific
image, and (2) can be controlled using text to focus on specific objects, actions or concepts. To achieve that, the proposed method uses two modality-specific contrastive objectives to guide the generation of the question. The image contrastive objective drives the question away from a question
generated using the image alone. The text contrastive objective drives the question away from one generated using only
the textual constraint, enforcing more specific descriptions

Introduction
Modern intelligent agents, like chatbots and dialog systems (Ouyang et al. 2022), nowadays achieve (almost) human conversational skills, thanks to the development of large
language models (Brown et al. 2020). With the advances in
vision-language research, we are now leaning towards visual dialog systems (Das et al. 2017; OpenAI 2023), which
should be able to understand and interpret visual scenes and
at the same time communicate with users. In this context,
they should not only be able to provide answers but also be
aware of what they do not know and request complementary
information by asking questions about visual content.
Consequently, Visual Question Generation (VQG, (Krishna, Bernstein, and Fei-Fei 2019; Zhang et al. 2017)) becomes a rising area at the intersection of computer vision
and natural language processing. VQG agents aim to generate meaningful and engaging questions for visual stimuli such as images. These images often depict multi-faceted
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4207

