The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-View Randomized Kernel Classification via Nonconvex Optimization
Xiaojian Ding, Fan Yang ∗
College of Information Engineering,
Nanjing University of Finance and Economics, Nanjing 210023, China
{wjswsl,nufe yf}@163.com

Abstract

kernels, such as fixed rule, heuristic, and optimization methods. Fixed rule methods learn the kernel as a weighted linear
combination of the available kernels without training (BenHur and Noble 2005). Heuristic methods find the combination parameters by some heuristic measures like conditional
class probabilities calculated from the kernel matrices or the
performance values trained by each kernel separately (Aiolli
and Donini 2015; Fan et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2020). Optimization methods usually learn the kernel combination parameters together with the parameters of the base learner (e.g.,
parameter C in SVM) by solving an optimization problem
(Han et al. 2018; Wang, Lu, and Zhang 2018; Chamakura
and Saha 2022). Some other approaches consider designing
a nonlinear combination method that uses nonlinear functions of kernels, namely, multiplication, power, and exponentiation (Gu et al. 2016; Song et al. 2018). Although
the algorithms mentioned above achieve promising performance, they fail to consider the tradeoff between diversity
and classification accuracy of kernels, preventing further improvement of classification performance.

Multi-kernel learning (MKL) is a representative supervised
multi-view learning method widely applied in multi-modal
and multi-view applications. MKL aims to classify data by
integrating complementary information from predefined kernels. Although existing MKL methods achieve promising
performance, they fail to consider the tradeoff between diversity and classification accuracy of kernels, preventing further
improvement of classification performance. In this paper, we
tackle this problem by generating a number of high-quality
base learning kernels and selecting a kernel subset with maximum pairwise diversity and minimum generalization errors.
We first formulate this idea as a nonconvex quadratic integer programming problem. Then, we transform this nonconvex problem into a convex optimization problem and show
it is equivalent to a semidefinite relaxation problem, which a
semidefinite-based branch-and-bound algorithm can quickly
solve. Experimental results on the real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method. The results also
show that our method works for the support vector machine
(SVM) classifier and other state-of-the-art kernel classifiers.

Diversity and accuracy have been considered two essential characteristics in kernel combinations (Xia and Hoi
2013; Liu et al. 2016). Ko et al. (Ko, Sabourin, and de Souza
Britto Jr 2009) studied the correlation between accuracy and
diversity and established theoretically and empirically that
the two are indeed correlated. These studies assert that to
get a good combination, the combined kernels should be
as diverse as possible without sacrificing accuracy. In previous studies on MKL, various approaches have been used
to select base learning kernels. Some approaches (Han et al.
2018; Shen et al. 2021) studied predefined kernels from
commonly used kernels (e.g., linear, Gaussian, and Polynomial) with different parameters. Chamakura and Saha
(Chamakura and Saha 2022) used linear kernel, Intersection kernel, and Chi-squared kernel as base learning kernels.
Ding et al. (Ding, Tang, and Guo 2020) used the Gaussian
Interaction Profile of the network (GIP) kernel as a base
learning kernel. Yu et al. (Yu, Gong, and Jiang 2020) generated multiple base kernels from a specific kernel set, including the Hadamard, RBF, and linear kernels. To summarize, predefined kernels can be different kernels or the same
kernel with different parameters. Since a kernel learning algorithm (e.g., SVM) is sensitive to kernel parameters, few
parameter candidates usually perform best. To this end, con-

Introduction
Numerous methods of learning from multi-view data by considering the diversity of different views have been developed
recently. These views can come from multiple sources or
modalities. Multiple kernel learning (MKL) is a representative supervised multi-view learning method widely applied
in multi-modal and multi-view applications (Arabacı et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020;
Jiang et al. 2022; Shah et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2020). MKL
was initially proposed to regulate the capacity of the search
space for potential kernel matrices to achieve better generalization (Gönen 2013). However, it has been extensively utilized in multi-view data scenarios because MKL kernels inherently correspond to various sources or views.
For MKL analysis, learning an optimal linear or nonlinear combination of a predefined set of kernels is the foundation of using the complementary information within them
and improving learning performance. Some approaches consider using linear combination methods to combine these
∗

Fan Yang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11793

