The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Trustworthy Deep Learning
Tsui-Wei (Lily) Weng
UC San Diego
lweng@ucsd.edu

Part (II) Interpretable ML: Understanding DNNs via
Neuron Interpretations and Building Interpretable DNN
To understand the internal working of DNNs, there is a
stream of research on developing neuron interpretability.
However, existing methods are still very restricted due to the
need of manual inspection and concept annotations. These
requirements are time-consuming and labor-intensive that
may slow down the research advancement. Moreover, these
methods can only detect concepts from a pre-defined concept set, which is difficult and expensive to expand, as new
(densely labeled) data is required for new concepts.
I will overview our research efforts along this direction by
addressing above challenges. Our goal is to develop a fullyautomated and flexible interpretation method for DNNs that
is efficient and requires minimum human efforts. I will also
introduce our work on learning interpretable DNN that can
remain high DNN performance unlike existing approaches
that are limited by interpretability and accuracy trade-off.

In this New Faculty Highlights talk at AAAI-24, I will
survey my representative works in Robust ML and Interpretable ML, which are two vital components towards trustworthy deep learning.
Part (I) Robust ML: Provable DNN Robustness Guarantee and Scalable Certified Defense. DNNs are known to
be vulnerable to adversarial examples, which has raised serious concerns in the society as DNNs have been deployed to
many mission-critical tasks including self-driving cars, aircraft control systems, and malware detection protocols. To
study the vulnerability of neural network models, my lab
has contributed significant research efforts on quantifying
and improving robustness of DNNs.
I will overview our research effort along this topic since
2017, where we proposed the first attack-agnostic robustness
evaluation metric, the first efficient robustness certification
algorithms, and efficient robust learning algorithms.
• In ICLR 18, we proposed CLEVER score, the first
attack-agnostic robustness evaluation of DNNs based
on universal lower bound and extreme value theory.
CLEVER score is efficient to compute and well matched
the practical robustness indication of a wide range of natural and robust DNNs.

• In ICLR 23, we proposed CLIP-Dissect, to automatically
describe the function of individual hidden neurons inside vision networks with open-vocabulary concepts. Our
method does not need any concept labeled data, which
are required for existing tools to succeed. CLIP-Dissect
has several advantages: (i) it provides more accurate descriptions than existing state-of-the-art; (ii) it is 10-200×
faster than existing methods.
• In ICLR 23, we proposed Label-free Concept Bottleneck Model, to address two crucial limitations of existing CBMs which needs labor to collect concept labelled
data and suffers from serious accuracy and interpretability trade-off. Our method can transform any NN into an
interpretable CBM without labeled concept data while
retaining a high accuracy by leveraging our neuron interpretability tool CLIP-Dissect. Our method is also the
first CBM that can scale to large-scale ImageNet.

• In AAAI 19, we proposed CNN-Cert, the first efficient
algorithm to certify robustness of general CNNs. CnnCert is able verify robustness of more complicated NNs
(e.g. LeNet, ResNet) than prior work by generalizing the
idea of linear bounding framework in my prior work on
fully-connected NN to conv/pool/residual blocks.
• In AAAI 21, we proposed SingleProp, a efficient robust
training algorithm based on novel regularization and approximation of linear verification bounds that can effectively improve robustness of DNNs while being up to
13.5× faster to train compared to prior work based on
verification bounds.

I will also briefly overview our recent efforts on demystifying black-box DNN training process, automated neuron
explanations for Large Language Models and the first robustness evaluation of a family of neuron-level interpretation techniques. For full publication details, please visit my
website: https://lilywenglab.github.io/

I will also briefly overview our follow-up works on verifying
semantic perturbations, learning robust deep RL agents, robustifying conformal prediction of DNN, and enabling scalable defense .
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22682

