The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

O2 -Recon: Completing 3D Reconstruction of Occluded Objects in the Scene
with a Pre-trained 2D Diffusion Model
Yubin Hu1 , Sheng Ye1 , Wang Zhao1 , Matthieu Lin1 , Yuze He1 ,
Yu-Hui Wen3 , Ying He2 , Yong-Jin Liu1
1

2

Tsinghua University
Nanyang Technological University
3
Beijing Jiaotong University

Abstract
Occlusion is a common issue in 3D reconstruction from
RGB-D videos, often blocking the complete reconstruction of
objects and presenting an ongoing problem. In this paper, we
propose a novel framework, empowered by a 2D diffusionbased in-painting model, to reconstruct complete surfaces for
the hidden parts of objects. Specifically, we utilize a pretrained diffusion model to fill in the hidden areas of 2D images. Then we use these in-painted images to optimize a neural implicit surface representation for each instance for 3D
reconstruction. Since creating the in-painting masks needed
for this process is tricky, we adopt a human-in-the-loop strategy that involves very little human engagement to generate
high-quality masks. Moreover, some parts of objects can be
totally hidden because the videos are usually shot from limited perspectives. To ensure recovering these invisible areas,
we develop a cascaded network architecture for predicting
signed distance field, making use of different frequency bands
of positional encoding and maintaining overall smoothness.
Besides the commonly used rendering loss, Eikonal loss, and
silhouette loss, we adopt a CLIP-based semantic consistency
loss to guide the surface from unseen camera angles. Experiments on ScanNet scenes show that our proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and completeness in
object-level reconstruction from scene-level RGB-D videos.
Code: https://github.com/THU-LYJ-Lab/O2-Recon.

1

Figure 1: Occlusion presents significant hurdles for objectlevel reconstruction. For the occluded armchair, highlighted
in blue, existing methods can only yield a partial reconstruction where a significant portion of the geometry is missing.
the actual object surfaces. There are also a few approaches
focusing retrieving suitable CAD models from a database
and estimating their 9 degrees of freedom poses (Avetisyan
et al. 2019). These methods also face similar issues, such as
limited scalability and low accuracy in reconstruction.
Benefiting from the emerging technology of neural radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Sucar et al.
2021), vMap (Kong et al. 2023) is able to reconstruct a
wider variety of objects, moving beyond just categorical instances. However, it does not address the issue of occlusion
in scene-level videos, which results in incomplete observations of objects and reduced reconstruction quality. As illustrated in Figure 1, the camera paths in 3D indoor scenes
often limit the coverage of scene-level videos. As a result,
objects close to walls or to each other are frequently only
partially recorded. The lack of complete visuals, especially
the absence of information for the occluded regions, makes
these images inadequate for neural rendering-based reconstruction methods (Wang et al. 2021; Yariv et al. 2021).
Inspired by the recent success of diffusion-based image
in-painting (Wang et al. 2023b), we explore the application
of a pre-trained diffusion model to in-paint the occluded regions in the input video frames. While the latent diffusion
model (Rombach et al. 2022) is adept at in-painting missing regions in images, it may produce drastically incorrect
content without precise in-painting masks that identify the
missing parts. In this paper, we address this challenge by in-

Introduction

The task of reconstructing 3D objects within a scene has
been a longstanding challenge in computer vision. Unlike
scene-level reconstruction techniques (Azinovic et al. 2022;
Wang, Bleja, and Agapito 2022), object-level 3D reconstruction focuses on creating individual representations for each
instance within a scene. This technique is crucial for applications in computer vision, robotics, and mixed reality that
require fined-grained scene modeling and understanding.
Many works approach object-level 3D reconstruction as
a task of estimating an object’s pose and shape code, using a categorical generative model (Rünz et al. 2020; Shan
et al. 2021). While these methods create complete shapes,
they are limited to reconstructing objects from specific categories, like tables or chairs. Even within these categories,
the generated shape codes often struggle to accurately match
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2285

