The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unit Selection with Nonbinary Treatment and Effect
Ang Li1 , Judea Pearl2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Florida State University
Cognitive Systems Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
angli@cs.fsu.edu, judea@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The unit selection problem aims to identify a set of individuals
who are most likely to exhibit a desired mode of behavior or
to evaluate the percentage of such individuals in a given population, for example, selecting individuals who would respond
one way if encouraged and a different way if not encouraged.
Using a combination of experimental and observational data,
Li and Pearl solved the binary unit selection problem (binary
treatment and effect) by deriving tight bounds on the “benefit
function,” which is the payoff/cost associated with selecting
an individual with given characteristics. This paper extends
the benefit function to the general form such that the treatment
and effect are not restricted to binary. We then propose an
algorithm to test the identifiability of the nonbinary benefit
function and an algorithm to compute the bounds of the nonbinary benefit function using experimental and observational
data.

Introduction
Several areas of industry, marketing, and health science face
the unit selection dilemma. For example, in customer relationship management (Berson, Smith, and Thearling 1999;
Lejeune 2001; Hung, Yen, and Wang 2006; Tsai and Lu
2009), it is useful to determine the customers who are going
to leave but might reconsider if encouraged to stay. Due to
the high expense of such initiatives, management is forced
to limit inducement to customers who are most likely to exhibit the behavior of interest. As another example, companies
are interested in identifying users who would click on an
advertisement if and only if it is highlighted in online advertising (Yan et al. 2009; Bottou et al. 2013; Li et al. 2014;
Sun et al. 2015). The challenge in identifying these users
stems from the fact that the desired response pattern is not
observed directly but rather is defined counterfactually in
terms of what the individual would do under hypothetical
unrealized conditions. For example, when we observe that a
user has clicked on a highlighted advertisement, we do not
know whether they would click on that same advertisement
if it were not highlighted.
The binary benefit function for the unit selection problem
was defined by Li and Pearl (Li and Pearl 2019) (we will call
this Li-Pearl’s model), and it properly captures the nature of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20473

the desired behavior. Using a combination of experimental
and observational data, Li and Pearl derived tight bounds of
the benefit function. The only assumption is that the treatment has no effect on the population-specific characteristics.
Inspired by the idea of Mueller, Li, and Pearl (Mueller, Li,
and Pearl 2022) and Dawid et al. (Dawid, Musio, and Murtas 2017) that the bounds of probabilities of causation could
be narrowed using covariates information, Li and Pearl (Li
and Pearl 2022c) narrowed the bounds of the benefit function using covariates information and their causal structure.
However, the abovementioned studies are based on binary
treatment and effect. Recently, researchers have shown interest in developing bounds for probabilities of causation with
nonbinary treatment and effect. Zhang, Tian, and Bareinboim
(Zhang, Tian, and Bareinboim 2022), as well as Li and Pearl
(Li and Pearl 2022a), proposed nonlinear programming-based
solutions to compute the bounds of nonbinary probabilities
of causation numerically. Li and Pearl (Li and Pearl 2022b)
provided the theoretical bounds of nonbinary probabilities
of causation. The benefit function is a linear combination of
probabilities of causation; therefore, in this paper, we focus
on discovering the bounds of any benefit function without
restricting them to binary treatment and effect.
Consider the following motivating scenario: a clinical
study is conducted to test the effectiveness of a vaccine.
The treatments include vaccinated and unvaccinated. The
outcomes include uninfected, asymptomatic infected, and
infected in a severe condition. The benefited individuals include the following: the individual who would be infected in a
severe condition if unvaccinated and would be asymptomatic
infected if vaccinated, the individual who would be infected
in a severe condition if unvaccinated and would be uninfected
if vaccinated, and the individual who would be asymptomatic
infected if unvaccinated and would be uninfected if vaccinated. The harmed individuals include the following: the individual who would be asymptomatic infected if unvaccinated
and would be infected in a severe condition if vaccinated,
the individual who would be uninfected if unvaccinated and
would be infected in a severe condition if vaccinated, and
the individual who would be uninfected if unvaccinated and
would be asymptomatic infected if vaccinated. All others are
unaffected individuals. The researcher performing the clinical
study has collected both experimental and observational data.
The researcher then wants to know the expected difference

