The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiffusionTrack: Diffusion Model For Multi-Object Tracking
Run Luo123 , Zikai Song3* , Lintao Ma3 , Jinlin Wei34 , Wei Yang3 , Min Yang12*
1

Shenzen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
University of California, Santa Barbara
{r.luo,min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, {skyesong, mltdml,weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn, jinlinwei@ucsb.edu
f𝐫𝐚𝐦𝐞 𝐭 − 𝟏

1

Diffusion
Head

Input

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a challenging vision task
that aims to detect individual objects within a single frame
and associate them across multiple frames. Recent MOT
approaches can be categorized into two-stage tracking-bydetection (TBD) methods and one-stage joint detection and
tracking (JDT) methods. Despite the success of these approaches, they also suffer from common problems, such as
harmful global or local inconsistency, poor trade-off between
robustness and model complexity, and lack of flexibility in
different scenes within the same video. In this paper we propose a simple but robust framework that formulates object
detection and association jointly as a consistent denoising diffusion process from paired noise boxes to paired ground-truth
boxes. This novel progressive denoising diffusion strategy
substantially augments the tracker’s effectiveness, enabling it
to discriminate between various objects. During the training
stage, paired object boxes diffuse from paired ground-truth
boxes to random distribution, and the model learns detection
and tracking simultaneously by reversing this noising process. In inference, the model refines a set of paired randomly
generated boxes to the detection and tracking results in a flexible one-step or multi-step denoising diffusion process. Extensive experiments on three widely used MOT benchmarks,
including MOT17, MOT20, and DanceTrack, demonstrate
that our approach achieves competitive performance compared to the current state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/RainBowLuoCS/DiffusionTrack.

f𝐫𝐚𝐦𝐞 𝐭 − 𝟏

Diffusion
Track
Backbone

Abstract

Output

f𝐫𝐚𝐦𝐞 𝐭

f𝐫𝐚𝐦𝐞 𝐭

𝒑𝜽 (𝒙𝒕−𝟏 |𝒙𝒕 )

𝑥𝑡

𝑥𝑇
Denoising

𝑥𝑡−1
𝒒𝜽 (𝒙𝒕 |𝒙𝒕−𝟏 )

𝑥0
Process

Figure 1: DiffusionTrack formulates object association as
a denoising diffusion process from paired noise boxes to
paired object boxes within two adjacent frames t − 1 and t.
The diffusion head receives the two-frame image information extracted by the frozen backbone and then iteratively
denoises the paired noise boxes to obtain the final paired object boxes.

based trackers (Bewley et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022; Aharon, Orfaig, and Bobrovsky 2022; Zhao
et al. 2022; Wojke, Bewley, and Paulus 2017; Zhang et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2023) that employ the Kalman filter framework (Welch, Bishop et al. 1995). In addition, certain TBD
approaches establish object associations through the utilization of Re-identification (Re-ID) techniques (Chen et al.
2018; Bergmann, Meinhardt, and Leal-Taixe 2019a), and
others that rely on graph-based trackers (He et al. 2021;
Rangesh et al. 2021; Li, Gao, and Jiang 2020) that model
the association process as minimization of a cost flow problem.
JDT approaches try to combine the tracking and detection
process in a unified manner. This paradigm consists of three
mainstream strategies: query-based trackers (Sun et al. 2020;
Meinhardt et al. 2022; Zeng et al. 2022; Cai et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2021) that adopt unique query implicitly by forcing
each query to track the same object, offset-based trackers
(Bergmann, Meinhardt, and Leal-Taixe 2019b; Tokmakov
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Zhou, Koltun, and Krähenbühl
2020) utilizing the motion feature to predict motion offset, and trajectory-based trackers (Pang et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2022) that tackle severe object occlusions via spatialtemporal information. However, most of TBD and JDT ap-

Introduction

Multi-object Tracking is one of the fundamental vision tasks
with applications ranging from human-computer interaction,
surveillance, autonomous driving, etc. It aims at detecting
the bounding box of the object and associating the same
object across consecutive frames in a video sequence. Recent MOT approaches can be categorized into two-stage
tracking-by-detection (TBD) methods and one-stage joint
detection and tracking (JDT) methods. TBD methods detect the bounding boxes of the objects within a single
frame using a detector and associate the same object cross
frames by employing supplementary trackers. These trackers encompass a spectrum of techniques, such as motion* co-corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3991

