The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Efficient and Effective Text-to-Video Retrieval with Coarse-to-Fine
Visual Representation Learning
Kaibin Tian, Yanhua Cheng, Yi Liu, Xinglin Hou, Quan Chen, Han Li
Kuaishou Technology
{tiankaibin, chengyanhua, liuyi24, houxinglin, chenquan06, lihan08}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
E ff e c t i v e n e s s ( M e a n R 1 , R 5 , R 1 0 )

DRL, arXiv22

In recent years, text-to-video retrieval methods based on
CLIP have experienced rapid development. The primary direction of evolution is to exploit the much wider gamut of visual and textual cues to achieve alignment. Concretely, those
methods with impressive performance often design a heavy
fusion block for sentence (words)-video (frames) interaction,
regardless of the prohibitive computation complexity. Nevertheless, these approaches are not optimal in terms of feature utilization and retrieval efficiency. To address this issue,
we adopt multi-granularity visual feature learning, ensuring
the model’s comprehensiveness in capturing visual content
features spanning from abstract to detailed levels during the
training phase. To better leverage the multi-granularity features, we devise a two-stage retrieval architecture in the retrieval phase. This solution ingeniously balances the coarse
and fine granularity of retrieval content. Moreover, it also
strikes a harmonious equilibrium between retrieval effectiveness and efficiency. Specifically, in training phase, we design a parameter-free text-gated interaction block (TIB) for
fine-grained video representation learning and embed an extra Pearson Constraint to optimize cross-modal representation
learning. In retrieval phase, we use coarse-grained video representations for fast recall of top-k candidates, which are then
reranked by fine-grained video representations. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate the efficiency and
effectiveness. Notably, our method achieves comparable performance with the current state-of-the-art methods while being nearly 50 times faster.

EERCF

68.33

TS2-Net, ECCV22

66.67

X-Pool, CVPR22

CLIP-ViP, ICLR23
LAFF, ECCV22
CenterCLIP, SIGIR22

65.00

X-CLIP, MM22

CLIP4Clip, Neurocom22

63.33

MMT, ECCV20

61.67

W2VV++, MM19

104
105
106
Efficiency (Estimated FLOPs per video-text matching, log scale)
103

Figure 1: Effectiveness and efficiency for text-to-video retrieval models. We evaluate our approach under the settings
of MSRVTT-1K-Test and backbone CLIP(ViT-B/32). The
current trend of mainstream is reflected from the lower left
to the upper right corner. Our method achieves the best balance, positioned at the upper left corner.

is conducted by CLIP4Clip (Luo et al. 2022), which transfers the pre-trained CLIP to video-language domain with
simple MeanPooling and achieves a certain level of promotion. A problem arises where, unlike relatively less visual
information in text-image matching, aggregating the entire
video as a representation in text-to-video retrieval can lead
to over-abstraction and be misleading. As one sentence generally describes video sub-regions of interest. Therefore, a
natural idea is to consider how to align text and video representations at a finer granularity. The development of CLIP
variants can be divided into two main categories to address
the above problem. One category focuses on designing a
heavy fusion block to strengthen the interaction between visual (video, frames) and text (sentence, words) cues for better alignment of the two modalities (Liu et al. 2021; Ma et al.
2022). The other one optimizes text-driven video representations by keeping multi-grained features including videolevel and frame-level for brute-force search (Gorti et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022).

Introduction
With the explosive growth of videos uploaded online every day from platforms like TikTok, Kwai, YouTube, and
Netflix, text-to-video retrieval is a crucial and fundamental task for multi-modal representation learning (Fang et al.
2021; Ge et al. 2022; Gorti et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2022; Ma
et al. 2022). Recently, the pre-trained text-image matching
models (CLIP (Radford et al. 2021)) from a large scale of
web-collected image-text pairs show the great success on diverse vision-language downstream tasks (Nichol et al. 2021;
Ramesh et al. 2022; Mokady, Hertz, and Bermano 2021; Hu
et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2022; Conde and Turgutlu 2021). In
light of the well-learned visual features, a preliminary study
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5207

