The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Oscillators for Generalization of Physics-Informed Machine Learning
Taniya Kapoor1 * , Abhishek Chandra2 * , Daniel M. Tartakovsky3 ,
Hongrui Wang1 , Alfredo Nunez1 , Rolf Dollevoet1
1

2

Department of Engineering Structures, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
3
Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Stanford University, USA
t.kapoor@tudelft.nl
Abstract

distribution, resulting in a physical-agnostic methodology
(Gu et al. 2022).
Limitations of data-driven methods, characterized by their
inability to adhere to physical laws and their agnosticism
towards underlying physics, underscore the need for deep
learning models capable of effectively capturing fundamental physical phenomena, such as their structure and symmetry (Lee, Trask, and Stinis 2021). Adopting such learning approaches promises to enhance the generalization capabilities
of the model significantly. Consequently, a growing interest has been in embedding physics principles into machine
learning to develop physics-aware models such as physicsinformed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi, Perdikaris, and
Karniadakis 2019). PINNs consider mathematical models of
the underlying physical process, represented as partial differential equations (PDEs), and integrate them into the loss
function during training.
Despite their popularity, experimental evidence suggests
that PINNs might fail to generalize. Minimizing the PDE
residual in PINN does not straightforwardly control the generalization error (Mishra and Molinaro 2023, 2022). Although PINNs and their subsequent enhancement aim to incorporate soft or hard physical constraints for robustness,
they often struggle to achieve strong generalization (Kim
et al. 2021; Daw et al. 2022a; Fesser, Qiu, and D’AmicoWong 2023). Hence, simply embedding physical equations
into the loss function need not necessarily guarantee genuine physics awareness or robustness beyond the training
domain. Ideally, a physics-informed model must reproduce
known physics in the training domain and exhibit predictive capabilities for new scenarios while respecting conservation laws and effectively handling variations and uncertainties in real-world applications. Attaining this level of
physics awareness remains a crucial challenge in developing
dependable and powerful physics-informed machine learning methods (Fuks and Tchelepi 2020; Shin, Darbon, and
Karniadakis 2020).
One way to enhance the extrapolation power of PINNs is
to dynamically manipulate the gradients of the loss terms,
building upon a gradient-based optimizer (Kim et al. 2021).
This method shares similarities with gradient-based techniques employed in domain generalization tasks (Wang et al.
2022). However, one drawback of such methods is the need
for training until a specific user-defined tolerance in the

A primary challenge of physics-informed machine learning
(PIML) is its generalization beyond the training domain, especially when dealing with complex physical problems represented by partial differential equations (PDEs). This paper aims to enhance the generalization capabilities of PIML,
facilitating practical, real-world applications where accurate
predictions in unexplored regions are crucial. We leverage
the inherent causality and temporal sequential characteristics of PDE solutions to fuse PIML models with recurrent
neural architectures based on systems of ordinary differential equations, referred to as neural oscillators. Through effectively capturing long-time dependencies and mitigating
the exploding and vanishing gradient problem, neural oscillators foster improved generalization in PIML tasks. Extensive
experimentation involving time-dependent nonlinear PDEs
and biharmonic beam equations demonstrates the efficacy
of the proposed approach. Incorporating neural oscillators
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on benchmark
problems across various metrics. Consequently, the proposed
method improves the generalization capabilities of PIML,
providing accurate solutions for extrapolation and prediction
beyond the training data.

Introduction
In machine learning and artificial intelligence, generalization refers to the ability of a model to perform on previously
unseen data beyond its training domain. This entails prediction of outcomes for a sample x that lies outside the convex
hull of the training set X = {x1 , . . . , xN }, where N is the
number of training samples (Balestriero, Pesenti, and LeCun
2021). Current deep-learning models exhibit robust generalization on tasks like image (Su et al. 2023), and speech
recognition (Chen et al. 2023), among others (Zhou et al.
2022). In physical sciences, state-of-the-art deep-learning
models, also known as data-driven approaches, learn patterns and correlations from training data but lack intrinsic comprehension of the underlying governing laws of the
problem (Liu et al. 2019; Alber et al. 2019). Despite their
effective approximation of complex functions and relationships, these data-driven methods face challenges in generalizing to scenarios significantly different from the training
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13059

