The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Using Artificial Populations to Study Psychological Phenomena in Neural Models
Jesse Roberts1 , Kyle Moore1 , Drew Wilenzick2 , Douglas Fisher1
1

Vanderbilt University
2
Cornell University
jesse.roberts@vanderbilt.edu, kyle.a.moore@vanderbilt.edu, ddw77@cornell.edu, douglas.h.fisher@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

found that relatively small experimental alterations caused
the effect to disappear (Ullman 2023). This suggests the experimental design in the original study was insufficient to
support the drawn conclusions.
This is precisely the motivation for the present paper.
Claims that fail to be reproducible regarding powerful AI
models may ultimately result in erosion of the public’s trust
and attention. Any study of neural model cognitive behavior should characterize not only the presence but the size of
the effect and the significance. Doing so necessitates rigor
which may decrease erroneous conclusions, and will permit better explanation of neural model cognitive behavior
through meta-analytic study. To this end, we present and
demonstrate an artificial population generation method for
the study of cognitive phenomena in neural models with the
hope that it will aid in the reproducibility of research regarding the behavior of neural models.
This paper contributes by drawing connections between
social and behavioral experimental design and neural model
uncertainty estimation resulting in a (1) tool called PopulationLM for the creation of populations of neural models
via stratified MC dropout. We harvest novel metrics and explore population best practices by applying artificial populations to the (2) replication and extension of (Misra, Ettinger,
and Rayz 2021) (correlation analysis) and (3) (Sinclair et al.
2022) (difference analysis). We present novel results regarding the presence of typicality and structural priming effects
in language models.

The recent proliferation of research into transformer based
natural language processing has led to a number of studies
which attempt to detect the presence of human-like cognitive behavior in the models. We contend that, as is true of
human psychology, the investigation of cognitive behavior in
language models must be conducted in an appropriate population of an appropriate size for the results to be meaningful.
We leverage work in uncertainty estimation in a novel approach to efficiently construct experimental populations. The
resultant tool, PopulationLM, has been made open source. We
provide theoretical grounding in the uncertainty estimation
literature and motivation from current cognitive work regarding language models. We discuss the methodological lessons
from other scientific communities and attempt to demonstrate
their application to two artificial population studies. Through
population based experimentation we find that language models exhibit behavior consistent with typicality effects among
categories highly represented in training. However, we find
that language models don’t tend to exhibit structural priming
effects. Generally, our results show that single models tend
to over estimate the presence of cognitive behaviors in neural
models.

Introduction
In the wake of success following the introduction of transformers in (Vaswani et al. 2017) and the public deployment
of powerful variants of GPT, many have started to question
if these models exhibit behavior similar to human cognition.
Work analyzing the cognition of these powerful, Turingcomplete (Roberts 2023) models is important not only to
the explanation and interpretation of the models themselves
but may offer insight into cognition more generally, a synergism best embodied by the interplay of reinforcement learning and neuroscience (Subramanian, Chitlangia, and Baths
2022). We believe this emerging study of cognitive behavior in neural models can be improved by adopting methods
from branches of science more typically associated with statistical testing. Without appropriate experimental methodology conclusions may not be robust in the face of variations, a symptom associated with the greater replicability
crisis (Goodman, Fanelli, and Ioannidis 2016). Research attempting replication and extension of ToM results in GPT-4

Behavioral Phenomena in Neural Models
In this section we review the current work related to the
study of cognitive behavior in neural language models paying specific attention to the measures reported and methodology. Table 1 summarizes the works that have been identified, organized by the behavioral phenomenon that they investigate. This review and meta-commentary does not invalidate any of the findings in the associated papers. Rather, it
serves as a compendium of work so far in this field and helps
to illuminate the problem we wish to address.
The measures reported refers to the measure applied to
the model output. Statistic refers to the statistical analysis
applied to the measures. We find that most papers used atypical measures of effect like frequency of occurrence or qualitative analysis and tend to not use statistical testing. Those

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18906

