The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stealthy Adversarial Attacks on Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits
Zhiwei Wang1 , Huazheng Wang2 , Hongning Wang1
1

Tsinghua University
Oregon State University
zhiweithu@gmail.com, huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu, wang.hongn@gmail.com
2

Abstract

The concerns have therefore spurred great research efforts in developing adversarially robust stochastic MAB algorithms. The existing efforts are mainly focused on developing new algorithms with provable robustness guarantees (Lykouris, Mirrokni, and Paes Leme 2018; Gupta, Koren, and Talwar 2019; Guan et al. 2020; Liu and Lai 2020).
Various robust reward estimators or exploration strategies
are introduced to tolerate the adversarial reward corruption,
which, however, are at the cost of increased regret. Our study
shows that most existing reward poisoning attacks can be
effectively detected via the test of homogeneity (Buishand
1982). As a result, most existing MAB algorithms can be
easily protected by such a detection method, with little impact on their regret. This provides a new perspective to examine the robustness or the so-called attackability (Wang,
Xu, and Wang 2022) of MAB algorithms under the presence
of attack detection methods.
This paper focuses on the targeted attack setting against
stochastic MAB algorithms. In Section , we first introduce
a method based on the test of homogeneity to detect possible reward poisoning attacks. Our key insight is that existing attack methods (Jun et al. 2018; Liu and Shroff 2019)
aggressively push the realized rewards of non-target arms
below that of the target arm, such that the observed reward
sequence on non-target arms is no longer i.i.d. samples from
the same distribution. As a result, the test of homogeneity is
in a good position to actively detect such data poisoning attacks. We demonstrate that this method exhibits a low typeI error, suggesting its reliability. We then prove that with
MAB algorithms like UCB1 or ϵ-greedy, if an attack method
can succeed with a high probability, this attack can always
be detected with a non-negligible probability. Consequently,
our detection method also demonstrates a low type-II error.
These results establish two key findings: 1) the proposed
detection method is highly effective, and 2) existing attack
methods can be easily detected using our approach.
In light of the limitations posed by existing attack methods in the presence of our proposed detection method, we
introduce the concept of stealthy attack in bandit problems
in Section . The results of Section also show that when
the learner applies UCB1 or ϵ-greedy algorithms, no attack method can simultaneously achieve both stealthiness
and efficiency, under the conditions specified by the reward
gap, i.e., the bandit instance’s attackability. We then pro-

Adversarial attacks against stochastic multi-armed bandit
(MAB) algorithms have been extensively studied in the literature. In this work, we focus on reward poisoning attacks and
find most existing attacks can be easily detected by our proposed detection method based on the test of homogeneity, due
to their aggressive nature in reward manipulations. This motivates us to study the notion of stealthy attack against stochastic MABs and investigate the resulting attackability. Our analysis shows that against two popularly employed MAB algorithms, UCB1 and ϵ-greedy, the success of a stealthy attack
depends on the environmental conditions and the realized reward of the arm pulled in the first round. We also analyze the
situation for general MAB algorithms equipped with our attack detection method and find that it is possible to have a
stealthy attack that almost always succeeds. This brings new
insights into the security risks of MAB algorithms.

Introduction
In a stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, a learner
each time takes an arm from a presented set to interact with
the environment for reward feedback, where the reward is
assumed to be i.i.d. sampled from an unknown but fixed distribution (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Auer 2002;
Agrawal and Goyal 2017; Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020).
The learner’s goal is to maximize its cumulative rewards in
a finite number of interactions. As such algorithms continuously learn from external feedback, their adversarial robustness has attracted increasing attention in the community (Liu
and Shroff 2019; Ma et al. 2018; Jun et al. 2018). The most
well-studied adversarial setting is the reward poisoning attack, where an attacker can selectively modify the reward of
the learner’s pulled arms to deceive the learner. Accordingly,
the attacker can have two distinct goals: with a high probability, 1) force the learner to take a particular arm a linear
number of times, i.e., known as a targeted attack; or 2) make
the learner suffer from linear regret, i.e., known as an untargeted attack, both subject to sublinear attack cost constraint.
It is known that most of the popular stochastic MABs algorithms can be easily manipulated (Jun et al. 2018; Liu and
Shroff 2019), indicating a serious security vulnerability for
the practical use of MAB algorithms.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15770

