The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semi-supervised TEE Segmentation via Interacting with
SAM Equipped with Noise-Resilient Prompting
Sen Deng1 , Yidan Feng1 , Haoneng Lin1 , Yiting Fan2 * , Alex Pui-Wai Lee3 , Xiaowei Hu4 , Jing Qin1 * ,
1

Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Department of cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200030, China
3
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
sendy.deng@connect.polyu.hk
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a powerful tool to address the challenge of insufficient annotated data in medical
segmentation problems. However, existing semi-supervised
methods mainly rely on internal knowledge for pseudo labeling, which is biased due to the distribution mismatch between the highly imbalanced labeled and unlabeled data. Segmenting left atrial appendage (LAA) from transesophageal
echocardiogram (TEE) images is a typical medical image
segmentation task featured by scarcity of professional annotations and diverse data distributions, for which existing
SSL models cannot achieve satisfactory performance. In this
paper, we propose a novel strategy to mitigate the inherent challenge of distribution mismatch in SSL by, for the
first time, incorporating a large foundation model (i.e. SAM
in our implementation) into an SSL model to improve the
quality of pseudo labels. We further propose a new selfreconstruction mechanism to generate both noise-resilient
prompts to demonically improve SAM’s generalization capability over TEE images and self-perturbations to stabilize the
training process and reduce the impact of noisy labels. We
conduct extensive experiments on an in-house TEE dataset;
experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
better performance than state-of-the-art SSL models.

(a) Teacher Model

(b) SAM w/ Prompt

(c) The Ground Truth (d) Avg Dice of Unlabeled Data

Figure 1: Comparison of the pseudo labels generated by (a)
the teacher model and (b) SAM with the proposed noiseresilient prompts. (c) is the ground-truth mask for reference,
and (d) shows the average dice of pseudo labels at different
labeled ratios, which implies that SAM in our method generated more robust and reliable pseudo labels compared to
the vanilla teacher model.

Introduction
Transesophageal Echocardiogram (TEE) is an increasingly
utilized modality in ultrasonic cardiac imaging due to its
unique advantage of proximity to cardiac structures (Fazlinezhad et al. 2020). The segmentation of left atrial appendage (LAA) from TEE images plays a crucial role in percutaneous LAA occlusion procedure, which is an effective
treatment for preventing patients with atrial fibrillation from
stroke (Nielsen-Kudsk et al. 2019). However, it is an extremely challenging task as: (1) compared with CT and MR
images, the quality of TEE images is relatively low due to
speckle noise, acoustic shadow, and motion artifacts, leading
to severe boundary ambiguity and deficiency (Faletra et al.
2014); (2) there exist large variations in the size and morphology of the LAA among patients (Chen et al. 2020); and

(3) it is laborious and expensive to obtain sufficient pixellevel annotated data from TEE experts for training.
Many efforts have been dedicated to addressing this challenging task. Early methods for LAA segmentation (Song
et al. 2016; Morais et al. 2019, 2018) mainly rely on manual
configurations and adjustments, which are time-consuming
and heavily dependent on individual expertise. More recently, deep learning-based methods have shown promising
performance by incorporating shape priors (Zhu et al. 2023)
or contextual information (Jin et al. 2018). However, these
methods are fully-supervised and rely on large amount of
labeled training data, which is hard to obtain in practice.
One promising solution to this problem is to leverage
abundant unlabeled data through semi-supervised learning

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11757

