The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Gaussian Similarity Modeling for Differential Graph Structure Learning
Xiaolong Fan1 , Maoguo Gong1 , Yue Wu2 , Zedong Tang3 , and Jieyi Liu1 ,
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence Systems of Ministry of Education,
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence Systems of Ministry of
Education, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence Systems of Ministry of
Education, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
xiaolongfan@outlook.com, gong@ieee.org, {ywu, zdtang, jieyiliu}@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

2021; Wu et al. 2022) is proposed to jointly learn the latent graph structure and corresponding graph embeddings
using structure learner and graph neural network encoder
where the parameters are optimized together by the downstream task. Specifically, the structure learner first computes
the similarity between node feature pairs as the edge weights
by using similarity kernel function, such as inner-product
kernel (Yu et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021), cosine similarity
kernel (Wang et al. 2020; Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2020), and
diffusion kernel (Gasteiger, Weißenberger, and Günnemann
2019). Then the graph structure is generated via a structure
sampling process from edge weight distribution. After producing the graph structure, graph neural network encoder
takes the node features and the generated graph structure as
input to produce the final node embeddings for downstream
tasks. However, two fundamental weaknesses of this framework may limit the performance and scalability of graph
structure learning method. First, the generated graph structure is not differentiable with respect to the edge weight distribution due to discrete sampling blocking gradient flow.
Second, computing the edge similarity for all pairs of graph
nodes requires huge complexity for both computational time
and memory consumption, rendering significant scalability
issue for large graphs.

Graph Structure Learning (GSL) has demonstrated considerable potential in the analysis of graph-unknown nonEuclidean data across a wide range of domains. However,
constructing an end-to-end graph structure learning model
poses a challenge due to the impediment of gradient flow
caused by the nearest neighbor sampling strategy. In this paper, we construct a differential graph structure learning model
by replacing the non-differentiable nearest neighbor sampling
with a differentiable sampling using the reparameterization
trick. Under this framework, we argue that the act of sampling nearest neighbors may not invariably be essential, particularly in instances where node features exhibit a significant
degree of similarity. To alleviate this issue, the bell-shaped
Gaussian Similarity (GauSim) modeling is proposed to sample non-nearest neighbors. To adaptively model the similarity, we further propose Neural Gaussian Similarity (NeuralGauSim) with learnable parameters featuring flexible sampling behaviors. In addition, we develop a scalable method
by transferring the large-scale graph to the transition graph
to significantly reduce the complexity. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a notable surge in academic attention towards Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
(Kipf and Welling 2017; Zeng et al. 2020; Lim et al.
2021; Fan et al. 2023a). A plethora of graph neural network models have been introduced, showcasing noteworthy advancements across diverse domains such as social network analysis (Gao et al. 2023), natural language processing
(Meng et al. 2022), computer vision (Han et al. 2022), and
various other fields. The efficacy of graph neural network
can be attributed to their inherent capability of effectively
leveraging the abundant information present within both the
structure of graph topology and the input node attributes in
a concurrent manner. However, the graph structure is not invariably ascertainable. For instance, within a social network,
the interconnections among users encompass sensitive privacy aspects, impeding direct access to such information.
To alleviate this issue, Graph Structure Learning (GSL)
(Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2020; Fatemi, El Asri, and Kazemi

To solve the problem of non-differentiable sampling, we
utilize the concrete relaxation of the Categorical distribution
by replacing the non-differentiable sampling with a differentiable sampling mechanism using the Gumbel-Softmax distribution. The Gumbel-Softmax distribution (Jang, Gu, and
Poole 2017; Zheng et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022) is a reparameterization trick that allows for the generation of discrete
samples while maintaining differentiability. Note that the
sampling probability is positively correlated with edge similarity, whereby greater similarity values entail higher probabilities of sampling the edges. We term this sampling approach as the linear sampling strategy. Our analysis reveals
that this linear sampling method is not universally indispensable, particularly in situations where node features demonstrate a substantial level of similarity. To alleviate this issue, we propose a bell-shaped Gaussian Similarity (GauSim)
modeling strategy, enabling the edge sampling probability
entails an initial increase followed by a decrease as the similarity between node pairs diminishes. Note that different
Gaussian function parameters need to be set for different

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11919

