The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Constraint Generation for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems
Johannes Schmalz, Felipe Trevizan
School of Computing, Australian National University
johannes.schmalz@anu.edu.au, felipe.trevizan@anu.edu.au

instance, let s and a be a state and an applicable action, even
if all successors of a will be pruned because they are too expensive, a Bellman backup on s still computes the Q-value
of a, so these algorithms can prune unpromising states but
not actions. This issue is compounded because algorithms
for SSPs require arbitrarily many Bellman backups on each
state s to find the optimal solution, thus wasting time on
computing Q-values for such actions many times.
This issue of computing unnecessary Q-values for a state
s is addressed by action elimination (Bertsekas 1995), which
can be implemented in search algorithms to prune useless
actions. Action elimination looks for pairs (a, a
b) of applicable actions in a state, such that a lower bound on b
a’s cost-togo exceeds an upper bound on a’s cost-to-go, in which case a
b
is proved to be a useless action and can be pruned. Although
domain-independent lower bounds (heuristics) can be computed efficiently, finding an efficient, domain-independent
upper bound remains an open question to the best of our
knowledge. This gap has limited the use of action elimination in domain-independent planning. In the context of optimal heuristic planning for SSPs, the only algorithm we
are aware of that utilises action elimination to prune actions is FTVI (Dai, Weld et al. 2009). Other algorithms,
such as BRTDP (McMahan, Likhachev, and Gordon 2005),
FRTDP (Smith and Simmons 2006) and VPI-RTDP (Sanner et al. 2009), use upper bounds in conjunction with lower
bounds to guide their search. However, unlike FTVI, they do
not perform action elimination.
We present a general technique for ignoring actions that
does not rely on upper bounds. In contrast to action elimination that incrementally prunes useless actions, our approach
initially treats all actions as inactive, i.e., not contributing
to the solution. It then iteratively adds actions to the search
that are guaranteed to improve the current solution. To develop our approach, we strengthen the connections between
planning and operations research by relating heuristic search
to variable and constraint generation. Similar to heuristic
search, variable and constraint generation enable the solving
of large Linear Programs (LPs) by considering only a subset
of variables and constraints. We show that algorithms such
as iLAO∗ implicitly perform constraint generation, albeit in
a trivial manner, to the LP encoding of VI. Building on this,
we introduce an efficient algorithm for constraint generation
for SSPs that leads to inactive actions being ignored. We ap-

Abstract
Current methods for solving Stochastic Shortest Path Problems (SSPs) find states’ costs-to-go by applying Bellman
backups, where state-of-the-art methods employ heuristics to
select states to back up and prune. A fundamental limitation
of these algorithms is their need to compute the cost-to-go
for every applicable action during each state backup, leading to unnecessary computation for actions identified as suboptimal. We present new connections between planning and
operations research and, using this framework, we address
this issue of unnecessary computation by introducing an efficient version of constraint generation for SSPs. This technique allows algorithms to ignore sub-optimal actions and
avoid computing their costs-to-go. We also apply our novel
technique to iLAO∗ resulting in a new algorithm, CG-iLAO∗ .
Our experiments show that CG-iLAO∗ ignores up to 57% of
iLAO∗ ’s actions and it solves problems up to 8× and 3×
faster than LRTDP and iLAO∗ .

1

Introduction

Planning is an important facet of AI that gives efficient algorithms for solving current real-world problems. Stochastic Shortest Path problems (SSPs) (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1991) generalise classical (deterministic) planning by introducing actions with probabilistic effects, which lets us
model problems where the actions are intrinsically probabilistic. Value Iteration (VI) (Bellman 1957) is a dynamic
programming algorithm that forms the basis of optimal algorithms for solving SSPs. VI finds the cost-to-go for each
state, which describes the solution of an SSP. A state s’s
cost-to-go is the minimum expected cost of reaching a goal
from s, and similarly a action a’s cost-to-go is the minimum
after applying a. VI finds the optimal cost-to-go by iteratively applying Bellman backups, which update each state’s
cost-to-go with the minimal outgoing action’s cost-to-go.
LRTDP (Bonet and Geffner 2003) and iLAO∗ (Hansen
and Zilberstein 2001), the state-of-the-art algorithms for
optimally solving SSPs, build on VI and offer significant
speedup by using heuristics to apply Bellman backups only
to promising states and pruning states that are deemed too
expensive. A shortcoming of such algorithms is that each
Bellman backup must consider all applicable actions. For
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20247

