The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge Guided Semi-supervised Learning for Quality Assessment of User
Generated Videos
Shankhanil Mitra, Rajiv Soundararajan
Visual Information Processing Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
{shankhanilm, rajivs}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

NR VQA models which can be trained with very limited labelled training data, yet achieve excellent generalisation performance on multiple datasets in terms of correlation with
human perception.
Our focus in this work is on designing semi-supervised
NR VQA method with limited labelled along with unlabelled data. Since UGC videos have diverse quality characteristics, we believe that pretraining a robust video quality
feature backbone is extremely important to transfer knowledge during semi-supervised learning. With this motivation, we approach the problem using a combination of
contrastive self-supervised pretraining followed by semisupervised finetuning. A few self-supervised contrastive
learning based methods have been designed for NR VQA recently (Mitra and Soundararajan 2022; Madhusudana et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022) to learn rich video quality features.
However, none of these methods yet exploit the performance
benefit offered by the attention mechanism in transformer
based models. One of the major challenges in training such
transformer based architectures for VQA is the difficulty in
training such networks end-to-end. We leverage recent literature on end-to-end training of Swin-transformers for supervised VQA (Wu et al. 2022) to overcome this difficulty
in self-supervised video quality representation learning. Further, we employ a novel statistical contrastive learning loss
instead of a point-wise similarity loss to make the learning more robust. Thus, in the first stage of our approach,
we learn rich quality aware spatio-temporal features without
requiring any human annotations.
In the second stage of our approach, we leverage the limited number of quality labels in a semi-supervised learning (SSL) framework. While several SSL based methods on
pseudo-labelling and consistency regularisation have been
explored in video action recognition (Xu et al. 2022; Singh
et al. 2021; Kumar and Rawat 2022), they need to adapted
for the specific task of VQA. In this direction, we employ
knowledge transfer between two measures of video quality evaluated on the unlabelled videos. The first measure is
based only on human annotations, while the second measure uses a distance between features of the distorted video
and a corpus of pristine videos along with human labels.
Such knowledge transfer helps overcome the drawback of
limited human annotations, while simultaneously trying to
help determine a perceptually relevant distance to a corpus

Perceptual quality assessment of user generated content
(UGC) videos is challenging due to the requirement of
large scale human annotated videos for training. In this
work, we address this challenge by first designing a selfsupervised Spatio-Temporal Visual Quality Representation
Learning (ST-VQRL) framework to generate robust quality
aware features for videos. Then, we propose a dual-model
based Semi Supervised Learning (SSL) method specifically
designed for the Video Quality Assessment (SSL-VQA) task,
through a novel knowledge transfer of quality predictions
between the two models. Our SSL-VQA method uses the
ST-VQRL backbone to produce robust performances across
various VQA datasets including cross-database settings, despite being learned with limited human annotated videos.
Our model improves the state-of-the-art performance when
trained only with limited data by around 10%, and by around
15% when unlabelled data is also used in SSL. Source
codes and checkpoints are available at https://github.com/
Shankhanil006/SSL-VQA.

Introduction
The emergence of video capturing devices such as smartphones, DSLRs, and GoPro has led to millions of users uploading or accessing videos via various sharing platforms
such as YouTube, Instagram, Facebook and so on. This necessitates the quality assessment (QA) of videos to monitor
and control the user experience. However, a reference video
is often not available for user generated content (UGC), motivating the study of no reference (NR) video QA (VQA).
Further, the videos also suffer from complex camera captured distortions which makes the task of NR VQA extremely challenging.
The recent decade has seen significant progress in NR
VQA, based on classical or handcrafted features (Saad,
Bovik, and Charrier 2014; Xu et al. 2014; Ghadiyaram and
Bovik 2017; Tu et al. 2021a,b) and deep learning based approaches (Li, Jiang, and Jiang 2019, 2021; Wu et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2020a; Shen et al. 2022). The deep learning based
approaches particularly require training on large amount of
labelled data, which is cumbersome and expensive to acquire. This leads to us to the question of how we can design
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4251

