The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UCMCTrack: Multi-Object Tracking with Uniform Camera Motion
Compensation
Kefu Yi1 * , Kai Luo2 , Xiaolei Luo2 , Jiangui Huang2 , Hao Wu2 , Rongdong Hu3 , Wei Hao1 *
1

2

School of Traffic and Transportation, Changsha University of Science and Technology
College of Automotive and Mechanical Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology
3
Changsha Intelligent Driving Institute
{corfyi, haowei}@csust.edu.cn
Abstract

66.0

Multi-object tracking (MOT) in video sequences remains a
challenging task, especially in scenarios with significant camera movements. This is because targets can drift considerably on the image plane, leading to erroneous tracking outcomes. Addressing such challenges typically requires supplementary appearance cues or Camera Motion Compensation (CMC). While these strategies are effective, they also
introduce a considerable computational burden, posing challenges for real-time MOT. In response to this, we introduce
UCMCTrack, a novel motion model-based tracker robust to
camera movements. Unlike conventional CMC that computes
compensation parameters frame-by-frame, UCMCTrack consistently applies the same compensation parameters throughout a video sequence. It employs a Kalman filter on the
ground plane and introduces the Mapped Mahalanobis Distance (MMD) as an alternative to the traditional Intersection
over Union (IoU) distance measure. By leveraging projected
probability distributions on the ground plane, our approach
efficiently captures motion patterns and adeptly manages uncertainties introduced by homography projections. Remarkably, UCMCTrack, relying solely on motion cues, achieves
state-of-the-art performance across a variety of challenging
datasets, including MOT17, MOT20, DanceTrack and KITTI.
More details and code are available at https://github.com/
corfyi/UCMCTrack.

65.5

UCMCTrack+(ours)

MOT17 test
MotionTrack&
SparseTrack

HOTA

65.0

StrongSORT

64.5

C-BIoU
ByteTrack

63.0
62.5
62.0

Deep OCSORT

UCMCTrack(ours)

64.0
63.5

Bot-SORT

OC-SORT
Quo Vadis

GHOST

FCG

77

78

appearance & motion
motion

79

80

81

82

IDF1

Figure 1: IDF1-HOTA-AssA comparisons of different trackers on the test set of MOT17. The horizontal axis is IDF1,the
vertical axis is HOTA, and the radius of circle is AssA.
Our UCMCTrack+ achieves 65.8 HOTA, 81.1 IDF1 on
MOT17 test, possessing significant competitiveness compared to SOTA trackers. Details are given in Table 1.

without resorting to the cumbersome frame-by-frame CMC?
Our answer is YES. We have developed a pure motion
model-based multi-object tracker that is robust to camera
movement. For the same video sequence, it suffices to use
the same camera motion compensation parameters, rather
than computing the camera motion compensation parameters for every frame as traditional CMC does. We choose to
model the target’s motion using a simple Kalman filter on the
ground plane, instead of on the imaging plane as most MOT
algorithms do, and effectively compensate the motion estimation errors caused by camera movement through the process noise parameters of the Kalman filter. We abandon the
commonly used Intersection over Union (IoU) , and instead
propose the Mapped Mahalanobis Distance (MMD). It computes the projected probability distribution on the ground
plane, and utilizes the Mahalanobis distance to calculate the
matching costs between targets. It not only effectively leverages the underlying motion patterns of the targets on the
ground plane but also efficiently handles the uncertainties

Introduction
At the core of tracking-by-detection paradigm of multiobject tracking (MOT) is the accurate association of detections with tracked objects. Motion cues are widely used
due to their effectiveness and simplicity. However, the application of motion model in scenarios with frequent camera
movement is highly challenging. This issue is usually addressed by applying additional appearance cues or performing frame-by-frame Camera Motion Compensation (CMC)
on video captured by the moving camera. While effective,
these additional measures introduce a non-negligible computational burden, posing a obstacle for real-time MOT.
Thus, a pertinent question arises: Is it possible to employ
motion cues in MOT that are robust to camera movement
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6702

