The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Heterogeneous Graph Reasoning for Fact Checking over Texts and Tables
Haisong Gong1,2 , Weizhi Xu3 , Shu Wu1,2 * , Qiang Liu1,2 , Liang Wang1,2
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
ByteDance Inc.
gonghaisong2021@ia.ac.cn, jason xu1998@163.com, {shu.wu, qiang.liu, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

target of veracity reasoning is to precisely predict the veracity of claim based on the retrieved evidence from the former
stage. In this paper, we mainly focus on the design of veracity reasoning model.
Previous veracity reasoning models (Aly et al. 2021;
Kotonya et al. 2021; Funkquist 2021; Hu et al. 2022;
Bouziane et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022) have
primarily relied on fine-tuning pretrained language models
or training homogeneous-graph-based models. In the finetuning approach, they firstly transform tables into sentences
via some heuristic linearizing rules. Then, a pretrained language model (PLM), such as RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019),
is fine-tuned by concatenating all pieces of evidence as the
input. In the homogeneous-graph-based approach, they construct a homogeneous fully-connected evidence graph where
each node is treated as a piece of evidence. After that, a
graph neural network (GNN) is utilized to propagate neighborhood information, which enables the semantic representations of different pieces of evidence to be aggregated.
While effective, existing approaches exhibit two key
weaknesses. Firstly, fact checking necessitates capturing semantics among various evidence pieces, demanding intricate modeling of evidence relationships. Transformer-based
methods often fall short as they merely concatenate evidence or deal with point-wise claim-evidence pairs, insufficiently exploring complex evidence interconnections. Secondly, prevalent graph-based methods construct sentencelevel graphs with claim-evidence pairs as nodes, employing Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) for node representations (Zhou et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Kotonya et al.
2021). Although these models perform well in conventional
fact checking, they falter in scenarios involving both structured and unstructured information. This is due to the limitations of sentence-level graphs in capturing fine-grained details such as entities and time phrases. Furthermore, assuming uniform relationships between node pairs overlooks the
diverse properties inherent in table and sentence evidence.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose a
novel word-level Heterogeneous-graph-based model for
Fact Checking over unstructured and structured information, HeterFC for brevity. Specifically, we first construct a
graph where nodes represent words in all pieces of evidence,
thereby achieving a granularity at word-level. Then, to capture the different relationships in structured and unstructured

Fact checking aims to predict claim veracity by reasoning
over multiple evidence pieces. It usually involves evidence
retrieval and veracity reasoning. In this paper, we focus on
the latter, reasoning over unstructured text and structured table information. Previous works have primarily relied on finetuning pretrained language models or training homogeneousgraph-based models. Despite their effectiveness, we argue
that they fail to explore the rich semantic information underlying the evidence with different structures. To address this,
we propose a novel word-level Heterogeneous-graph-based
model for Fact Checking over unstructured and structured information, namely HeterFC. Our approach leverages a heterogeneous evidence graph, with words as nodes and thoughtfully designed edges representing different evidence properties. We perform information propagation via a relational
graph neural network, facilitating interactions between claims
and evidence. An attention-based method is utilized to integrate information, combined with a language model for generating predictions. We introduce a multitask loss function to
account for potential inaccuracies in evidence retrieval. Comprehensive experiments on the large fact checking dataset
FEVEROUS demonstrate the effectiveness of HeterFC. Code
will be released at: https://github.com/Deno-V/HeterFC.

Introduction
Fact checking, or fact verification, predicts claim veracity
using evidence. This task has practical applications in various domains like politics (Liu et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2022),
news media (Zellers et al. 2019), public health (Naeem and
Bhatti 2020; Krause et al. 2020), and science (Wright et al.
2022; Wadden et al. 2020), attracting extensive research.
Prior efforts predominantly address unstructured fact checking, handling evidence and claims as plain text (Thorne et al.
2018; Wang 2017; Xu et al. 2023). However, real-world
contexts often involve structured data like tables, creating
a pressing need for fact checking across unstructured and
structured information.
Fact checking mainly involves evidence retrieval and veracity reasoning, which are two independent tasks (Aly et al.
2021). The aim of evidence retrieval is to retrieve as much
the claim-related evidence (golden evidence) as possible; the
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

100

