The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identification for Tree-Shaped Structural Causal Models in Polynomial Time
Aaryan Gupta1 , Markus Bläser2
1

2

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
aaryanguptaxyz@gmail.com, mblaeser@cs.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

ω1,2

Linear structural causal models (SCMs) are used to express
and analyse the relationships between random variables. Direct causal effects are represented as directed edges and confounding factors as bidirected edges. Identifying the causal
parameters from correlations between the nodes is an open
problem in artificial intelligence. In this paper, we study
SCMs whose directed component forms a tree. Van der Zander et al. give a PSPACE-algorithm for the identification
problem in this case, which is a significant improvement
over the general Gröbner basis approach, which has doublyexponential time complexity in the number of structural parameters. However, they do not show that their algorithm is
complete. In this work, we present a randomized polynomialtime algorithm, which solves the identification problem for
tree-shaped SCMs. For every structural parameter, our algorithms decides whether it is generically identifiable, generically 2-identifiable, or generically unidentifiable. (No other
cases can occur.) In the first two cases, it provides one or two
fractional affine square root terms of polynomials (FASTPs)
for the corresponding parameter, respectively. In particular,
our algorithm is not only polynomial time, but also complete
for for tree-shaped SCMs.

0

λ0,1

1

λ1,2

3
2

Figure 1: SCM M1 , a
classical IV example

λ0,3

4
λ1,4

0

λ0,1

1

ω2,4
ω1,4
λ1,2

2

Figure 2: Tree-shaped SCM

More general, we write the coefficients of all directed
edges as a matrix Λ = (λi,j ) and the coefficients of all bidirected edges as Ω = (ωi,j ). Then the matrix Σ = (σi,j ) of
covariances between the variables Vi and Vj is given by
Σ = (I − Λ)−1 Ω(I − Λ)−T ,

(1)

see e.g. Drton (2018). The reverse problem, the identification of causal effects, is a major open problem. Given the
mixed graph and the matrix of covariances Σ, calculate the
matrix Λ. (By (1), this also identifies Ω.) We here deal with
what is called the identification problem: Is the number of
solutions for a particular λi,j finite and if yes, provide corresponding symbolic expressions for λi,j . If there is exactly
one solution for λi,j , we call λi,j identifiable, if there are k
solutions, we call it k-identifiable, and if there is an infinite
number of solutions, we call it unidentifiable.
There has been a considerable amount of research on
identification in linear SCMs in economics, statistics, and
artificial intelligence. Of particular interest here is the pioneering work by Pearl (2009) on the computational aspects
of identification and subsequent works. Most approaches are
based on instrumental variables (Bowden and Turkington
σ
λ λ1,2
= σ0,2
.
1990). In Figure 1, one can calculate λ1,2 = 0,1
λ0,1
0,1
V0 is called an instrumental variable (IV) in this case. Since
IVs are not complete, that is, not all identifiable parameters can be identified with IVs, more complex generalizations of IVs have been developed, for instance conditional
instrumental variables (Bowden and Turkington 1990; Pearl
2001; van der Zander, Textor, and Liśkiewicz 2015), instrumental sets (Brito and Pearl 2002a; Brito 2010; Brito and
Pearl 2002b; van der Zander and Liśkiewicz 2016), halftreks (Foygel, Draisma, and Drton 2012), auxiliary instrumental variables (Chen, Pearl, and Bareinboim 2015), determinantal instrumental variables (Weihs et al. 2018), instrumental cutsets (Kumor, Chen, and Bareinboim 2019), or

Introduction
Linear structural causal models (SCMs) model relationships
between random variables (Bollen 1989; Duncan 1975). We
are given random variables V0 , V1 , . . . , Vn , which depend
linearly on the other variables and
P an additional error term
ϵi , that is, we can write Vi =
j λj,i Vj + ϵi . The error
terms are normally distributed with zero mean and covariances between the terms given by some matrix Ω = (ωi,j ).
We consider only recursive models, i.e., for all j > i, we
have λj,i = 0. Such a model can be represented by a socalled mixed graph: The nodes 0, . . . , n correspond to the
variables V0 , . . . , Vn . Directed edges represent a linear influence λj,i of a parent node j on its child i. Bidirected edges
represent an additional correlation ωi,j ̸= 0 between the error terms.
Figure 1 shows a classical example of an SCM M1 . A
change of V0 by 1 implies a change of λ0,1 of V1 and a
change of λ01 λ12 of V2 . The covariance σ01 between V0 and
V1 is thus λ01 and between V0 and V2 , it is λ01 λ12 .
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20404

