The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GINN-LP: A Growing Interpretable Neural Network for Discovering Multivariate
Laurent Polynomial Equations
Nisal Ranasinghe1 , Damith Senanayake1 , Sachith Seneviratne1,2 , Malin Premaratne3 , Saman
Halgamuge1
1

AI, Optimization and Pattern Recognition Research Group, Dept. of Mechanical Eng., University of Melbourne, Australia
2
Melbourne School of Design, University of Melbourne, Australia
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering , Monash University, Australia
nsranasinghe@student.unimelb.edu.au, {damith.senanayake, sachith.seneviratne}@unimelb.edu.au,
malin.premaratne@monash.edu, saman@unimelb.edu.au
Phenomenon
Coulomb’s Law
Kinetic Energy
Potential Energy (Gravity)

Abstract
Traditional machine learning is generally treated as a blackbox optimization problem and does not typically produce interpretable functions that connect inputs and outputs. However, the ability to discover such interpretable functions is desirable. In this work, we propose GINN-LP, an interpretable
neural network to discover the form and coefficients of the
underlying equation of a dataset, when the equation is assumed to take the form of a multivariate Laurent Polynomial.
This is facilitated by a new type of interpretable neural network block, named the “power-term approximator block”,
consisting of logarithmic and exponential activation functions. GINN-LP is end-to-end differentiable, making it possible to use backpropagation for training. We propose a neural
network growth strategy that will enable finding the suitable
number of terms in the Laurent polynomial that represents the
data, along with sparsity regularization to promote the discovery of concise equations. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first model that can discover arbitrary multivariate Laurent polynomial terms without any prior information
on the order. Our approach is first evaluated on a subset of
data used in SRBench, a benchmark for symbolic regression.
We first show that GINN-LP outperforms the state-of-the-art
symbolic regression methods on datasets generated using 48
real-world equations in the form of multivariate Laurent polynomials. Next, we propose an ensemble method that combines our method with a high-performing symbolic regression method, enabling us to discover non-Laurent polynomial equations. We achieve state-of-the-art results in equation
discovery, showing an absolute improvement of 7.1% over
the best contender, by applying this ensemble method to 113
datasets within SRBench with known ground-truth equations.

Equation
1 q1 q2
Ef = 4πϵ
r2
2
2
K=m
(u
+
v
+ w2 )
2
1
U = Gm1 m2 ( r2 − r11 )

Table 1: Three example equations as multivariate LPs and
their relevant phenomena

In this work, we focus on the data-driven discovery of
equations that take the form of multivariate Laurent polynomials (LP). LPs produce equations important in physics and
real-world systems, with some examples shown in Table 1.
More formally, we aim to discover a multivariate LP that
can accurately map features X ∈ Rd to a target y ∈ R using a dataset of paired samples for X and y. An exhaustive
search is tractable to solve this problem when the search
space is small but quickly becomes intractable as the number
of variables and possible terms increases, as demonstrated in
the appendix1 .
In this work, we present GINN-LP, a Growing Interpretable Neural Network for discovering multivariate Laurent Polynomials, which can efficiently discover the form
and coefficients of a multivariate LP equation that describes
a given dataset, without explicitly searching through the
equation space.
The main contributions of this work are as follows.
• A new type of interpretable neural network (NN) block
named the “power-term approximator” (PTA).
• GINN-LP: An interpretable neural network architecture
that uses multiple PTA blocks to discover multivariate
LPs using observed data.
• A neural network growth strategy allowing the automatic
discovery of the number of terms in the underlying polynomial while reducing overfitting and training time.
• A model training strategy that can effectively train the
interpretable neural network and decide the best tradeoff between accuracy and model simplicity.

Introduction
Although supervised machine learning (ML) can create arbitrary mappings between a large number of input variables
and target variables, typically, there is no ability to discover
an interpretable mathematical expression between the two
variable spaces. However, in cases where the recovery of an
underlying governing equation is required, this lack of interpretability is an obstacle. Interpretable machine learning has
the potential to harness data to discover underlying equations that govern them.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14776

Appendix available in https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10913

