The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Automatic Radiology Reports Generation via
Memory Alignment Network
Hongyu Shen1 , Mingtao Pei1 , Juncai Liu2 , Zhaoxing Tian3
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
Shandong University of Science and Technology
3
Beijing Jishuitan Hospital
{hyshen,peimt}@bit.edu.cn, 202282080086@sdust.edu.cn, tjtzx@126.com
2

Abstract

Xing 2018; You et al. 2021). Although these direct alignment methods are intuitive, effectiveness is limited not only
by the classification accuracy, but also by the limited information that disease labels can provide. Later, Chen et al. propose to use the a Cross-modal Memory Matrix (CMM) as an
alignment medium to align the image and text features. As
shown in Figure 1 (a), they first extract visual features from
images and map words to word embeddings, then align textual and visual features by re-mapping them to a same vector
space constructed by the Memory Matrix (M ). The M is designed to store cross-modal information to assist the alignment. However they couple the representation and alignment
process together, which inevitably brings extra work to M .
As a result, the alignment module is unable to take advantage of the knowledge learned by the generator and it is also
more difficult to adapt to the generator, which may reduce
the alignment effect.
To address the above-mentioned problems, we propose
the Memory Alignment (MA) module, a simpler alignment
method. As shown in Figure 1 (b), first we embed the visual
features into the same vector space of the word embedding
to get the visual embeddings, then we bring the visual and
word embedding closer by the memory alignment embedding got from the MA module. In our approach, M only
needs to focus on how to align the visual features with the
textual features, without to learn how to represent them. Another advantage is that the memory alignment embedding
only needs to be calculated once during the whole inference
process, while the CMN needs to remap each newly generated word. Notably, we include the positional embeddings
of the visual features as part of the MA module input to provide some cross-modal information. These inputs may act
like some common sense for the alignment module, such as
what the visual feature here usually to represent. We argue
this may improve the robustness of the alignment model, and
can make our alignment more effective and work better with
the report generator.
Specially, we first extract visual features by a pretrained
CNN, then embed them into the visual embeddings. Afterward, we combine the visual embeddings with their respective positional embeddings as a query, and utilize a memory matrix storing cross-modal knowledge as key and value,
to get the memory alignment embeddings through the MA
module. In the end, we combine these input embeddings

The automatic generation of radiology reports is of great significance, which can reduce the workload of doctors and improve the accuracy and reliability of medical diagnosis and
treatment, and has attracted wide attention in recent years.
Cross-modal mapping between images and text, a key component of generating high-quality reports, is challenging due
to the lack of corresponding annotations. Despite its importance, previous studies have often overlooked it or lacked adequate designs for this crucial component. In this paper, we
propose a method with memory alignment embedding to assist the model in aligning visual and textual features to generate a coherent and informative report. Specifically, we first
get the memory alignment embedding by querying the memory matrix, where the query is derived from a combination of
the visual features and their corresponding positional embeddings. Then the alignment between the visual and textual features can be guided by the memory alignment embedding during the generation process. The comparison experiments with
other alignment methods show that the proposed alignment
method is less costly and more effective. The proposed approach achieves better performance than state-of-the-art approaches on two public datasets IU X-Ray and MIMIC-CXR,
which further demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
alignment method.

Introduction
In medical practice, analyzing radiographic images and writing corresponding radiology reports is important. Automatically generating radiology report based on medical images
can not only alleviate the burden on doctors, but also help
those who do not have much experience, even playing a role
in future home medical care. Up to now, there have been
many methods for generating reports in this field (Jing, Xie,
and Xing 2018; Chen et al. 2020, 2021; Yan and Pei 2022;
Yang et al. 2023). Cross-modal mapping between images
and texts plays an important role in generating high-quality
reports, but due to lack of annotations correspondence between images and texts, it is hard to directly align them.
As an alternative, some methods choose to align the image
features with the predicted disease labels1 (Jing, Xie, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
These disease labels were predicted by the CheXpert (Irvin
et al. 2019), which is designed for the MIMIC-CXR.

4776

