The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Toxic Content Detection by Bootstrapping and Distilling
Large Language Models
Jiang Zhang1 * , Qiong Wu2 , Yiming Xu2 , Cheng Cao2 , Zheng Du2 , Konstantinos Psounis1
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2
Amazon.com, Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA
{jiangzha,kpsounis}@usc.edu, {qionggwu,ymxu,chengcao,zhengdu}@amazon.com

Abstract

on a task-specific dataset achieve the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance (Caselli et al. 2020; Kim, Park, and Han 2022).
However, existing supervised learning ML solutions face
three challenges. First, they require training data with labels, which are non-trivial to obtain for toxic content detection tasks due to the lack of standard definitions, especially
for implicit toxic content. Second, the fine-tuned LMs may
overfit the training dataset, which limits the transferability to
other datasets. Lastly, they typically can only predict binary
labels without detailed reasoning.
To handle the above challenges, the recently emerging
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been leveraged to
detect toxic content (Wang and Chang 2022; Zhang et al.
2023), due to their superior zero-shot and few-shot incontext learning performance and transferability. Existing
works on LLMs for toxic content detection focus on designing novel prompting approaches to enhance the performance
of LLMs. However, their performance relies heavily on the
quality of prompts, which are non-trivial to design. Moreover, deploying LLMs for toxic content detection in production can incur both high run-time cost and high latency, especially when the number of tokens in the prompt is large
(e.g. for in-context few-shot learning).
Motivated by the above, in this paper, we propose BDLLM, a novel and efficient approach to Bootstrapping and
Distilling LLMs for toxic content detection (as shown in
Figure 1). We first design a novel prompting approach called
Decision-Tree-of-Thought (DToT) to improve the zero-shot
and few-shot in-context learning performance of LLMs as
well as extract better rationales. At a high level, DToT works
by iteratively selecting more fine-grained context to reprompt LLMs whenever they have low-confident answers. It
automatically decides when to select more fine-grained context for re-prompting and which type of fine-grained context
should be selected. Second, we propose to fine-tune a student LM with smaller model size to predict both labels and
rationales extracted via DToT.
We evaluate the proposed approach on three public
datasets and one Amazon internal dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that employing DToT prompting consistently leads to improved zero-shot and few-shot in-context
learning performance on all datasets, by up to 4.6% higher
accuracy. Furthermore, we demonstrate that fine-tuning student LMs with DToT-extracted rationales results in up

Toxic content detection is crucial for online services to remove inappropriate content that violates community standards. To automate the detection process, prior works have
proposed varieties of machine learning (ML) approaches
to train Language Models (LMs) for toxic content detection. However, both their accuracy and transferability
across datasets are limited. Recently, Large Language Models
(LLMs) have shown promise in toxic content detection due to
their superior zero-shot and few-shot in-context learning ability as well as broad transferability on ML tasks. However,
efficiently designing prompts for LLMs remains challenging. Moreover, the high run-time cost of LLMs may hinder
their deployments in production. To address these challenges,
in this work, we propose BD-LLM, a novel and efficient
approach to Bootstrapping and Distilling LLMs for toxic
content detection. Specifically, we design a novel prompting
method named Decision-Tree-of-Thought (DToT) to bootstrap LLMs’ detection performance and extract high-quality
rationales. DToT can automatically select more fine-grained
context to re-prompt LLMs when their responses lack confidence. Additionally, we use the rationales extracted via DToT
to fine-tune student LMs. Our experimental results on various
datasets demonstrate that DToT can improve the accuracy of
LLMs by up to 4.6%. Furthermore, student LMs fine-tuned
with rationales extracted via DToT outperform baselines on
all datasets with up to 16.9% accuracy improvement, while
being more than 60× smaller than conventional LLMs. Finally, we observe that student LMs fine-tuned with rationales
exhibit better cross-dataset transferability.

Introduction
Toxic content detection is important for online services to
protect users from harmful and offensive content, ensuring
a safer and more positive user experience. Common toxic
content categories include hate speech, biased content, sexual content, violent content, bullying content, etc. Due to the
massive amount of content on the Internet, it is impractical
to manually check the toxicity of each content. Hence, machine learning (ML) solutions based on supervised learning
have been widely applied to automate the toxic content detection process, where Language Models (LMs) fine-tuned
* This work was done when the author was an intern at Amazon.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21779

