The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Pivot as a Smart Expert
Tianhao Liu1 , Shanwen Pu1 , Dongdong Ge1 , Yinyu Ye2
1

Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
Stanford University
liu.tianhao@163.sufe.edu.cn, 2019212802@live.sufe.edu.cn, ge.dongdong@mail.shufe.edu.cn,
yyye@stanford.edu

Abstract

high accuracy and reliability, the simplex methods and IPMs
are preferred and become two main classes of algorithms implemented in commercial solvers.
The simplex methods start from a basic solution and improve objective or feasibility by reaching a certain adjacent
basic solution, which is called the pivot. The criterion for
switching from the current basic solution to its neighbor is
called the pivot rule. Different pivot rules greatly affect the
performance of the simplex methods, so designing a smart
pivot rule is one of the most significant simplex’s tasks.
From the theoretical aspect, whether there exists a strongly
polynomial bound for the length of the pivot path, which represents the iteration number of the simplex methods, attracts
much research interest but is still an open problem.
Instead of moving between vertices, IPMs keep an interior
point and walk along a central path approaching the optimal
solution (Karmarkar 1984). In practice, IPMs usually yield
a dense primal-dual approximate solution, from which modern commercial solvers tend to conduct a crossover and run
simplex methods for a sparse exact solution.
In this paper, we focus on designing smart pivot rules for
the primal simplex method. It is believed that our study can
be easily migrated to other types of simplex methods. The
smart pivot rules are expected to generate short pivot paths
for different kinds of LP instances in different scales and
should not run intolerably slow.

Linear programming has been practically solved mainly by
simplex and interior point methods. Compared with the
weakly polynomial complexity obtained by the interior point
methods, the existence of strongly polynomial bounds for the
length of the pivot path generated by the simplex methods remains a mystery. In this paper, we propose two novel pivot
experts that leverage both global and local information of the
linear programming instances for the primal simplex method
and show their excellent performance numerically. The experts can be regarded as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of classical pivot rules, although they are hard to
directly implement. To tackle this challenge, we employ a
graph convolutional neural network model, trained via imitation learning, to mimic the behavior of the pivot expert. Our
pivot rule, learned empirically, displays a significant advantage over conventional methods in various linear programming problems, as demonstrated through a series of rigorous
experiments.

1

Introduction

Linear programming (LP) is among the most fundamental
problems and has been well-studied in the field of optimization. LP is not only directly used across various industries
but has also become an important cornerstone of mixed integer programming (MIP) and sequential linear programming
(SLP) methods for solving nonlinear programming (NLP).
Nowadays, most commercial (Ge et al. 2023; Gurobi Optimization, LLC 2023; Nickel et al. 2022; Xpress 2014)
and open-source (Huangfu and Hall 2018; Achterberg 2009)
solvers have implemented fast and stable LP solvers (software for solving LP) and constantly achieve new advancements for large-scale LP problems.
A general LP formulation solves the problem with only a
linear objective function and linear constraints. It is wellknown that these linear constraints geometrically form a
polyhedron and if the optimal solution exists, it exists in
one of the vertices which belong to basic solutions from
an algebra point of view. The state-of-the-art methods for
LP include the simplex methods, the interior-point methods (IPMs), and some recently developed first-order methods (FOMs) (Applegate et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2022). For

Our contribution We propose a class of novel pivot experts that can outperform several classical and popular pivot
rules. To modify the experts for practical use, we also apply
machine learning methods to imitate the pivot expert. Our
contribution can be summarized as follows.
• First, we design novel pivot experts. Compared with classical pivot rules that only utilize local information, we
consider a smart pivot rule should be able to combine
global and local information together. Based on this idea,
two pivot experts are proposed and can generate significantly shorter pivot paths than classical pivot candidates
in a series of experiments. The pivot paths generated by
experts are also analyzed on Klee-Minty variants.
• Second, to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the
first to combine imitation learning with dynamic pivot for
general LP of different scales. Incorporating a graph convolutional neural network (GCNN) model, our learned

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8073

