The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Online Sensitivity Optimization in Differentially Private Learning
Filippo Galli1,4 , Catuscia Palamidessi2,3 , Tommaso Cucinotta4
1

Scuola Normale Superiore
INRIA, Palaiseau, France
3
École Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
4
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy
filippo.galli@sns.it, catuscia@lix.polytechnique.fr, tommaso.cucinotta@santannapisa.it
2

Abstract

user in the dataset. In the context of gradient-based learning,
this is achieved by introducing a parameter C called the clipping threshold (Abadi et al. 2016). This parameter controls
the magnitude of gradients from each user (or sample) before they are averaged with contributions from other users.
Subsequently, the result undergoes a process of differential
privacy sanitization, which involves the addition of random
Gaussian noise proportional to the value of C.
The choice of the clipping threshold C is crucial: on the
one hand, large values introduce noise levels that may slow
down or hinder the optimization altogether; on the other
hand, small values introduce a bias in the average clipped
gradient with respect to the true average gradient and may
leave the optimization stuck in bad local minima. Figure
1 exemplifies the issue. Note that the clipping bias is not
only directed toward zero (as bounding the 2-norm may lead
to believe), but depends, in general, on the distribution of
the per-sample gradients around the expectation (Chen, Wu,
and Hong 2020). Achieving an optimal trade-off remains
an ongoing challenge. Historically, researchers have treated
the clipping threshold as a parameter to be optimized, often through a grid or random search, in order to assess the
performance of privacy preserving models in the ideal conditions in which an oracle provides the optimal values for
the hyperparameters. However, it is worth noting that every
additional gradient-query to the dataset for optimization purposes introduces a certain degree of privacy leakage. Of late
though, the implications of not accounting for privacy leakage over multiple runs of a grid search have drawn more attention, leading to different accounting strategies (Papernot
and Steinke 2022; Mohapatra et al. 2022; Liu and Talwar
2019). The inherent challenges of increased privacy leakage
and computational overhead resulting from extensive hyperparameter searches persist, necessitating further innovations
to encourage broader adoption of differentially private machine learning techniques. Therefore, we set out to find a
strategy for the online optimization of the clipping threshold
that is privacy preserving and computationally inexpensive,
while maintaining comparable or better performance on a
set of tasks, datasets, and model architectures.
Our contributions: i) We investigate the sensitivity tradeoff in differentially private learning in terms of cosine similarity between the sanitized and true gradients, showing that
at every iteration it is possible to determine a fairly promi-

Training differentially private machine learning models requires constraining an individual’s contribution to the optimization process. This is achieved by clipping the 2-norm of
their gradient at a predetermined threshold prior to averaging and batch sanitization. This selection adversely influences
optimization in two opposing ways: it either exacerbates the
bias due to excessive clipping at lower values, or augments
sanitization noise at higher values. The choice significantly
hinges on factors such as the dataset, model architecture, and
even varies within the same optimization, demanding meticulous tuning usually accomplished through a grid search. In
order to circumvent the privacy expenses incurred in hyperparameter tuning, we present a novel approach to dynamically optimize the clipping threshold. We treat this threshold
as an additional learnable parameter, establishing a clean relationship between the threshold and the cost function. This
allows us to optimize the former with gradient descent, with
minimal repercussions on the overall privacy analysis. Our
method is thoroughly assessed against alternative fixed and
adaptive strategies across diverse datasets, tasks, model dimensions, and privacy levels. Our results indicate that it performs comparably or better in the evaluated scenarios, given
the same privacy requirements.

Introduction
The widespread adoption of machine learning techniques
has led to increased concerns about user privacy. Users who
share their data with service providers are becoming more
cautious due to the exposure of various privacy attacks,
observed in both academic and industrial contexts (Carlini
et al. 2021, 2023; Papernot et al. 2018). As a result, there is
a growing effort to enhance training methods that can provide strong and quantifiable privacy guarantees.
In the privacy-preserving machine learning community,
differential privacy (Dwork 2006) has emerged as the predominant framework for defining privacy requirements and
strategies. Essentially, training a model with differential privacy requires bounding the contribution of a single individual to the overall procedure, to guarantee that the trained
model will be probabilistically indistinguishable compared
to the same model trained without including any one specific
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12109

