The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Wikiformer: Pre-training with Structured Information of Wikipedia for Ad-Hoc
Retrieval
Weihang Su1 * , Qingyao Ai2† , Xiangsheng Li2 , Jia Chen2 , Yiqun Liu2 , Xiaolong Wu3 , Shengluan
Hou3
1

Quan Cheng Laboratory & DCST, Tsinghua University & Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
2
DCST, Tsinghua University & Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Huawei Poisson Lab
Abstract

search(Ma et al. 2021a,d,b; Chang et al. 2020). These studies have shown promising results in conducting IR-specific
pre-trained models for downstream tasks.
As one of the largest online knowledge bases, Wikipedia
has been widely used as the pre-training corpus. In previous works, IR researchers have devised several pre-training
tasks by leveraging the rich textual contents in Wikipedia.
For example, PROP(Ma et al. 2021a) utilizes pure texts in
Wikipedia, while HARP(Ma et al. 2021d) utilizes hyperlinks
and anchor texts in the web pages. However there’s more
rich knowledge brought by the structured information of
Wikipedia, which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been
exploited in existing studies. For example, the abstract section of Wikipedia is the summarization of an article. When
the user’s query is the title of an article, the abstract section
is more likely to match the user’s information needs compared to other sections within the same article. In addition,
every article on Wikipedia has a hierarchical heading (multilevel title) structure, the subtitle is always the representative
words or summarization of the corresponding section. Besides, different subsections of the same section share similar
ideas. The relationship between different articles also contains rich information, e.g., the See Also section links one
article to other articles that contain additional or similar information. Whether this structured knowledge could benefit
the pre-trained models for IR remains mostly unknown.
To better incorporate the knowledge of Wikipedia into
the pre-training stage, we propose a framework named
Wikiformer that fully utilizes the structured information
of Wikipedia in the pre-training stage. Wikiformer mainly
includes four pre-training tasks: 1) Simulated Re-ranking
(SRR), 2) Representative Words Identification (RWI), 3)
Abstract Texts Identification (ATI), and 4) Long Texts
Matching (LTM). These tasks use the title, subtitles, abstract, hyperlinks, and heading hierarchies to construct
pseudo query-document pairs for the pre-training of the retrieval model. Each of them captures the needs of retrieval
and ranking in different granularities from different angles.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the above pre-training tasks,
we test the performance of our model on several IR benchmarks in zero-shot and fine-tuning settings. In the zero-shot
setting, no supervised data is used for fine-tuning. Since
the fine-tuning process gradually updates the parameters of
PLMs, zero-shot performance is a more direct metric to eval-

With the development of deep learning and natural language processing techniques, pre-trained language models
have been widely used to solve information retrieval (IR)
problems. Benefiting from the pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm, these models achieve state-of-the-art performance.
In previous works, plain texts in Wikipedia have been widely
used in the pre-training stage. However, the rich structured
information in Wikipedia, such as the titles, abstracts, hierarchical heading (multi-level title) structure, relationship between articles, references, hyperlink structures, and the writing organizations, has not been fully explored. In this paper, we devise four pre-training objectives tailored for IR
tasks based on the structured knowledge of Wikipedia. Compared to existing pre-training methods, our approach can
better capture the semantic knowledge in the training corpus by leveraging the human-edited structured data from
Wikipedia. Experimental results on multiple IR benchmark
datasets show the superior performance of our model in
both zero-shot and fine-tuning settings compared to existing strong retrieval baselines. Besides, experimental results
in biomedical and legal domains demonstrate that our approach achieves better performance in vertical domains compared to previous models, especially in scenarios where long
text similarity matching is needed. The code is available at
https://github.com/oneal2000/Wikiformer.

Introduction
Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) have achieved great
success in the field of Natural Language Processing
(NLP)(Devlin et al. 2018; Vaswani et al. 2017; Yang et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2019; Yasunaga, Leskovec, and Liang 2022).
These models are firstly pre-trained on a large-scale unlabeled text corpus and then fine-tuned on certain downstream
tasks. The pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm have
achieved state-of-the-art performance in many downstream
NLP tasks. Recently, it has also attracted the attention of the
Information Retrieval (IR) community. Besides directly applying PLMs to solve downstream IR tasks(Nogueira and
Cho 2019), IR researchers have also developed several pretraining methods tailored for IR tasks, especially ad-hoc
* First Author: swh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
†

Corresponding Author: aiqy@tsinghua.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19026

