The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalisation through Negation and Predicate Invention
David M. Cerna1 , Andrew Cropper2
1

Czech Academy of Sciences Institute of Computer Science (CAS ICS), Prague, Czechia
2
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
dcerna@cs.cas.cz, andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

from a small number of examples. For instance, an ILP system could learn the following hypothesis (a set of logical
rules) from the examples in Figure 1:
{ f(S) ← cone(S,A),red(A),cone(S,B),red(B),all diff(A,B) }
This hypothesis says that the relation f holds for the state
S when there are two distinct red cones A and B, i.e. this
hypothesis says there are two red cones.

The ability to generalise from a small number of examples
is a fundamental challenge in machine learning. To tackle
this challenge, we introduce an inductive logic programming
(ILP) approach that combines negation and predicate invention. Combining these two features allows an ILP system to
generalise better by learning rules with universally quantified
body-only variables. We implement our idea in N OPI, which
can learn normal logic programs with predicate invention,
including Datalog programs with stratified negation. Our experimental results on multiple domains show that our approach
can improve predictive accuracies and learning times.

Introduction

Figure 2: Additional Zendo examples.

Zendo is a game where one player, the teacher, creates a
hidden rule for structures. The other players, the students,
aim to discover the rule by building structures. The teacher
provides feedback by marking which structures follow or
break the rule without further explanation. The students continue to guess the rule. The first student to correctly guess
the rule wins. For instance, consider the examples shown in
Figure 1. A possible rule for these examples is “there are two
red cones”.

Figure 1: Positive (E+ ) and negative (E− ) Zendo examples.
Suppose we want to use machine learning to play Zendo, i.e.
to learn rules from examples. Then we need an approach that
can (i) learn explainable rules, and (ii) generalise from a small
number of examples. Although crucial for many problems,
these requirements are difficult for standard machine learning
techniques (Cropper et al. 2022).
Inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1991) is
a form of machine learning that can learn explainable rules
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Suppose we are given the two new examples shown in Figure
2. Our previous hypothesis does not correctly explain the new
examples as it entails the new negative example. To correctly
explain all the examples, we need a disjunctive hypothesis
that says “[there are exactly two red cones] or [there are
exactly three red cones]”. Given a new positive example with
four red cones and a negative example with three red and one
green cone, we would need to learn yet another rule that says
“there are exactly four red cones”.
As is hopefully clear, we would struggle to generalise
beyond the training examples using this approach because
we need to learn a rule for each number of cones. Rather than
learn a rule for each number of cones, we would ideally learn
a single rule that says “all the cones are red”. However, most
ILP approaches struggle to learn rules of this form because
they only learn Datalog or definite programs and thus only
learn rules with existentially quantified body-only variables
(Apt and Blair 1991; Dantsin et al. 2001).
To overcome this limitation, we combine negation as failure (NAF) (Clark 1977) and predicate invention (PI) (Stahl
1995) to learn rules with universally quantified body-only
variables. The main reason to combine NAF and PI is that
many concepts can only be expressed in this more expressive
language (Stahl 1995; Dantsin et al. 2001). For instance, for
the Zendo scenario, our approach, which combines negation
and PI, learns the hypothesis:


f(S) ← scene(S), not inv1 (S)
inv1 (S) ← cone(S,P), not red(P)

10467

