The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Online Boosting Adaptive Learning under Concept Drift
for Multistream Classification
En Yu, Jie Lu* , Bin Zhang, Guangquan Zhang
Decision Systems and e-Service Intelligence Laboratory, Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute (AAII),
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
En.Yu@student.uts.edu.au; {Jie.Lu, Bin.Zhang, Guangquan.Zhang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract

To date, prior studies have provided empirical evidence of
the efficacy of concept drift adaptation methods in effectively addressing data streams with dynamic distributions. It
is worth noting that the majority of existing techniques have
been tailored specifically for a single stream with delayed labels (Yu et al. 2022b; Song et al. 2021b). However, it is common to encounter scenarios where multiple data streams are
generated simultaneously in real-world intelligent systems.
For example, data samples continuously stream from sensors
in manufacturing systems. These data streams, despite being
associated with the same task, often exhibit distinct distributions due to varying data sources (Zhou et al. 2023a). In addition, while data collection is straightforward, the labeling
process incurs high time and labor costs, leading to the hybrid multiple streams where massive labeled and unlabeled
streams arrive simultaneously (Yu et al. 2022a).
To tackle this scenario, multistream classification has
been proposed, in which a model can be flexibly transferred
from labeled source streams to the unlabeled target stream
while employing online detection and adaptation working
principles. This not only enables the model to adapt to
new and unlabeled data streams but also mitigates the expenses and logistical challenges. The multistream classification problem features three major challenges that have to
be tackled simultaneously: 1) Scarcity of labels: this arises
from the absence of labels specifically for the target stream,
while the source streams possess labeled data; 2) Covariate
shift: this implies that any two data streams exhibit distinct
distributions, whether they are different source streams or
a source stream and a target stream; and 3) Asynchronous
drift: the source and target streams are susceptible to independent concept drift, which occurs at varying time periods
and results in unique effects on the model performance.
In recent years, several approaches have been proposed to
address the multistream classification problem by using online domain adaptation and drift handling techniques (Chandra et al. 2016; Haque et al. 2017; Pratama et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2021). However, many of these methods have primarily focused on the single-source stream, potentially impeding model performance due to limitations in the quality of
the source data. Furthermore, such single-source-based approaches may be prone to overfitting issues. Accordingly,
the multi-source configuration is introduced, which enables
the acquisition of supplementary information from different

Multistream classification poses significant challenges due to
the necessity for rapid adaptation in dynamic streaming processes with concept drift. Despite the growing research outcomes in this area, there has been a notable oversight regarding the temporal dynamic relationships between these
streams, leading to the issue of negative transfer arising from
irrelevant data. In this paper, we propose a novel Online
Boosting Adaptive Learning (OBAL) method that effectively
addresses this limitation by adaptively learning the dynamic
correlation among different streams. Specifically, OBAL operates in a dual-phase mechanism, in the first of which we
design an Adaptive COvariate Shift Adaptation (AdaCOSA)
algorithm to construct an initialized ensemble model using
archived data from various source streams, thus mitigating the
covariate shift while learning the dynamic correlations via an
adaptive re-weighting strategy. During the online process, we
employ a Gaussian Mixture Model-based weighting mechanism, which is seamlessly integrated with the acquired correlations via AdaCOSA to effectively handle asynchronous
drift. This approach significantly improves the predictive performance and stability of the target stream. We conduct comprehensive experiments on several synthetic and real-world
data streams, encompassing various drifting scenarios and
types. The results clearly demonstrate that OBAL achieves
remarkable advancements in addressing multistream classification problems by effectively leveraging positive knowledge
derived from multiple sources.

Introduction
In various real-world scenarios, such as auto-driving systems, weather forecasts, and industrial production, data is
continuously and sequentially generated over time, which
is referred to as data streams or streaming data (Lu et al.
2018; Zhou et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2022a). These data
streams are susceptible to changes in their underlying distribution, resulting in concept drift. Consequently, classifiers
trained on historical data may fail to predict subsequent samples, leading to a performance decrease (Li et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2023). Thus, it attracts many researchers to develop
efficient learning techniques capable of analyzing streaming data with concept drift in non-stationary environments.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16522

