The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AvatarVerse: High-Quality & Stable 3D Avatar Creation from Text and Pose
Huichao Zhang1 * , Bowen Chen1 * , Hao Yang1 , Liao Qu1, 2 , Xu Wang1
Li Chen1 , Chao Long1 , Feida Zhu1 , Daniel Du1 , Min Zheng1
1

ByteDance, Beijing, China.
Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA
{zhanghuichao.hc, chenbowen.cbw, wangxu.ailab, chenli.phd, longchao, zhufeida, dukang.daniel,
zhengmin.666}@bytedance.com, liaoq@andrew.cmu.edu, yanghao.alexis@foxmail.com
2

Abstract

Xiu et al. 2022). These methods primarily rely on limited
visual priors from videos or reference images, leading to
constrained ability to generate creative avatars with complex
text prompts. Diffusion models has been applied to various
realms (Ho et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023c; Ruan et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2023b; Nie et al. 2022) in recent years. Specifically,
in 2D image generation, they (Rombach et al. 2021; Zhang
and Agrawala 2023; Saharia et al. 2022) illustrate considerable creativity, primarily due to the availability of large-scale
text-image pairs. Nevertheless, the limited diversity of 3D
models present challenges to effectively training a 3D diffusion model. Several studies (Poole et al. 2022; Cao et al.
2023; Huang et al. 2023; Kolotouros et al. 2023) have investigated the use of pre-trained text-image diffusion models to optimize Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al. 2020) for generating high-fidelity 3D models. Yet, stable creation of high-quality 3D avatars exhibiting various
poses, appearances, and shapes remains a difficult task. Employing common score distillation sampling (SDS) (Poole
et al. 2022) to guide NeRF optimization without additional
control tends to bring in the Janus (multi-face) problem. The
avatars produced by current approaches tend to exhibit noticeable blurriness and coarseness, leading to the absence of
high-resolution local texture details, accessories, and other
relevant features.
To cope with these weaknesses, we propose AvatarVerse,
a novel framework designed for generating high-quality and
stable 3D avatars from textual descriptions and pose guidances. We first train a new ControlNet with human DensePose condition (Güler, Neverova, and Kokkinos 2018) over
800K images. SDS loss conditinal on the 2D DensePose signal is then implemented on top of the ControlNet. Through
this way, we obtain precise view correspondence between
different 2D views as well as between every 2D view and
the 3D space. Our approach not only enables pose control of
the generated avatars, but also eliminates the Janus Problem
suffered by most existing methods. It thus ensures a more
stable and view-consistent avatar creation process. Additionally, benefiting from the accurate and flexible supervision
signals provided by DensePose, the generated avatars can be
highly aligned with the joints of the SMPL model, enabling
simple and effective skeletal binding and control.
While relying solely on DensePose-conditioned ControlNet may result in local artifacts and blurry details, we in-

Creating expressive, diverse and high-quality 3D avatars from
highly customized text descriptions and pose guidance is a
challenging task, due to the intricacy of modeling and texturing in 3D that ensure details and various styles (realistic,
fictional, etc). We present AvatarVerse, a stable pipeline for
generating expressive high-quality 3D avatars from nothing
but text descriptions and pose guidance. In specific, we introduce a 2D diffusion model conditioned on DensePose signal to establish 3D pose control of avatars through 2D images, which enhances view consistency from partially observed scenarios. It addresses the infamous Janus Problem
and significantly stablizes the generation process. Moreover,
we propose a progressive high-resolution 3D synthesis strategy, which obtains substantial improvement over the quality
of the created 3D avatars. To this end, the proposed AvatarVerse pipeline achieves zero-shot 3D modeling of 3D avatars
that are not only more expressive, but also in higher quality
and fidelity than previous works. Rigorous qualitative evaluations and user studies showcase AvatarVerse’s superiority in
synthesizing high-fidelity 3D avatars, leading to a new standard in high-quality and stable 3D avatar creation. Our project
page is: https://avatarverse3d.github.io/ .

1

Introduction

The creation of high-quality 3D avatars has garnered significant interest due to their widespread applications in domains such as game production, social media and communication, augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR), and
human-computer interaction. Traditional manual construction of these intricate 3D models is a labor-intensive and
time-consuming process, requiring thousands of hours from
skilled artists possessing extensive aesthetic and 3D modeling expertise. Consequently, automating the generation of
high-quality 3D avatars using only natural language descriptions holds great research prospects with the potential to
save resources, which is also the goal of our work.
Recently, great efforts have been made in reconstructing
high-fidelity 3D avatars from multi-view videos (Jiang et al.
2022; Li et al. 2023d; Zheng et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a;
Isik et al. 2023) or reference images (Wang et al. 2021;
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7124

