The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SocialCVAE: Predicting Pedestrian Trajectory via Interaction Conditioned
Latents
Wei Xiang1 * , Haoteng Yin2 * , He Wang3 , Xiaogang Jin1†
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
3
Department of Computer Science, University College London
xiangwvivi@gmail.com, yinht@purdue.edu, he wang@ucl.ac.uk, jin@cad.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2017). These models are explainable but with lower predictive accuracy, as they cannot fit observed data precisely.
In contrast, various methods based on deep neural nets
have been proposed with social interaction modeling by employing social pooling mechanism (Alahi et al. 2016; Gupta
et al. 2018), graph-based modeling (Mohamed et al. 2020;
Bae and Jeon 2021), and attention mechanism (Mangalam
et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2021; Tsao et al. 2022). While they
achieve expressive power and generalization ability, their
black-box nature makes the learned model less interpretable
to human understanding. It remains a challenge to explore
the trade-off between model explainability and prediction
capability. Recent research effort has been focused on exploring the aforementioned trade-off by designing hybrid
models that combine deep neural nets with explainable interaction (Kothari, Sifringer, and Alahi 2021; Yue, Manocha,
and Wang 2022). However, their prediction accuracy suffers
from the deterministic nature of the physics-driven behaviors (Yue, Manocha, and Wang 2023).
To overcome the challenges while retaining the advantages of hybrid methods, we propose SocialCVAE, a
new hybrid model for pedestrian trajectory prediction that
combines an energy-based interaction model for socially
explainable interaction anticipations with an interactionconditioned CVAE for multimodal prediction. Fig. 1 illustrates the framework of our method. SocialCVAE takes advantage of the data-driven optimization model (Xiang et al.
2023) to quantify the interaction energy cost (i.e., repulsion
intensity) of the temporal coarse predictions and explicitly
represent the interaction energies into the local energy map.
Using the CVAE model conditioned on the interaction energy map, SocialCVAE learns socially reasonable residuals
for the temporal motion decisions. Similar to the previous
methods (Zhou et al. 2021; Yue, Manocha, and Wang 2022)
that achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, we employ the recursive prediction scheme to update future trajectories step by step with the input trajectories at each step
including the updated trajectories.
We conduct extensive experiments on two popular benchmark datasets (ETH-UCY (Pellegrini et al. 2009; Lerner,
Chrysanthou, and Lischinski 2007) and SDD (Robicquet
et al. 2016)), and demonstrate SocialCVAE’s superiority
over existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of prediction
accuracy. Furthermore, our results highlight the effective-

Pedestrian trajectory prediction is the key technology in many
applications for providing insights into human behavior and
anticipating human future motions. Most existing empirical
models are explicitly formulated by observed human behaviors using explicable mathematical terms with a deterministic
nature, while recent work has focused on developing hybrid
models combined with learning-based techniques for powerful expressiveness while maintaining explainability. However, the deterministic nature of the learned steering behaviors from the empirical models limits the models’ practical
performance. To address this issue, this work proposes the
social conditional variational autoencoder (SocialCVAE) for
predicting pedestrian trajectories, which employs a CVAE to
explore behavioral uncertainty in human motion decisions.
SocialCVAE learns socially reasonable motion randomness
by utilizing a socially explainable interaction energy map
as the CVAE’s condition, which illustrates the future occupancy of each pedestrian’s local neighborhood area. The
energy map is generated using an energy-based interaction
model, which anticipates the energy cost (i.e., repulsion intensity) of pedestrians’ interactions with neighbors. Experimental results on two public benchmarks including 25 scenes
demonstrate that SocialCVAE significantly improves prediction accuracy compared with the state-of-the-art methods,
with up to 16.85% improvement in Average Displacement
Error (ADE) and 69.18% improvement in Final Displacement Error (FDE). Code is available at: https://github.com/
ViviXiang/SocialCVAE.

Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is a vital task in intelligent
systems for understanding human behavior and anticipating
future motions. Predicting the future movements of pedestrians in complex environments is challenging due to the
highly dynamic and subtle nature of human interactions.
Empirical methods explicitly model interactions for
crowd motion prediction, e.g., rule-based model (Reynolds
1987; Reynolds et al. 1999), force-based model (Helbing
and Molnar 1995; Karamouzas, Skinner, and Guy 2014) and
energy-based model (Guy et al. 2010; Karamouzas et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6216

