The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning the Topology and Behavior of Discrete Dynamical Systems
Zirou Qiu1,2 , Abhijin Adiga2 , Madhav V. Marathe1,2 , S. S. Ravi 2,3 ,
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz 2,3 , Richard E. Stearns 2,3 , Anil Vullikanti1,2
1

Computer Science Dept., University of Virginia.
Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia.
3
Computer Science Dept., University at Albany – State University of New York.
{zq5au, aa5ts, marathe, vsakumar}@virginia.edu, {ssravi0, drosenkrantz, thestearns2}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

to infer the unknown interaction functions or the topology
of a system. Network topology and interaction functions
play critical roles in the system dynamics. The topology
encodes the underlying relationships between the entities,
while the interaction functions provide the decision rules
that entities employ to update their contagion states. The
class of threshold interaction functions (Granovetter 1978),
which are widely used to model the spread of social contagions (Watts 2002), is one such example. Specifically, each
entity in the network has a decision threshold that represents
the tipping point for a behavioral (i.e., state) change. In the
case of a rumor, a person’s belief shifts when the number of
neighbors believing in the rumor reaches a certain threshold.
Previous research (Adiga et al. 2017) has presented efficient algorithms for inferring classes of interactions functions (e.g., threshold functions) based on the observed dynamics, assuming that the underlying network is known. To
our knowledge, the more challenging problem of learning a
system from observed dynamics, where both the interaction
function and the topology are unknown, has not been examined. In this work, we fill this gap with a theoretical study of
the problem of learning both the topology and the interaction functions of an unknown dynamical system.
Problem description. Consider a black-box networked system where both the interaction functions and the network
topology are unknown. Our objective is to recover a system
that captures the behavior of the true but unknown system
while providing performance guarantees under the Probably
Approximately Correct (PAC) model (Valiant 1984). We
learn from snapshots of the true system’s dynamics, a
common scheme considered in related papers (e.g., (Chen
et al. 2021; Conitzer, Panigrahi, and Zhang 2020; Wilinski and Lokhov 2021)). Since our problem setting also involves multiclass learning, we examine the Natarajan dimension (Natarajan 1989), a well-known generalization of
the VC dimension (Vapnik and Chervonenkis 2015). In particular, the Natarajan dimension quantifies the expressive
power of the hypothesis class and characterizes the sample
complexity of learning. Overall, we aim to answer the following two questions: (i) Can one efficiently learn the blackbox system, and if so, how many training examples are sufficient? (ii) What is the expressive power of the hypothesis
class of networked systems?
The key challenges of our learning problem arise from

Discrete dynamical systems are commonly used to model
the spread of contagions on real-world networks. Under the
PAC framework, existing research has studied the problem of
learning the behavior of a system, assuming that the underlying network is known. In this work, we focus on a more
challenging setting: to learn both the behavior and the underlying topology of a black-box system. We show that, in general, this learning problem is computationally intractable. On
the positive side, we present efficient learning methods under
the PAC model when the underlying graph of the dynamical system belongs to certain classes. Further, we examine
a relaxed setting where the topology of an unknown system
is partially observed. For this case, we develop an efficient
PAC learner to infer the system and establish the sample complexity. Lastly, we present a formal analysis of the expressive
power of the hypothesis class of dynamical systems where
both the topology and behavior are unknown, using the wellknown Natarajan dimension formalism. Our results provide
a theoretical foundation for learning both the topology and
behavior of discrete dynamical systems.

1

Introduction

Discrete dynamical systems have been used as a formal
models for numerous cascade processes, such as the spread
of social behaviors, information, diseases, and biological
phenomena (Battiston et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2017; Cohen et al.
2010; González-Bailón et al. 2011; Romero, Meeder, and
Kleinberg 2011; Sabhapandit, Dhar, and Shukla 2002). A
discrete dynamical system consists of an underlying graph
with vertices representing entities (e.g., individuals, genes),
and edges representing connections between the entities.
Each vertex has a state and an interaction function (i.e.,
behavior), which specify how the state changes over time.
Overall, vertices update their states using interaction functions as the system dynamics proceeds in discrete time.
Due to the large size of real-world systems, a complete
specification of the underlying dynamical system is often not
available. To this end, learning the unknown components of
a system is an active area of research (Adiga et al. 2019;
Chen and Poor 2022; Conitzer, Panigrahi, and Zhang 2020;
Dawkins, Li, and Xu 2021). One ongoing line of work is
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14722

