The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GSDD: Generative Space Dataset Distillation for Image Super-resolution
Haiyu Zhang1 , Shaolin Su1 , Yu Zhu1 * , Jinqiu Sun2 , Yanning Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
School of Astronautics, Northwestern Polytechnical University
zhanghaiyu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Animal-tiger

Abstract

Building-church

Single image super-resolution (SISR), especially in the real
world, usually builds a large amount of LR-HR image pairs to
learn representations that contain rich textural and structural
information. However, relying on massive data for model
training not only reduces training efficiency, but also causes
heavy data storage burdens. In this paper, we attempt a pioneering study on dataset distillation (DD) for SISR problems
to explore how data could be slimmed and compressed for the
task. Unlike previous coreset selection methods which select
a few typical examples directly from the original data, we remove the limitation that the selected data cannot be further
edited, and propose to synthesize and optimize samples to
preserve more task-useful representations. Concretely, by utilizing pre-trained GANs as a suitable approximation of realistic data distribution, we propose GSDD, which distills data
in a latent generative space based on GAN-inversion techniques. By optimizing them to match with the practical data
distribution in an informative feature space, the distilled data
could then be synthesized. Experimental results demonstrate
that when trained with our distilled data, GSDD can achieve
comparable performance to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) SISR
algorithms, while a nearly ×8 increase in training efficiency
and a saving of almost 93.2% data storage space can be realized. Further experiments on challenging real-world data also
demonstrate the promising generalization ability of GSDD.

Distilled Image

0.7424/0.1591

0.7207/0.1765

0.5191/0.2030

0.8196/0.1169

0.7938/0.1206

RealSR

Real-ESRGAN

GSDD

SSIM↑/LPIPS↓

0.6188/0.3373

SSIM↑/LPIPS↓

Ground Truth

Trained with 10,324+ original images

Trained with 700 distilled images

Figure 1: A demonstration of the corresponding distilled images and SR results of two example categories. Two advanced SISR models trained on more than 10,324 original
images (yellow part) are compared. The proposed GSDD
(based on Real-ESRGAN (Wang et al. 2021) generator) was
only trained on 700 distilled images (red part), but achieved
approximate results with the SOTA. The arrow here indicates comparable performance. Please zoom in for best view.
August 13, 2023

2023 ACM International Conference on Multimedia

67

is natural to think of adopting the coreset selection (Phillips
2017) methods. By selecting a subset of data from the whole
training data, models are expected to perform competitively
with those trained on the whole population of data. Despite
the straightforward methodology, it has two drawbacks: 1)
most coreset selections are developed as upstream tasks,
they do not guarantee an optimal solution for downstream
tasks (e.g., image restoration); 2) the method simply selects
samples from dataset, while the most informative data representation cannot be reached (Zhao and Bilen 2021).
To overcome above limitations, dataset distillation1 (DD)
was proposed to synthesize a bunch of compact data that
has better informative property than the coreset (Wang et al.
2018a). This process can also be interpreted as learning a
small set of representative images from a large amount of
training data, while achieving similar generalization abilities
but higher training efficiencies than models trained on the
original data. Unlike coreset selection, the synthetic data are
directly optimized for downstream tasks and thus leading to
better testing performance (Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen 2020).

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) refers to recovering
the high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR)
counterpart. With the increasing pursuit and preference for
high-definition images, a rising requirement for the performance improvement of current SISR algorithms is urgently
demanded. To this end, people attempt to build a massive
amount of LR-HR image pairs to train SR models that cover
rich textural and structural information existing in the real
scenarios. However, one of the most prominent problems
emerges accordingly is that its success was mainly derived at
the cost of the massive data, which consumes huge computational and storage resources for model implementation. A
feasible way to reduce the cost is to compact the data while
preserving sufficient information for deep models. Thus, it

1

Dataset distillation is also referred to as dataset condensation
in some literatures (Zhao and Bilen 2021; Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen
2020; Kim et al. 2022). The two are essentially the same.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7069

