The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Temporal Feature Correlation for Efficient and Stable Video Semantic
Segmentation
Matthieu Lin* 1 , Jenny Sheng* 1 , Yubin Hu1 , Yangguang Li2 , Lu Qi3 , Andrew Zhao4 ,
Gao Huang4 , Yong-Jin Liu1
1

BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4
BNRist, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
SenseTime Group Limited
3
The University of California, Merced
{yh-lin21, cqq22, huyb20, zqc21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liuyongjin, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
liyangguang256@gmail.com, luqi@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

2020). As a result, predictions across frames are unstable/inconsistent (Miao et al. 2021), making image-based methods
impractical for real-world video applications. However, incorporating the temporal information is expensive (Sun et al.
2022a,b), leading to the emerging focus on efficient video
semantic segmentation (Zhu et al. 2017; Shelhamer et al.
2016).
While stability in VSS has been under-explored (Miao
et al. 2021), prevalent work (Zhu et al. 2017; Shelhamer
et al. 2016; Hu et al. 2023) in efficient video semantic segmentation uses the keyframe paradigm: the nonkeyframes only need to compute their low-level features and
reuse high-level features computed at selected keyframes.
The reused features stabilize the predictions across frames,
thereby improving video consistency. However, dynamic
scenes in the video can easily cause misalignments between
the reused and recomputed features in the non-keyframe feature pyramid (Jain, Wang, and Gonzalez 2019; Hu et al.
2020). Therefore, the keyframe paradigm hurts the performance of existing image-based methods (Jain, Wang, and
Gonzalez 2019). Furthermore, feature reuse implicitly improves stability but is sensitive to incorrectly aligned features. Consequently, the keyframe paradigm suffers from a
dilemma between stability and performance. Prior work addresses the performance drop by aligning the reused features
with flow-based warping (Jain, Wang, and Gonzalez 2019).
Yet, optical flow is prohibitively expensive, and erroneous
warping leads to unstable predictions.
We address the efficiency and stability challenge using a
novel yet simple Temporal Feature Correlation (TFC) module. TFC uses the cosine similarity between two frames’
low-level features to inform the semantic label’s consistency
across frames. As shown in this paper (Fig. 3), its prediction
of the between-frame semantic label consistency is highly
accurate. Specifically, we selectively reuse label-consistent
features across frames while updating others to account for
the feature misalignment.
In this paper, we make two main contributions. First, we
use the cosine similarity as the weight of the linear interpolation between features of two frames before the class prediction head. If the cosine similarity is high, it would as-

This paper tackles the problem of efficient and stable video
semantic segmentation. While stability has been underexplored, prevalent work in efficient video semantic segmentation uses the keyframe paradigm. They efficiently process videos by only recomputing the low-level features and
reusing high-level features computed at selected keyframes.
In addition, the reused features stabilize the predictions across
frames, thereby improving video consistency. However, dynamic scenes in the video can easily lead to misalignments
between reused and recomputed features, which hampers performance. Moreover, relying on feature reuse to improve prediction consistency is brittle; an erroneous alignment of the
features can easily lead to unstable predictions. Therefore,
the keyframe paradigm exhibits a dilemma between stability and performance. We address this efficiency and stability
challenge using a novel yet simple Temporal Feature Correlation (TFC) module. It uses the cosine similarity between
two frames’ low-level features to inform the semantic label’s
consistency across frames. Specifically, we selectively reuse
label-consistent features across frames through linear interpolation and update others through sparse multi-scale deformable attention. As a result, we no longer directly reuse
features to improve stability and thus effectively solve feature misalignment. This work provides a significant step towards efficient and stable video semantic segmentation. On
the VSPW dataset, our method significantly improves the prediction consistency of image-based methods while being as
fast and accurate.

1

Introduction

Video semantic segmentation (VSS) (Miao et al. 2021) is
critical in enabling machines to understand dynamic visual
scenes and plays an important role in various applications,
such as AR/VR, live video, self-driving, and robotics. The
explosion of deep learning techniques brought significant
improvements to VSS. Nevertheless, current methods often
use a per-frame segmentation network for VSS (Liu et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3450

