The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

D3: A Methodological Exploration of Domain Division, Modeling, and Balance in
Multi-Domain Recommendations
Pengyue Jia1 , Yichao Wang2 , Shanru Lin1 , Xiaopeng Li1 ,
Xiangyu Zhao1 * , Huifeng Guo2 , Ruiming Tang2 *
1

City University of Hong Kong
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{jia.pengyue,xiaopli2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, lllam32316@gmail.com,
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk,{wangyichao5,huifeng.guo,tangruiming}@huawei.com
Domain Adaptation

Abstract
To enhance the efficacy of multi-scenario services in industrial recommendation systems, the emergence of multidomain recommendation has become prominent, which entails simultaneous modeling of all domains through a unified model, effectively capturing commonalities and differences among them. However, current methods rely on manual domain partitioning, which overlook the intricate domain relationships and the heterogeneity of different domains
during joint optimization, hindering the integration of domain commonalities and differences. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a universal and flexible framework D3 aimed at optimizing the multi-domain recommendation pipeline from three key aspects. Firstly, an attentionbased domain adaptation module is introduced to automatically identify and incorporate domain sensitive features during training. Secondly, we propose a fusion gate module that
enables the seamless integration of commonalities and diversities among domains, allowing for implicit characterization
of intricate domain relationships. Lastly, we tackle the issue of joint optimization by deriving loss weights from two
complementary viewpoints: domain complexity and domain
specificity, alleviating inconsistencies among different domains during the training phase. Experiments on three public
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our
proposed framework. In addition, D3 has been implemented
on a real-life, high-traffic internet platform catering to millions of users daily.

Domain Division
Domain Sensitive
Feature Selection
feature-level

Domain Modeling
Fusion Commonalities
and Diversities
modeling-level

Domain Balance
Loss Adaptation
optimization-level

Figure 1: Three aspects on domain adaptation.

maintenance and training costs, and (2) simply training a
single model using data from all scenarios, thereby failing
to capture the commonalities and diversities, resulting in a
notable loss of effectiveness.
To address these challenges, multi-domain recommendation (MDR) has been proposed and has garnered significant
attention. MDR offers a solution to reduce maintenance and
training costs by employing a unified model while effectively handling domain adaptation through specifically designed network structures. As depicted in Figure 1, three
crucial aspects should be considered in domain adaptation:
• Domain Division. Domain division significantly influences the data distribution across different domains, thus
impacting the efficacy of MDR modeling. Existing research typically uses business scenario IDs as a direct
means of dividing domains, without considering more nuanced approaches (Sheng et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2022;
Shen et al. 2021). Alternatively, some studies (Zhang et al.
2022a; Chang et al. 2023) employ manually selected domain sensitive features for domain division. However,
these approaches require high experiential expertise and
lack dynamic updating mechanisms to adapt to novel data.
• Domain Modeling. Capturing commonalities and diversities across domains presents core challenges in domain
modeling. Some works adopt the shared-specific network
paradigm (Sheng et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2022; Shen
et al. 2021), where shared networks capture commonalities, while different domains possess independent specific
structures to capture their respective diversities. Another
approach utilizes the dynamic weight paradigm (Zhang
et al. 2022a; Chang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b), where
weights generated from domain sensitive features are
directly applied to the backbone network. While these
methodologies have achieved promising results, they over-

Introduction
To cater to diverse user interests and business needs, modern recommendation systems are designed to handle multiple scenarios concurrently (Wang et al. 2023b), such as
the homepage and the item detail page on e-commerce platforms. Data from these scenarios exhibit both commonalities and diversities. On one hand, users and items overlap
across different scenarios, resulting in similar data distributions. On the other hand, users exhibit inconsistent behavioral patterns when facing different scenarios, leading to distinct data distributions. Traditional approaches can be categorized into two types (Sheng et al. 2021): (1) constructing
separate models for each scenario, significantly increasing
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8553

