The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Constellation-Inspired Single-Shot Global LiDAR Localization
Tongzhou Zhang1 , Gang Wang1,2,3,4 * , Yu Chen2 , Hai Zhang5 , Jue Hu5
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
College of Software, Jilin University
3
State Key Laboratory of Automotive Simulation and Control, Jilin University
4
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
5
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special Environments,
Harbin Institute of Technology
tzzhang20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, gangwang@jlu.edu.cn, chen yu21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {hai.zhang, juehundt}@hit.edu.cn
Abstract
Global localization is a challenging task for intelligent robots,
as its accuracy directly contributes to the performance of
downstream navigation and planning tasks. However, existing literature focus more on the place retrieval and the success
rate of localization, with limited attention given to the metrics
of position estimation. In this paper, a single-shot global LiDAR localization method is proposed with the ultimate goal
of achieving high position accuracy, inspired by the positioning approach of multi-constellation localization systems. Initially, we perform coarse localization using global descriptors
and select observation points along with their corresponding
coordinates based on the obtained coarse localization results.
Coordinates can be acquired from a pre-built map, GNSS, or
other devices. Then, a lightweight LiDAR odometry method
is designed to estimate the distance between the retrieved data
and the observation points. Ultimately, the localization problem is transformed into an optimization problem of solving a
system of multiple sphere equations. The experimental results
on the KITTI dataset and the self-collected dataset demonstrate that our method achieves an average localization error
(including errors in the z-axis) of 0.89 meters. In addition, it
achieves retrieval efficiency of 0.357 s per frame on the former dataset and 0.214 s per frame on the latter one. Code
and data are available at https://github.com/jlurobot/multiconstellation-localization.

Figure 1: An illustration of the mechanism of multiconstellation localization and the proposed method.

the highest-probability keyframe (element of the pre-built
map) using global descriptors, and assessing the similarity
between the current frame and the keyframe. Typical methods include handcrafted feature-based methods such as Delight (2018) and Scan Context (2018), as well as deep learning based methods like LPD-Net (2019) and OverlapTransformer (2022). However, these methods are constrained by
the aforementioned mechanism, as they treat the localization
problem as a database retrieval task only, resulting in coarse
localization results by providing the closest matching frame
pose from the database.
If high-precision results are required, feature-based registration or similar methods is still necessary for matching current frame to retrieved keyframes. This category of method
is known as “place recognition followed by local pose estimation,” employing a separate coarse-to-fine manner. Ratz
et al. (2020) enhanced SegMap (Dubé et al. 2020) by training neural network and evaluated the localization accuracy
using Iterative Closest Point (ICP) (Besl and McKay 1992).
Shi et al. (Shi et al. 2021) proposed a variant of Scan Context for keyframe retrieval, then applied Normal Distributions Transform (NDT) (Biber and Straßer 2003) to get a
precise initial pose. Luo et al. (Luo et al. 2022) proposed
a descriptor called HOPN and refined the coarse pose using ICP. While these methods involve a refinement process,
their primary focus still lies in place recognition. The registration methods they utilize, such as ICP and NDT, can be
trapped in local optima due to unknown initial correspondences between the source and target frames, or fail to converge because of large translation between them. The cumu-

Introduction
Global localization has a wide range of applications in autonomous navigation for robots, e.g., initial localization in
autonomous driving (Li and Li 2021) and relocalization in
the kidnapped robot problem (Yu et al. 2020). It can be regarded as a problem of determining a robot or vehicle’s initial pose from sensor data without a prior pose. Single-shot
global localization (Ratz et al. 2020) is an efficient and effective method for initializing the pose, which utilizes a place
recognition and pose estimation to establish the relationship
between a single local lighting detection and ranging (LiDAR) frame and a pre-built map.
Single-shot global localization achieved solely through
place recognition (Cop, Borges, and Dubé 2018; Kim and
Kim 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2022) is to retrieve
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10404

