The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Regret of Adversarial MDPs with Unknown Transition
and Linear Function Approximation
Long-Fei Li, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{lilf, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

and Mansour (2009) first studies the problem of learning
adversarial MDPs, where the losses can change arbitrarily. There is a line of subsequent work studying adversarial
MDPs (Zimin and Neu 2013; Rosenberg and Mansour 2019;
Jin et al. 2020a), which studies various settings depending
on whether the transition kernel is known, and whether the
feedback is full-information or bandit. We focus on the unknown transition and full-information setting where the loss
function is revealed to the learner after each episode ends.
One limitation of the above studies is that they choose
static regret as the performance measure, which is defined
as the performance difference between the learner’s policy
π1 , . . . , πK and that of the best-fixed policy, namely,

We study reinforcement learning (RL) in episodic MDPs with
adversarial full-information losses and the unknown transition. Instead of the classical static regret, we adopt dynamic
regret as the performance measure which benchmarks the
learner’s performance with changing policies, making it more
suitable for non-stationary environments. The primary challenge is to handle the uncertainties of unknown transition and
unknown non-stationarity of environments simultaneously.
We propose a general framework to decouple the two sources
of uncertainties and show the dynamic regret bound naturally
decomposes into two terms, one due to constructing confidence sets to handle the unknown transition and the other
due to choosing sub-optimal policies under the unknown nonstationarity. To this end, we first employ the two-layer online ensemble structure to handle the adaptation error due to
the unknown non-stationarity, which is model-agnostic. Subsequently, we instantiate the framework to three fundamental MDP models, including tabular MDPs, linear MDPs and
linear mixture MDPs, and present corresponding approaches
to control the exploration error due to the unknown transition. We provide dynamic regret guarantees respectively and
show they are optimal in terms of the number of episodes K
and the non-stationarity P̄K by establishing matching lower
bounds. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that achieves the dynamic regret exhibiting optimal dependence on K and P̄K without prior knowledge about the nonstationarity for adversarial MDPs with unknown transition.

RegK =

K
X

Lk (πk ) − min
π∈Π

k=1

K
X

Lk (π),

(1)

k=1

where Lk (πk ) is the expected loss of policy πk at episode k,
and Π is the set of all stochastic policies. However, the bestfixed policy may behave poorly in non-stationary environments. To this end, following previous studies (Zhao, Li, and
Zhou 2022; Li, Zhao, and Zhou 2023), we choose dynamic
regret as the performance measure, which benchmarks the
learner’s performance with changing policies, defined as
c
D-RegK (π1c , . . . , πK
)=

K
X
k=1

c
where π1c , . . . , πK

Lk (πk ) −

K
X

Lk (πkc ), (2)

k=1

∈ Π is any policy sequence, which can
be chosen by taking into account complete knowledge of
the online loss functions. An upper bound of dynamic regret is expected to scale with a certain variation quantity of
c
the compared policies denoted by PK (π1c , . . . , πK
), which
reflects the degree of the environmental non-stationarity.
The dynamic regret measure in (2) is very powerful and
general due to the flexibility of compared policies. For example, it immediately recovers the standard regret in (1)
when choosing the single best policy in hindsight, that is,
PK
∀k ∈ [K], πkc = π ∗ = arg minπ∈Π k=1 Lk (π). Another
typical choice for the compared policies is the sequence of
the best policy of each episode, namely, ∀k ∈ [K], πkc =
πk∗ = arg minπ∈Π Lk (π), which is studied in the work of Fei
et al. (2020); Zhong et al. (2021) and we refer it as worstcase dynamic regret. A dynamic regret bound with respect
to (2) implies a worst-case dynamic regret bound directly.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning studies the problem where a learner
interacts with the environment sequentially and aims to improve her strategy over time (Sutton and Barto 1998). The
dynamics of the environment are typically modeled as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman 1994). Much of
the existing literature on MDPs assumes the losses and dynamics of the environment are stationary over time (Jaksch,
Ortner, and Auer 2010; Azar, Osband, and Munos 2017; Jin
et al. 2018). However, in real-world applications, the loss
functions might change over time, even could potentially be
adversarial chosen by the environments (Zhou 2022).
To better capture applications with non-stationary or even
adversarial losses, the seminal work of Even-Dar, Kakade,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13572

