The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Actionability of Outcome Prediction
Lydia T. Liu1, 2 , Solon Barocas1, 3 , Jon Kleinberg1 , Karen Levy1
1
Cornell University
Princeton University
3
Microsoft Research
{lydiatliu, sbarocas, kleinberg, karen.levy}@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

Consider the example of predicting student academic performance at the secondary level. In most cases, the goal of
building such predictors is to improve the relevant educational outcome, academic performance. However, a prediction of a student’s future academic performance alone does
not improve academic performance unless there is an intervening action, such as providing additional tutoring or financial support. Students who lack the necessary academic
prerequisites may need additional tutoring rather than financial support to improve their performance, whereas students
who lack the time to complete course work because they are
working multiple jobs may need financial aid rather than to
be referred for additional tutoring. Therefore, the success of
any action depends on a student’s latent state (so called as
we do not know a priori whether the student lacks prerequisites or income). A school official may take measurements,
such as diagnostic tests, past grades, or a survey of income,
to obtain information about students’ latent states. But these
measurements can be costly, requiring time and labor.
The key question, therefore, is: what should the school
official measure in order to best predict the student’s future
academic performance, and what should they measure in order to best improve it? Further, when are these the same measurements, and when are they different?
Many applications of ML/AI for social impact focus on
solving prediction problems (Kleinberg et al. 2015; Athey
2017) and maximizing prediction accuracy for future outcomes. Although risk prediction has become ubiquitous in
education and other domains, its effectiveness for improving
outcomes has been called into question. A recent empirical
qualitative study by Liu et al. (2023) on machine learning
applications in education found a significant gap between
predictions and beneficent interventions.

Predicting future outcomes is a prevalent application of machine learning in social impact domains. Examples range
from predicting student success in education to predicting
disease risk in healthcare. Practitioners recognize that the ultimate goal is not just to predict but to act effectively. Increasing evidence suggests that relying on outcome predictions for
downstream interventions may not have desired results.
In most domains there exists a multitude of possible interventions for each individual, making the challenge of taking
effective action more acute. Even when causal mechanisms
connecting the individual’s latent states to outcomes are well
understood, in any given instance (a specific student or patient), practitioners still need to infer—from budgeted measurements of latent states—which of many possible interventions will be most effective for this individual. With this in
mind, we ask: when are accurate predictors of outcomes helpful for identifying the most suitable intervention?
Through a simple model encompassing actions, latent states,
and measurements, we demonstrate that pure outcome prediction rarely results in the most effective policy for taking
actions, even when combined with other measurements. We
find that except in cases where there is a single decisive action for improving the outcome, outcome prediction never
maximizes “action value”, the utility of taking actions. Making measurements of actionable latent states, where specific
actions lead to desired outcomes, may considerably enhance
the action value compared to outcome prediction, and the degree of improvement depends on action costs and the outcome model. This analysis emphasizes the need to go beyond
generic outcome prediction in interventional settings by incorporating knowledge of plausible actions and latent states.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence has been used for impact in variety of
societal domains, from education to healthcare. While many
of its applications have focused on prediction, such as that
of educational outcomes (Tamhane et al. 2014; Lakkaraju
et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2017) and medical incidents and risk
(Hosseinzadeh et al. 2013; Ma et al. 2018; Ballinger et al.
2018; Optum 2024), practitioners and researchers invariably
encounter the question of how to use these predictions for
interventions to improve the outcomes that they care about.

“You don’t improve things by predicting them better.”
- Education researcher on the value of predicting academic risk (Liu et al. 2023)
The study of interventions has been fundamental in the
social sciences, statistics, and theoretical computer science
(Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983; Pearl 1995; Rubin 2005; Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017; Hofman et al. 2021). The
set of techniques and applications for causal inference and
analysis is vast, mostly notably including program evaluation and randomized controlled trials (Stephenson and Imrie

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22240

