The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combining Multiple Supervision for Robust Zero-Shot Dense Retrieval
Yan Fang1 , Qingyao Ai1 * , Jingtao Zhan1 , Yiqun Liu1 , Xiaolong Wu2 , Zhao Cao2
1

Quan Cheng Laboratory & DCST, Tsinghua University & Zhongguancun Laboratory & Beijing, China
2
Huawei Poisson Lab
fangy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, aiqy@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

tor. Experimental results show that dense retrieval substantially outperforms the traditional lexical retrieval methods
like BM25 (Robertson and Walker 1994).
Studies have shown that dense retrieval methods are often
data hungry and require large-scale annotated data in order
to achieve reliable performance (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz
2021; Gururangan et al. 2020). In practice, however, obtaining such large-scale training data are usually prohibitive due
to the high cost of data annotations. Without new annotated
data, existing dense retrieval methods can hardly adapt to
a target domain that is different from their original training corpus, which usually results in poor performance on
the target dataset. This is often refer to as the out-of-domain
(OOD) problem of dense retrieval. Therefore, how to construct effective dense retrieval models on a specific target
domain without using annotated data, i.e., zero-shot dense
retrieval, has become an important question to the IR community (Thakur et al. 2021).
To tackle this problem, previous studies on zero-shot DR
and domain adaptation mostly adopt different training algorithms with data augmentation techniques to improve the
performance of dense retrieval models in OOD scenarios.
Specifically, they first extract weak or pseudo supervision
data with data augmentation methods on the target domain,
and then train dense retrieval models with both the source
domain (which provides the original large-scale annotated
data for the dense retrieval model ) and the target domain
together. A variety of data augmentation methods and training algorithms have been explored, including unsupervised
Sequence Contrastive Learning (SCL) (Yu et al. 2022) and
Inverse Cloze Task (ICT) (Lee, Chang, and Toutanova 2019;
Izacard et al. 2021), which are mainly used for second-stage
pre-training, and query generation methods (Wang et al.
2022), which are combined with continuous fine-tuning or
knowledge distillation. Despite their differences in algorithm design, most existing zero-shot DR methods assume
that, with proper training algorithms, dense retrieval models are mighty enough to model and memorize different
language distributions and relevance matching patterns. In
other words, there should be no need to explicitly distinguish
the data and supervision signals we feed into the dense retrieval model.
However, we consider that such assumptions usually lead
to two limitations in OOD scenarios. First, as existing stud-

Recently, dense retrieval (DR) models, which represent
queries and documents with fixed-width vectors and retrieve
relevant ones via nearest neighbor search, have drawn increasing attention from the IR community. However, previous studies have shown that the effectiveness of DR critically relies on sufficient training signals, which leads to severe performance degradation when applied in out-of-domain
scenarios, where large-scale training data are usually unavailable. To solve this problem, existing studies adopt a
data-augmentation-plus-joint-training paradigm to construct
weak/pseudo supervisions on the target domain and combine them with the large-scale human annotated data on the
source domain to train the DR models. However, they don’t
explicitly distinguish the data and the supervision signals in
the training process and simply assume that the DR models are mighty enough to capture and memorize different
domain knowledge and relevance matching patterns without
guidance, which, as shown in this paper, is not true. Based
on this observation, we propose a Robust Multi-Supervision
Combining strategy (RMSC) that decouples the domain and
supervision signals by explicitly telling the DR models how
the domain data and supervision signals are combined in the
training data with specially designed soft tokens. With the extra soft tokens to store the domain-specific and supervisionspecific knowledge, RMSC allows the DR models to conduct
retrieval based on human-like relevance matching patterns
and target-specific language distribution on the target domain
without human annotations. Extensive experiments on zeroshot DR benchmarks show that RMSC significantly improves
the ranking performance on the target domain compared to
strong DR baselines and domain adaptation methods, while
being stable during training and can be combined with query
generation or second-stage pre-training.

Introduction
Dense Retrieval (Guo et al. 2021; Lin, Nogueira, and Yates
2021) has become increasingly popular in recent years and
has achieved the state-of-the-art ranking performance. It effectively leverages the pre-trained language models (Devlin
et al. 2018) to create dense representations for text, and relevant documents can be efficiently retrieved by conducting nearest neighbor search with the encoded query vec* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17994

