The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimistic Policy Gradient in Multi-Player Markov Games with a Single
Controller: Convergence beyond the Minty Property
Ioannis Anagnostides1 * , Ioannis Panageas2 , Gabriele Farina3 , Tuomas Sandholm1, 4, 5, 6
1

Carnegie Mellon University
University of California Irvine
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Strategy Robot, Inc.
5
Optimized Markets, Inc.
6
Strategic Machine, Inc.
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu, ipanagea@ics.uci.edu, gfarina@mit.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

ing is still lagging behind, especially in multi-player games;
this is precisely the primary focus of our paper.
In particular, we operate in the canonical framework
of Markov (aka. stochastic) games (Shapley 1953; Zhang,
Yang, and Basar 2019), which captures multiagent Markov
decision processes. Such settings have been the subject of
intense scrutiny in recent years, with a flurry of results
emerging for computing Nash equilibria (NE)—the standard game-theoretic equilibrium concept—in either twoplayer zero-sum games or multi-player cooperative games;
our synopsis in the sequel features numerous such developments. Algorithmic advances beyond those classes of
games are scarce in the literature, and have been considerably impeded by recently established computational
barriers for stationary NE even in turn-based two-player
Markov games (Daskalakis, Golowich, and Zhang 2023; Jin,
Muthukumar, and Sidford 2023); besides those recent lower
bounds, any student of algorithmic game theory should also
come to terms with the intrinsic intractability of NE even in
one-shot (stateless) general-sum games (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2006). Yet, characterizing classes
of games that elude those computational barriers is recognized as an important research direction in this line of work.
Our second key motivation—which will naturally coalesce with the aforedescribed considerations—is to characterize the behavior of policy gradient methods (Agarwal
et al. 2021) in Markov games. Such techniques are especially natural from an optimization standpoint, and enjoy
strong practical performance in a number of tasks (Schulman et al. 2015, 2017). Furthermore, unlike other popular
methods, they are amenable to function approximation (Sutton et al. 1999), thereby enabling to tackle enormous action
spaces under continuous parameterizations.
In light of the inability of traditional gradient-based methods to converge even in normal-form zero-sum games (Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras 2018), we focus
here on analyzing optimistic gradient descent (henceforth
OGD). Optimism has been a crucial ingredient in attaining convergence in monotone settings and beyond (Cai,
Oikonomou, and Zheng 2022; Gorbunov, Taylor, and Gidel
2022; Golowich et al. 2020), but its role is not well-

Policy gradient methods enjoy strong practical performance
in numerous tasks in reinforcement learning. Their theoretical understanding in multiagent settings, however, remains
limited, especially beyond two-player competitive and potential Markov games. In this paper, we develop a new framework to characterize optimistic policy gradient methods in
multi-player Markov games with a single controller. Specifically, under the further assumption that the game exhibits an
equilibrium collapse, in that the marginals of coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) induce Nash equilibria (NE), we show
convergence to stationary ϵ-NE in O(1/ϵ2 ) iterations, where
O(·) suppresses polynomial factors in the natural parameters
of the game. Such an equilibrium collapse is well-known to
manifest itself in two-player zero-sum Markov games, but
also occurs even in a class of multi-player Markov games
with separable interactions, as established by recent work.
As a result, we bypass known complexity barriers for computing stationary NE when either of our assumptions fails.
Our approach relies on a natural generalization of the classical Minty property that we introduce, which we anticipate to
have further applications beyond Markov games.

Introduction
Realistic strategic interactions typically occur in stateful
multiagent environments in which agents’ decisions do not
only determine their immediate rewards, but they also shape
the next state of the system. Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL), endowed with game-theoretic principles, furnishes a rigorous framework whereby artificial agents with
strong performance guarantees can be developed even in
such complex and volatile environments. Indeed, algorithmic advances in MARL have been translated to exciting empirical breakthroughs in grand AI challenges, covering twoplayer competitive games (Bowling et al. 2015; Brown and
Sandholm 2017; Moravčı́k et al. 2017), as well as popular
multi-player games (Brown and Sandholm 2019). In spite of
those remarkable developments, our theoretical understand* Part of this work was performed as an intern at Meta AI.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9451

