The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Composite Active Learning:
Towards Multi-Domain Active Learning with Theoretical Guarantees
Guang-Yuan Hao1, 4 , Hengguan Huang3 , Haotian Wang5 * , Jie Gao2 , Hao Wang2
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Rutgers University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
5
JD Logistics
guangyuanhao@outlook.com, hengguan.huang@gmail.com, wanghaotian18@jd.com, {jg1555, hw488}@cs.rutgers.edu

+
-

Abstract
Active learning (AL) aims to improve model performance
within a fixed labeling budget by choosing the most informative data points to label. Existing AL focuses on the singledomain setting, where all data come from the same domain
(e.g., the same dataset). However, many real-world tasks often involve multiple domains. For example, in visual recognition, it is often desirable to train an image classifier that
works across different environments (e.g., different backgrounds), where images from each environment constitute
one domain. Such a multi-domain AL setting is challenging for prior methods because they (1) ignore the similarity among different domains when assigning labeling budget
and (2) fail to handle distribution shift of data across different
domains. In this paper, we propose the first general method,
dubbed composite active learning (CAL), for multi-domain
AL. Our approach explicitly considers the domain-level and
instance-level information in the problem; CAL first assigns
domain-level budgets according to domain-level importance,
which is estimated by optimizing an upper error bound that
we develop; with the domain-level budgets, CAL then leverages a certain instance-level query strategy to select samples
to label from each domain. Our theoretical analysis shows
that our method achieves a better error bound compared to
current AL methods. Our empirical results demonstrate that
our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
AL methods on both synthetic and real-world multi-domain
datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/Wang-MLLab/multi-domain-active-learning.

1

+
-

𝒪1

+
-

+
𝒪2

-

𝒪4

𝒪3

Figure 1: Among the four domains, domain O2 is the closest
to the other three domains. Assigning more labels to this
representative domain O2 could better generalize to other
domains, since similar domains may have similar decision
boundaries.

e.g., the same dataset. In practice, however, real-world tasks
often require actively querying labels among multiple domains with the same input space. For example, to train an
object recognition model that detects and classifies wildlife
animals in different environments, where images from each
environment constitute one domain, one needs to carefully
decide how to spend the labeling budget among the different domains to achieve the highest average accuracy across
all domains. In such cases, it is sub-optimal to directly perform single-domain AL separately for each domain. The
reasons are two-fold. (1) Domain similarity: Single-domain
AL fails to effectively consider the similarities of different
domains when considering cross-domain generalization and
assigning labeling budget. In the wildlife detection example, it would be more cost-effective to spend more computing resources and more budget on representative environments, i.e., domains that are more similar to other domains, as the improvement on such domains could better
generalize to other domains, as shown in Fig. 1. (2) Distribution shift: Single-domain AL fails to handle the distribution shift of data across different domains because it tends to
learn domain-specific features instead of domain-invariant
features, leading to poor cross-domain generalization and
rendering the query strategies less effective.
Therefore the key challenges for effective multi-domain
AL are to estimate/incorporate domain similarity and to handle distribution shift. Our approach for addressing both chal-

Introduction

The performance of machine learning models, especially
supervised learning ones, largely hinges on the amount of
labeled data available. However, in practice, labels are often expensive, tedious, or time-consuming to obtain. Active
learning (AL) tackles this problem by ‘actively’ choosing
the most informative data points (e.g., data with the most uncertain model predictions) to label, thereby achieving higher
accuracy with the same labeling budget.
Existing AL research mostly focuses on the singledomain setting, where all data come from the same domain,
* Work done during PhD at Rutgers.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12286

