The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Successive POI Recommendation via Brain-Inspired Spatiotemporal Aware
Representation
Gehua Ma1,2 , He Wang1,2 , Jingyuan Zhao3,4 , Rui Yan5 , Huajin Tang1,2,6 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University;
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
3
Group Data, The Great Eastern Life Assurance Company Limited
4
Department of Statistics & Data Science, National University of Singapore
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
6
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University
gehuama@icloud.com, 2449758305@qq.com, zhaojy@nus.edu.sg, Ryan@zjut.edu.cn, htang@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

modeling to achieve recommendations. Since consecutive
check-ins are usually highly correlated, naturally, sequence
modeling approaches like the Markov chain model were
used to capture the check-in sequential characteristics of
POIs (Ye et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2013; Zhang 2014; Feng
et al. 2015). Employing the tensor factorization technique,
the works (Yang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018) modeled
target users and POIs separately by interacted features for
POI recommendation. More recently, enlightened by neural networks’ success, recurrent neural nets were remolded
to represent POIs and user preferences implicitly (Liu et al.
2016; Zhao et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2017). Considering the geographical attributes of POIs, researchers have used powerlaw distribution, Gaussian distribution, or hierarchical tiling
methods to depict the geographical influence over POI distributional features (Ye et al. 2011; Lian et al. 2014; Feng
et al. 2017; Chang and Kim 2020; Luo et al. 2020). However, the geographical modeling methods above only provide single-scale or coarse-grained manually designed representations of POI geographical influences, which is deficient in capturing the POI-specific spatial features. Also, arbitrary modeling might even lead to over-parameterization.
While temporal dimension offers indeterminate auxiliary information for POI modeling, to utilize the POI temporal information within the check-ins, some works use time interval, time state variables, or temporal transition vectors to
promote the POI representing (Zhao et al. 2019, 2016, 2017;
Li, Shen, and Zhu 2018; Manotumruksa, Macdonald, and
Ounis 2018; Zhao et al. 2020). However, these methods focused on utilizing general temporal patterns among all POIs
and failed to exploit the POI-specific visiting time patterns
sufficiently. Still, the POI-specific spatiotemporal characteristics were not adequately mined and utilized.

Existing approaches usually perform spatiotemporal representation in the spatial and temporal dimensions, respectively,
which isolates the spatial and temporal natures of the target
and leads to sub-optimal embeddings. Neuroscience research
has shown that the mammalian brain entorhinal-hippocampal
system provides efficient graph representations for general
knowledge. Moreover, entorhinal grid cells present concise
spatial representations, while hippocampal place cells represent perception conjunctions effectively. Thus, the entorhinalhippocampal system provides a novel angle for spatiotemporal representation, which inspires us to propose the SpatioTemporal aware Embedding framework (STE) and apply it to POIs (STEP). STEP considers two types of POIspecific representations: sequential representation and spatiotemporal conjunctive representation, learned using sparse
unlabeled data based on the proposed graph-building policies. Notably, STEP jointly represents the spatiotemporal natures of POIs using both observations and contextual information from integrated spatiotemporal dimensions by constructing a spatiotemporal context graph. Furthermore, we introduce a successive POI recommendation method using STEP,
which achieves state-of-the-art performance on two benchmarks. In addition, we demonstrate the excellent performance
of the STE representation approach in other spatiotemporal
representation-centered tasks through a case study of the traffic flow prediction problem. Therefore, this work provides a
novel solution to spatiotemporal representation and paves a
new way for spatiotemporal modeling-related tasks.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of location-based web services like
Instagram and Yelp, there has been a seismic shift in how
people interact with locations around them. Through the
exploitation of Points-of-Interest (POIs) and their contexts,
successive POI recommendations can benefit users and businesses greatly. As a core of POI information utilization, encoding POIs into vector representation space is of great significance for advanced POI analysis and downstream applications. Existing studies attempt to represent POI from
different perspectives and collaborate with user preference

The entorhinal-hippocampal system plays a central role
in the mammal cognition architecture. The Nobel Prizewinning neuroscience research (O’keefe and Nadel 1978)
demonstrated that entorhinal grid cells provide an effective multi-scale periodic spatial representation (Yuan et al.
2015; Banino et al. 2018; Mai et al. 2020). Moreover,
the entorhinal-hippocampal system is also critical for the
non-spatial inference that relies on understanding the associations between perceptions from various perspectives

* Author for correspondence.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

574

