The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Narrowing the Gap between Supervised and Unsupervised
Sentence Representation Learning with Large Language Model
Mingxin Li1 , Richong Zhang1,2 * , Zhijie Nie1,3 , Yongyi Mao4
1

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Shen Yuan Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
{limx,zhangrc,niezj}@act.buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca
Abstract

0.10

Wiki.NLI
(81.5)
0.05
Wiki.STS_HT
(83.3)

Sentence Representation Learning (SRL) is a fundamental
task in Natural Language Processing (NLP), with the Contrastive Learning of Sentence Embeddings (CSE) being the
mainstream technique due to its superior performance. An
intriguing phenomenon in CSE is the significant performance
gap between supervised and unsupervised methods, with their
only difference lying in the training data. Previous works attribute this performance gap to differences in two representation properties (alignment and uniformity). However, since
alignment and uniformity only measure the results, they fail
to answer “What aspects of the training data contribute to the
performance gap?” and “How can the performance gap be
narrowed?”. In this paper, we conduct empirical experiments
to answer these “What” and “How” questions. We first answer the “What” question by thoroughly comparing the behavior of supervised and unsupervised CSE during their respective training processes. From the comparison, we identify the similarity pattern as a key factor to the performance
gap, and introduce a metric, called Relative Fitting Difficulty
(RFD), to measure the complexity of the similarity pattern.
Then, based on the insights gained from the “What” question, we tackle the “How” question by increasing the pattern
complexity of the training data. We achieve this by leveraging
the In-Context Learning (ICL) capability of the Large Language Model (LLM) to generate data that simulates complex
patterns. By utilizing the hierarchical patterns in the LLMgenerated data, we effectively narrow the gap between supervised and unsupervised CSE. We release our codes and
appendix at https://github.com/BDBC-KG-NLP/NGCSE.

NLI.SUP
NLI.NLI
(85.5)
(83.0)
NLI.STS_HT
(84.6)

RFDa

0.00
−0.05

NLI.STS
(84.1)

Wiki.STS
(81.4)

−0.10
−0.15
−0.20
−0.25
−0.5

82

Wiki.token_cutoff
Wiki.dropout (81.2)
NLI.token_cutoff
(81.1)
(79.6)
Wiki.token_shuffle
(79.7) NLI.dropout
NLI.token_shuffle
(78.1)
(80.0)
−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

RFDu

0.0

84

0.1

80

78

0.2

Figure 1: RFDu -RFDa plot of models based on BERTbase .
The colors of the points and the numbers in brackets represent Spearman’s correlation in the evaluation data, i.e.,
the validation split of STS Benchmark dataset. RFD is a
metric we propose to measure the complexity of the similarity pattern in the training data. This metric helps us answer the “What” question and further leads us to address the
“How” question. “” is trained with unsupervised data, “ ”
is trained with supervised data, and “F” is trained with data
generated from the LLM.
2021) and has drawn much attention as it significantly improves the performance of sentence embeddings. CSE can
be trained in both supervised and unsupervised settings,
where the primary difference is the training data. However,
with only this difference, supervised CSE can outperform
unsupervised CSE on STS tasks by a large margin. Gao,
Yao, and Chen (2021) explain this performance gap by referring to two properties (alignment and uniformity) from
(Wang and Isola 2020). Specifically, compared to the representations trained by the unsupervised method, they find
that the representations trained by supervised data exhibit
better alignment, uniformity or both (as shown in Figure 2),
thereby resulting in better performance on STS tasks. This
explanation still rests on the final results, and cannot explain
the mechanism that led to these results. In this paper, we
focus on the training data and its relationship with the performance gap. Specifically, we pose two questions: “What
aspects of the training data contribute to the performance

Introduction
Sentence Representation Learning (SRL) is a crucial task in
Natural Language Processing (NLP), which learns representations (or embeddings) for sentences in the feature space.
It is a fundamental task that underpins many NLP applications, including Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) (Wang
and Isola 2020), Information Retrieval (IR) (Cer et al. 2018),
and text classification (Pang and Lee 2004). Contrastive
learning of Sentence Embeddings (CSE) has been recently
introduced into SRL (Yan et al. 2021; Gao, Yao, and Chen
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13590

