The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spectral-Based Graph Neural Networks for Complementary Item
Recommendation
Haitong Luo1, 2 , Xuying Meng1, 5 , Suhang Wang3 , Hanyun Cao1, 2
Weiyao Zhang1 , Yequan Wang4 , Yujun Zhang1, 2, 6 *
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Pennsylvania State University,
4
BAAI,
5
Purple Mountain Laboratories,
6
Nanjing Institute of InforSuperBahn
{luohaitong21s, nrcyujun}@ict.ac.cn
Candidate Item

Abstract
Modeling complementary relationships greatly helps recommender systems to accurately and promptly recommend the
subsequent items when one item is purchased. Unlike traditional similar relationships, items with complementary relationships may be purchased successively (such as iPhone
and Airpods Pro), and they not only share relevance but also
exhibit dissimilarity. Since the two attributes are opposites,
modeling complementary relationships is challenging. Previous attempts to exploit these relationships have either ignored or oversimplified the dissimilarity attribute, resulting
in ineffective modeling and an inability to balance the two attributes. Since Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) can capture
the relevance and dissimilarity between nodes in the spectral domain, we can leverage spectral-based GNNs to effectively understand and model complementary relationships.
In this study, we present a novel approach called Spectralbased Complementary Graph Neural Networks (SComGNN)
that utilizes the spectral properties of complementary item
graphs. We make the first observation that complementary
relationships consist of low-frequency and mid-frequency
components, corresponding to the relevance and dissimilarity attributes, respectively. Based on this spectral observation, we design spectral graph convolutional networks with
low-pass and mid-pass filters to capture the low-frequency
and mid-frequency components. Additionally, we propose a
two-stage attention mechanism to adaptively integrate and
balance the two attributes. Experimental results on four
e-commerce datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model, with SComGNN significantly outperforming existing
baseline models.

Substitutable

Galaxy S23

Query Item

Dissimilarity
Categories
Appearances
Functions
...

Complementary

AirPods Pro

iPhone 14
Unrelated

Relevance
Digital Product
Apple brand
...

Basketball

Figure 1: Item relationships in recommender systems.

they are purchased together but serve different functions
(e.g., iPhone and AirPods Pro). These properties make complementary relationships more challenging to model than
traditional similarity relationships (also known as substitutable relationships). In this study, we focus on complementary item recommendation, i.e., given a query item, the
goal is to recommend relevant yet dissimilar items to satisfy
users’ needs and encourage joint purchases.
The core attributes of complementary relationships are
relevance and dissimilarity. As shown in Figure 1, for iPhone
and AirPods Pro, they are relevant as digital products under the Apple brand. Their dissimilarity lies in that they are
different products with different functions and appearances.
When recommending complementary products for users, it
is crucial to understand and balance these two characteristics. On one hand, if we emphasize their relevance too much,
it may lead to substitutable item recommendations. On the
other hand, if we emphasize their dissimilarity too much, it
may lead to recommendations for unrelated items.
Hence, researchers have made many efforts on complementary item recommendations. Some works (McAuley,
Pandey, and Leskovec 2015; Wang et al. 2018; Cen et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2023) tentatively decouple and focus on complementary relations from item rela-

Introduction
Complementary item recommendation (Liu et al. 2020; Hao
et al. 2020; Bibas, Shalom, and Jannach 2023) aims to suggest related items to users after they make a purchase in order to stimulate further purchases. To ensure the success of
an e-commerce platform, it is crucial to model the complementary relationships between items. Complementary relationships involve items that are relevant yet dissimilar, as
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8868

