The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Prompting Segmentation with Sound Is
Generalizable Audio-Visual Source Localizer
Yaoting Wang1 * , Weisong Liu2 * , Guangyao Li1 , Jian Ding3 , Di Hu1† , Xi Li4
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
School of Computer Science, Northwest Polytechnical University
3
LIESMARS, Wuhan University
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
yaoting.wang@outlook.com, liuweisong@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, guangyaoli@ruc.edu.cn
jian.ding@whu.edu.cn, dihu@ruc.edu.cn, xilizju@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Currently, as illustrated in the upper-center of Figure 1,
many methods commonly implement AVS based on crossmodal correlation learning, such as calculating audio-visual
heatmaps through representation similarity (Arandjelovic
and Zisserman 2018) or attention (Zhou et al. 2022b). These
methods initially fuse the latent features of audio and visual modalities, then learn to localize sounding objects with
the fused representation. We name such methods as the
encoder-fusion-decoder paradigm. However, in real-world
applications, the limited training data and varying data distribution hinder the segmentation performance of models
when faced with unseen classes and different datasets (crossdatasets). Therefore, this study focuses on generalizable
audio-visual segmentation, which facilitates effective localization for both unseen classes and cross-dataset settings.
To probe the generalization capability of the current
encoder-fusion-decoder paradigm, we conduct cross-dataset
tests on the VGG-SS dataset (Chen et al. 2021) but trained
on AVS-Benchmarks (Zhou et al. 2022b). The right side of
Figure 1 demonstrates that fusion-based models under the
zero-shot setting are unable to surpass the performance of
the classic AVL models trained on the VGG-Sound dataset
(Chen et al. 2020), which has the same data distribution with
VGG-SS. We attribute this performance to the limited generalization ability resulting from exploring audio-visual correlations on specific datasets using the encoder-fusion-decoder
paradigm, without prior knowledge from pre-trained models. SLAVC (Mo and Morgado 2022a) demonstrates that
leveraging the prior knowledge within pre-trained visual
models can improve the generalization ability.
We argue that one of the ways to enhance generalization capability is to leverage the prior knowledge encoded
in large-scale pre-trained models (Yang et al. 2023). Many
models in natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV) exhibit remarkable generalization abilities (Brown et al. 2020; He et al. 2016). Some researchers
(Li et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022; Zang et al. 2022) consider prompt learning to enhance the model generalization
ability. One of the key benefits lies in its ability to align the
data distribution of downstream tasks with the prior knowledge embedded in the foundation model, as the task formats and the output space have reached a consensus between

Never having seen an object and heard its sound simultaneously, can the model still accurately localize its visual position from the input audio? In this work, we concentrate
on the Audio-Visual Localization and Segmentation tasks
but under the demanding zero-shot and few-shot scenarios.
To achieve this goal, different from existing approaches that
mostly employ the encoder-fusion-decoder paradigm to decode localization information from the fused audio-visual
feature, we introduce the encoder-prompt-decoder paradigm,
aiming to better fit the data scarcity and varying data distribution dilemmas with the help of abundant knowledge from
pre-trained models. Specifically, we first propose to construct a Semantic-aware Audio Prompt (SAP) to help the
visual foundation model focus on sounding objects, meanwhile, the semantic gap between the visual and audio modalities is also encouraged to shrink. Then, we develop a Correlation Adapter (ColA) to keep minimal training efforts as
well as maintain adequate knowledge of the visual foundation model. By equipping with these means, extensive experiments demonstrate that this new paradigm outperforms
other fusion-based methods in both the unseen class and
cross-dataset settings. We hope that our work can further
promote the generalization study of Audio-Visual Localization and Segmentation in practical application scenarios.
Project page: https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/GeneralizableAudio-Visual-Segmentation

Introduction
Audio-Visual Localization (AVL) aims to locate the region
of sounding objects within a visual scene based on the input
audio (Wei et al. 2022; Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2018;
Chen et al. 2021), which has made satisfactory development
with the help of multimodal learning (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja,
and Morency 2018) in recent years. Moreover, the demand
for more precise localization in real-world scenarios has led
the task of AVL to shift from localization with bounding box
or coarse heatmap to finer pixel-level segmentation masks,
i.e., Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS) (Zhou et al. 2022b).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5669

