The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MeDM: Mediating Image Diffusion Models for Video-to-Video Translation with
Temporal Correspondence Guidance
Ernie Chu, Tzuhsuan Huang, Shuo-Yen Lin, Jun-Cheng Chen
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
128 Academia Road, Section 2, Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.)
{shchu, jason890425, joseph, pullpull}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

have extended text-to-image models to encompass video
generation, incorporating a temporal aspect into the latent
Diffusion Models (LDMs) (Blattmann et al. 2023). In addition, several zero-shot methods are also proposed to directly
leverage the pre-trained image-based or text-to-image-based
DMs for text-guided video-to-video translation, including
Pix2Video (Ceylan, Huang, and Mitra 2023), Rerender A
Video (Yang et al. 2023), ControlVideo (Chen et al. 2023),
etc. While these methods achieve video transformation, some
still experience persistent flickering issues, while others involve intricate and meticulous processes.
To perform efficient and high-quality temporally consistent video-to-video translation, we propose a novel temporal
correspondence guidance based on optical flows to Mediate
image Diffusion Models (MeDM, pronounced “medium”)
for video-to-video translation. Explicit optical flows are utilized to establish an encoding based on pixel correspondences
across video frames. By leveraging this encoding, pixels on
a trajectory stay consistent to their corresponding pixel in a
global pixel repository, and maintaining temporal consistency
in the generated videos can be framed as an optimization
problem with a closed-form solution. Then, the proposed approach enables high-quality and temporally consistent videoto-video translation by iteratively aligning corresponding
noisy pixels across video frames using the provided temporal correspondence guidance derived from optical flows for
each denoising step. Notably, MeDM does not necessitate
additional video data for fine-tuning or test-time optimization of the DMs. With extensive quantitative, qualitative, and
subjective evaluation on different benchmarks and tasks, our
approach outperforms other state-of-the-art alternatives in
terms of video quality and temporal consistency. The effectiveness of MeDM is also demonstrated in Figure 1.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.

This study introduces an efficient and effective method,
MeDM, that utilizes pre-trained image Diffusion Models for
video-to-video translation with consistent temporal flow. The
proposed framework can render videos from scene position
information, such as a normal G-buffer, or perform text-guided
editing on videos captured in real-world scenarios. We employ
explicit optical flows to construct a practical coding that enforces physical constraints on generated frames and mediates
independent frame-wise scores. By leveraging this coding,
maintaining temporal consistency in the generated videos can
be framed as an optimization problem with a closed-form solution. To ensure compatibility with Stable Diffusion, we also
suggest a workaround for modifying observation-space scores
in latent Diffusion Models. Notably, MeDM does not require
fine-tuning or test-time optimization of the Diffusion Models.
Through extensive qualitative, quantitative, and subjective experiments on various benchmarks, the study demonstrates the
effectiveness and superiority of the proposed approach. Our
project page can be found at https://medm2023.github.io/.

Introduction
Recently, diffusion-based deep generative models (DMs) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021; Song
et al. 2021) have set new benchmarks in image generation,
particularly for text-to-image tasks. Major tech companies
are investing heavily in large-scale text-to-image models, like
DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al. 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al. 2022),
and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022). These models
deliver high-quality images within seconds based on text descriptions. Additionally, models like InstructPix2Pix (Brooks,
Holynski, and Efros 2023) and ControlNet (Zhang, Rao,
and Agrawala 2023) enable instruction-based and structurepreserving text-guided image-to-image translations. These
advances have spurred novel applications in content creation.
However, generating videos or performing video-to-video
translation while maintaining temporal consistency remains
a challenging and ongoing problem.
To tackle this challenge, many text-to-video models have
been proposed, including Imagen Video (Ho et al. 2022),
Make-A-Video (Singer et al. 2023), etc. However, these approaches demand substantial training videos and computational resources. To mitigate these requirements, researchers

• We develop a practical coding algorithm and a global
pixel repository based on optical flows to mediate independently estimated image scores. This mediation can
seamlessly integrate into current state-of-the-art imagebased denoising cycles, enhancing their ability for highquality, consistent video-to-video translation.
• We propose a workaround for modifying observationspace scores in LDMs, which enables more general LDM
applications.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1353

