The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NeBLa: Neural Beer-Lambert for 3D Reconstruction of Oral Structures from
Panoramic Radiographs
Sihwa Park* 1 , Seongjun Kim1 , Doeyoung Kwon1 , Yohan Jang1 , In-Seok Song2 , Seung Jun Baek†1
1

2

Korea University
Korea University Anam Hospital

Abstract

Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) is another dental imaging technique which provides a comprehensive 3D
view of oral and maxillofacial structures. CBCT enables accurate 3D imaging of hard tissues, but it is more expensive
(Lopes et al. 2016) and exposes patients to a greater dose of
radiation compared to PX (Brooks 2009).
Previous studies (Liang et al. 2020; Song et al. 2021) used
conventional encoder-decoder models for 3D reconstruction
from PX data. Those models are trained with synthetic PX
data generated from CBCT, instead of real-world PX. This
is because it is difficult to obtain paired PX-CBCT data from
the same patient. A number of problems arise from this approach. Firstly, the synthesis of PX typically involves flattening out layers of CBCT data (Yun et al. 2019), during
which spatial information can be lost. Secondly, the encoderdecoder models are oblivious to how input PX are generated,
and simply rely on supervision from synthetic data (Song
et al. 2021). Thirdly, to compensate for lost spatial information, the reconstruction model requires additional information such as the shape of patients’ dental arches (Song
et al. 2021). To overcome these problems, we propose that
the generation of synthetic PX and model architecture be
closely intertwined. The PX synthesis should capture spatial
information of CBCT which is based on the core principle
of PX imaging. The model should be aware of the process of
synthesizing 2D PX from 3D CBCT, so that the model can
readily revert the process to reconstruct 3D data. Finally, one
should narrow the domain gap between synthetic and real
PX, so that CBCT can be accurately estimated from real PX.
Based on these guidelines, we propose a novel architecture named NeBLa (Neural Beer-Lambert) for the reconstruction of 3D oral structures from real-world PX images.
To overcome the modality gap between real-world PX and
CBCT, we propose an intermediate representation called
simulated PX (SimPX). SimPX images are synthesized from
CBCT by incorporating the imaging principles of PX and the
Beer-Lambert law (Max 1995) to render realistic PX images.
Next, we propose a neural model for density estimation from
SimPX inspired by NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020). However, unlike original NeRF which generates novel views of
a single object, NeBLa estimates 3D structures for multiple
objects (patients) using input PX image as a condition. Our
model is designed to capture both local and global features
of SimPX to an effective estimation of object-dependent

Panoramic radiography (Panoramic X-ray, PX) is a widely
used imaging modality for dental examination. However, PX
only provides a flattened 2D image, lacking in a 3D view of
the oral structure. In this paper, we propose NeBLa (Neural Beer-Lambert) to estimate 3D oral structures from realworld PX. NeBLa tackles full 3D reconstruction for varying subjects (patients) where each reconstruction is based
only on a single panoramic image. We create an intermediate representation called simulated PX (SimPX) from 3D
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) data based on the
Beer-Lambert law of X-ray rendering and rotational principles of PX imaging. SimPX aims at not only truthfully simulating PX, but also facilitates the reverting process back to 3D
data. We propose a novel neural model based on ray tracing
which exploits both global and local input features to convert
SimPX to 3D output. At inference, a real PX image is translated to a SimPX-style image with semantic regularization,
and the translated image is processed by generation module to
produce high-quality outputs. Experiments show that NeBLa
outperforms prior state-of-the-art in reconstruction tasks both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Unlike prior methods, NeBLa
does not require any prior information such as the shape of
dental arches, nor the matched PX-CBCT dataset for training, which is difficult to obtain in clinical practice. Our code
is available at https://github.com/sihwa-park/nebla.

Introduction
Panoramic radiography (Panoramic X-ray, or PX) is a standard imaging technique for examining and diagnosing dental conditions. However, PX only provides flattened 2D images, making it difficult to visualize the complete oral structure despite its panoramic nature. Since PX is a widely used
imaging modality, there is a growing interest in estimating
3D oral structures from PX data. The estimated 3D representation offers a wide range of applications including
3D visualizations for patient education (Liang et al. 2020).
Also, the generated 3D data can be integrated with virtual
or augmented reality, e.g., in virtual surgical simulations for
training physicians (Pohlenz et al. 2010; Li et al. 2021).
* Contact Email: sihwapark@korea.ac.kr
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4433

