The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DATA E LIXIR: Purifying Poisoned Dataset to Mitigate Backdoor Attacks
via Diffusion Models
Jiachen Zhou1,2 , Peizhuo Lv1,2 , Yibing Lan1,2 , Guozhu Meng1,2 * , Kai Chen1,2 * , Hualong Ma1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{zhoujiachen, lvpeizhuo, lanyibing, mengguozhu, chenkai, mahualong}@iie.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Dataset sanitization is a widely adopted proactive defense
against poisoning-based backdoor attacks, aimed at filtering
out and removing poisoned samples from training datasets.
However, existing methods have shown limited efficacy in
countering the ever-evolving trigger functions, and often
leading to considerable degradation of benign accuracy. In
this paper, we propose DATA E LIXIR, a novel sanitization approach tailored to purify poisoned datasets. We leverage diffusion models to eliminate trigger features and restore benign
features, thereby turning the poisoned samples into benign
ones. Specifically, with multiple iterations of the forward and
reverse process, we extract intermediary images and their predicted labels for each sample in the original dataset. Then,
we identify anomalous samples in terms of the presence of
label transition of the intermediary images, detect the target
label by quantifying distribution discrepancy, select their purified images considering pixel and feature distance, and determine their ground-truth labels by training a benign model.
Experiments conducted on 9 popular attacks demonstrates
that DATA E LIXIR effectively mitigates various complex attacks while exerting minimal impact on benign accuracy, surpassing the performance of baseline defense methods.

Figure 1: The forward and reverse process in diffusion models. The poisoned image is misclassified as “airplane” due
to the trigger in the lower right. The forward process eliminates this trigger by introducing noise, while the reverse process restores the benign features, correcting the model to its
ground-truth label “bird”.

et al. 2022). In particular, backdoor attacks craft poisoned
samples by using trigger functions to modify benign images.
Victim models trained on these poisoned datasets, although
can make accurate predictions for benign inputs, will be controlled to produce wrong outputs given poisoned inputs.
A straightforward and effective way to defend such backdoor attacks is to identify in the dataset the poisoned samples and further remove or replace them. Prior studies propose dataset sanitization methods to identify poisoned samples by detecting their anomalies in model activations (Chen
et al. 2019), spectral signatures (Tran, Li, and Madry 2018),
and loss values (Li et al. 2021c; Huang et al. 2022). Subsequently, they remove identified anomalous samples from the
dataset to train benign models free from backdoors. However, existing methods have exhibited limited effectiveness,
only working on specific types of trigger functions and often
resulting in considerable degradation of benign accuracy (Li
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022). Similar challenges are also
encountered in other types of defense approaches, including model reconstruction (Wang et al. 2019; Wu and Wang
2021; Li et al. 2021d; Zeng et al. 2022) and input purification (Doan, Abbasnejad, and Ranasinghe 2020; Shi et al.
2023; May et al. 2023).
In this paper, we propose DATA E LIXIR, a novel sanitization approach tailored to purify poisoned datasets. We utilize the forward and reverse process of diffusion models to

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited remarkable
performance in various fields, including autonomous driving (Grigorescu et al. 2020), facial recognition (Wang and
Deng 2021) and medical image analysis (Shen, Wu, and Suk
2017), etc. Advanced DNN models necessitate large and
diverse high-quality data for training. However, collecting
high-quality data is an exceedingly resource-intensive task.
For instance, ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) took more than
two years to construct and consumed substantial resources.
Therefore, it has become customary for individuals to leverage data from external sources, such as data markets and
crowd-sourcing platforms (Zeng et al. 2023).
However, except for a few authoritative and communitymaintained sources that are well maintained and thereby
have high-quality data (HuggingFace 2016), other sources
may be poisoned with backdoor samples by miscreants (Li
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21850

