The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pushing the Limit of Fine-Tuning for Few-Shot Learning:
Where Feature Reusing Meets Cross-Scale Attention
Ying-Yu Chen1 , Jun-Wei Hsieh1 *, Xin Li2 , Ming-Ching Chang2
1

College of Artificial Intelligence and Green Energy, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan.
2
Department of Computer Science, University at Albany - SUNY.
a0919903171@gmail.com, jwhsieh@nycu.edu.tw, Xin.Li@mail.wvu.edu, mchang2@albany.edu.

Abstract

made independently, and (2) transductive few-shot, where
predictions are made taking into account the relationships
among all labeled and unlabeled samples in a batch.
Many methods have been developed to address FSL in
recent years, including transfer-based methods that achieve
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. With the constraints of
few samples, transfer learning aims to transfer the knowledge learned from a large labeled dataset (base case) to
the unlabeled target dataset (novel case). Recent studies
(Shalam and Korman 2022; Hu, Pateux, and Gripon 2022;
Hu, Gripon, and Pateux 2021) claim that the main problem of transfer learning is the skewed distribution of feature maps extracted using the feature backbone pre-trained
with the base case, which might deviate from that in the
target case. To strengthen the quality of the extracted features, they preprocess the feature maps with PCA-like transforms and power transforms to fit a particular distribution
(i.e. Gaussian-like), then apply optimal transport to solve
the classification problem. The current SOTA method of
P>M>F (PMF) (Hu et al. 2022) demonstrates that largescale models can also be feasible for FSL after pre-training
with external data. Furthermore, fine-tuning the model on
the target dataset can further boost the FSL performance.
However, little is known about how much room is left for
further optimization of FSL performance, partially due to
the simplicity of the pipeline considered in PMF.
The motivation behind this work is two-fold. On the one
hand, conventional wisdom in supervised learning requires
abundant labeled training data, because each convolution
block in the CNN model is finely trained to provide feature maps for the following convolution blocks. However,
when it comes to few-shot classification tasks, the practicality of fine-tuning each convolution block using the novel
target data becomes doubtful. Imprecise information generated by previous blocks may lead to drift in the subsequent
blocks, and therefore degrades the FSL performance. On the
other hand, FSL tasks demand the model to learn from a
few labeled samples, which may not fully represent the entire distribution of the target classes. It is desirable to let
the model combine local and global information for making predictions. How to handle few-shot examples on a local scale while also capturing higher-level patterns from the
entire dataset remains an open question in the FSL literature (Song et al. 2023). Such scaling-related inconsistencies

Due to the scarcity of training samples, Few-Shot Learning
(FSL) poses a significant challenge to capture discriminative object features effectively. The combination of transfer
learning and meta-learning has recently been explored by pretraining the backbone features using labeled base data and
subsequently fine-tuning the model with target data. However, existing meta-learning methods, which use embedding
networks, suffer from scaling limitations when dealing with a
few labeled samples, resulting in suboptimal results. Inspired
by the latest advances in FSL, we further advance the approach of fine-tuning a pre-trained architecture by a strengthened hierarchical feature representation. The technical contributions of this work include: 1) a hybrid design named
Intra-Block Fusion (IBF) to strengthen the extracted features
within each convolution block; and 2) a novel Cross-Scale
Attention (CSA) module to mitigate the scaling inconsistencies arising from the limited training samples, especially
for cross-domain tasks. We conducted comprehensive evaluations on standard benchmarks, including three in-domain
tasks (miniImageNet, CIFAR-FS, and FC100), as well as two
cross-domain tasks (CDFSL and Meta-Dataset). The results
have improved significantly over existing state-of-the-art approaches on all benchmark datasets. In particular, the FSL
performance on the in-domain FC100 dataset is more than
three points better than the latest PMF of Hu et al. 2022.

Introduction
When large and well-annotated datasets are available, deep
learning including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Vision Transformers has made substantial progress in
many areas, including classification, detection, and segmentation. However, deep learning encounters challenges in
real-world scenarios due to the cost of collecting sufficient
data or even the impracticality to do so. Optimizing deep
CNNs or Transformers with significantly larger parameters
than the training dataset can result in severe overfitting. FewShot Learning (FSL) aims to solve this problem by allowing
CNN or Transformer models to learn from very few annotated data and transfer the knowledge across different domains (Wang et al. 2020). FSL methods can be divided into
two types: (1) inductive few-shot, where each prediction is
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11434

