The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SCD-Net: Spatiotemporal Clues Disentanglement Network for
Self-Supervised Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Cong Wu1,2 , Xiao-Jun Wu1 * , Josef Kittler2 , Tianyang Xu1 , Sara Ahmed2 ,
Muhammad Awais2 , Zhenhua Feng2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, and CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK
congwu@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn, wu xiaojun@jiangnan.edu.cn; tianyang xu@163.com; {sara.atito, muhammad.awais, j.kittler,
z.feng}@surrey.ac.uk
2

Abstract

associations instead of relying on annotations. In particular, recent investigations (Dong et al. 2023) have demonstrated that contrastive learning, owing to its interpretability and transferability, has emerged as a front-runner in selfsupervised skeleton-based action recognition.
However, several crucial aspects are disregarded by existing approaches. First, the encoder is responsible for mapping
the input into a latent space where the contrast can be conducted. While most previous methods (Zhang et al. 2022a;
Franco et al. 2023) concentrate on obtaining unified information through commonly used spatiotemporal modelling
networks. Their designs result in the complete entanglement of information, failing to provide clear indications for
subsequent contrastive measures. There have been sporadic
attempts (Dong et al. 2023) aiming to extract absolutely
isolated spatial or temporal information. But repeated evidence has shown that complete isolation of spatiotemporal
information is suboptimal for action recognition (Kay et al.
2017; Lin, Gan, and Han 2019). More importantly, most approaches focus on constructing contrast pairs at same level
of representation (Guo et al. 2022) during optimisation; Or
attempt to force the interaction between information flows,
overlooking the gap between domains (Dong et al. 2023).
In addition, existing techniques (Thoker et al. 2021) often
limit themselves to scale transformation, which results in not
fully capitalising on the potential of data augmentation. Here
we introduce a novel contrastive learning framework that
focuses on disentangling spatiotemporal clues, and exploits
masking in data augmentation to provide more discriminative inputs, thereby prompting the model to learn more robust interactions.
To leverage the intricate features present in skeleton sequences, we propose a dual-path decoupling encoder to generate explicit representations from spatial and temporal domains. Our encoder comprises two main subsystems: a feature extractor and a decoupling module. The role of the
feature extractor is to extract fundamental spatiotemporal
features from skeleton sequences as the intermediate representations. Since lacking an overall grasp of the skeleton
sequence, it is difficult to obtain a picture of the features
simply by modelling from a certain perspective. Next, we
generate token embeddings by projection and refine the sequence features with a transformer-based module. The decoupling modules are instrumental to deriving disentangled

Contrastive learning has achieved great success in skeletonbased action recognition. However, most existing approaches
encode the skeleton sequences as entangled spatiotemporal
representations and confine the contrasts to the same level
of representation. Instead, this paper introduces a novel contrastive learning framework, namely Spatiotemporal Clues
Disentanglement Network (SCD-Net). Specifically, we integrate the decoupling module with a feature extractor to derive
explicit clues from spatial and temporal domains respectively.
As for the training of SCD-Net, with a constructed global anchor, we encourage the interaction between the anchor and
extracted clues. Further, we propose a new masking strategy
with structural constraints to strengthen the contextual associations, leveraging the latest development from masked image
modelling into the proposed SCD-Net. We conduct extensive evaluations on the NTU-RGB+D (60&120) and PKUMMD (I&II) datasets, covering various downstream tasks
such as action recognition, action retrieval, transfer learning, and semi-supervised learning. The experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms the existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches significantly. Our code and supplementary material can be found at
https://github.com/cong-wu/SCD-Net.

1

Introduction

Skeleton-based action recognition focuses on identifying
human actions via skeleton sequences, which has witnessed significant advancements in recent years. On one
hand, deep networks, such as Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018), have been investigated and successfully applied for the task at hand.
On the other hand, several large-scale datasets, e.g., NTURGB+D (Shahroudy et al. 2016), have been proposed, providing an experimental foundation for further development
of the area. However, like most visual tasks, the training of a high-performance model typically requires a massive amount of high-quality labelled data. This requirement
poses a significant challenge in data collection and annotation. Fortunately, self-supervised learning has emerged as
a solution to address this challenge by leveraging inherent
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5949

