The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AMD: Autoregressive Motion Diffusion
Bo Han1 , Hao Peng2 , Minjing Dong3 , Yi Ren1 , Yixuan Shen4 , Chang Xu3 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Univerisity
2
Unity China
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
4
National University of Singapore
borishan815@gmail.com, caspian.peng@unity.cn, mdon0736@uni.sydney.edu.au, rayeren613@gmail.com,
yshe0148@gmail.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

Latent space strategy (Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022;
Ahuja and Morency 2019; Tevet et al. 2022a): This is typically done by separately learning a motion Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013) and a text
encoder, and then constraining them to a compatible latent space using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence loss.
However, since the distributions of natural language and human motion are vastly different, forcibly aligning these two
simple Gaussian distributions can result in misalignments
and diminished generative diversity.
Diffusion-based approach (Tevet et al. 2022b; Zhang et al.
2022; Xin et al. 2023): diffusion models (Ho and Salimans
2022; Song et al. 2020) have recently attracted significant
attention and have shown remarkable breakthroughs in various areas such as video (Luo et al. 2023), image (Ramesh
et al. 2022), and 3D point cloud generation (Han, Liu, and
Shen 2023), etc. Current motion generation methods based
on diffusion models (Tevet et al. 2022b; Zhang et al. 2022;
Xin et al. 2023) have achieved exceptional results using different denoising strategies.
Typically, MDM (Tevet et al. 2022b) proposes a motion
diffusion model on raw motion data to learn the relationship
between motion and text conditions. However, these models tend to only generate single motions or contain several
motion sequences and are often inefficient for complex long
texts. Autoregressive method (Gopalakrishnan et al. 2019;
Pavllo et al. 2020; Athanasiou et al. 2022): they can process
varying motion lengths, tackling the issue of fixed motion
duration. However, their single-step generation methods often rely on traditional VAE models (Kingma and Welling
2013), which are less effective than diffusion models. Despite the progress made by existing methods, text-based conditional human motion generation remains a challenging
task for several reasons:

Human motion generation aims to produce plausible human
motion sequences according to various conditional inputs,
such as text or audio. Despite the feasibility of existing methods in generating motion based on short prompts and simple motion patterns, they encounter difficulties when dealing
with long prompts or complex motions. The challenges are
two-fold: 1) the scarcity of human motion-captured data for
long prompts and complex motions. 2) the high diversity of
human motions in the temporal domain and the substantial
divergence of distributions from conditional modalities, leading to a many-to-many mapping problem when generating
motion with complex and long texts. In this work, we address
these gaps by 1) elaborating the first dataset pairing long textual descriptions and 3D complex motions (HumanLong3D),
and 2) proposing an autoregressive motion diffusion model
(AMD). Specifically, AMD integrates the text prompt at the
current timestep with the text prompt and action sequences
at the previous timestep as conditional information to predict the current action sequences in an autoregressive iterative
manner. Furthermore, we present its generalization for X-toMotion with “No Modality Left Behind”, enabling the generation of high-definition and high-fidelity human motions
based on user-defined modality input.

Introduction
Human motion generation is a crucial task in computer
animation and has applications in various fields including
gaming, robots, and film. Traditionally, new motion is accessed through motion capture in the gaming industry, which
can be costly. As a result, automatically generating motion
from textual descriptions or audio signals can be more timeefficient and cost-effective. Related research work is currently flourishing, exploring human motion generation from
different modalities (Tevet et al. 2022b; Zhang et al. 2022;
Tseng, Castellon, and Liu 2022; Li et al. 2021).
Current text-based conditional human motion synthesis
approaches have demonstrated plausible mapping from text
to motion (Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022; Tevet et al.
2022b; Zhang et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2023). They are mainly divided into three categories:

• Lack of motion-captured data: At present, there are few
widely used text-to-motion datasets (Plappert, Mandery,
and Asfour 2016; Guo et al. 2022; Punnakkal et al. 2021),
which mostly contain simple motions and are deficient in
long text prompts, i,e., ”he is flying kick with his left leg”.
• Weak correlation: Due to the differing distributions of language and human motion, resulting in a multiple mapping
problem (Tevet et al. 2022b). This issue is further exacerbated when generating long text-based human motions.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2022

