The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A New Benchmark and Model for Challenging Image Manipulation Detection
Zhenfei Zhang1 , Mingyang Li2 , Ming-Ching Chang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University at Albany, State University of New York, New York, USA, 12222
2
Department of Bioengineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 0E9
zzhang45@albany.edu, mingyang.li@mail.mcgill.ca, mchang2@albany.edu

Abstract
The ability to detect manipulation in multimedia data is vital in digital forensics. Existing Image Manipulation Detection (IMD) methods are mainly based on detecting anomalous
features arisen from image editing or double compression
artifacts. All existing IMD techniques encounter challenges
when it comes to detecting small tampered regions from a
large image. Moreover, compression-based IMD approaches
face difficulties in cases of double compression of identical
quality factors. To investigate the State-of-The-Art (SoTA)
IMD methods in those challenging conditions, we introduce
a new Challenging Image Manipulation Detection (CIMD)
benchmark dataset, which consists of two subsets, for evaluating editing-based and compression-based IMD methods, respectively. The dataset images were manually taken and tampered with high-quality annotations. In addition, we propose
a new two-branch network model based on HRNet that can
better detect both the image-editing and compression artifacts
in those challenging conditions. Extensive experiments on the
CIMD benchmark show that our model significantly outperforms SoTA IMD methods on CIMD. The dataset is available
at: https://github.com/ZhenfeiZ/CIMD.

Figure 1: Sample images of our dataset and comparison
of image manipulation detection results with recent mainstream methods. The first three rows show manipulation of
region copy-move, splicing and removal, respectively. The
last row shows double-compressed splicing with the same
Quality Factor (QF). Our method achieves the new state-ofthe-art in detecting challenging manipulation cases.

Introduction
With the advancement image editing and AI content generation, image editing, tampering and content synthesis are
becoming common. However, the abuse of these technologies can bring in serious security and social impacts, including misinformation, disinformation, and deepfakes (Hu et al.
2021; Tolosana et al. 2020). Image Manipulation Detection (IMD) methods that can accurately detect image manipulation regions are important in media forensics.
There are three general types of image manipulation operations: (1) region splicing, where the content from one image
is copied and pasted onto another image, (2) region copymove, where an image regions is moved to another location
within the same image, and (3) region removal, where parts
of the image are erased and new contents are synthesized. To
accurately detect these manipulations, some methods rely
on detecting anomalous image region or texture features,
while others identify double compression artifacts. While
the State-of-the-Art (SoTA) IMD methods perform well on

mainstream public IMD datasets, they still face two challenges as shown in Fig. 1. First, existing IMD methods have
general difficulties in detecting relatively small tampered regions, due to the data-driven design under limited visual information. Secondly, approaches detecting double compression inconsistencies with two different quantization matrices fall apart when the compression Quality Factor (QF)
remains the same. This is because the use of identical Qmatrix can significantly suppress double compression artifacts. As shown in Fig. 3, methods in this category detect
tampered regions by identifying missing histogram values
arisen from the two compression processes. When the same
QF is used, the histogram undergoes very small changes,
making it hard to detect double compression. In summary, as
the image tampering techniques improve increasingly fast,
forensic problems are typically ill-defined, and IMD methods in general fall behind in research for challenging cases.
To address the issues and challenging conditions, we
present a new two-branch IMD network incorporating both

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7405

