The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CGS-Mask: Making Time Series Predictions Intuitive for All
Feng Lu* 1 , Wei Li* †2 , Yifei Sun* 1 , Cheng Song1 , Yufei Ren3 , Albert Y. Zomaya2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
The Australia-China Joint Research Centre for Energy Informatics and Demand Response Technologies, Centre for
Distributed and High Performance Computing, School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{lufeng,sunyifei,songch}@hust.edu.cn, {weiwilson.li,albert.zomaya}@sydney.edu.au, yfren@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) has immense potential in time series prediction, but most explainable tools have limited capabilities in providing a systematic understanding of important
features over time. These tools typically rely on evaluating a
single time point, overlook the time ordering of inputs, and
neglect the time-sensitive nature of time series applications.
These factors make it difficult for users, particularly those
without domain knowledge, to comprehend AI model decisions and obtain meaningful explanations. We propose CGSMask, a post-hoc and model-agnostic cellular genetic strip
mask-based saliency approach to address these challenges.
CGS-Mask uses consecutive time steps as a cohesive entity to
evaluate the impact of features on the final prediction, providing binary and sustained feature importance scores over time.
Our algorithm optimizes the mask population iteratively to
obtain the optimal mask in a reasonable time. We evaluated
CGS-Mask on synthetic and real-world datasets, and it outperformed state-of-the-art methods in elucidating the importance of features over time. According to our pilot user study
via a questionnaire survey, CGS-Mask is the most effective
approach in presenting easily understandable time series prediction results, enabling users to comprehend the decisionmaking process of AI models with ease.

Figure 1: Six explanation masks are employed to analyze
data from MIMIC-III, covering the 48 hours preceding a patient’s death. In Fig. 1(f), the green strips reveal the key features indicative of patient outcomes. Specifically, a decline
in blood pressure, tachycardia of heart rate, and rapid breathing signal an impending risk of death, thereby enabling
timely intervention by doctors. However, the other masks do
not distinctly identify the periods and features contributing
to this outcome, particularly as observed in Fig. 1(a)−(d).
Saliency methods aim to explain the importance of input features for predictions, which is crucial for building
trust among stakeholders (Adebayo et al. 2018; Sun et al.
2023). Perturbation-based methods (Ivanovs, Kadikis, and
Ozols 2021) like Feature Occlusion (FO) (Suresh et al.
2017) and RISE (Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko 2018), perturb
inputs and compare the resulting outcomes to provide explanations. Gradient-based methods like Integrated Gradient (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017), DeepLIFT (Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017), and GradSHAP (Lundberg et al. 2018) use feature representation gradients for
explanation. Attention mechanisms are used with saliency
methods (Vaswani et al. 2017; Kwon et al. 2018; Gomez,
Fréour, and Mouchère 2022), but their efficacy for explaining black-box models remains a topic of debate (Bai et al.
2021; Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019). SHAP (Lundberg and
Lee 2017) uses Shapley values, while LIME (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016) derives explanation from a random local
combination of records and their neighborhoods weighted
by proximity.
Some saliency methods have been implemented as explainable AI tools and worked well on images, text, and tab-

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly being used for
time series prediction, particularly in fields like healthcare (Esteva et al. 2019), physics (Naul et al. 2018), energy (Bedi and Toshniwal 2019), and sensor data (Moin
et al. 2021). Ensuring that users can quickly comprehend
the reasons behind AI decisions is crucial, particularly in
time-sensitive applications where AI is employed to aid in
decision-making. Explanation methods are designed to investigate the factors behind a decision and expose any biases or unintended effects of AI models. The transparency
and explainability provided by these methods increase human trust in AI models, allowing for more extensive and
profound use of AI (Kanamori et al. 2020; Albini et al. 2020;
Lu et al. 2023b).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14149

