The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Automatic Interpretation of Line Probe Assay Test for Tuberculosis
Jatin Agrawal1 * , Mukul Kumar1 * , Avtansh Tiwari1 * , Sachin Danisetty1 , Soma Dhavala1 , Nakul
Jain1 , Prasaanth Balraj1 , Niket Singh1 , Siddhant Shingi1 , Jayakrishna Kurada1 , Raghuram Rao2 ,
S Anand2 , Nishant Kumar2
1

Wadhwani Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Central Tuberculosis Division, Government of India
{jatin,mukul,sachin,soma,nakul,prasaanth,niket}@wadhwaniai.org,
{raor,anands,kumarn}@rntcp.org
2

Abstract

There are two types of LPA tests: i) First Line (FL)
and ii) Second Line (SL). FL-LPA picks up drug resistance to First Line Anti TB drugs such as Isoniazid and
Rifampicin while SL-LPA picks up drug resistance to Second line Anti TB drugs such as Fluoroquinolones and second line injectables. According to the guidelines of the National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme (NTEP) of India, all micro-biologically confirmed pulmonary TB patients
should be tested for drug sensitivity using LPA. Approximately 1,000,000 patients should be tested for LPA. At
present, 400,000 tests are performed every year across 64
Culture and drug Sensitivity Test Labs (CDST).
Existing practice requires lab technicians and microbiologists to review each strip, determine the bands present in
the strip, and apply a set of rules to infer sensitivity to the
corresponding drugs. In our study, we found that it takes up
to an hour for a lab technician to read, interpret, and tabulate
an LPA sheet containing 24 strips. Through this solution, we
show that this process can be automated by using machine
learning. We develop a novel system that:

Line Probe Assay (LPA) is a widely used method for diagnosing drug-resistant tuberculosis (DRTB), but it is a timeconsuming and labor-intensive process that requires expert
interpretation. DRTB is a significant threat to global TB control efforts and its prompt diagnosis is critical for initiating
appropriate treatment. In this paper, we present an automated
LPA test interpretation solution that uses computer vision
techniques to extract and analyze strips from LPA sheets and
uses machine learning algorithms to produce drug sensitivity
and resistivity outcomes with extremely high precision and
recall. We also develop OCR models to eliminate manual data
entry to further reduce the overall time. Our solution comprises a rejection module that flags ambiguous and novel samples that are then referred to experienced lab technicians. This
results in increased trust in the solution. To evaluate our solution, we curate an extensive and diverse dataset of LPA strips
annotated by multiple microbiologists across India. Our solution achieves more than 95% accuracy for all drugs on this
dataset. The proposed solution has the potential to increase
the efficiency, standardization of LPA test interpretation, and
fast-tracking the dissemination of results to end-users via a
designated Management Information System (MIS).

• Automates the interpretation of LPA sheets.
• Improves overall efficiency, standardizes LPA results,
and fast-tracks the dissemination of results to the end
user via designated MIS.

Introduction
Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is a major public health concern worldwide. In 2019, there were an estimated 10 million
cases of TB, and 1.4 million people died from the disease
(WHO, 2020). The LPA testing process involves a complex
interaction between a series of probes (reagents) and specific
segments of TB bacterial DNA called genotypes (wild types
and mutations) which are visible as dark bands of varying intensities against a white background. Each patient’s LPA test
result is captured over a special 64x3mm paper strip with 27
bands each representing a unique band class, which is interpreted by lab technicians and microbiologists to infer sensitivity to various drugs. LPA test strips for each patient are
serially pasted onto an LPA sheet and are interpreted manually in the lab using a reference reading strip. The sample
sheet can be seen in Figure 1.

• Achieves extremely high precision and recall for all
classes on a gold standard dataset.
• Mitigates biases and improves trustworthiness by introducing human in the loop.

Related Works
Automation in Tuberculosis Diagnosis
Efforts to automate TB diagnosis have gained traction in
recent years. Various automated techniques have been explored to improve the speed, accuracy, and scalability of
TB diagnostic processes (Panicker et al. 2015). Automated
microscopy techniques, using image processing techniques
have been explored to automate various diagnosis tests in
TB, and have shown promising results in reducing the subjectivity and time required for TB detection (Lopez-Garnier,
Sheen, and Zimic 2019).

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21897

