The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Learn Better Visual Prompts
Fengxiang Wang1 , Wanrong Huang1 , Shaowu Yang1 * , Fan Qi2 , Long Lan1
1

HPCL, College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{wfx23, huangwanrong12, shaowu.yang}@nudt.edu.cn, fanqics@gmail.com,long.lan@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

task-related model training is a formidable challenge. To
address the aforementioned quandary, prompt tuning (Gan
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022b,a; Gao et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2021) has explored the application of pre-trained VLM
models to downstream tasks with limited data, and achieved
exceptional outcomes in zero-shot visual tasks.
Unlike CLIP utilizes a manually curated handcrafted fixed
prompt ”a photo of a [Class]” as a text-based class embedding for zero-shot classification, the methods such as CoOp
for prompt tuning concatenate learnable text tokens with
class labels to acquire specific textual knowledge for prediction. However, this explicit textual understanding becomes
excessively tailored to downstream tasks, thus demonstrating poor generalization to new classes. Some previous works
(Zhou et al. 2022b,a; Yao, Zhang, and Xu 2023) demonstrate
the phenomenon of overfitting with CoOp-based methods:
CoOp’s accuracy on the base class initially increases then
declines, while on the new class, it continually drops and
remains unstable. Nevertheless, current efforts to mitigate
overfitting within CoOp still possess limitations. For example, distinct from employing conventional anti-overfitting
techniques, CoCoOp (Zhou et al. 2022a) seeks to reduce
the extent of overfitting by introducing image prompts with
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)-transformed images feature.
However, CoCoOp still shows a marked decrease in accuracy in the latter stages of training, manifesting a conspicuous issue of overfitting. Furthermore, KgCoOp (Yao, Zhang,
and Xu 2023) introduces specific losses to minimize the
disparity between learnable prompts and manual prompts,
which alleviates CoOp’s overfitting phenomenon to some
extent. However, these methods exhibit limitations in alleviating the overfitting within CoOp. We argue that the scale
of the pre-trained model is a hundred times more than the
scale of the adaptable vector, thus the learned vector has a
limited ability to absorb the knowledge of novel classes. We
believe that the CoOp-based research lacks consideration for
the organization of input data during prompt tuning. They
merely use the base class data as a holistic input for training
and fitting, thereby resulting in the text knowledge becoming
overly tailored to the base class.
Recently, meta-learning (Hospedales et al. 2021), otherwise termed “learning to learn”, has emerged as one of
the common techniques to address the problem of few-shot
learning. Inspired by meta-learning, we explore the advan-

Prompt tuning provides a low-cost way of adapting visionlanguage models (VLMs) for various downstream vision
tasks without requiring updating the huge pre-trained parameters. Dispensing with the conventional manual crafting of prompts, the recent prompt tuning method of Context Optimization (CoOp) introduces adaptable vectors as text
prompts. Nevertheless, several previous works point out that
the CoOp-based approaches are easy to overfit to the base
classes and hard to generalize to novel classes. In this paper, we reckon that the prompt tuning works well only in
the base classes because of the limited capacity of the adaptable vectors. In addition, the scale of the pre-trained model
is a hundred times the scale of the adaptable vector, thus the
learned vector has a very limited ability to absorb the knowledge of novel classes. To minimize this excessive overfitting of textual knowledge on the base class, we view prompt
tuning as learning to learn (LoL) and learn the prompt in
the way of meta-learning, the training manner of dividing
the base classes into many different subclasses could fully
exert the limited capacity of prompt tuning and thus transfer its power to recognize the novel classes. To be specific,
we initially perform fine-tuning on the base class based on
the CoOp method for pre-trained CLIP. Subsequently, predicated on the fine-tuned CLIP model, we carry out further
fine-tuning in an N-way K-shot manner from the perspective
of meta-learning on the base classes. We finally apply the
learned textual vector and VLM for unseen classes. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets validate the efficacy
of our meta-learning-informed prompt tuning, affirming its
role as a robust optimization strategy for VLMs.

Introduction
Large-scale vision language pre-training (Zhang et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2019; Bao et al. 2022; Radford
et al. 2021) has achieved remarkable progress in zero-shot
and few-shot image classification. The large pretrained vision language models (VLMs) encapsulates fundamental
universal knowledge, thus endowing models with commendable generalizability to diverse tasks. Despite VLM’s efficacy in extracting visual and textual descriptions, their training requires an abundance of high-quality datasets. In realworld vision language tasks, gathering requisite data for
* This is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5354

