The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Structural Information Guided Multimodal Pre-training
for Vehicle-Centric Perception
Xiao Wang1,2,3 , Wentao Wu1,2,4 , Chenglong Li1,2,4 * , Zhicheng Zhao1,2,4 ,
Zhe Chen5 , Yukai Shi6 , Jin Tang1,2,3
1

Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China
5
School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, La Trobe University
6
School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{wangxiaocvpr, lcl1314}@foxmail.com, wuwentao0708@163.com, {zhaozhicheng, tangjin}@ahu.edu.cn,
zhechen91@gmail.com, ykshi@gdut.edu.cn
Abstract

Understanding vehicles in images is important for various applications such as intelligent transportation and self-driving
system. Existing vehicle-centric works typically pre-train
models on large-scale classification datasets and then finetune them for specific downstream tasks. However, they neglect the specific characteristics of vehicle perception in different tasks and might thus lead to sub-optimal performance.
To address this issue, we propose a novel vehicle-centric pretraining framework called VehicleMAE, which incorporates
the structural information including the spatial structure from
vehicle profile information and the semantic structure from
informative high-level natural language descriptions for effective masked vehicle appearance reconstruction. To be specific, we explicitly extract the sketch lines of vehicles as a
form of the spatial structure to guide vehicle reconstruction.
The more comprehensive knowledge distilled from the CLIP
big model based on the similarity between the paired/unpaired vehicle image-text sample is further taken into consideration to help achieve a better understanding of vehicles. A large-scale dataset is built to pre-train our model,
termed Autobot1M, which contains about 1M vehicle images and 12693 text information. Extensive experiments on
four vehicle-based downstream tasks fully validated the effectiveness of our VehicleMAE. The source code and pretrained models will be released at https://github.com/EventAHU/VehicleMAE.

Figure 1: Our proposed pre-trained big model VehicleMAE
takes the large-scale vehicle images and corresponding natural language descriptions as input and supports multiple
downstream vehicle-based tasks.

Wang et al. 2022a), segmentation (He et al. 2022a), attribute recognition (Liu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2022b),
re-identification (Wang et al. 2020), fine-grained classification (Krause et al. 2013), and text-based retrieval (Scribano
et al. 2021). In the early stages of deep learning, these research topics are usually studied in a relatively independent
form. To be more specific, they first collect and annotate a
small subset, then, train a neural network from scratch or
based on a pre-trained backbone network. Then, they conduct the evaluation on the testing subset. Although good
performance can be achieved compared with previous ones,
however, these problems are far from being solved due to the
complicity of the real world.
Recently, the self-attention-based Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017) networks illustrate their powerful ability on capturing long-range relations than the widely used Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Also, the big models obtained by stacking the Transformer blocks and pre-training
on large-scale datasets demonstrate their amazing performance (Wang et al. 2023). Compared with the traditional
small-scale deep neural network, these large Transformer
models have achieved obvious advantages in accuracy and

Introduction
Vehicles play a very important role in modern real life,
such as the private car, public transport bus, trucks, etc.
With the development of artificial intelligence, the problem of vehicle-centered perception has attracted more and
more attention, especially for autonomous driving, security
monitoring, and smart city. Many computer vision problems are proposed for the vehicles, including vehicle detection and tracking (Chadwick, Maddern, and Newman 2019;
* Corresponding author: Chenglong Li
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5624

