The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ProCC: Progressive Cross-Primitive Compatibility for Open-World
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Fushuo Huo1 , Wenchao Xu1 * , Song Guo3 , Jingcai Guo1, 2 * , Haozhao Wang4 , Ziming Liu1 ,
Xiaocheng Lu3
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{fushuo.huo, ziming.liu}@connect.polyu.hk, songguo@cse.ust.hk, {jc-jingcai.guo, wenchao.xu}@polyu.edu.hk,
hz wang@hust.edu.cn, xiaochenglu1997@gmail.com
2

Abstract

objects in different states often have different appearances,
and states can vary greatly conditioned on different objects.
The major challenge behind the CZSL lies in how to model
the interactions between state and object primitives and extrapolate seen compositions to unseen ones. Existing methods mainly focus on learning a shared embedding space for
object-state compositions (Li et al. 2020; Naeem et al. 2021;
Nagarajan and Grauman 2018; Khan et al. 2023) or compositional attribute and object classifiers (Purushwalkam et al.
2019; Misra, Gupta, and Hebert 2017; Li et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022).
However, the performances of these methods degrade to
some extent (Mancini et al. 2021, 2022) as for the openworld setting (OW-CZSL), where there are no priors on
the unseen compositions, and the model must consider the
whole possible compositions in terms of all objects and
states. To deal with such a problem, existing mainstream
methods utilize feasibility constraints on the composition
embedding (Mancini et al. 2021, 2022) or independently
predict simple state and object primitives (Karthik, Mancini,
and Akata 2021, 2022). While (Mancini et al. 2021, 2022)
rely on different word embedding methods. The straightforward but effective Visual Product method like (Karthik,
Mancini, and Akata 2022) predicts the state and object primitives while ignoring the compatibility between two primitives. So external knowledge is introduced to eliminate
less feasible compositions, while it is cumbersome to select
proper external knowledge for varying datasets.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose
Progressive Cross-primitive Compatibility (ProCC) network
to recognize compositions in the open-world setting and
a more realistic setting (i.e., partial supervision), aiming
at attaining cross-primitive compatibility during easy-hard
recognition progress, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, following the route of the human learning process (Hochstein
and Ahissar 2002), we first learn to classify objects, which is
easier than recognizing states (Saini, Pham, and Shrivastava
2022; Karthik, Mancini, and Akata 2022) because the same
state varies greatly conditioned on objects and related contexts, i.e., ancient castle / ancient coin, and different states
are sometimes less feasible composed with the same object,
i.e., old dog / ripe dog. Then, with the learned knowledge

Open-World Compositional Zero-shot Learning (OW-CZSL)
aims to recognize novel compositions of state and object
primitives in images with no priors on the compositional
space, which induces a tremendously large output space
containing all possible state-object compositions. Existing
works either learn the joint compositional state-object embedding or predict simple primitives with separate classifiers. However, the former method heavily relies on external
word embedding methods, and the latter ignores the interactions of interdependent primitives, respectively. In this paper,
we revisit the primitive prediction approach and propose a
novel method, termed Progressive Cross-primitive Compatibility (ProCC), to mimic the human learning process for
OW-CZSL tasks. Specifically, the cross-primitive compatibility module explicitly learns to model the interactions of
state and object features with the trainable memory units,
which efficiently acquires cross-primitive visual attention to
reason high-feasibility compositions, without the aid of external knowledge. Moreover, to alleviate the invalid crossprimitive interactions, especially for partial-supervision conditions (pCZSL), we design a progressive training paradigm
to optimize the primitive classifiers conditioned on pretrained features in an easy-to-hard manner. Extensive experiments on three widely used benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our method outperforms other representative methods on
both OW-CZSL and pCZSL settings by large margins.

Introduction
Humans can extrapolate new concepts from previously
learned knowledge. For instance, if the people are taught
what the fried chip and toasted bread are, most of them can
recognize the fried bread immediately. This ability is known
as compositional generalization (Atzmon et al. 2016), which
is one of the ultimate targets for artificial intelligence. In the
literature, such a task is formulated as Compositional ZeroShot Learning (CZSL). Concretely, the training set contains
images with corresponding descriptions (primitives), i.e.,
state and object. The model is expected to recognize unseen compositions based on known primitives, which is nontrivial because object and state are semantically tangled, i.e.,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12689

