The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Visual Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Knowledge-Based Visual Reasoning
Zhenfang Chen1 * , Qinhong Zhou2∗ , Yikang Shen1 , Yining Hong3 ,
Zhiqing Sun4 , Dan Gutfreund1 , Chuang Gan1,2
1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
2
UMass Amherst
3
University of California, Los Angeles
4
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Knowledge-based visual reasoning remains a daunting task
since it not only requires machines to interpret the concepts
and relationships from visual scenes but also associate them
with external world knowledge to conduct a chain of reasoning on open-world questions. Previous works, however, treat
visual perception and language-based reasoning as two independent modules, failing to attend to both modules throughout all stages of reasoning. To this end, we propose Visual
Chain-of-thought Prompting (VCTP) for knowledge-based
reasoning, which involves the interaction between visual content and natural language in an iterative step-by-step reasoning
manner. VCTP contains three stages, see, think and confirm.
The see stage scans the image and grounds the visual concept candidates with a visual perception model. The think
stage adopts a pre-trained large language model (LLM) to
attend to key visual concepts from natural language questions adaptively. It then transforms key visual context into text
context for prompting with a visual captioning model, and
adopts the LLM to generate the answer. The confirm stage
further uses the LLM to generate the supporting rationale for
the answer, which is then passed through a cross-modality
classifier to verify that it’s consistent with the visual context. We iterate through the think-confirm stages to ensure the
verified rationale is consistent with the answer. We conduct
experiments on a range of knowledge-based visual reasoning
datasets. We found our VCTP enjoys several benefits, 1). it
achieves better performance than the previous few-shot learning baselines; 2). it enjoys the total transparency and trustworthiness of the whole reasoning process by providing rationales
for each reasoning step; 3). it is computation-efficient compared with other fine-tuning baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/UMass-Foundation-Model/VisualCoT.git

…
1. See
2. Think

Question:
What is the name
of the room?

This is a
coffee
table.
There is a
long sofa
with brown
pillows.
The answer is
living room.

✓

3. Confirm

✓

Because sofa and
coffee table are
usually located in
✓ the living room.

Figure 1: The human process to handle knowledge-based
visual reasoning. Given an image-question pair, a human is
able to see all the objects in the image, think of the related
visual concepts to get the answer, and finally confirm the
answer is correct based on visual observation and knowledge.

2007) since they rely solely on closed-world logic rules and
hard constraints(Stenning and Van Lambalgen 2012).
We therefore study the problem of knowledge-based visual reasoning (Marino et al. 2019; Schwenk et al. 2022),
which requires models to interpret the image content, recall the relevant parts of open-world knowledge, and perform step-by-step logical reasoning to arrive at an answer.
Knowledge-based visual reasoning is more challenging than
traditional visual question answering and reasoning (Antol
et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017) in that the visual context, external knowledge, and natural language questions need to be
interactively integrated throughout the reasoning chain. As
depicted in Fig 1, to answer the question “What is the name of
the room?”, humans need first to see the room and extract visual concepts such as “frame”, “sofa”, and“lamp”. We then
attend to key visual concepts that are semantically related
to the question and think that “This is a coffee table” and

Introduction
Machine visual reasoning has taken a huge step forward since
neuro-symbolic mechanisms (Yi et al. 2018) were introduced,
which enable machines to develop a reasoning chain with
multiple steps. However, as foreshadowed by cognitive scientists in early works, such systems of logic and symbols are
fundamentally ill-suited to representation and reasoning with
real-world, common-sense knowledge (Oaksford and Chater
* indicates equal contributions

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1254

