The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Characterizing Information Seeking Events in Health-Related Social Discourse
Omar Sharif1 , Madhusudan Basak1 , Tanzia Parvin2 , Ava Scharfstein1 , Alphonso Bradham1 , Jacob
T. Borodovsky3, 4 , Sarah E. Lord3, 4, 5 , Sarah M. Preum1, 3, 4
1
Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, CUET, Bangladesh
3
Center for Technology and Behavioral Health, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College
4
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College
5
Department of Psychiatry, Dartmouth Health
{omar.sharif.gr, sarah.masud.preum}@dartmouth.edu
2

Abstract

contextualize information needs, knowledge gaps, treatment
perceptions, conflicting information, and misconceptions as
illustrated in prior works (Edo-Osagie et al. 2020; Chen,
Wang et al. 2021; Gatto, Basak, and Preum 2023; Skaik and
Inkpen 2020).
Event analysis is a well-studied NLP problem that can
be leveraged to get insights into online health discourse
(Ma et al. 2023; Naik, Bogart, and Rose 2017). Analyzing
posts from social support groups through the lens of events
can give us a nuanced understanding of health information
needs. For example, consider the following post seeking information on post-operative pain relief.

Social media sites have become a popular platform for individuals to seek and share health information. Despite the
progress in natural language processing for social media mining, a gap remains in analyzing health-related texts on social discourse in the context of events. Event-driven analysis can offer insights into different facets of healthcare at an
individual and collective level, including treatment options,
misconceptions, knowledge gaps, etc. This paper presents a
paradigm to characterize health-related information-seeking
in social discourse through the lens of events. Events here
are board categories defined with domain experts that capture the trajectory of the treatment/medication. To illustrate
the value of this approach, we analyze Reddit posts regarding medications for O PIOID U SE D ISORDER (OUD), a critical global health concern. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first attempt to define event categories for characterizing information-seeking in OUD social discourse. Guided by
domain experts, we develop TREAT-ISE, a novel multilabel
treatment information-seeking event dataset to analyze online
discourse on an event-based framework. This dataset contains
Reddit posts on information-seeking events related to recovery from OUD, where each post is annotated based on the
type of events. We also establish a strong performance benchmark (77.4% F1 score) for the task by employing several machine learning and deep learning classifiers. Finally, we thoroughly investigate the performance and errors of ChatGPT on
this task, providing valuable insights into the LLM’s capabilities and ongoing characterization efforts.

I just had knee surgery about a week ago, and my pain
meds (Gabapentin) are not cutting it! I am having
sleep troubles and getting pretty anxious about recovery. I am considering Kratom. Any suggestions
about how much I can take per day and how often?
This post mentions multiple key events, e.g., taking medication (Gabapentin), and experiencing psychophysical effects (pain or anxiety). Such event analysis based on a large
number of samples can reveal insights into different aspects
of treatment at both individual and collective levels (e.g.,
how many people report a new or rare side effect during
pain management), the perceived value of treatment (e.g.,
ineffective pain medication), self-treatment strategies (e.g.,
self-dosing Kratom), knowledge gaps and concern (rare or
new side effects of treatment), and misconceptions (e.g., selfdosing Kratom is safe for pain relief ). However, a significant
gap still exists in performing event-driven analysis on health
discourse in online communities, including social media.
To showcase the significance of event-driven analysis, we
explore online discussions regarding recovery from opioid
use disorder (OUD), a critical concern with substantial societal impact. OUD remains a leading cause of mortality in
the US, incurring a massive economic toll, estimated at 1.02
trillion dollars annually (Florence, Luo, and Rice 2021). Existing challenges, including stigma around addiction, limited
healthcare access, and distrust of traditional systems, drive
individuals towards seeking recovery support within social
groups (Olsen and Sharfstein 2014). Medications for opioid
use disorder (MOUD) offer a vital treatment avenue, capable of saving lives (Mooney et al. 2020). Pseudo-anonymous
platforms like Reddit, known for its wide US user base and

Introduction
About 70% of people in the USA rely on social media to
connect with peers and share information to navigate aspects of their lives (Kanchan and Gaidhane 2023), such
as finance, professional development, and health. Approximately 72% of adult internet users engage in online searches
to find information about various health issues, either for
themselves or on behalf of others. Individuals from diverse
socio-demographic backgrounds and medical conditions often resort to these platforms for sharing and seeking information during different phases of their healthcare journey (Neely, Eldredge, and Sanders 2021). As a result, online platforms offer a unique opportunity to surface and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22350

