The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

OVD-Explorer:
Optimism Should Not Be the Sole Pursuit of Exploration in Noisy Environments
Jinyi Liu1 * , Zhi Wang2 * , Yan Zheng1† , Jianye Hao1 , Chenjia Bai3 , Junjie Ye2 ,
Zhen Wang4 , Haiyin Piao4 , Yang Sun5
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Independent Researcher
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University
5
SADRI Institute
{jyliu, yanzheng, jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn, zhiwoong@163.com, baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn, kourenmu@gmail.com,
{w-zhen, haiyinpiao}@nwpu.edu.cn, yang.sun2010@gmail.com

Abstract

higher

Aleatoric uncertainty (noise)

higher

Optimistic

Epistemic
uncertainty

In reinforcement learning, the optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) is a mainstream principle for directing
exploration towards less explored areas, characterized by
higher uncertainty. However, in the presence of environmental stochasticity (noise), purely optimistic exploration may
lead to excessive probing of high-noise areas, consequently
impeding exploration efficiency. Hence, in exploring noisy
environments, while optimism-driven exploration serves as
a foundation, prudent attention to alleviating unnecessary
over-exploration in high-noise areas becomes beneficial. In
this work, we propose Optimistic Value Distribution Explorer
(OVD-Explorer) to achieve a noise-aware optimistic exploration for continuous control. OVD-Explorer proposes a new
measurement of the policy’s exploration ability considering
noise in optimistic perspectives, and leverages gradient ascent
to drive exploration. Practically, OVD-Explorer can be easily
integrated with continuous control RL algorithms. Extensive
evaluations on the MuJoCo and GridChaos tasks demonstrate
the superiority of OVD-Explorer in achieving noise-aware
optimistic exploration.

lower

lower

Risk-averse

Agent

Ours

Figure 1: An intuitive example. The agent learns to move
to the flag in a room filled with noise, and the noise in the
left side is higher. The optimistic exploration strategy may
overly explore the noisy area, and the risk-averse policy indiscriminately avoids noisy areas but explores insufficiently.
referred to as epistemic uncertainty (Osband et al. 2016).
Another kind of uncertainty existed in RL is known as
aleatoric uncertainty, caused by the randomness in the environment or policy, and referred to as noise (Kirschner and
Krause 2018) or risk (Dabney et al. 2018a). The noise is
ubiquitous in real world. For example, unpredictable wind
shifts the trajectory after an robot’s action, and rough ground
changes the force point of objects, etc. However, overly visiting such noisy areas may cause severely unstable state
transitions (the Optimistic arrow in the intuitive example
in Fig. 1), thus is detrimental to the learning efficiency
(Clements et al. 2019). For this, risk-averse policy is proposed to avoid visiting the areas with high aleatoric uncertainty estimation (Dabney et al. 2018b,a). Typical approaches use Conditional Variance at Risk (CVaR) to calculate a conservative value estimation and guide policy learning for easing the negative effect of the noise (Dabney et al.
2018a). However, indiscriminately avoiding noise may also
yield no performance guarantee due to excessively conservation (the risk-averse arrow in Fig. 1).
Therefore, a more reasonable approach is integrating the
risk-averse policy and optimistic exploration, guiding the
agent to optimistically exploring the whole areas, while
avoiding overly exploring the areas with high noise, like the

Introduction
Efficient exploration is crucial for improving the reinforcement learning (RL) efficiency and ultimate policy performance (Sutton and Barto 2018), and many exploration
strategies have been proposed in the literatures (Lillicrap
et al. 2016; Osband et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Ciosek
et al. 2019). Most of them follows the Optimism in the Face
of Uncertainty (OFU) principle (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and
Fischer 2002) to guide exploration optimistically towards
the area with high uncertainty (Chen et al. 2017; Ciosek
et al. 2019). Conceptually, OFU-based methods regard the
uncertainty as the ambiguity caused by insufficient exploration, and is high at those state-action pairs seldom visited,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Yan Zheng (yanzheng@tju.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13954

