The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CAR-Transformer: Cross-Attention Reinforcement Transformer for
Cross-Lingual Summarization
Yuang Cai, Yuyu Yuan*
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (BUPT), Ministry of Education
{cyang,yuanyuyu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

2021; Xue et al. 2021), while others introduce cross-lingual
training objectives to enhance performance on downstream
cross-lingual seq2seq tasks (Xu et al. 2020; Chi et al. 2020;
Ma et al. 2021).
Cross-lingual summarization (CLS) datasets typically
consist of a document paired with multiple parallel summaries in different languages (Ladhak et al. 2020; Bhattacharjee et al. 2021; Perez-Beltrachini and Lapata 2021).
Among these summaries, there is usually one that corresponds to the same language as the source document, referred to as the monolingual summary. The monolingual
summary plays a crucial role in existing CLS approaches
as it is widely utilized to enhance performance. To leverage the monolingual summary, various techniques, such as
multi-task training and knowledge distillation, have been
adopted. Multi-task training involves jointly performing MS
and CLS, while knowledge distillation entails extracting
knowledge from a pre-trained MS model (Wang et al. 2022).
Although these approaches can improve CLS performance
by utilizing the monolingual summary, they do introduce additional modules and/or training samples, which come at a
cost. Furthermore, while multi-task training and knowledge
distillation have shown intuitive improvements in CLS performance, they often lack interpretability. Recognizing this
limitation, Duan et al. 2019 propose a more explainable approach by distilling cross-attention weights from a teacher
model. However, this approach still incurs costs due to the
utilization of knowledge distillation. Another approach, put
forth by Liang et al. 2022, suggests the adoption of hierarchical structures for translation and summarization. Although this approach shows promise, it introduces multiple additional encoders for Machine Translation (MT) and
Monolingual Summarization (MS), leading to a significant
increase in training and inference costs.
Consider a human editor proficient in multiple languages.
We require the editor to generate parallel summaries in different languages, ensuring that the meanings of the summaries remain the same for a given document. Intuitively,
whether to summarize the document in which language,
the editor will pay attention to similar parts of the document. Fortunately, most existing fundamental seq2seq models employ a cross-attention mechanism, which describes
the attention from the target sequence (i.e., the summary)
to the source sequence (i.e., the document) (Bahdanau, Cho,

Cross-Lingual Summarization (CLS) involves generating a
summary for a given document in another language. Most of
the existing approaches adopt multi-task training and knowledge distillation, which increases the training cost and improves the performance of CLS tasks intuitively but unexplainably. In this work, we propose Cross-Attention Reinforcement (CAR) module and incorporate the module into
the transformer backbone to formulate the CAR-Transformer.
The CAR module formulates a pseudo-summary policy parameterized by the cross-attention weights reinforced by the
ground-truth monolingual summary without introducing extra model parameters. Our approach demonstrates more consistent improvement across CLS tasks compared to traditional
multi-task training methods and outperforms the fine-tuned
vanilla mBART by 3.67 and the best-performing multi-task
training approach by 1.48 in ROUGE-L F1 score on the WikiLingua Korean-to-English CLS task.

Introduction
Cross-lingual summarization (CLS) refers to the process of
generating a summary in a different language for a given
document. There are two main categories of methods, which
are pipeline methods and end-to-end methods, for crosslingual summarization. Pipeline methods involve breaking
down CLS into two sub-tasks, namely Monolingual Summarization (MS) and Machine Translation (MT), and executing them sequentially (Leuski et al. 2003; Lim, Kang,
and Lee 2004; Orǎsan and Chiorean 2008; Wan, Li, and
Xiao 2010). Although these approaches may seem intuitive,
they are hindered by several limitations, including error accumulation, reliance on external data/models, and high inference latency, as noted in Wang et al. 2022. In an effort
to address these limitations, end-to-end approaches based
on neural networks have been proposed (Zhu et al. 2019;
Cao, Liu, and Wan 2020; Bai, Gao, and Huang 2021; Takase
and Okazaki 2022; Liang et al. 2022). In particular, multilingual pre-trained transformers have emerged as a noteworthy development, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
CLS tasks. Some approaches involve training these transformers on a multilingual corpus (Liu et al. 2020; Tang et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17718

