The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Plug-In Diffusion Model for Sequential Recommendation
Haokai Ma1 , Ruobing Xie3 , Lei Meng2,1 * , Xin Chen3 , Xu Zhang3 , Leyu Lin3 , Zhanhui Kang3
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
Shandong Research Institute of Industrial Technology, China
3
Tencent, China
mahaokai@mail.sdu.edu.cn, ruobingxie@tencent.com, lmeng@sdu.edu.cn,
{andrewxchen, xuonezhang, goshawklin, kegokang}@tencent.com
2

Abstract

Directly use the
highest-score item

Fully utilize all
diffusion outputs

Pioneering efforts have verified the effectiveness of the diffusion models in exploring the informative uncertainty for
recommendation. Considering the difference between recommendation and image synthesis tasks, existing methods
have undertaken tailored refinements to the diffusion and reverse process. However, these approaches typically use the
highest-score item in corpus for user interest prediction, leading to the ignorance of the user’s generalized preference
contained within other items, thereby remaining constrained
by the data sparsity issue. To address this issue, this paper presents a novel Plug-In Diffusion Model for Recommendation (PDRec) framework, which employs the diffusion
model as a flexible plugin to jointly take full advantage of the
diffusion-generating user preferences on all items. Specifically, PDRec first infers the users’ dynamic preferences on all
items via a time-interval diffusion model and proposes a Historical Behavior Reweighting (HBR) mechanism to identify
the high-quality behaviors and suppress noisy behaviors. In
addition to the observed items, PDRec proposes a Diffusionbased Positive Augmentation (DPA) strategy to leverage the
top-ranked unobserved items as the potential positive samples, bringing in informative and diverse soft signals to alleviate data sparsity. To alleviate the false negative sampling
issue, PDRec employs Noise-free Negative Sampling (NNS)
to select stable negative samples for ensuring effective model
optimization. Extensive experiments and analyses on four
datasets have verified the superiority of the proposed PDRec
over the state-of-the-art baselines and showcased the universality of PDRec as a flexible plugin for commonly-used sequential encoders in different recommendation scenarios. The
code is available in https://github.com/hulkima/PDRec.

DiffRec

TI-DiffRec

(a) Illustration of DiffRec

As
plugins
SR
models

(b) Illustration of the proposed PDRec

Figure 1: Illustration of the difference between the pioneering DiffRec and PDRec, where each rectangle denotes the
user’s diffusion-based preference of the corresponding item.

within the overall item corpus, consequently leading to the
data sparsity problem (Xia et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023a,b).
Diffusion model (DM), benefiting from its characteristics of diverse representation and informative uncertainty,
has achieved state-of-the-art results in the field of image
synthesis (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), semantic segmentation (Brempong et al. 2022), and time series imputation
(Lopez Alcaraz and Strodthoff 2023). This demonstrates
the dominance of DM as a novel generative paradigm in
multiple generation tasks. Looking back to the real-world
recommender systems, it could be regarded as a generator of the complete user-item interaction matrix based on
the extremely sparse supervised signals (Moon et al. 2023).
It prompts an intuitive question: Can we take full advantage of DM’s potent generalization capability to generate
user preferences on both observed and unobserved items,
thereby addressing the sparsity issue in recommendation?
Recently, CODIGEM (Walker et al. 2022) and DiffRec
(Wang et al. 2023) have introduced DM into recommendation, which generates users’ preferences based on their
historical behaviors, yielding promising results. However,
these pioneering studies still grapple with two challenges:
(1) How to fully utilize the generalized user preferences
from DM? As shown in Fig.1 (a), these methods merely utilize the highest-scored item as the final prediction in recommendation, overlooking users’ preferences towards other
items in corpus and struggling with data sparsity issue. However, these preferences encapsulate substantial informative
and generalized knowledge during the inference process of
DM. (2) How to incorporate the diffusion-based knowledge
to construct a universal framework that could smoothly cooperate with different SR models? These DM-based methods are primarily proposed for collaborative filtering (CF),

Introduction
Personalized recommendation aims to capture user preference from the massive user behaviors and predict the appropriate items the user will be interested in (Meng et al.
2020; Ma et al. 2021, 2023a). Sequential recommendation
(SR) is a effective method for inferring dynamic interests
from the user’s historical behavior sequences(Zhang et al.
2022; Li et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022). However, most users
in the real world only interact with a limited number of items
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8886

