The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Compositional Inversion for Stable Diffusion Models
Xulu Zhang1,2 , Xiao-Yong Wei3,1 * , Jinlin Wu2,5 , Tianyi Zhang1 ,
Zhaoxiang Zhang2,4,5 , Zhen Lei2,4,5 , Qing Li1
1

Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS, Hong Kong
3
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS, Beijing, China
5
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA, Beijing, China
Abstract

space that can represent the semantics of a specific concept,
even if it is difficult to describe in words. TI evaluates the
distance of current embedding to the optimal point through
back-propagated gradients based on the reconstruction loss
from a few sample images provided by the user. Instead of
updating the model weights like in regular training, TI updates the values of the current embedding towards the optimal while keeping the weights fixed. The post-training feature enables personalization for a significantly wider range
of users and researchers, as it demands fewer computational
resources compared to the extensive requirement for pretraining or fine-tuning diffusion models. We hereafter use a
star to denote an inverted specific concept (e.g., cat*), commonly referred to as a pseudo word in literature.

Inversion methods, such as Textual Inversion, generate personalized images by incorporating concepts of interest provided by user images. However, existing methods often suffer from overfitting issues, where the dominant presence of
inverted concepts leads to the absence of other desired concepts. It stems from the fact that during inversion, the irrelevant semantics in the user images are also encoded, forcing the inverted concepts to occupy locations far from the
core distribution in the embedding space. To address this issue, we propose a method that guides the inversion process
towards the core distribution for compositional embeddings.
Additionally, we introduce a spatial regularization approach
to balance the attention on the concepts being composed. Our
method is designed as a post-training approach and can be
seamlessly integrated with other inversion methods. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach in mitigating the overfitting problem and generating more diverse and balanced compositions of concepts
in the synthesized images. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zhangxulu1996/Compositional-Inversion.

Despite the presence of promising outcomes, the composition of inverted concepts with other concepts proves to be
challenging. As shown in Fig. 1, the results maintain fidelity
to the user samples for cat*, but the concept butterflies is
absent. This occurs because the method primarily emphasizes the reconstruction loss while disregarding the compositional aspect of the target concept in relation to others.
Similar findings are reported in (Tewel et al. 2023) which
suggests the dominance of the inverted concepts in the generation process encroaches upon the spotlight of other concepts. However, this is simply attributed to an over-fitting
problem, with underlying rationale remaining unexplored.

Introduction
Recently, image synthesis has witnessed remarkable performance from text-to-image diffusion models such as
DALL•E (Ramesh et al. 2021), Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al. 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al. 2022). These models
typically consist of two modules: semantic embedding and
diffusion. Given a simple text prompt like “a cat chasing
butterflies”, the semantic embedding module represents the
semantics as embeddings, while the diffusion module transforms the embeddings into images that incorporate the desired concepts (e.g., cat, butterflies). However, these models
produce concepts in a general sense, resulting in randomly
assigned appearances for the cat. This limitation becomes
apparent when users seek specific concepts, such as their
own cat. It raises challenges to these models in the era of
pursuing personalized customization.
Textual Inversion (TI) (Gal et al. 2022) remains a core
technology to address this limitation. The underlying hypothesis is that an optimal point exists within the embedding

This paper represents an initial endeavor to delve into the
underlying reasons and offer straightforward solutions from
an internal perspective. Specifically, we have discovered that
Textual Inversion leads to the inverted concepts being out
of distribution (OOD). Modern models are always trained
on large-scale dataset like LAION (Schuhmann et al. 2022)
containing text-image pairs on the billions scale. Most existing concepts have thus been trained to be compositional
to others due to their frequent occurrence in the dataset. It
forms a core distribution where the pretrained concepts are
easily combinable. We have evaluated the compositionality
of each concept by combining with others in prompts and
testing the probability of their presence in resulting images
using object detection. In Fig. 2, the core distribution becomes evident through the visualization of the probabilities
based on their coordinates in the embedding space. This visual representation clearly showcases the OOD issue of the

* Corresponding Author (x1wei@polyu.edu.hk).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7350

