The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mask-Homo: Pseudo Plane Mask-Guided Unsupervised
Multi-Homography Estimation
Yasi Wang1 , Hong Liu2 , Chao Zhang1 , Lu Xu1 , Qiang Wang1 ,
1

Samsung Research China – Beijing (SRC-B), China
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands
yasi.wang@samsung.com, h.liu2@tue.nl, {c0502.zhang, lu94.xu, qiang.w}@samsung.com

2

Abstract
Warp

Homography estimation is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Previous works mainly focus on estimating either a single homography, or multiple homographies based on
mesh grid division of the image. In practical scenarios, single
homography is inadequate and often leads to a compromised
result for multiple planes; while mesh grid multi-homography
damages the plane distribution of the scene, and does not fully
address the restriction to use homography.
In this work, we propose a novel semantics guided multihomography estimation framework, Mask-Homo, to provide an explicit solution to the multi-plane depth disparity
problem. First, a pseudo plane mask generation module is
designed to obtain multiple correlated regions that follow the
plane distribution of the scene. Then, multiple local homography transformations, each of which aligns a correlated region
precisely, are predicted and corresponding warped images are
fused to obtain the final result. Furthermore, a new metric,
Mask-PSNR, is proposed for more comprehensive evaluation
of alignment. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify
the effectiveness of the proposed method. Our code is
available at https://github.com/SAITPublic/MaskHomo.

Diff

Single-Homography

Multi-warp
…

Diff

Multi-Homography
(Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison between single-H and multi-H. When
multiple planes exist in a scene, single-H tends to focus
on the dominant plane or find a balance between multiple
planes, leading to misalignment in some regions. The
overlay image is generated with R channel from the target
image and G, B channels from the warped source image.

Introduction
Homography (H) estimation is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, that has been extensively used in various
applications, such as image alignment, image stitching, etc.
A homography is a type of projective transformation, which
can be used to describe the mapping relationship between
the pixel coordinates of two planes within an image pair.
Traditional H estimation solutions are feature-based,
which follow the pipeline of feature detection and matching,
outlier rejection and numerical calculation. However, they
are highly dependent on the feature detection quality,
leading to inaccurate estimation in low texture scenes.
In recent years, unsupervised deep learning-based methods (Nguyen et al. 2018; Ye et al. 2021) which directly
predict H by minimizing the difference between the warped
source image and target image become top performers.
However, an optimal H can be obtained only under the
following constraints: (1) rotation only movements of the
camera; (2) the scene locates at a planar surface; (3) the

scene is at a distance from the observer. Therefore, when
dealing with scenes containing multiple planes, single-H
encounters difficulties in locating and aligning the corresponding regions within the image pair (Fig 1).
To deal with this, (Zhang et al. 2020) learns a mask to
reject outlier regions and only select reliable regions for
H estimation. Later, (Hong et al. 2022) proposes to guide
the estimated H to focus on the dominant plane. Despite
the efforts, these methods still obtain a global H, which is
intrinsically a compromised result for multi-plane scenes.
Recently, (Liu et al. 2016) and (Nie et al. 2022) propose
to estimate multiple Hs by dividing the image into mesh
grids and computing a local H for each grid. (Liu et al.
2022b) and (Liu et al. 2022a) also propose to use mesh grid
H estimation. By dividing the image into even mesh grids,
there will be both cases where one grid contains multiple

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5678

