The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MINES: Message Intercommunication for Inductive Relation Reasoning Over
Neighbor-Enhanced Subgraphs
Ke Liang1 , Lingyuan Meng1 , Sihang Zhou2 * , Wenxuan Tu1 , Siwei Wang3 , Yue Liu1 ,
Meng Liu1 , Long Zhao4 , Xiangjun Dong4 , Xinwang Liu1 *
1
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China
4
Qilu University of Technology, Jinan, China

Sava. parent_

Derived Logical Knowledge

of

Bron.

Davis
Training Graph

Sava.

?

Curry

L.A.

LeBr.

Bron.

f
rent_o

pa

Lakers

live

s_in

Davis

s_in

in

Lakers

es_

liv

LeBr.

f
parent_o

GraIL and its variants have shown their promising capacities
for inductive relation reasoning on knowledge graphs. However, the uni-directional message-passing mechanism hinders such models from exploiting hidden mutual relations
between entities in directed graphs. Besides, the enclosing
subgraph extraction in most GraIL-based models restricts
the model from extracting enough discriminative information for reasoning. Consequently, the expressive ability of
these models is limited. To address the problems, we propose a novel GraIL-based framework, termed MINES, by
introducing a Message Intercommunication mechanism on
the Neighbor-Enhanced Subgraph. Concretely, the message
intercommunication mechanism is designed to capture the
omitted hidden mutual information. It introduces bi-directed
information interactions between connected entities by inserting an undirected/bi-directed GCN layer between unidirected RGCN layers. Moreover, inspired by the success of
involving more neighbors in other graph-based tasks, we extend the neighborhood area beyond the enclosing subgraph to
enhance the information collection for inductive relation reasoning. Extensive experiments prove the promising capacity
of the proposed MINES from various aspects, especially for
the superiority, effectiveness, and transfer ability.

live

Abstract

lives_in

2

Cali.
?

L.A.

Transductive Test Graph

Aye.

live

s_in
Canon

Inductive Test Graph

Figure 1: Illustration of transductive and inductive relation
reasoning. In the transductive scenario, entities in test graphs
are all seen in the model during training. While as for the
inductive scenario, unseen entities may exist in test graphs.

(Chen et al. 2022d, 2023b; Zhang et al. 2023b,a). Therefore,
more attention has recently been drawn to inductive models,
which can infer missing links between brand-new entities,
and our research also falls into this category.
Rule-based and GNN-based methods (Xia et al. 2022)
are two typical inductive relation reasoning methods. Rulebased methods, such as NeuralLP (Yang, Yang, and Cohen
2017), RuleN (Meilicke et al. 2018), and DRUM (Sadeghian
et al. 2019), induce the entity-independent rules based on observed co-occurrence patterns. Such methods are naturally
suitable for inductive scenarios with inherent inductive attributes. However, they suffer from limited expressive ability, and scalability (Teru, Denis, and Hamilton 2020). Inspired by the great achievements of GNN-based methods for
other graph-based tasks, several GNN-based inductive relation reasoning models have recently been proposed. Among
them, Graph Inductive Learning (Teru, Denis, and Hamilton
2020), i.e., GraIL, is the most influential. It first leverages
RGCN (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018) to infer missing triplets
based on the enclosing subgraph, which gains great inductive ability. Based on the prototype GraIL, many GraILbased models (e.g., TACT (Chen et al. 2021), CoMPILE
(Mai et al. 2021), Meta-iKG (Zheng et al. 2022), RMPI
(Geng et al. 2023), etc.) are proposed. Although proven effective, there are two common limitations in most GraILbased models, i.e., (1) insufficient message communication,
and (2) insufficient neighborhood information collection.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) organize human knowledge in the
form of the relational fact triplet. Each triplet consists of a
head entity, a tail entity, and a relational edge between them.
Recently, many applications have been developed based on
KGs, such as information retrieval (Chen et al. 2022e; Li
et al. 2023), recommendation systems (Wei et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2022), integration with LLMs (Pan et al. 2023;
Luo et al. 2023b), etc. However, most KGs suffer from incompleteness issues. As an essential way to address the
problem, relation reasoning, i.e., relation prediction, can be
generally divided into two categories (Chen et al. 2023a),
including transductive relation reasoning and inductive relation reasoning (See Fig. 1). In fact, the inductive scenario
is more common in the real world, e.g., new users (i.e., entities) are added in e-commerce KGs over continuous time
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10645

