The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

No More Shortcuts: Realizing the Potential of Temporal Self-Supervision
Ishan Rajendrakumar Dave1 * , Simon Jenni2 , Mubarak Shah1
1

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
2
Adobe Research, USA
ishandave@ucf.edu, jenni@adobe.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Frame-consistent Augmentation
Local-patches share high similarity for in-order frames

Abstract
Self-supervised approaches for video have shown impressive
results in video understanding tasks. However, unlike early
works that leverage temporal self-supervision, current stateof-the-art methods primarily rely on tasks from the image domain (e.g., contrastive learning) that do not explicitly promote the learning of temporal features. We identify two factors that limit existing temporal self-supervision: 1) tasks are
too simple, resulting in saturated training performance, and
2) we uncover shortcuts based on local appearance statistics that hinder the learning of high-level features. To address
these issues, we propose 1) a more challenging reformulation of temporal self-supervision as frame-level (rather than
clip-level) recognition tasks and 2) an effective augmentation
strategy to mitigate shortcuts. Our model extends a representation of single video frames, pre-trained through contrastive
learning, with a transformer that we train through temporal self-supervision. We demonstrate experimentally that our
more challenging frame-level task formulations and the removal of shortcuts drastically improve the quality of features
learned through temporal self-supervision. Our extensive experiments show state-of-the-art performance across 10 video
understanding datasets, illustrating the generalization ability
and robustness of our learned video representations. Project
Page: https://daveishan.github.io/nms-webpage.

Out-of-order frame
Frame-wise Augmentation
Local-patches share very low similarity regardless of frame is in-order or not

Out-of-order frame

Figure 1: Breaking Shortcuts in Temporal SSL Tasks. We illustrate an example of our pretext task where the model has
to localize out-of-order frames. In the first row, the input sequence has identical augmentations applied to each frame,
whereas the second row shows our proposed independent
frame-wise augmentations. We observe that the task can be
solved by observing only a local image patch (highlighted
circle) when identical augmentations are used. As a result,
the task does not require learning higher-level features, e.g.,
object dynamics. In contrast, when applying the proposed
frame-wise augmentations (second row), a local observation
(highlighted circle) is insufficient, and the model must consider the global scene context.

Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has unlocked the potential of
large amounts of unlabelled data for large-scale pre-training
of image (Zhou et al. 2022a; Li et al. 2022; He et al. 2022;
Chen, Xie, and He 2021; Chen et al. 2020) and, more recently, video representations (Tong et al. 2022; Pan et al.
2021; Feichtenhofer et al. 2021; Dave et al. 2022; Feichtenhofer et al. 2022). The potential benefits of SSL methods
on video are even greater than on images due to their larger
dimensionality and much greater cost of comprehensive human labeling.
Video understanding tasks, such as action recognition, depend on representations that capture both the static scene appearance (e.g., object textures, pose, and layout) and scene
dynamics (e.g., the change in pose and relative dynamics of
objects). Human activity recognition, in particular, crucially

depends on accurate representations of the human pose and
how it deforms over time as a person performs an action.
However, to what extent current video SSL approaches
capture both static and temporal features in videos is unclear.
Indeed, we observe that many of the current methods rely on
contrastive objectives (Qian et al. 2021b; Feichtenhofer et al.
2021; Pan et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2020), which encourage
spatial and temporal invariance and thus do not promote the
learning of temporal features. While several works demonstrated the benefits of including additional objectives that
encourage the learning of temporal features, e.g., through
pretext tasks (Jenni, Meishvili, and Favaro 2020; Xu et al.
2019; Bai et al. 2020; Misra, Zitnick, and Hebert 2016), it

* Majority of work done as an intern at Adobe Research, USA.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1481

