The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Vector Field Oriented Diffusion Model for Crystal Material Generation
Astrid Klipfel123 , Yaël Fregier2 , Adlane Sayede3 , Zied Bouraoui1
1

Univ. Artois, UMR 8188, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens (CRIL), F-62300 Lens, France.
2
Univ. Artois, UR 2462, Laboratoire de Mathématiques de Lens (LML), F-62300 Lens, France.
3
Univ. Artois, UMR 8181, Unité de Catalyse et de Chimie du Solide (UCCS), F-62300 Lens, France.
{astrid.klipfel, yael.fregier, adlane.sayede, zied.bouraoui}@univ-artois.fr

Abstract

know, no existing model can perform sampling with a precise composition. This type of sampling is crucial for exploring the various phases of a material within a specific
composition and generating a convex hull. The ability to do
this is essential in searching for new materials (Kim et al.
2020). Our work is unique in enabling this type of sampling,
whereas other models are not as well-suited for this task.
In this paper, we propose an effective probabilistic sampling
diffusion process with GNN for crystal materials generation.
Crystals are periodic structures consisting of a minimal
set of atoms (unit cell) infinitely repeated in all directions
of 3D space. Contrary to organic chemistry, where diffusion models have led to spectacular results on generation,
a key challenge when dealing with crystals is how the periodicity and the complex chemistry of materials are taken
into account and handled by the generative model. In (Xie
et al. 2021), a GNN-based model for material generation has
been proposed where the diffusion process is only applied
to atomic positions but not cells. Generating an appropriate
cell is crucial for crystals. A cell defines the repetition pattern of a material and its density, which have an important
impact on the properties of the crystal lattice. To this end, we
propose a diffusion process on all the geometry of the structures (atomic positions and cells). In particular, our model
relies on a diffusion process in a torus (for the atoms) and
on a lattice (for the cells). We use a neural network based
on an equivariant vector field to create our lattices, which
sets us apart from others who only predict lattice parameters
from geometry. Additionally, we use an equivariant graph
neural network layer. This layer is equivariant to both E and
SL3 (Z). Although introducing this diffusion process is challenging, we offer an elegant solution and explain how to reverse the process. Our model generates a more realistic lattice, as confirmed by our experiments.
To assess the quality of the generated structure, several
metrics such as validity, density and formation energy are
commonly used (Xie et al. 2021; Court et al. 2020). The validity metric performs well when the generated crystals are
bad, i.e., to discard invalid materials having a poor validity ratio. When a generative model produces a good crystal
structure, this metric is no longer meaningful. The density
and formation energy are good metrics. However, they are
arbitrary and partially cover material characteristics. There
exist also metrics that compare the distributions of other

Discovering crystal structures with specific chemical properties has become an increasingly important focus in material science. However, current models are limited in their
ability to generate new crystal lattices, as they only consider
atomic positions or chemical composition. To address this issue, we propose a probabilistic diffusion model that utilizes a
geometrically equivariant GNN to consider atomic positions
and crystal lattices jointly. To evaluate the effectiveness of
our model, we introduce a new generation metric inspired by
Frechet Inception Distance, but based on GNN energy prediction rather than InceptionV3 used in computer vision. In
addition to commonly used metrics like validity, which assesses the plausibility of a structure, this new metric offers a
more comprehensive evaluation of our model’s capabilities.
Our experiments on existing benchmarks show the significance of our diffusion model. We also show that our method
can effectively learn meaningful representations.

Introduction
Crystal materials play a crucial role in numerous technological applications, such as the aerospace industry and semiconductors. As global warming poses a significant threat to
our society, developing new materials can be vital to our
ability to adapt to change and minimize our carbon footprint.
To support the ecological transition, it is important to search
for and generate new crystals, such as new semiconductors,
that can be used to produce solar hydrogen or store hydrogen in solid form (Tournet et al. 2020; Rusman and Dahari
2016). New methods, such as high-throughput screening,
rely heavily on machine learning models to speed up the
development process. Recently, there has been growing interest in developing machine learning models to create new
crystals (Noh et al. 2019; Dan et al. 2020; Long et al. 2021).
In particular, Graph-based Neural Networks (GNNs) models
have been proven effective for handling crystal structures.
While, however, these models have shown excellent performances for regression tasks and property prediction such as
the formation energy or the band-gap (Xie and Grossman
2018; Jørgensen, Jacobsen, and Schmidt 2018; Choudhary
and DeCost 2021), the progress is still hampered by the limited extent to which generation is performed. As far as we
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22193

