The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learn to Follow: Decentralized Lifelong Multi-Agent Pathfinding via Planning
and Learning
Alexey Skrynnik1,2 , Anton Andreychuk1 , Maria Nesterova2,3 ,
Konstantin Yakovlev2,1 , Aleksandr Panov1,3
1

AIRI, Moscow, Russia
Federal Research Center for Computer Science and Control of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
3
MIPT, Dolgoprudny, Russia
skrynnikalexey@gmail.com, andreychuk@airi.net, minesterova@yandex.ru, yakovlev@isa.ru, panov@airi.net

2

Abstract

3

Multi-agent Pathfinding (MAPF) problem generally asks to
find a set of conflict-free paths for a set of agents confined to
a graph and is typically solved in a centralized fashion. Conversely, in this work, we investigate the decentralized MAPF
setting, when the central controller that possesses all the information on the agents’ locations and goals is absent and
the agents have to sequentially decide the actions on their
own without having access to the full state of the environment. We focus on the practically important lifelong variant of MAPF, which involves continuously assigning new
goals to the agents upon arrival to the previous ones. To address this complex problem, we propose a method that integrates two complementary approaches: planning with heuristic search and reinforcement learning through policy optimization. Planning is utilized to construct and re-plan individual paths. We enhance our planning algorithm with a dedicated technique tailored to avoid congestion and increase the
throughput of the system. We employ reinforcement learning
to discover the collision avoidance policies that effectively
guide the agents along the paths. The policy is implemented
as a neural network and is effectively trained without any
reward-shaping or external guidance. We evaluate our method
on a wide range of setups comparing it to the state-of-the-art
solvers. The results show that our method consistently outperforms the learnable competitors, showing higher throughput
and better ability to generalize to the maps that were unseen
at the training stage. Moreover our solver outperforms a rulebased one in terms of throughput and is an order of magnitude
faster than a state-of-the-art search-based solver. The code is
available at https://github.com/AIRI-Institute/learn-to-follow.

2

1

Figure 1: An example of a decentralized LMAPF instance.
Agents are depicted as filled circles. The dashed line illustrates the red agent’s ego-centric field-of-view, where the
other observed agents are colored in teal. The red circles
with numbers represent the goals that the agent needs to
reach. The next goal is only revealed to the agent when the
current one is achieved.

In many real-world domains, however, it is not possible, from the engineering perspective, to design such a central controller that has a stable connection to all the agents
(robots) and obtains a full knowledge of the environment
all the time. For example, consider a fleet of service robots
delivering some items in a human-shared environment, e.g.,
the robots delivering medicine in the hospital. Each of these
robots is likely to have access to the global map of the environment (e.g., the floor plan), possibly refined through the
robot’s sensors. However, the connection to the central controller may not be consistent. Thus, the latter may not have
accurate data on the robots’ locations and, consequently,
cannot provide valid MAPF solutions. In such scenarios, decentralized approaches to the MAPF problems, when the
robots themselves have to decide their future paths based on
their local observations, as depicted in Fig. 1, are essential.
In this work, we aim to develop such an efficient decentralized approach.
It is natural to frame the decentralized MAPF problem
as a sequential decision-making problem where, at each
timestep, each agent must choose and execute an action that
will advance it toward its goal while ensuring that the other
agents can also reach their goals. The result of solving this
problem is a policy that, at each moment, specifies which

Introduction
Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019) is a
challenging problem that has been getting increasing attention recently. It is often studied in the AI community with the
following assumptions. The agents are confined to a graph,
and at each timestep, an agent can either move to an adjacent vertex or stay at the current one. A central controller
possesses information about the graph and the agents’ start
and goal locations. This unit is in charge of constructing a
set of conflict-free plans for all the agents. Thus, a typical
setting for MAPF can be attributed as centralized and fully
observable.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17541

