The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SpFormer: Spatio-Temporal Modeling for Scanpaths with Transformer
Wenqi Zhong* , Linzhi Yu* , Chen Xia† , Junwei Han, Dingwen Zhang†
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
wenqizhong@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, 15160557827@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, cxia@nwpu.edu.cn,
junweihan2010@gmail.com, zhangdingwen2006yyy@gmail.com

Scanpath

Abstract

Meta Scanpath

Saccadic scanpath, a data representation of human visual
behavior, has received broad interest in multiple domains.
Scanpath is a complex eye-tracking data modality that includes the sequences of fixation positions and fixation duration, coupled with image information. However, previous
methods usually face the spatial misalignment problem of
fixation features and loss of critical temporal data (including temporal correlation and fixation duration). In this study,
we propose a Transformer-based scanpath model, SpFormer,
to alleviate these problems. First, we propose a fixationcentric paradigm to extract the aligned spatial fixation features and tokenize the scanpaths. Then, according to the visual working memory mechanism, we design a local meta
attention to reduce the semantic redundancy of fixations and
guide the model to focus on the meta scanpath. Finally, we
progressively integrate the duration information and fuse it
with the fixation features to solve the problem of ambiguous location with the Transformer block increasing. We conduct extensive experiments on four databases under three
tasks. The SpFormer establishes new state-of-the-art results
in distinct settings, verifying its flexibility and versatility
in practical applications. The code can be obtained from
https://github.com/wenqizhong/SpFormer.

Image I

Scanpath s

Fixation Position f

Fixation Duration d

Figure 1: Illustration of the unique and intricate data modality for scanpath and meta scanpath. The scanpath contains
a sequence of fixation positions and fixation duration, coupled with image information. The meta scanpath stores only
a few local fixations (approximately 3-4 visual items).

group, while scanpaths typically depict the spatial-temporal
attention distribution for an individual. Therefore, scanpaths
are well-suited for individual-level analysis and prediction
in various domains (Xia et al. 2022; Dalrymple et al. 2019;
Mohammadhasani et al. 2020).
Scanpath is a unique and intricate data modality, but existing methods for scanpaths often neglect their complexity.
The scanpath is a multivariate time series composed of the
fixation position and the corresponding duration (see Fig.
1). Moreover, the scanpath is intimately related to the image
stimuli that excite the attention behavior. Overall, the intricate properties of the scanpath can be summarized in three
key aspects: 1) The scanpath represents a multivariate time
series. 2) Each time step of the scanpath comprises a pair
of fixation position and fixation duration. 3) The scanpath
exhibits a coupling with the corresponding image stimuli.
However, previous scanpath-based models have not comprehensively considered the above-mentioned properties.
Generally speaking, existing methods in the medical and
psychology fields typically conduct statistic analysis with
scanpath representation based on hand-craft features, e.g.,
the fixation ratio of different regions (Jones and Klin 2013).
In the computer community, learning-based models for
scanpaths have gradually emerged in recent years (Jiang and
Zhao 2017; Dalrymple et al. 2019; Rahman et al. 2021).

Introduction
The human visual system (HVS) plays an essential role in
human perception, which receives and processes the majority of information perceived by humans. Human visual behaviors provide valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms of the HVS. A comprehensive understanding of human vision can greatly benefit various downstream tasks,
e.g., saliency prediction (Liu et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2015;
Wang et al. 2019), salient object detection (Han et al. 2018;
Fan et al. 2021), scanpath prediction (Xia et al. 2019), segmentation (Lang et al. 2022), onfocus detection (Zhang et al.
2022), and auxiliary diagnosis (Liu, Li, and Yi 2016; Xia
et al. 2022). Two primary data types used to represent human
visual behaviors are saliency maps and saccadic scanpaths
(abbreviated as scanpaths). Saliency maps usually represent
the static spatial probability distribution of attention for a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7605

