The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Multimodal Volumetric Features for Large-Scale Neuron Tracing
Qihua Chen, Xuejin Chen* , Chenxuan Wang, Yixiong Liu, Zhiwei Xiong, Feng Wu
National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology and Application, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China.
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei 230088, China.
cqh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xjchen99@ustc.edu.cn, {wangcx01, yxliu99}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{zwxiong, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

2018; Shapson-Coe et al. 2021; Consortium et al. 2021).
Many automated volumetric image segmentation methods,
either two-stage (Lee et al. 2021; Beier et al. 2017; Funke
et al. 2018; Sheridan et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2017) or endto-end (Januszewski et al. 2018), have been developed for
neuron reconstruction. While only exploiting the pixel-level
local context in limited regions at the nanometer resolution,
these methods have difficulty segmenting complete neurons
while a single neuron typically spans a cable length of over
one thousand micrometers. When applied to large-scale serial section EM volume, complete neuron reconstruction becomes even more challenging due to various imaging artifacts, such as section missing and misalignment. Since a
few merge errors could lead to several incorrectly merged
neuronal processes and correcting the split errors is more
straightforward, existing methods typically follow the consensus of over-segmentation where a neuronal process is
segmented into many small fragments (Li et al. 2019; Matejek et al. 2019; Januszewski et al. 2018). For example, a
single neuron from a fly brain (Zheng et al. 2018) is usually segmented into hundreds of fragments by Flood-filling
networks (FFN) (Li et al. 2019). To reconstruct more complete neurons, intensive human proofreading efforts are required in current neuron tracing pipelines (Dorkenwald et al.
2022; Shapson-Coe et al. 2021). Starting from the oversegmentation result, proofreaders trace complete neurons by
inspecting the continuity in 3D morphology and image features between fragments and merging fragments when necessary, as Fig. 1 shows.

The current neuron reconstruction pipeline for electron microscopy (EM) data usually includes automatic image segmentation followed by extensive human expert proofreading.
In this work, we aim to reduce human workload by predicting connectivity between over-segmented neuron pieces, taking both microscopy image and 3D morphology features into
account, similar to human proofreading workflow. To this
end, we first construct a dataset, named FlyTracing, that contains millions of pairwise connections of segments expanding the whole fly brain, which is three orders of magnitude
larger than existing datasets for neuron segment connection.
To learn sophisticated biological imaging features from the
connectivity annotations, we propose a novel connectivityaware contrastive learning method to generate dense volumetric EM image embedding. The learned embeddings can
be easily incorporated with any point or voxel-based morphological representations for automatic neuron tracing. Extensive comparisons of different combination schemes of image and morphological representation in identifying split errors across the whole fly brain demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach, especially for the locations
that contain severe imaging artifacts, such as section missing and misalignment. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/Levishery/Flywire-Neuron-Tracing.

Introduction
The development of various imaging techniques, such as
electron microscopy (EM), optical microscopy (OM), and
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, bring massive
volumetric imaging data in biological and medical research
fields. Segmenting 3D objects with complex structures and
wide expansion in these high-resolution image volumes is
non-trivial. Among various 3D segmentation tasks, connectomics, which aims to reconstruct and interpret neural circuits at the synaptic resolution, presents extreme challenges
due to the huge volume of EM images and the significant
morphological complexity of neurons. Notably, with the advent of advanced serial section electron microscopy imaging
techniques, several EM data of mm3 -scale volumes have
been published for the connectomics community, with the
data sizes ranging from terabyte to perabyte (Zheng et al.

A few methods have been developed to automatically detect and correct split and merge errors from the automatic
segmentation (Matejek et al. 2019; Zung et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2020). Matejek et al. (2019) reduce split errors by
extracting biologically-inspired graphs that indicate potential connectivity of over-segments using hand-designed geometric constraints. They train a 3D convolutional neural
network (CNN) to predict the probability of merging based
on segment morphologies. However, their method is trained
and tested on small densely annotated blocks and not well
generalized to various brain regions. Moreover, morphology
is insufficient for reliable connectivity prediction as human
proofreaders have to frequently check the 3D morphology
as well as EM images of two neighboring segments during
long-range neuron tracing.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1174

