The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SD-MVS: Segmentation-Driven Deformation Multi-View Stereo
with Spherical Refinement and EM Optimization
Zhenlong Yuan1 , Jiakai Cao1 , Zhaoxin Li2, 3 * , Hao Jiang1 , Zhaoqi Wang1
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Agricultural Big Data, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
yuanzhenlong21b@ict.ac.cn, caojiakai21@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
cszli@hotmail.com, {jianghao, zqwang}@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Segmentation-Driven Deformation Multi-View Stereo (SD-MVS), a method that can effectively tackle challenges in 3D reconstruction of textureless
areas. We are the first to adopt the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) to distinguish semantic instances in scenes and further leverage these constraints for pixelwise patch deformation on both matching cost and propagation. Concurrently, we
propose a unique refinement strategy that combines spherical
coordinates and gradient descent on normals and pixelwise
search interval on depths, significantly improving the completeness of reconstructed 3D model. Furthermore, we adopt
the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm to alternately
optimize the aggregate matching cost and hyperparameters,
effectively mitigating the problem of parameters being excessively dependent on empirical tuning. Evaluations on the
ETH3D high-resolution multi-view stereo benchmark and the
Tanks and Temples dataset demonstrate that our method can
achieve state-of-the-art results with less time consumption.

Figure 1: Comparative analysis of patch deformation strategies between APD-MVS and our approach. APD-MVS (a)
selects green anchor pixels from pixels characterized by similar colors but may have inconsistent depths to help reconstruct central red pixel, leading to potential inaccuracy. Conversely, our method (b) utilizes neighboring pixels inside the
segmentation boundary for reconstruction.

facing large textureless areas, these methods perform unsatisfactory and leave room for further improvement.
Differently, learning-based methods leverages network to
build learnable 3D cost volumes and thereby ameliorating
the reconstruction quality. Several methods (Yao et al. 2019;
Yan et al. 2020) attempt to employ the gated recurrent unit
(GRU) to provide a more rational interpretation in reconstruction, while this often leads to unaffordable time and
memory cost. Others (Su and Tao 2023) try to utilize residual learning module to refine depth estimates by rectifying the upsampling errors. Yet, such networks typically lack
generalization when facing scenes different from training
datasets, posing challenges for their practical application.
Edges in the color image are usually consistent with depth
boundaries. Thus, edge information plays a pivotal role in
both computation of PatchMatch and construction of 3D
cost volumes. Nonetheless, problems like shadows and occlusions in complicated scenes tend to weaken the linkage
between edge and depth boundaries. Consequently, several
methods (Yuesong Wang et al. 2023) struggle to harness
edge information effectively, often skipping edges and consequently calculating regions with inconsistent depth, leading to detail distortion, as shown in Fig. 1. Additionally,
certain superpixel segmentation approaches (Kuhn, Lin, and
Erdler 2019) face challenges in precisely segmenting edges

Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a technique that employs images
to reconstruct 3D objects or scenes. Its application spans various fields, including autonomous driving (Orsingher et al.
2022), augmented reality (Cao et al. 2021), and robotics (Li,
Gogia, and Kaess 2019).
Recently, PatchMatch-based methods (Schönberger et al.
2016; Xu and Tao 2019; Lee et al. 2021) exhibits remarkable capabilities in sub-pixel reconstruction for large-scale
imagery while being reliable for unstructured image set.
These methods typically initiate by computing the matching
cost of fixed patches between images, then proceeding with
propagation and refinement for accurate depth estimation.
Nonetheless, they typically encounter difficulties in textureless areas where the absence of texture results in unreliable depth estimations. To address this issue, several techniques have been introduced, including plane prior (Xu and
Tao 2020), superpixel-wise planarization (Romanoni and
Matteucci 2019), epipolar geometry (Xu et al. 2020) and
confidence-based interpolation (Li et al. 2020). Yet when
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6871

