The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Data Geometry in Machine Learning
Melanie Weber
Harvard University
mweber@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

improve the performance of Graph Neural Networks, including via curvature-based rewiring (Fesser and Weber 2023b)
and curvature-based structural encodings (Fesser and Weber
2023a).

A key challenge in Machine Learning (ML) is the identification of geometric structure in high-dimensional data. Most
algorithms assume that data lives in a high-dimensional vector space; however, many applications involve non-Euclidean
data, such as graphs, strings and matrices, or data whose
structure is determined by symmetries in the underlying system. Here, we discuss methods for identifying geometric
structure in data and how leveraging data geometry can give
rise to efficient ML algorithms with provable guarantees.

Machine Learning on Manifolds
Encoding data geometry as inductive bias into ML architectures can often lead to algorithmic benefits.We will review
several results on representation trade-offs in ML algorithms
with and without geometric inductive biases. (Weber and Sra
2022, 2023) show that exploiting data geometry in nonconvex optimization allows for certifying fast convergence of
first-order methods, a result which applies to a range of classical ML tasks. (Weber et al. 2020) investigates the role of
data geometry in robust classification of data with hierarchical structure and demonstrates the advantages of geometric
inductive biases both theoretically and computationally.

Identifying Geometric Structure in Data
High-dimensional data with intrinsic geometric structure
can often be represented with high accuracy in a lowdimensional non-Euclidean space. This has motivated the
development of algorithms for identifying representation
spaces whose geometric structure aligns with that of the
data (Weber 2020; Trillos and Weber 2023). Reparametrizing a function on a suitable geometric domain can give rise
to more efficient optimization subroutines. A prime example are Euclidean nonconvex matrix-valued problems, which
fulfill a Riemannian notion of convexity with respect to a
suitable non-Euclidean metric (Weber and Sra 2022). Examples include common subroutines in ML algorithms, such as
barycenter problems, robust subspace recovery, maximum
likelihood estimation and the computation of generalized
eigenvalues.

References
Fesser, L.; and Weber, M. 2023a. Effective Structural Encodings
via Local Curvature Profiles. arXiv:2311.14864.
Fesser, L.; and Weber, M. 2023b. Mitigating Over-Smoothing and
Over-Squashing using Augmentations of Forman-Ricci Curvature.
Learning on Graphs Conference.
Tian, Y.; Lubberts, Z.; and Weber, M. 2023. Curvature-based clustering on graphs. arXiv:2307.10155.
Trillos, N. G.; and Weber, M. 2023. Continuum Limits of Ollivier’s
Ricci Curvature on data clouds: pointwise consistency and global
lower bounds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02378.
Weber, M. 2020. Neighborhood Growth Determines Geometric
Priors for Relational Representation Learning. In International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108,
266–276.
Weber, M.; Saucan, E.; and Jost, J. 2017. Characterizing Complex
Networks with Forman-Ricci Curvature and Associated Geometric
Flows. Journal of Complex Networks, 5(4): 527–550.
Weber, M.; and Sra, S. 2022. Riemannian Optimization via FrankWolfe Methods. Mathematical Programming.
Weber, M.; and Sra, S. 2023. Global optimality for Euclidean
CCCP under Riemannian convexity. In International Conference
on Machine Learning.
Weber, M.; Zaheer, M.; Rawat, A. S.; Menon, A.; and Kumar, S.
2020. Robust Large-Margin Learning in Hyperbolic Space. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34.

Geometric Methods for Graph Machine Learning
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in the Sciences and Engineering; Graph ML has had a tremendous impact on scientific discovery, biomedical research and in the study of social
networks, among others. Graphs may be viewed as geometric objects, a perspective that allows for translating key concepts, such as curvature, from Differential Geometry to the
discrete setting. Several discrete analogues of Ricci curvature have proven useful for Graph ML (Weber, Saucan, and
Jost 2017). Curvature-based algorithms for unsupervised
node clustering have been shown to be more efficient and
scalable than related approaches based on the spectrum of
the Graph Laplacian or modularity optimization (Tian, Lubberts, and Weber 2023). Moreover, curvature can be used to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22681

