The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CatmullRom Splines-Based Regression for Image Forgery Localization
Li Zhang1,2 , Mingliang Xu2 , Dong Li2 , Jianming Du1,† , Rujing Wang1,2† *
1

Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, China

Abstract
IFL (Image Forgery Location) helps secure digital media
forensics. However, many methods suffer from false detections (i.e., FPs) and inaccurate boundaries. In this paper,
we proposed the CatmullRom Splines-based Regression Network (CSR-Net), which first rethinks the IFL task from the
perspective of regression to deal with this problem. Specifically speaking, we propose an adaptive CutmullRom splines
fitting scheme for coarse localization of the tampered regions.
Then, for false positive cases, we first develop a novel rescoring mechanism, which aims to filter out samples that cannot have responses on both the classification branch and the
instance branch. Later on, to further restrict the boundaries,
we design a learnable texture extraction module, which refines and enhances the contour representation by decoupling
the horizontal and vertical forgery features to extract a more
robust contour representation, thus suppressing FPs. Compared to segmentation-based methods, our method is simple
but effective due to the unnecessity of post-processing. Extensive experiments show the superiority of CSR-Net to existing
state-of-the-art methods, not only on standard natural image
datasets but also on social media datasets.

Figure 1: The categorization of existing methods applied
into IFL. Please zoom in for better visualization.

Introduction

2020). However, due to the specific properties of forgery regions such as large variance in color, texture, shape, etc.,
there are still mainly two challenging issues that haven’t
been addressed satisfactorily in Image Forgery Localization.
The first issue is false positives (FPs). False positives refer to test results that indicate the presence of a satisfactory
target region when in reality it is not convincing. Traditional
segmentation-based methods often suffer from this situation
(as shown in Fig. 2). Binarization, an indispensable and decisive strategy used in these methods, is a threshold-sensitive
task that directly determines the number of foreground region blocks. An unreasonable threshold value often leads
to the appearance of unexpected regions (i.e., false positive cases) in traditional segmentation methods. However,
many methods, when focusing on potentially tampered regions, usually ignore the false alarm rate. This has negative
implications on the propagation of digital content, impacting the profitability of relevant journalistic sources, which
constrains the development of assay results in a more convincing direction.
The second issue is inaccurate boundaries. As shown in

Image Forgery Location (IFL), also known as image tampering detection, refers to the task of detecting the location
of forged regions in a suspicious image. With the increasing
availability of digital image editing software, image forgery
has become a prevalent issue in various fields such as journalism, forensics, and biometrics.
However, IFL has not been adequately studied due to the
various techniques used to manipulate images, including removal, splicing, and cloning. Furthermore, the forgers may
use carefully crafted tools to conceal the tampered regions
and make the detection more difficult. Therefore, the development of accurate and efficient forgery localization algorithms is crucial to address this issue, ensuring the integrity
and credibility of digital images in today’s world. Thanks
to the rapid development of deep learning in recent years,
many excellent methods have been introduced and continue
to drive the progress of the field (Wang et al. 2022; Hu et al.
* † corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7196

