The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Leveraging Normalization Layer in Adapters With Progressive Learning and
Adaptive Distillation for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Yongjin Yang, Taehyeon Kim, Se-Young Yun
KAIST AI
{dyyjkd, potter32, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

(a)

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot learning presents a formidable challenge, as models must be trained on base classes and then
tested on novel classes from various domains with only a
few samples at hand. While prior approaches have primarily focused on parameter-efficient methods of using adapters,
they often overlook two critical issues: shifts in batch statistics and noisy sample statistics arising from domain discrepancy variations. In this paper, we introduce a novel generic
framework that leverages normalization layer in adapters with
Progressive Learning and Adaptive Distillation (ProLAD),
marking two principal contributions. First, our methodology
utilizes two separate adapters: one devoid of a normalization
layer, which is more effective for similar domains, and another embedded with a normalization layer, designed to leverage the batch statistics of the target domain, thus proving effective for dissimilar domains. Second, to address the pitfalls
of noisy statistics, we deploy two strategies: a progressive
training of the two adapters and an adaptive distillation technique derived from features determined by the model solely
with the adapter devoid of a normalization layer. Through
this adaptive distillation, our approach functions as a modulator, controlling the primary adapter for adaptation, based on
each domain. Evaluations on standard cross-domain few-shot
learning benchmarks confirm that our technique outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methodologies.

1

v

(b)

Source Domain
(ImageNet)

Similar Objects Background Shift
(MSCOCO)
(Traﬃc Sign)
Gray Color Space Fine-Grained
(Omniglot)
(Aircraft)

Target Domains

Figure 1: (a) Domain shift encountered during deployment
in CD-FSL, (b) Kernel density estimation of batch statistics across different domains, where bold dotted lines represent the mean value of batch statistics for each domain
and light solid lines represent the batch statistics of individual samples, showing high variations. Domain similarity is
computed using Earth-Mover Distance (EMD) as outlined
in (Cui et al. 2018; Oh et al. 2022). Detailed information is
described in Appendix B.

Introduction

Deep neural networks, while showing remarkable aptitude
for visual recognition tasks when trained on large datasets,
face a significant challenge when applied to real-world scenarios characterized by diverse domains. The challenges
become even more pronounced when these networks encounter unseen data with scarce samples during operational
deployment. This is where Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL) comes into play. CD-FSL aims to leverage
knowledge from a source domain (e.g., ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009)), where abundant labeled data is available, to
learn a predictive model for a target domain (e.g., Fungi
(Schroeder and Cui 2018)) where labeled data is scarce.
The core objective of this learning paradigm is to cultivate a
model that can generalize effectively to new classes within
the target domain using a limited set of examples.

The primary challenges encountered in CD-FSL stem
from the diverse domain discrepancies (Li et al. 2020; Oh
et al. 2022) and the scarcity of samples. As illustrated in
Figure 1 (a), the model is required to adjust to new domains
that may differ in aspects such as color space and background scenes, focal features essential for accurate classification, while using only a restricted number of samples.
Adaptation from the source domain to the target domain is
challenging since it easily poses a high risk of overfitting to a
few samples. To address this challenge, a parameter-efficient
approach that fine-tunes only linear adapters has gained attention in CD-FSL (Requeima et al. 2019; Bateni et al. 2020;
Li, Liu, and Bilen 2022). This approach aims to balance the
need for domain adaptation with the risk of overfitting by

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16370

