The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ProAgent: Building Proactive Cooperative Agents with Large Language Models
Ceyao Zhang1,2 * † , Kaijie Yang3 * , Siyi Hu4 * , Zihao Wang2,5 , Guanghe Li2 , Yihang Sun2 ,
Cheng Zhang2 , Zhaowei Zhang2,5 , Anji Liu2 , Song-Chun Zhu5 , Xiaojun Chang4 , Junge Zhang3 ,
Feng Yin1 , Yitao Liang2 , Yaodong Yang2‡
1

SSE, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
5
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
ceyaozhang2@link.cuhk.edu.cn, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

amount of training data, can capture and embody a significant amount of common sense knowledge. Notable LLMbased agents like SayCan (Ahn et al. 2022), ReAct (Yao
et al. 2023), DEPS (Wang et al. 2023b), RAP (Hao et al.
2023), Reflexion (Shinn et al. 2023), and JARVIS-1 (Wang
et al. 2023c) have demonstrated the ability to make decisions interactively through appropriate prompts or feedback.
However, these works have primarily focused on exploring the potential of LLMs as individual agents, whether in
games or robotics. The untapped potential lies in investigating how LLM-based agents can effectively cooperate with
other AI agents or humans.
This research delves into the capabilities of LLMs in
tackling the intricate challenges of multi-agent coordination (Yang and Wang 2021; Zhang, Yang, and Başar 2021;
Gronauer and Diepold 2022), particularly in the realm of
policy generalization (Strouse et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2023b, 2024). Current approaches (Carroll et al.
2019; Jaderberg et al. 2017; Strouse et al. 2021; Zhao et al.
2023; Li et al. 2023b, 2024) to developing cooperative
agents rely primarily on learning-based methods, whose policy generalization depends heavily on the diversity of teammates they interact with during the training phase. Such reliance, however, constrains the agents’ capacity for strategic adaptation when cooperating with unfamiliar teammates,
which becomes a significant challenge in zero-shot coordination scenarios. We present ProAgent, an innovative and
adaptable framework specifically designed to excel in coordination scenarios alongside novel agents. ProAgent comprises four essential modules: Planner, Verificator,
Controller and Memory, along with the mechanism of
Belief Revision. These modules synergistically enable ProAgent to actively predict teammates’ intentions and
achieve adaptive cooperative reasoning and planning without the need for prior training or finetuning. To assess
the adaptive cooperative capabilities of ProAgent, we conducted performance evaluations using the well-established
multi-agent coordination testing suite, Overcooked-AI (Carroll et al. 2019). In this environment, two players must work
together to maximize their score. The empirical findings

Building agents with adaptive behavior in cooperative tasks
stands as a paramount goal in the realm of multi-agent systems. Current approaches to developing cooperative agents
rely primarily on learning-based methods, whose policy generalization depends heavily on the diversity of teammates
they interact with during the training phase. Such reliance,
however, constrains the agents’ capacity for strategic adaptation when cooperating with unfamiliar teammates, which
becomes a significant challenge in zero-shot coordination
scenarios. To address this challenge, we propose ProAgent,
a novel framework that harnesses large language models
(LLMs) to create proactive agents capable of dynamically
adapting their behavior to enhance cooperation with teammates. ProAgent can analyze the present state, and infer
the intentions of teammates from observations. It then updates its beliefs in alignment with the teammates’ subsequent actual behaviors. Moreover, ProAgent exhibits a high
degree of modularity and interpretability, making it easily integrated into various of coordination scenarios. Experimental evaluations conducted within the Overcooked-AI environment unveil the remarkable performance superiority of
ProAgent, outperforming five methods based on self-play and
population-based training when cooperating with AI agents.
Furthermore, in partnered with human proxy models, its performance exhibits an average improvement exceeding 10%
compared to the current state-of-the-art method. For more information about our project, please visit https://pku-proagent.
github.io.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have rapidly emerged as
powerful tools, achieving remarkable advancements across
various domains, including long conversations (Ouyang
et al. 2022), reasoning (Bubeck et al. 2023), and text generation (Brown et al. 2020). These models, by leveraging a vast
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done when Ceyao Zhang visited Peking University.
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

17591

