The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving PTM Site Prediction by Coupling of Multi-Granularity Structure and
Multi-Scale Sequence Representation
Zhengyi Li1 , Menglu Li1 , Lida Zhu1* , Wen Zhang1,2,3 *
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan 430070, China
{lzy gnn, mengluli}@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, {ldzhu, zhangwen}@mail.hzau.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Protein post-translational modification (PTM) site prediction is a fundamental task in bioinformatics. Several computational methods have been developed to predict PTM
sites. However, existing methods ignore the structure information and merely utilize protein sequences. Furthermore, designing a more fine-grained structure representation
learning method is urgently needed as PTM is a biological event that occurs at the atom granularity. In this paper,
we propose a PTM site prediction method by Coupling of
Multi-Granularity structure and Multi-Scale sequence representation, PTM-CMGMS for brevity. Specifically, multigranularity structure-aware representation learning is designed to learn neighborhood structure representations at
the amino acid, atom, and whole protein granularity from
AlphaFold predicted structures, followed by utilizing contrastive learning to optimize the structure representations.
Additionally, multi-scale sequence representation learning is
used to extract context sequence information, and motif generated by aligning all context sequences of PTM sites assists
the prediction. Extensive experiments on three datasets show
that PTM-CMGMS outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Source code can be found at https://github.com/LZYHZAU/PTM-CMGMS.

Figure 1: The example of lysine crotonylation, which occurs
on the side chain nitrogen atom marked in red. The other
atoms of lysine are marked in yellow.

In recent years, plenty of computational methods have
been developed for predicting PTM sites, and these methods are roughly classified into three categories: machine
learning-based methods, deep learning-based methods, and
pre-trained language model-based methods. The machine
learning-based methods (Xu et al. 2013; Qiu et al. 2017;
Ning et al. 2018; Hasan et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020) extracted the protein sequence-derived features manually and
then fed them into the classifiers, such as support vector machine (SVM), random forest, and conditional random field
algorithm, for PTM site prediction. These methods heavily rely on feature engineering and cannot learn abstract
feature representations. Deep learning-based methods (Xie
et al. 2018; Thapa et al. 2020; Lv et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022)
employed a deep learning model, such as bidirectional long
short-term memory network(BiLSTM), convolutional neural network(CNN), deep neural network(DNN) and transformer, to learn representations automatically, which have
been demonstrated to be powerful techniques for PTM site
prediction. However, these methods roughly address PTM
site prediction as a sequence modeling problem, ignoring
the structure information. The pre-trained language models (PLMs) on large-scale protein sequence corpora have
achieved impressive performance for various downstream
protein understanding tasks. A series of pre-trained language
model-based methods (Qiao, Zhu, and Gong 2022; Pokharel
et al. 2022) have been developed, which utilized the sequence representation extracted from PLMs, such as BERT
(Devlin et al. 2018) and ProtTrans (Elnaggar et al. 2021), for
PTM site prediction. PLMs can learn implicit structure in-

Introduction
Post-translational modification (PTM) refers to the biological events of adding small molecular groups to the side
chains of amino acids, which greatly enhances the functional
diversity of the proteome. Accurate determination of PTM
sites contributes to a deepening understanding of protein
functions(Yang and Gibson 2019) and their specific roles
in various complex cellular processes (Wei et al. 2017; Fernando et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2021), and facilitates precision therapy by illuminating the regulatory systems underlying disease states (Cai et al. 2022). Several wet experiments
have been used for identifying PTM sites, such as highsensitivity mass spectrometry, antibodies, isotope labeling,
and probes (Bos and Muir 2018), but they are often timeconsuming and labor-intensive, hindering large-scale investigations into PTM.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

188

