The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DME: Unveiling the Bias for Better Generalized Monocular Depth Estimation
Songsong Yu, Yifan Wang, Yunzhi Zhuge, Lijun Wang* , Huchuan Lu
Dalian University of Technology
22209083@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wyfan, ljwang, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, zgyzzgyz@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper aims to design monocular depth estimation models with better generalization abilities. To this end, we have
conducted quantitative analysis and discovered two important
insights. First, the Simulation Correlation phenomenon, commonly seen in long-tailed classification problems, also exists
in monocular depth estimation, indicating that the imbalanced
depth distribution in training data may be the cause of limited
generalization ability. Second, the imbalanced and long-tail
distribution of depth values extends beyond the dataset scale,
and also manifests within each individual image, further exacerbating the challenge of monocular depth estimation. Motivated by the above findings, we propose the Distance-aware
Multi-Expert (DME) depth estimation model. Unlike prior
methods that handle different depth range indiscriminately,
DME adopts a divide-and-conquer philosophy where each
expert is responsible for depth estimation of regions within
a specific depth range. As such, the depth distribution seen
by each expert is more uniform and can be more easily predicted. A pixel-level routing module is further designed and
learned to stitch the prediction of all experts into the final
depth map. Experiments show that DME achieves state-ofthe-art performance on both NYU-Depth v2 and KITTI, and
also delivers favorable zero-shot generalization capability on
unseen datasets.

Figure 1: Simulation Correlation. The bar chart displays
the frequency distribution of depth values in the NYUD v2
dataset. The line graph represents the model’s d1 accuracy,
with the values corresponding to the primary axis. It can be
observed that the depth values exhibit a unimodal distribution, while the model’s performance shows a positive correlation with the frequency variation.

Though achieving state-of-the-art performance, they cannot restore absolute depth values. While these approaches
have advanced the field, their limitations highlight the need
for methods that improve generalization without sacrificing
metric accuracy or requiring scene priors.
In the literature of image classification, the generalization
issue has been intensively explored and largely attributed to
the Simulation Correlation effect (Hong et al. 2021) found
in long-tail data distributions, i.e., the classification model
tends to overly focus on high-frequent categories with degraded performance on low frequent ones. In contrast, although the imbalanced distribution of monocular depth has
been identified by prior works (Jiao et al. 2018), its connection to the generalization issue has been rarely explored. We
thus make one of the first attempts by asking the questions
of whether monocular depth also exhibits long-tailed distribution and whether the generalization issue can be explained
by the Simulation Correlation effect.
To answer the aforementioned questions, we have conducted quantitative studies on depth distribution and its impact on depth estimation models. Two important findings has

Introduction
Despite remarkable progress being achieved in recent years (Bhat, Alhashim, and Wonka 2021; Ranftl,
Bochkovskiy, and Koltun 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Ren et al.
2022), monocular depth estimation still suffers from unsatisfactory generalization ability, which hinders their applicability in complex real-world scenarios. The lack of generalization issue is mostly attributed to either significant
scene diversities or scale variations, and addressed by methods of two main kinds. First, scene-aware models incorporate multi-branch architectures to estimate depth tailored
to different scenes (Ren, El-Khamy, and Lee 2019; Bhat
et al. 2023). However, they require scene priors. Second,
relative depth models train in a scale-invariant manner on
diverse, large-scale data to enable metric depth prediction
(Ranftl et al. 2020; Ranftl, Bochkovskiy, and Koltun 2021).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6817

