The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAUI: Scale-Aware Unseen Imagineer for Zero-Shot Object Detection
Jiahao Wang1 , Caixia Yan1 * , Weizhan Zhang1 * , Huan Liu1 ,
Hao Sun2 , Qinghua Zheng1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS Laboratory, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
China Telecom Artificial Intelligence Technology Co.Ltd
uguisu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {yancaixia, zhangwzh, huanliu, qhzheng}@xjtu.edu.cn,
sunh10@chinatelecom.cn
Abstract

Zero-shot object detection (ZSD) aims to localize and classify
unseen objects without access to their training annotations.
As a prevailing solution to ZSD, generation-based methods
synthesize unseen visual features by taking seen features as
reference and class semantic embeddings as guideline. Although previous works continuously improve the synthesis
quality, they fail to consider the scale-varying nature of unseen objects. The generation process is preformed over a
single scale of object features and thus lacks scale-diversity
among synthesized features. In this paper, we reveal the scalevarying challenge in ZSD and propose a Scale-Aware Unseen
Imagineer (SAUI) to lead the way of a novel scale-aware
ZSD paradigm. To obtain multi-scale features of seen-class
objects, we design a specialized coarse-to-fine extractor to
capture features through multiple scale-views. To generate
unseen features scale by scale, we innovate a Series-GAN
synthesizer along with three scale-aware contrastive components to imagine separable, diverse and robust scale-wise
unseen features. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC,
COCO and DIOR datasets demonstrate SAUI’s better performance in different scenarios, especially for scale-varying and
small objects. Notably, SAUI achieves the new state-of-theart performance on COCO and DIOR.

Figure 1: Comparison between previous framework and the
proposed SAUI framework, where different colored boxes
denote different scale-levels. Top: Previous generative methods for ZSD extract single-scale features and then imagine,
which neglects the diversity of different scale-levels; Bottom: Our SAUI extracts coarse-to-fine features through multiple scale-views and imagine diverse scale-wise features to
improve scale-varying object detection.

Introduction
Zero-Shot Object Detection (ZSD) (Bansal et al. 2018; Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2018) is the task that aims to detect novel objects without any access to their corresponding
annotations. Besides seen-class objects involved in the labeled training dataset, ZSD models can also detect unseenclass objects beyond the dataset. Thus, it avoids the laborious pre-task of annotating and simultaneously contributes to
the detection of rarely captured objects, such as endangered
animals and novelty items. Generally, the unseen-class object scales in ZSD vary intensively due to different poses,
shapes or shooting angles. Since models are not allowed to
learn the real scale-diverse distribution of unseen features,
detecting scale-varying unseen-class objects still remains a
key challenge in ZSD.
In recent years, ZSD has achieved tremendous advancements (Zhao et al. 2020; Hayat et al. 2020; Zheng et al.

2020; Yan et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022), which is indeed dominated by mapping-based and generation-based approaches. Specifically, mapping-based methods (Zheng et al.
2020; Yan et al. 2022) manage to align the visual features to
class embeddings and perform the nearest neighbor search
to find their classes. However, lack of unseen visual features
causes severe bias towards seen objects and thus leads to
poor performance or even mode collapse when classifying
(Khan et al. 2019). For this issue, generation-based methods
(Zhao et al. 2020; Hayat et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2022) are
proposed to synthesize unseen visual features based on the
corresponding unseen class embeddings. Both real seen features and synthesized unseen features can contribute to the
training of classifier and thereby significantly alleviate the
bias problem towards seen classes.
Existing generation-based ZSD methods have utilized
Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) (Lin et al. 2017) to process seen objects of different scales and then leverage their

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5445

