The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continuous Rotation Group Equivariant Network Inspired by Neural Population
Coding
Zhiqiang Chen1,2 , Yang Chen2 , Xiaolong Zou3 , Shan Yu2,4 *
2

1
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
Laboratory of Brain Atlas and Brain-inspired Intelligence, Institute of Automation(CASIA), Beijing, China
3
Qiyuan Lab, Beijing, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), Beijing, China
chenzhiqiang@mails.ucas.ac.cn,yang.chen@ia.ac.cn,xiaolz@mail.pku.edu.cn,shan.yu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Neural population coding can represent continuous information by neurons with a series of discrete preferred stimuli,
and we find that the bell-shaped tuning curve plays an important role in this mechanism. Inspired by this, we incorporate
a bell-shaped tuning curve into the discrete group convolution to achieve continuous group equivariance. Simply, we
modulate group convolution kernels by Gauss functions to
obtain bell-shaped tuning curves. Benefiting from the modulation, kernels also gain smooth gradients on geometric dimensions (e.g., location dimension and orientation dimension). It allows us to generate group convolution kernels from
sparse weights with learnable geometric parameters, which
can achieve both competitive performances and parameter efficiencies. Furthermore, we quantitatively prove that discrete
group convolutions with proper tuning curves (bigger than 1x
sampling step) can achieve continuous equivariance. Experimental results show that 1) our approach achieves very competitive performances on MNIST-rot with at least 75% fewer
parameters compared with previous SOTA methods, which
is efficient in parameter; 2) Especially with small sample
sizes, our approach exhibits more pronounced performance
improvements (up to 24%); 3) It also has excellent rotation
generalization ability on various datasets such as MNIST, CIFAR, and ImageNet with both plain and ResNet architectures.

Figure 1: Population coding. (a) A standard model of neural
population coding(Pouget, Dayan, and Zemel 2000). Upper
figure shows the tuning curves of 20 neurons with different
preferred orientations. Blue points in the bottom figure are
responses of the 20 neurons to an orientation of 0.15π. The
red solid line is the posterior distribution of the orientation
(Gauss fitting) estimated from the responses of neurons. The
red arrow is the decoded orientation, which is in continuous
space. (b) Group convolution with bell-shaped tuning curve.
Solid lines are the orientation tuning curves of the kernels
in group convolution. With proper tuning curves, the group
convolution can achieve continuous equivariance.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited great potential in the past decade, achieving excellent performance on
a variety of visual tasks, including classification(Lin, Chen,
and Yan 2013), detection(Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015;
He et al. 2017), segmentation(Kamnitsas et al. 2016; Chen
et al. 2014; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015), etc. Compared with fully connected networks(Hsu, Li, and Psaltis
1990), convolutional neural networks(CNN)(Lecun et al.
1998; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016) have intrinsic decoupling ability for translation, which
allows the network to learn essential features regardless of
the position. Besides the parameter efficiency by sharing
weights in different locations, CNN also reduces the latent
learning space due to the built-in translation symmetry. In

order to take advantage of more symmetries and further improve the decoupling ability of the network, the group equivariant theory and the group equivariant CNN (G-CNN) were
proposed (Cohen and Welling 2016). G-CNN constructed
rotation group convolutions by rotating the convolution kernels to multiple orientations, thereby establishing the intrinsic rotation symmetry.
The manner of group convolution is similar to neural population coding(Averbeck, Latham, and Pouget 2006) that
represents information by a group of neurons with a series
of different preferred stimuli. For example, the ‘place cells’,
neurons of orientation, color and direction in visual cortical
areas, and many other neurons all encode the information
in a population coding manner(Borst and Theunissen 1999;
Usrey and Reid 1999; Zemel, Dayan, and Pouget 1998).

* Corresponding author: Shan Yu
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11462

