The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SkeletonGait: Gait Recognition Using Skeleton Maps
Chao Fan1,2 , Jingzhe Ma1,2 , Dongyang Jin1,2 , Chuanfu Shen1,2,3 , Shiqi Yu1,2 *
1

Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous System, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
The University of Hong Kong
{12131100, 12031127, 11911221, 11950016}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, yusq@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
The choice of the representations is essential for deep gait
recognition methods. The binary silhouettes and skeletal coordinates are two dominant representations in recent literature, achieving remarkable advances in many scenarios. However, inherent challenges remain, in which silhouettes are not
always guaranteed in unconstrained scenes, and structural
cues have not been fully utilized from skeletons. In this paper, we introduce a novel skeletal gait representation named
skeleton map, together with SkeletonGait, a skeleton-based
method to exploit structural information from human skeleton maps. Specifically, the skeleton map represents the coordinates of human joints as a heatmap with Gaussian approximation, exhibiting a silhouette-like image devoid of exact body structure. Beyond achieving state-of-the-art performances over five popular gait datasets, more importantly,
SkeletonGait uncovers novel insights about how important
structural features are in describing gait and when they play
a role. Furthermore, we propose a multi-branch architecture,
named SkeletonGait++, to make use of complementary features from both skeletons and silhouettes. Experiments indicate that SkeletonGait++ outperforms existing state-of-theart methods by a significant margin in various scenarios. For
instance, it achieves an impressive rank-1 accuracy of over
85% on the challenging GREW dataset. The source code is
available at https://github.com/ShiqiYu/OpenGait.

Representation
Binary Image

Coordinates

Skeleton Map

Format

Image

Graph

Image

Architecture

CNN

GCN

CNN

Shape Features

√

×

×

Structural Features

√

√

√

DeepGaitV2

SOTA Skeleton

SkeletonGait

Model

GREW
(77.70)

Gait3D
(74.4)

Main Results

OU-MVLP
(91.90)
SUSTech1K
(77.38)

CCPG
(92.70)

DeepGaitv2
SkeletonGait
SOTA Skeleton

Figure 1: The representations of the developed skeleton map
v.s. the classical gait graph and silhouette. Only a single
frame is displayed for brevity.

maintaining gait-related features such as body shape, structure, and dynamics, and meanwhile eliminate the influence
of gait-unrelated factors, such as background, clothing, and
viewpoints. In recent literature, the binary silhouettes and
skeletons serve as the two most prevailing gait representations (Shen et al. 2022). As shown in Fig. 1, they both explicitly present the structural characteristics of the human
body, e.g., the length, ratio, and movement of human limbs.
Silhouettes, differently, have more discriminative capacity
by explicitly maintaining appearance information. However,
utilizing appearance information from silhouettes is not always beneficial for identification, as these characteristics are
usually vulnerable and mixed up with the shape of dressing and carrying items. Conversely, skeletons present an
appearance-free representation and are naturally robust to
appearance changes. Nevertheless, existing skeleton-based
methods primarily employ Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) on conventional skeletal representations (i.e. 2D/3D
coordinates) and provide unsatisfactory performance, partic-

Introduction
Vision-based gait recognition refers to the use of vision technologies for individual identification based on human walking patterns. Compared to other biometric techniques such
as face, fingerprint, and iris recognition, gait recognition offers the benefits of non-intrusive and long-distance identification without requiring the cooperation of the subject of interest. These advantages make gait recognition particularly
suitable for various security scenarios such as suspect tracking and crime investigation (Nixon and Carter 2006).
Before leveraging deep models to learn gait features, a
fundamental issue worth exploring is to consider the ideal
input modality. To achieve robust long-term human identification, this input should be the ‘clean’ gait representation
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1662

