The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Simplicity Bias in Overparameterized Machine Learning
Yakir Berchenko
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
P. O. 653, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.
berchenk@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

descent, SGD). However, this has been questioned by theoretical and empirical work showing strong evidence to
the contrary (Razin and Cohen 2020; Huang et al. 2019;
Kawaguchi, Kaelbling, and Bengio 2017). Furthermore, although the reasoning behind SGD as an implicit regularizer
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Keskar et al. 2016) is
insightful (“solutions that do not generalize well correspond
to sharp minima, and added noise prevents convergence to
such solutions”), there are examples where a good generalization is obtained irrespective of the optimizer used (Huang
et al. 2019; Kawaguchi, Kaelbling, and Bengio 2017; Wu,
Zhu et al. 2017).
Here we propose an entirely different and new approach:
instead of implicitly assuming that learning-models are
uniformly-probable random objects (prior to training), we
suggest that the probability space over models is in fact
biased towards simple functions. Thus, the trained model
will likely extrapolate well without fluctuating wildly inbetween the training data-points.
Despite some preliminary results (Arpit et al. 2017; VallePerez, Camargo, and Louis 2018; Mingard et al. 2019;
De Palma, Kiani, and Lloyd 2019), a theoretical treatment
with a rigorous proof of such a bias is still lacking. Here,
in addition to explaining the outcome of simplicity bias,
we also study its source. This work suggests that, for
typical overparameterized models (in addition to explaining generalization), simplicity bias is in fact universal and
nearly unavoidable. The crux of the matter is that the functions obtained (at initialization) are uniformly-at-random
constructed but not uniformly-at-random sampled. In other
words, the naive “default” probability space over functions,
where each unique function is sampled with equal probability, is actually conceptually wrong and irrelevant for this
domain. Instead, it is well-known that if a construction process is used to “sample” complex objects then the resulting
probability space is not a uniform space (even if the construction itself is uniformly random, i.e., in each sub-step we
choose uniformly from several construction options). Moreover, different (spaces of) construction processes yield different probability spaces over functions. However, several
properties can be expected to be universal in some sense,
with simplicity bias being a case in point (Chauvin et al.
2004).
Below we present a concrete rigorous example; we then

A thorough theoretical understanding of the surprising generalization ability of deep networks (and other overparameterized models) is still lacking. Here we demonstrate that simplicity bias is a major phenomenon to be reckoned with in
overparameterized machine learning. In addition to explaining the outcome of simplicity bias, we also study its source:
following concrete rigorous examples, we argue that (i) simplicity bias can explain generalization in overparameterized
learning models such as neural networks; (ii) simplicity bias
and excellent generalization are optimizer-independent, as
our examples show, and although the optimizer affects training, it is not the driving force behind simplicity bias; (iii) simplicity bias in pre-training models, and subsequent posteriors,
is universal and stems from the subtle fact that uniformly-atrandom constructed priors are not uniformly-at-random sampled; and (iv) in neural network models, the biasing mechanism in wide (and shallow) networks is different from the
biasing mechanism in deep (and narrow) networks.

Introduction
Contemporary practice in deep learning has challenged conventional approaches to machine learning. Specifically, deep
neural networks are highly overparameterized models with
respect to the number of data points and are often trained
without explicit regularization. Yet they achieve state-ofthe-art generalization performance. It is interesting to note
that these observations are not limited just to neural network
models. Qualitatively similar behaviour has also been observed when using boosting with decision trees and random
forests (Wyner et al. 2017) and other non-network learning problems, with some examples dating back to the early
1990s (Loog et al. 2020).
A thorough theoretical understanding of the unreasonable
effectiveness of deep networks (and other overparameterized
models) is still lacking. Previous work (e.g., (Neyshabur,
Tomioka, and Srebro 2014; Neyshabur et al. 2018)) has suggested that an implicit regularization is occurring in neural networks via an implicit norm minimization; in particular, the minimization of the (generalized) norm was conjectured to be a by-product of the “optimizer”, the method
by which the network is trained (i.e., stochastic gradient
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11052

