The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improved MLP Point Cloud Processing with
High-Dimensional Positional Encoding
Yanmei Zou1 , Hongshan Yu1 * , Zhengeng Yang2 * , Zechuan Li1 , Naveed Akhtar3
1

College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Quanzhou Innovation Institute, Hunan University, Changsha, China
2
College of Engineering and Design, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 3052 Victoria, Australia
zouyanmei@hnu.edu.cn, yuhongshancn@hotmail.com, yzg050215@163.com, lizechuan@hnu.edu.cn,
naveed.akhtar1@unimelb.edu.au
Abstract

cloud. This generally helps in making the methods computationally efficient. However, the discretization process also
results in a noticeable loss of fine-grained geometric information. The seminal work of PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a)
originally demonstrated the possibility of directly processing point clouds with Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) based
neural models. Since PointNet, numerous point based methods have surfaced, e.g., PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), PointConv (Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019), PointNeXt (Qian et al.
2022). A key attribute of such methods is that they employ sophisticated local feature aggregation schemes to encode strong representations of the point clouds. For instance,
PointNet++ uses a hierarchical network structure for that
purpose, whereas PointConv employs a density-aware discrete convolution for high-quality local feature aggregation.
The more recent PointNeXt proposes an inverted residual
bottleneck module to improve PointNet++ scalability.

Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) models are the bedrock of
contemporary point cloud processing. However, their complex network architectures obscure the source of their
strength. We first develop an “abstraction and refinement”
(ABS-REF) view for the neural modeling of point clouds.
This view elucidates that whereas the early models focused
on the ABS stage, the more recent techniques devise sophisticated REF stages to attain performance advantage in point
cloud processing. We then borrow the concept of “positional
encoding” from transformer literature, and propose a Highdimensional Positional Encoding (HPE) module, which can
be readily deployed to MLP based architectures. We leverage
our module to develop a suite of HPENet, which are MLP
networks that follow ABS-REF paradigm, albeit with a sophisticated HPE based REF stage. The developed technique
is extensively evaluated for 3D object classification, object
part segmentation, semantic segmentation and object detection. We establish new state-of-the-art results of 87.6 mAcc
on ScanObjectNN for object classification, and 85.5 class
mIoU on ShapeNetPart for object part segmentation, and 72.7
and 78.7 mIoU on Area-5 and 6-fold experiments with S3DIS
for semantic segmentation. The source code for this work is
available at https://github.com/zouyanmei/HPENet.

In recent years, the success of transformers in the natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al.
2018) and computer vision domains (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021a) has also motivated transformer based
neural models for directly processing 3D point clouds. To
that end, Point Transformer (Zhao et al. 2021) and other recent methods, e.g., (Lai et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022), use
transformer architectures for an even more sophisticated feature aggregation. These efforts are emerging in parallel to
the MLP networks for point clouds (Choe et al. 2022; Ma
et al. 2022; Qian et al. 2022). One of the intended contributions of this paper is to show that the key feature extraction
modules used by the conventional MLP based methods and
the emerging transformer based techniques essentially follow the same two-stage “abstraction and refinement” (ABSREF) paradigm. We discuss this unified view of the latest
techniques in detail in the Proposed Method Section.

Introduction
The increasing popularity of 3D sensors is currently fueling a wide use of 3D point clouds in numerous application
domains, such as autonomous driving (Zheng et al. 2021;
Shi et al. 2022), robotics (Li et al. 2022) and geological surveying (Kong, Wu, and Saroglou 2020). Unlike digital images with regular 2D grid structures, 3D points in a typical
point cloud are irregularly located in 3D space. This intrinsic irregularity causes considerable challenges in processing
point clouds with neural networks.
Existing neural network based point cloud processing
methods can be categorized into two broad categories: voxel
based (Huang and You 2016; Choy, Gwak, and Savarese
2019) and point based methods (Zhao et al. 2021; Qian et al.
2022; Qi et al. 2017a). The former discretize the underlying
3D space into volumetric units before processing the point

Under our ABS-REF perspective, it becomes clear that
whereas the early works, e.g., PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b)
and PointConv (Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019), employ sophisticated local feature aggregation strategies at the ABS stage,
they generally lack the REF stage. As compared to them,
success of the more recent techniques can be attributed to
the REF stage, which enables an increased receptive field
of the network and a greater extent of context information
considerations. These factors are crucial for discriminative

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7891

