The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Planning Domains from Non-redundant Fully-Observed Traces:
Theoretical Foundations and Complexity Analysis
Pascal Bachor1 , Gregor Behnke2
1

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
2
Universiteit van Amsterdam
bachorp@cs.uni-freiburg.de, g.behnke@uva.nl

Abstract

Aineto, Celorrio, and Onaindia 2019)), domain learning can
be more complicated as we might have to infer the existence
of certain unobserved state features.
In most cases, domain learning algorithms are provided
only with positive examples, i.e. traces that are supposed
to be valid in the domain to be learned. The possible inferences when requiring only the validity of the given traces
are limited. Therefore, usually either further assumptions on
the given input are made or there is some other bias toward
certain models. In this work, we will presuppose that given
traces are non-redundant (we say justified) in the sense that
either no single action or no set of actions can be skipped
without violating the validity of the trace. We will then analyze the problem of deciding whether there exists a domain
in which the given traces are valid and justified. As far as we
are aware, these particular assumptions have not yet been
studied in the context of domain learning. Furthermore, an
analysis of the problem’s computational complexity (in this
or any other formulation) has never been conducted. We aim
at building a firm theoretical foundation that facilitates the
formal definition and analysis of varied domain learning scenarios in the future.

Domain learning is the task of finding an action model that
can explain given observed plan executions, so-called traces.
It allows us to automate the identification of actions’ preconditions and effects instead of relying on hand-modeled expert knowledge. While previous research has put forth various techniques and covers multiple planning formalisms, the
theoretical foundations of domain learning are still in their
infancy.
We investigate the most basic setting, that is grounded classical planning without negative preconditions or conditional
effects with full observability of the state variables. The given
traces are assumed to be justified in the sense that either no
single action or no set of actions can be removed without
violating correctness of the plan. Furthermore, we might be
given additional constraints in the form of a propositional logical formula. We show the consequences of these assumptions
for the computational complexity of identifying a satisfactory
planning domain.

Introduction
Automated planning is concerned with finding out how to
act in a given environment by means of computation. A domain, or action model, specifies available actions along with
the effects they have on the current world state and the conditions under which they can be applied. To be able to utilize
planning algorithms, we require an action model. Modeling
actions, however, can be difficult and expensive, as it usually requires the knowledge and labor of domain experts.
This drawback, known as the knowledge acquisition problem, has been identified as a bottleneck for the successful
application of planning systems (Wang 1995; Benson 1996;
Kambhampati 2007; Gregory and Lindsay 2016).
Domain learning is concerned with automatically inferring the preconditions and effects of actions from a given set
of observations. These observations usually take the form of
traces, i.e. plans together with information about the state
before and after each action execution (Jimenez et al. 2012;
Cresswell and Gregory 2011; Arora et al. 2018). In this
work, we consider only the fully-observable case in which
traces contain all state information. If the traces are (partially) unobservable (see e.g. (Yang, Wu, and Jiang 2007;

Problem Definition
We adopt the popular classical planning formalism STRIPS
(Fikes and Nilsson 1971). The environment state will be
modeled using a set of variables (or state variables) that can
either be contained (true) or missing (false) in a state. Actions are characterized by their preconditions, variables that
must be true in–, deletions, variables that will be removed
from–, and additions, variables that will be added to a state
in which the action is executed. A domain is the definition
of actions’ preconditions and effects. Note that we do not
allow negative preconditions or any other non-atomic preconditions or effects.
Definition 1. δ = (pre, del, add), where pre = δpre , del =
δdel , and add = δadd are relations between actions and
variables, is a domain if (pre ∪ del) ∩ add = ∅.
We let A(δ) := { 𝚊 | ∃x.(𝚊, x) ∈ δadd } and V(δ) :=
{ x | ∃𝚊.(𝚊, x) ∈ δadd }.
A relation rel between actions and variables is a set of
pairs (𝚊, x) such that 𝚊 is an action and x is a variable. We let
rel(𝚊) := { x | (𝚊, x) ∈ rel } and rel−1 (x) := { 𝚊 | (𝚊, x) ∈

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20028

