The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mining Fine-Grained Image-Text Alignment for Zero-Shot Captioning
via Text-Only Training
Longtian Qiu1∗ , Shan Ning1∗ , Xuming He1,2
1 ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
2 Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

{qiult, ningshan2022, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

network models in an end-to-end manner. Recent developments in Contrastive Image Language Pre-training (CLIP)
(Radford et al. 2021) have enabled researchers to explore
a new paradigm, zero-shot image captioning, through textonly training. In particular, CLIP learns a multi-modal embedding space where semantically related images and text
are encoded into features with close proximity. As such, if
a model learns to map the CLIP text features to their corresponding texts, it is feasible to generate image captions from
the CLIP image features without needing supervision from
caption annotations.
One main advantage of this zero-shot captioning paradigm
is that it enables a Large Language Model (LLM) (Brown
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022b) with image captioning capabilities using only text data and affordable computational
resources. Despite the impressive performance achieved
by recent powerful multimodal models (Zhu et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2023), they typically require large-scale, highquality human-annotated data and expensive computational
resources for fine-tuning an LLM. Zero-shot captioning
methods can significantly reduce such costs, which is particularly important in situations of data scarcity and limited
resources. Moreover, recent work (Guo et al. 2022a; Changpinyo et al. 2022; Tiong et al. 2022) demonstrates that other
vision-language tasks, such as VQA, can be addressed by
LLMs and image captions. Consequently, the paradigm of
zero-shot captioning has the potential to pave the way to solving complex vision-language tasks with LLMs through efficient text-only training.
A critical challenge in zero-shot image captioning through
text-only training is to mitigate a widely observed phenomenon known as the modality gap. While the features of
paired texts and images are close in the CLIP embedding
space, there remains a gap between them (Liang et al. 2022).
This gap often results in inaccurate mappings from the image embeddings to the text ones. Consequently, without finetuning with paired data, it significantly impairs the performance of zero-shot image captioning. Several works have
attempted to address the modality gap in zero-shot image
captioning, relying mainly on two strategies: (1) The first
strategy leverages a memory bank from training text data
to project visual embeddings into the text embedding space
(Li et al. 2023). However, this projection prevents it from
representing any semantic content outside the distribution

Abstract
Image captioning aims at generating descriptive and meaningful textual descriptions of images, enabling a broad range of
vision-language applications. Prior works have demonstrated
that harnessing the power of Contrastive Image Language Pretraining (CLIP) offers a promising approach to achieving zeroshot captioning, eliminating the need for expensive caption
annotations. However, the widely observed modality gap in
the latent space of CLIP harms the performance of zero-shot
captioning by breaking the alignment between paired imagetext features. To address this issue, we conduct an analysis
on the CLIP latent space which leads to two findings. Firstly,
we observe that the CLIP’s visual feature of image subregions
can achieve closer proximity to the paired caption due to the
inherent information loss in text descriptions. In addition, we
show that the modality gap between a paired image-text can
be empirically modeled as a zero-mean Gaussian distribution.
Motivated by the findings, we propose a novel zero-shot image
captioning framework with text-only training to reduce the
modality gap. In particular, we introduce a subregion feature
aggregation to leverage local region information, which produces a compact visual representation for matching text representation. Moreover, we incorporate a noise injection and
CLIP reranking strategy to boost captioning performance. We
also extend our framework to build a zero-shot VQA pipeline,
demonstrating its generality. Through extensive experiments
on common captioning and VQA datasets such as MSCOCO,
Flickr30k and VQAV2, we show that our method achieves
remarkable performance improvements. Code is available at
https://github.com/Artanic30/MacCap.

Introduction
Image captioning is a fundamental task in vision-language
understanding that involves generating natural language descriptions for a given image. It plays a critical role in facilitating more complex vision-language tasks, such as visual question answering (Agrawal et al. 2015; Hudson and
Manning 2019; Marino et al. 2019) and visual dialog (Das
et al. 2016; Niu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2023). The mainstream image captioning methods (Xu et al. 2015; Anderson
et al. 2017; Yao et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019) require expensive human annotation of image-text pairs for training neural
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4605

