The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Evidence Contraction Issue in Deep Evidential Regression: Discussion and
Solution
Yuefei Wu1,2 , Bin Shi1,2 * , Bo Dong2,3 , Qinghua Zheng1,2 , Hua Wei4
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Distance Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Arizona State University, Phoenix, Arizona, USA
yuelfei.wu@gmail.com, {shibin, dong.bo, qhzheng}@xjtu.edu.cn, hua.wei@asu.edu

Abstract
Deep Evidential Regression (DER) places a prior on the original Gaussian likelihood and treats learning as an evidence
acquisition process to quantify uncertainty. For the validity of the evidence theory, DER requires specialized activation functions to ensure that the prior parameters remain
non-negative. However, such constraints will trigger evidence
contraction, causing sub-optimal performance. In this paper,
we analyse DER theoretically, revealing the intrinsic limitations for sub-optimal performance: the non-negativity constraints on the Normal Inverse-Gamma (N IG) prior parameter trigger the evidence contraction under the specialized activation function, which hinders the optimization of DER performance. On this basis, we design a Non-saturating Uncertainty Regularization term, which effectively ensures that the
performance is further optimized in the right direction. Experiments on real-world datasets show that our proposed approach improves the performance of DER while maintaining
the ability to quantify uncertainty.

Figure 1: Performance Comparison on seven real-world
datasets from UCI Regression benchmark. Both RMSE and
MAE, smaller is better. It is evident that, in contrast to standard regression methods, DER exhibits noticeably poor performance across several datasets.

Introduction
Deep Learning has been highly successful for a decade and
is widely applied in various research areas such as Data Mining (Xu et al. 2023), Natural Language Processing (Zhang
et al. 2023), and Computer Vision (Kirillov et al. 2023). Despite the attractiveness of Deep Learning, their deployment
in high-risk domains such as Weather Prediction (Bi et al.
2023), Vehicle Control (Choi et al. 2019) and Medical Diagnostics (Seebock et al. 2020) is still limited, which is attributed to the fact that Deep Learning models are subject to
uncertainty.
Due to the powerful fitting capability, Deep Learning
might lead to over-confident predictions. If the failure to
provide reliable uncertainty quantification for prediction, it
has catastrophic consequences (Amini et al. 2020). Therefore, Uncertainty Quantification has received widespread
attention and is considered as one of the foundations for
building safe and reliable Deep Learning systems(Guo et al.
2017a; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Gal
and Ghahramani 2015).

In recent years, significant progress has been made in uncertainty quantification, such as Bayesian methods (Kendall
and Gal 2017) and Deep Ensemble(Lakshminarayanan,
Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Zaidi et al. 2021). However,
these methods are limited by the difficulties in approximating posterior computation or the high cost of sampling, and
cannot achieve fine-grained uncertainty quantification (Malinin and Gales 2018; Amini et al. 2020). To address these
issues, (Amini et al. 2020) proposed the Deep Evidential Regression (DER). The DER places Normal Inverse-Gamma
(N IG) priors on the likelihood function and formulates
learning as an evidence acquisition process. Due to only
minor modifications to neural networks without the sampling and the ability to quantify both epistemic and aleatoric
uncertainties in a single forward pass, DER have gained
widespread adoption (Liu et al. 2021; Chen, Bromuri, and
van Eekelen 2021; Singh et al. 2022; Petek et al. 2022; Li
and Liu 2022; Amini et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2021; Charpentier et al. 2022; Oh and Shin 2022; Pandey and Yu 2023a).
Despite the attractive ability for uncertainty quantification,
the DER’s error is noticeably bigger than standard regres-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21726

