The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Direction-Aware Video Demoiréing with Temporal-Guided Bilateral Learning
Shuning Xu1 * , Binbin Song1 * , Xiangyu Chen1,2 , Jiantao Zhou1†
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yc07425, yb97426, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, chxy95@gmail.com

Abstract
Moiré patterns occur when capturing images or videos on
screens, severely degrading the quality of the captured images or videos. Despite the recent progresses, existing video
demoiréing methods neglect the physical characteristics and
formation process of moiré patterns, significantly limiting the
effectiveness of video recovery. This paper presents a unified
framework, DTNet, a direction-aware and temporal-guided
bilateral learning network for video demoiréing. DTNet effectively incorporates the process of moiré pattern removal,
alignment, color correction, and detail refinement. Our proposed DTNet comprises two primary stages: Frame-level
Direction-aware Demoiréing and Alignment (FDDA) and
Tone and Detail Refinement (TDR). In FDDA, we employ
multiple directional DCT modes to perform the moiré pattern
removal process in the frequency domain, effectively detecting the prominent moiré edges. Then, the coarse and finegrained alignment is applied on the demoiréd features for facilitating the utilization of neighboring information. In TDR,
we propose a temporal-guided bilateral learning pipeline to
mitigate the degradation of color and details caused by the
moiré patterns while preserving the restored frequency information in FDDA. Guided by the aligned temporal features
from FDDA, the affine transformations for the recovery of the
ultimate clean frames are learned in TDR. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our video demoiréing method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches by 2.3 dB in PSNR, and
also delivers a superior visual experience.

Figure 1: A visual comparison with the existing methods for
video demoiréing. (a) Moiré input, (b-d) Outputs of state-ofthe-art image demoiréing methods, (e) Output of the video
demoiréing method VDmoiré, (f) Our result, capable of removing the moiré patterns, while restoring color deviations
and fine details. (Zoom in for a better view.)

Introduction
a multi-scale architecture to remove moiré patterns of various sizes. MBCNN (Zheng et al. 2020), WDNet (Liu
et al. 2020a) and FHDe2Net (He et al. 2020) compensate
the fine detail distortions in demoiréing by exploiting signal properties in the frequency domain. ESDNet (Yu et al.
2022) develops a lightweight model for high-resolution image demoiréing. The aforementioned models are designed
for removing moiré patterns from a single image, and there
are relatively fewer algorithms targeting at removing moiré
patterns from videos. If we directly apply image demoiréing
methods to remove moiré patterns from videos, it may result
in poor temporal consistency. This limitation arises from the
inability of image demoiréing methods to make use of information from neighboring frames for restoring moiré patterns
in the current frame (Dai et al. 2022). Hence, the removal

Moiré patterns appear when two similar repetitive patterns
interfere with each other, a phenomenon commonly observed during image capture on screens. The occurance of
moiré patterns can be intricate and multifaceted, leading to
an unsatisfactory visual experience. Eliminating moiré patterns can be arduous owing to their ambiguous shapes, diverse colors, and variable frequencies.
Image demoiréing has received increasing attention from
the research community. DMCNN (Sun, Yu, and Wang
2018) proposes the first deep end-to-end network that uses
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6360

