The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Retrieval-Augmented Primitive Representations for
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Chenchen Jing1 , Yukun Li2 , Hao Chen1 * , Chunhua Shen1
1

2

Zhejiang University, China
School of Computer Science and Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
{jingchenchen,haochen.cad,chunhuashen}@zju.edu.cn, liyk@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

Unseen composition

Seen compositions

Compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) aims to recognize
unseen attribute-object compositions by learning from seen
compositions. Composing the learned knowledge of seen
primitives, i.e., attributes or objects, into novel compositions
is critical for CZSL. In this work, we propose to explicitly retrieve knowledge of seen primitives for compositional
zero-shot learning. We present a retrieval-augmented method,
which augments standard multi-path classification methods
with two retrieval modules. Specifically, we construct two
databases storing the attribute and object representations of
training images, respectively. For an input training/testing image, we use two retrieval modules to retrieve representations
of training images with the same attribute and object, respectively. The primitive representations of the input image are
augmented by using the retrieved representations, for composition recognition. By referencing semantically similar images, the proposed method is capable of recalling knowledge
of seen primitives for compositional generalization. Experiments on three widely-used datasets show the effectiveness
of the proposed method.

young cat

wet cat

wet sand
(a)

Training images

Retrieved images

old cat

young cat

wet ground

wet sand

Query
retrieval

Composition
Recognition

wet cat
(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of primitive retrieval for compositional
zero-shot learning. (a) shows two seen compositions in the
training set of the MIT-States (Isola, Lim, and Adelson
2015) dataset on the left and an unseen composition in the
testing set on the right. (b) shows explicitly retrieving relevant images to identify novel compositions.

Introduction
Compositional generalization, understanding unseen combinations composed of seen primitives, is one of the
fundamental properties of human intelligence (Fodor and
Pylyshyn 1988). Aiming to evaluate such ability of vision
models, compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) (Misra,
Gupta, and Hebert 2017; Purushwalkam et al. 2019) requires
recognizing unseen attribute-object compositions by learning from seen compositions. Specifically, the training set in
CZSL contains images with compositional concepts, such
as wet-sand and young-cat. Given a testing image, the goal
is to assign a novel compositional concept, e.g. wet-cat, to
the image by composing the primitives, wet and cat, learned
from the training data, as shown in Figure 1 (a).
To compose the seen primitives into unseen compositions,
two challenges must be considered. Firstly, there are semantic entanglements between objects and attributes (Atzmon
et al. 2021; Anwaar, Pan, and Kleinsteuber 2022). For an image labeled as ancient-building, it is hard to tell which visual

features can be captured as a building, and which, as ancient.
Disentangling and composing primitives of training samples
is thus non-trivial. Secondly, visual concepts usually follow a long-tailed distribution (Salakhutdinov, Torralba, and
Tenenbaum 2011; Purushwalkam et al. 2019). Many classes
are rare and may not be well-learned for compositional generalization.
Inspired by the ability of humans to perform associative
learning to recall relevant concepts in deep memories (Chen
et al. 2022), in this work, we propose to improve compositional generalization with retrieval and association. The intuition is that the aforementioned challenges can be alleviated
if we construct a knowledge base from the training data. Referencing related knowledge in the test time could provide a
strong enhancement signal to help the model recall learned
primitives for generalization, as shown in Figure 1 (b).
We introduce a retrieval-augmented method, which enables explicit knowledge retrieval of seen primitives, for

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2652

