The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TaskLAMA: Probing the Complex Task Understanding of Language Models
Quan Yuan∗ , Mehran Kazemi∗ , Xin Xu∗ , Isaac Noble, Vaiva Imbrasaite, Deepak Ramachandran
Google Research
{yquan, mehrankazemi, xxujasmine, isaacn, vimbrasaite, ramachandrand}@google.com

Abstract

Task: How to make mayonnaise Context: Egg-based mayonnaise

Add salt for taste
Sprinkle some
pepper
Add vegetable oil

Transfer the egg
mayonnaise into a bowl

Mix a tablespoon
of mustard

Continue blending until
the mixture turns to
mayonnaise

Add 2 eggs to
the blender

Take a blender

Structured Complex Task Decomposition (SCTD) is the
problem of breaking down a complex real-world task (such
as planning a wedding) into a directed acyclic graph over individual steps that contribute to achieving the task, with edges
specifying temporal dependencies between them. SCTD is an
important component of assistive planning tools, and a challenge for commonsense reasoning systems. We probe how
accurately SCTD can be done with the knowledge extracted
from pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs). We introduce a new high-quality human-annotated dataset for this
problem and novel metrics to fairly assess performance of
LLMs against several baselines. Our experiments reveal that
LLMs are able to decompose complex tasks into individual steps effectively, with a relative improvement of 15% to
280% over the best baseline. We also propose a number of approaches to further improve their performance, with a relative
improvement of 7% to 37% over the base model. However,
we find that LLMs still struggle to predict pairwise temporal
dependencies, which reveals a gap in their understanding of
complex tasks.

Blend the ingredients
on high speed

Task Graph

Figure 1: An example of a task graph for a complex task
from the TaskLAMA dataset. Nine steps are outlined. The
four steps with horizontal texts can be done in any order.

set of necessary steps for achieving the task, and specify
temporal dependencies between these steps (i.e. which steps
should be done before which). The output can be described
as a directed acyclic graph, which we term Task Graph,
where the nodes represent the steps and the edges represent
temporal dependencies. Any ordering of the nodes that respects the graph edges is a possible ordering of the steps
to accomplish the task. Figure 1 demonstrates an example
task graph. The importance of this problem has led to an
extensive classic and modern literature for developing solutions based on the latest AI technologies available (Newell,
Simon et al. 1972; Kokkalis et al. 2013; Awadallah et al.
2014; Zhang et al. 2021). These works were also motivated
by the feature of SCTD being a quintessential or (informally
speaking) AI-Complete problem, involving many features of
human-level reasoning such as logical/defeasible reasoning,
uncertainty and high context-dependence. The existing solutions in the literature are typically based on crowd-sourcing
(Kokkalis et al. 2013; Zhou et al. 2022b), based on similarity or co-occurrence of user search queries (Awadallah
et al. 2014; Mehrotra and Yilmaz 2017; Zhang et al. 2015),
or based on summarizing the content of relevant web-pages
found through web search (Zhang et al. 2021).
In this paper, we probe the extent to which such knowledge can be extracted from large language models (LLMs).
Previous work has shown that LLMs contain a large amount
of different types of knowledge (Petroni et al. 2019; Sung
et al. 2021; West et al. 2021) and can do various types of
reasoning (Wei et al. 2022; Nye et al. 2021; Kazemi et al.
2023a). Our work extends this line of work by probing

Introduction
In their daily lives, people are involved in executing multiple tasks of different temporal granularity in order to achieve
their varied goals. There is abundant evidence that consciously decomposing a complex task into smaller sub-tasks
leads to more efficient and reliable execution. For example,
Kokkalis et al. (2013) show that people tend to achieve tasks
better and faster when given a concrete plan with actionable
steps. Cheng et al. (2015) show that breaking a macro-task
into micro-tasks for workers results in more accurate overall quality and allows for easier recovery from interruption.
Chilton et al. (2013) show that breaking down a task into
sub-tasks is beneficial for taxonomy creation. Teevan, Iqbal,
and Von Veh (2016) show that breaking a task into sub-tasks
can be beneficial for collaborative writing (e.g., writing a description of a shared project). Allen and Peikoff (2001) argue
in their book that “there is an inverse relationship between
things on your mind and those things getting done”.
Given a complex task, the goal of structured complex task
decomposition (SCTD) is to automatically find a complete
∗

Contributed equally.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19468

