The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reachability of Fair Allocations via Sequential Exchanges
Ayumi Igarashi1 , Naoyuki Kamiyama2 , Warut Suksompong3 , Sheung Man Yuen3
1

University of Tokyo
Kyushu University
3
National University of Singapore
2

Abstract

In this work, we take a different perspective by initiating the study of reachability in fair division. Given two fair
allocations—an initial allocation and a target allocation—
we are interested in whether the target allocation can be
reached from the initial allocation via a sequence of operations such that every intermediate allocation is also fair.
As an application of our problem, consider a company that
wants to redistribute some of its employees between its
departments. Since performing the entire redistribution at
once may excessively disrupt the operation of the departments, the company prefers to gradually adjust the distribution while maintaining fairness among the departments
throughout the process. Another example is a museum that
plans to reallocate certain exhibits among its branches—
performing one small change at a time can help ensure a
seamless transition for the visitors. In this paper, we shall
use EF1 as our fairness benchmark and allow any two agents
to exchange a pair of goods in an operation. The reachability between EF1 allocations, or lack thereof, is an interesting structural property in itself; similar properties have been
studied in other collective decision-making scenarios such
as voting (Obraztsova et al. 2013; Obraztsova, Elkind, and
Faliszewski 2020).
Closest to our work is perhaps a line of work initiated by
Gourvès, Lesca, and Wilczynski (2017). These authors considered the “housing market” setting, where the number of
agents is the same as the number of goods and each agent
receives exactly one good. In their model, a pair of agents
is allowed to exchange goods if the two agents are neighbors in a given social network and the exchange benefits
both agents. Their paper, along with a series of follow-up
papers (Huang and Xiao 2020; Li, Plaxton, and Sinha 2021;
Müller and Bentert 2021; Ito et al. 2023), explored the complexity of determining whether an allocation can be reached
from another allocation in this model and its variants. More
broadly, reachability problems are also known as reconfiguration problems (Nishimura 2018); examples of such problems that have been studied include minimum spanning tree
(Ito et al. 2011), graph coloring (Johnson et al. 2016), and
perfect matching (Bonamy et al. 2019).

In the allocation of indivisible goods, a prominent fairness
notion is envy-freeness up to one good (EF1). We initiate
the study of reachability problems in fair division by investigating the problem of whether one EF1 allocation can be
reached from another EF1 allocation via a sequence of exchanges such that every intermediate allocation is also EF1.
We show that two EF1 allocations may not be reachable from
each other even in the case of two agents, and deciding their
reachability is PSPACE-complete in general. On the other
hand, we prove that reachability is guaranteed for two agents
with identical or binary utilities as well as for any number
of agents with identical binary utilities. We also examine the
complexity of deciding whether there is an EF1 exchange sequence that is optimal in the number of exchanges required.

1

Introduction

Fair division, the study of how to allocate resources fairly
among competing agents, is a highly active research area at
the intersection of mathematics, economics, and computer
science. Recently, researchers have drawn connections between fair division and various other fields such as graph
theory (Bei et al. 2022; Bilò et al. 2022), extremal combinatorics (Chaudhury et al. 2021; Berendsohn, Boyadzhiyska,
and Kozma 2022), two-sided matching (Freeman, Micha,
and Shah 2021; Igarashi et al. 2023b), and differential privacy (Manurangsi and Suksompong 2023), to name a few.
In fair division, the goal is typically to find an allocation
of the resource that is “fair” with respect to the agents’ preferences. When allocating indivisible goods—such as books,
clothes, and office supplies—a prominent fairness notion in
the literature is envy-freeness up to one good (EF1). In an
EF1 allocation of the goods, an agent is allowed to envy another agent only if there exists a good in the latter agent’s
bundle whose removal would eliminate this envy. The “up
to one good” relaxation is necessitated by the fact that full
envy-freeness is sometimes infeasible, as can be seen, for instance, when two agents compete for a single valuable good.
It is well-known that an EF1 allocation always exists regardless of the agents’ valuations for the goods (Lipton et al.
2004; Budish 2011).

1.1

Our Contributions

As is often done in fair division, we assume that every agent
is equipped with an additive utility function. We consider

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9773

