The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Can You Rely on Synthetic Labellers
in Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning?
It’s Complicated
Katherine Metcalf, Miguel Sarabia, Masha Fedzechkina, Barry-John Theobald
Apple
kmetcalf, miguelsdc, mfedzechkina, bjtheobald@apple.com
Abstract

Specifically, we compare synthetic and human labels, and
the policies resulting from training on these labels. We
also analyze trends in human preference labels via interannotator agreement and label quality. The main findings of
this paper are:

Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (PbRL) enables
non-experts to train Reinforcement Learning models using
preference feedback. However, the effort required to collect
preference labels from real humans means that PbRL research
primarily relies on synthetic labellers. We validate the most
common synthetic labelling strategy by comparing against labels collected from a crowd of humans on three Deep Mind
Control (DMC) suite tasks: stand, walk, and run. We find that:
(1) the synthetic labels are a good proxy for real humans under some circumstances, (2) strong preference label agreement between human and synthetic labels is not necessary for
similar policy performance, (3) policy performance is higher
at the start of training from human feedback and is higher at
the end of training from synthetic feedback, and (4) training
on only examples with high levels of inter-annotator agreement does not meaningfully improve policy performance.
Our results justify the use of synthetic labellers to develop
and ablate PbRL methods, and provide insight into how human labelling changes over the course of policy training.

1. Policy performance from synthetic preference labels
(Christiano et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2021) aligns with policy performance from human labels until the final round
of preference feedback.
2. Policy performance from human feedback is higher at the
start of training and higher from synthetic feedback at the
end.
3. High human and synthetic preference label agreement is
not required for similar policy performance.
4. As the policy produces behaviors more similar to the target behavior, the preference labelling task becomes challenging for humans.
5. Using human preference feedback with high interannotator agreement does not meaningfully improve policy performance.

Introduction
Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (PbRL) is a
human-in-the-loop method to learn from teacher preference
feedback instead of requiring either a hand-engineered reward function, or examples of task success. PbRL infers a
reward function from preference feedback, then iterates between training the policy and seeking additional preference
feedback, as shown in Figure 1. Given the efforts associated with collecting human feedback, the majority of PbRL
development relies on synthetic labellers to compare methods and ablate method components. While prior work has
evaluated proposed PbRL methods with real human feedback (Christiano et al. 2017; Lee, Smith, and Abbeel 2021;
Stiennon et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021), the evaluations are
cursory, are run only on the newly proposed method, do not
validate their synthetic labeller results, and do not provide
insight into the human labels. Therefore, it is important to
establish that synthetic labels are indicative of human labels
to ensure experimental PbRL algorithm success translates
to practical success (Amershi et al. 2014). We address this
question in current work.

Taken together these findings show that we can use synthetic labels as a proxy for human labels, but that practitioners need to measure the quality of their labels to obtain best
results.

Related Work
The importance of studying the human in interactive machine learning settings was investigated by Amershi et al.
(2014) as their behaviors directly impact the success of
the developed algorithm. However, the majority of work in
PbRL relies primarily on perfect, synthetic preference labelers for their evaluations and prior work has not studied their algorithms in the context of human behavior (Lee
et al. 2021; Park et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Bıyık, Talati,
and Sadigh 2022; Hejna III and Sadigh 2022). Studies that
include experiments with human feedback do not systematically evaluate with human labels, they do not compare
across algorithms (Christiano et al. 2017; Lee, Smith, and
Abbeel 2021), they do not investigate human labelling behaviors (Palan et al. 2019; Wang, Wang, and Min 2022),
nor do they provide algorithm comparisons for both synthetic and human labellers (Palan et al. 2019; Lee, Smith,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10128

