The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Altruism in Facility Location Problems
Houyu Zhou1 , Hau Chan2 , Minming Li1
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computing, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
houyuzhou2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, hchan3@unl.edu, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

the preferences of the students (Bartholdi and Trick 1986)
and selecting an overall committee view to represent individuals with different political views (Chan et al. 2021).

We study the facility location problems (FLPs) with altruistic agents who act to benefit others in their affiliated groups.
Our aim is to design mechanisms that elicit true locations
from the agents in different overlapping groups and place a
facility to serve agents to approximately optimize a given objective based on agents’ costs to the facility. Existing studies
of FLPs consider myopic agents who aim to minimize their
own costs to the facility. We mainly consider altruistic agents
with well-motivated group costs that are defined over costs
incurred by all agents in their groups. Accordingly, we define
Pareto strategyproofness to account for altruistic agents and
their multiple group memberships with incomparable group
costs. We consider mechanisms satisfying this strategyproofness under various combinations of the planner’s objectives
and agents’ group costs. For each of these settings, we provide upper and lower bounds of approximation ratios of the
mechanisms satisfying Pareto strategyproofness.

Our Research Agenda with Altruistic Agents. Previous
mechanism design studies in FLPs have focused only on
myopic (egoistic) agents in which each agent cares about
their own cost to the facility (e.g., the distance between their
ideal location and the facility location). However, in many
real-world settings (e.g., group decision-making), agents exhibit group behavior (Hogg and Tindale 2001), altruistic behavior (Schroeder et al. 1995; Penner 2021), or prosocial
behavior (Eisenberg 2014; Schroeder and Graziano 2015),
where altruistic agents act to benefit others in their affiliated
groups without expecting anything in return (Monroe 1996;
Fehr and Fischbacher 2003). For instance, in the social psychology literature (Hogg and Tindale 2001), altruistic agents
within the same group exhibit group behavior that is consistent with the overall goal of the group. In group-selected altruism (Okasha 2005), altruistic agents can make efforts to
take actions that help their groups. Examples of altruistic behavior are well-documented and include doing nice things to
one’s family and relatives (e.g., donating organs, caregiving
for relatives, and fostering children), helping one’s friends
(e.g., loaning money and helping with work), and advocating for their organized groups (e.g., donating money to an
organization, joining the same day of protest, and fighting
for a common cause).
Motivated by the altruistic behavior of agents in realworld situations, our focus is to study and model altruistic
agents in FLPs. Conceptually, FLPs with altruistic agents
model situations ranging from altruistic agents advocating
for facility accessibility of their own groups to altruistic
agents lobbying for a committee to represent their group
views on some issue. For instance, when analyzing voter behavior, the altruism theory of voting has examined the social preferences of voters that consider the welfare of others (Edlin, Gelman, and Kaplan 2007; Jankowski 2002). We
also consider the setting where agents belong to multiple
groups, such as deciding an activity event location where
the students can belong to different school clubs (e.g., math
clubs, debate clubs, etc.) or deciding the location of a multipurpose recreation center where the citizens belong to multiple local communities (e.g., senior associations, family/rel-

Introduction
In recent decades, facility location problems (FLPs) have
been widely studied within the context of mechanism design without money (Chan et al. 2021). In the most basic
mechanism design version of FLPs, initiated by (Moulin
1980; Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2009), a planner seeks to
place a facility (e.g., school, library, or park) to best serve
a set of agents in a real line, based on the ideal locations
of the agents. Because agent ideal locations are unknown to
the planner, the planner must elicit agent locations to determine a facility location that best serves the agents. As
there is a potential for the agents to misreport private locations to manipulate the facility location, the main research
agenda in mechanism design for FLPs is to design a strategyproof mechanism to elicit the true private agents’ locations and place the facility that (approximately) optimizes a
given planner’s objective (e.g., minimizing the total or maximum distance of the agents to the facility).
Beyond placing a physical facility geographically, FLPs
conceptually can be used to model general settings for selecting an overall representative to represent the preferences
of the agents within some well-defined representative space.
For example, selecting the temperature for a classroom given
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9993

