The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FaceCoresetNet: Differentiable Coresets for Face Set Recognition
Gil Shapira1,2 and Yosi Keller 1
1

2

Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
Samsung Semiconductor Israel R&D Center (SIRC)
{ggiillsshhaappiirraa, yosi.keller}gmail.com

Face Template

Abstract
In set-based face recognition, we aim to compute the most
discriminative descriptor from an unbounded set of images
and videos showing a single person. A discriminative descriptor balances two policies when aggregating information
from a given set. The first is a quality-based policy: emphasizing high-quality and down-weighting low-quality images. The second is a diversity-based policy: emphasizing
unique images in the set and down-weighting multiple occurrences of similar images as found in video clips which
can overwhelm the set representation. This work frames faceset representation as a differentiable coreset selection problem. Our model learns how to select a small coreset of the
input set that balances quality and diversity policies using
a learned metric parameterized by the face quality, optimized end-to-end. The selection process is a differentiable
farthest-point sampling (FPS) realized by approximating the
non-differentiable Argmax operation with differentiable sampling from the Gumbel-Softmax distribution of distances.
The small coreset is later used as queries in a self and crossattention architecture to enrich the descriptor with information from the whole set. Our model is order-invariant and linear in the input set size. We set a new SOTA to set face verification on the IJB-B and IJB-C datasets. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/ligaripash/FaceCoresetNet.

𝑰𝟏

𝑰𝟐

𝑰𝟑

𝑰𝟒

𝑰𝟓

𝑰𝟔

𝑰𝟕

𝑰𝟖

𝑰𝟗

𝑰𝟏𝟎

𝑰𝟏𝟏

𝑰𝟏𝟐

Coreset

Figure 1: Template coreset selection. in the round blue rectangle, an input face set with 12 images containing a video
clip sample (I1 to I6 ) and six photographs of the same person (I7 to I12 ). The coreset selection process balances quality and diversity. The final coreset in the red round rectangle
contains four high-quality images with diverse poses and expressions.

probe) and identification, which entails searching a database
of registered subjects (known as a gallery) to identify an unknown probe person. FSR schemes encode the images in a
template into a fixed-size vector descriptor to allow computationally efficient similarity search. As the templates consist of an arbitrary number of images and video frames, the
image aggregation process has to be efficient with respect
to the template’s size. Furthermore, since the template is an
unordered set of images, the aggregation should be permutation invariant. Additionally, the aggregation should prioritize informative images while downplaying uninformative,
low-quality (blurry, poorly lighted) images. Finally, the process of feature fusion should factor in ”face burstiness”. If a
template includes a burst of similar frames as in video clips,
the burst should not overpower the template descriptor.
Some aggregation schemes apply average pooling (Chen
et al. 2015; Parkhi, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2015) to the
set of features. However, this method presents a significant
drawback. All images within the set are weighted equally,
regardless of their quality. To address this issue, (Kim, Jain,
and Liu 2022; Meng et al. 2021) suggest facial features

Introduction
Face Set Recognition (FSR) is a variant of Face Recognition
(FR) that involves recognizing an individual’s identity based
on a template, that is an unbounded and unordered set of
images and video clips depicting a particular face instead of
a single photograph. A template is shown in the Fig. 1. Given
the added data, FSR is more accurate compared to FR. The
increased accuracy and proliferation of face media available
on the Internet and public cameras make FSR an attractive
solution for ’in the wild’ situations, such as in unconstrained
surveillance and Homeland Security scenarios (Kalka et al.
2018) where image quality is lacking due to low resolution,
extreme pose, illumination, occlusions, and recognition of a
single image is difficult.
FSR consists of verification, which means confirming the
identity of an input query template (also referred to as a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4748

