The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Make Knockout Tournaments More Popular?
Juhi Chaudhary, Hendrik Molter, Meirav Zehavi
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
juhic@post.bgu.ac.il, molterh@post.bgu.ac.il, meiravze@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

Over the past decade, knockout tournaments have been
studied intensively from both theoretical and practical points
of view. Most of the attention has been given to the objective of making a specific player win, particularly by selecting
a seeding that is considered advantageous to this player, as
well as bribing some of the players (see, e.g., the surveys
by Suksompong (2021) and Williams and Moulin (2016)).
Here, to decide whether a seeding is advantageous, we assume to possess predictions (deterministic or probabilistic)
on the winners of (all or some of) the possible games or
matches (we use these two terms interchangeably). In particular, when the aforementioned information is deterministic
and complete (i.e., for every possible match involving two
players, we “know” who will be the winner) and our only
influence on the competition is by picking the seeding, the
problem is known as the T OURNAMENT F IXING problem.
This problem and its various variations have been extensively studied from the viewpoints of classical complexity,
parameterized complexity, and structural analysis (see, e.g.,
(Gupta et al. 2019, 2018a,b; Kim and Williams 2015; Aziz
et al. 2018; Vu, Altman, and Shoham 2009; Williams 2010;
Zehavi 2023; Ramanujan and Szeider 2017; Stanton and
Williams 2011b,a; Kim, Suksompong, and Williams 2017;
Manurangsi and Suksompong 2023); this list is illustrative
rather than comprehensive).

Given a mapping from a set of players to the leaves of a complete binary tree (called a seeding), a knockout tournament
is conducted as follows: every round, every two players with
a common parent compete against each other, and the winner is promoted to the common parent; then, the leaves are
deleted. When only one player remains, it is declared the winner. This is a popular competition format in sports, elections,
and decision-making. Over the past decade, it has been studied intensively from both theoretical and practical points of
view. Most frequently, the objective is to seed the tournament
in a way that “assists” (or even guarantees) some particular
player to win the competition. We introduce a new objective,
which is very sensible from the perspective of the directors
of the competition: maximize the profit or popularity of the
tournament. Specifically, we associate a “score” with every
possible match, and aim to seed the tournament to maximize
the sum of the scores of the matches that take place. We focus on the case where we assume a total order on the players’
strengths, and provide a wide spectrum of results on the computational complexity of the problem.

1

Introduction

A knockout (or single-elimination) tournament is the most
popular competition format in sports (Horen and Riezman
1985; Connolly and Rendleman 2011; Groh et al. 2012).
Here, roughly speaking, the players are paired up to compete
against each other in rounds, where, at each round, the losers
are knocked out, until only one player (the winner) remains.
For an illustrative example, consider any major tennis tournament or the knockout stage of the football world cup. Notably, knockout tournaments are common in other fields as
well, such as elections and decision-making (Suksompong
2021; Tullock 1980; Rosen 1986; Laslier 1997).
More formally, we are given n players (where, for simplicity, n is a power of 2) and a seeding that determines how
to label the n leaves of a complete binary tree with the players. Given a seeding, the competition is conducted in rounds:
As long as the tree has at least two leaves, every two players
with a common parent in the tree play against each other,
and the winner is promoted to the common parent; then, the
leaves of the tree are deleted from it. Eventually, only one
player remains, and this player is declared the winner.

One aspect of our contribution is conceptual: we introduce a new objective, which is, perhaps, more sensible from
the perspective of the directors of the competition: maximize
the profit or popularity of the tournament. Indeed, this is the
main reason behind commercials and promotions for sports
competitions and a subject of active discussion in the media.
More formally, the input consists of n players and, for every possible match between two players, the winner of that
match. Additionally, for every possible match between two
players and the round in which it is to be conducted, we
have the value of that match in that round, represented by
an integer. Here, the value can correspond to the profit, popularity, or any other measure (or combination thereof) associated with the match in that round. We expect matches
conducted in later rounds to be more profitable/popular; yet,
when rounds do not affect this matter, the value function is
said to be round-oblivious. The latter is plausible in many
cases, such as local derbies or games between two rivaling
teams or players, which roughly maintain their excitement

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9582

