The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

U-Trustworthy Models.
Reliability, Competence, and Confidence in Decision-Making
Ritwik Vashistha* , Arya Farahi
The Univertsity of Texas at Austin
ritwik.v@utexas.edu, arya.farahi@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract

Our theoretical framework is rooted in competence-based
trust theories, which draws from the philosophical literature
on the relation between trust, reliability, and competence
(Baier 1986; Jones 1996; Ryan 2020; Alvarado 2022). Epistemologically, trust is commonly understood as the act of
placing confidence in a source of information or in an agent
to perform a task based on its perceived competence to be accurate and reliable. In the context of predictive models and
decision-making, this notion translates into our reliance on a
model that consistently demonstrates competence in achieving its goal in a decision-making task. In competence-based
trust theories, trust is described through a three-part relationship “A trusts B to do X,” (Horsburgh 1960; Ryan 2020; von
Eschenbach 2021; Alvarado 2022; Afroogh 2023) where, in
our case, A represents the end-user, B represents the predictive model, and X specifies the delegated task. What counts
as good reasons for trusting is a matter of considerable debate, but at the very least, that B is capable or competent to
do X is necessary for A to trust B. Since our interest lies in
the trustworthiness of B rather than A’s trust, we reframe the
investigation as a two-part inquiry, “B is trustworthy to do
X.” Formalizing this inquiry provides a foundation for trustworthiness evaluation and is the primary aim of this work.
To achieve this goal, this work first constructs a mathematical framework for trustworthy evaluation; to evaluate
the claim of whether “B is trustworthy to do X,” where B
is a predictive model, and X is a subset of decision-making
tasks. Establishing trustworthiness requires guaranteeing reliance, competence, and confidence. Reliance reflects the
user may rely on the model to achieve its promised goal(s),
while competence provides theoretical guarantees that there
exists no other model that can achieve a superior result in
task X. Confidence is a statistical claim that, given the existing empirical evidence, B is competent.
Traditionally, probabilistic assessment or risk calibration
has been considered a crucial aspect of model trustworthiness evaluation, as it ensures that predicted risks align with
observed frequencies of outcomes and provides some information regarding the model uncertainty (Crowson, Atkinson, and Therneau 2016; Pleiss et al. 2017; Hébert-Johnson
et al. 2018; La Cava, Lett, and Wan 2022; Afroogh 2023).
However, its role in determining the trustworthiness of a
model, as described above, remains an open question. Drawing upon competence-based trust theories, we challenge this

With growing concerns regarding bias and discrimination
in predictive models, the AI community has increasingly
focused on assessing AI system trustworthiness. Conventionally, trustworthy AI literature relies on the probabilistic
framework and calibration as prerequisites for trustworthiness. In this work, we depart from this viewpoint by proposing a novel trust framework inspired by the philosophy literature on trust. We present a precise mathematical definition of trustworthiness, termed U -trustworthiness, specifically tailored for a subset of tasks aimed at maximizing a
utility function. We argue that a model’s U-trustworthiness is
contingent upon its ability to maximize Bayes utility within
this task subset. Our first set of results challenges the probabilistic framework by demonstrating its potential to favor
less trustworthy models and introduce the risk of misleading trustworthiness assessments. Within the context of U trustworthiness, we prove that properly-ranked models are
inherently U -trustworthy. Furthermore, we advocate for the
adoption of the AUC metric as the preferred measure of
trustworthiness. By offering both theoretical guarantees and
experimental validation, AUC enables robust evaluation of
trustworthiness, thereby enhancing model selection and hyperparameter tuning to yield more trustworthy outcomes.

Introduction
In recent years, the AI community has expressed growing
concerns about bias and discrimination embedded within
predictive models. These concerns have prompted a shift in
focus from performance to fairness and trustworthiness as a
pilar of model evaluation (Mehrabi et al. 2021; Eshete 2021).
While fairness aims to mitigate disparate impacts on different population groups, trustworthiness encompasses broader
notions of model reliability, robustness, competence, generalization, explainability, transparency, reproducibility, privacy, security, and accountability (Serban et al. 2021; von
Eschenbach 2021; Li et al. 2023; Broderick et al. 2023). In
this paper, by borrowing from the philosophy literature, we
develop a theory of trustworthiness from a lens of reliability
and competence and investigate its implications for classification models in the context of decision-making.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19956

