The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Inference Stability for Diffusion Models
Viet Nguyen1 * † , Giang Vu2,3 * , Tung Nguyen Thanh2,3 , Khoat Than2‡ , Toan Tran1
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Vietnam
3
Viettel Group, Vietnam
{v.vietnv18, v.toantm3}@vinai.io, khoattq@soict.hust.edu.vn, {giangvl2, tungnt759}@viettel.com.vn
2

Abstract

unique assumptions on data (Germain et al. 2015; Van den
Oord et al. 2016) or constraints in model architecture (Dinh,
Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2017; Papamakarios, Pavlakou,
and Murray 2017; Kingma and Dhariwal 2018; Ho et al.
2019) to perform well, DPMs do not hold any of that requirements. Moreover, compared with Generative Adversarial Networks, Diffusion Models do not require adversarial
training thus making the learning process easy and stable.
Although DPMs have been shown to achieve state-of-theart results in various data generation tasks since their debut,
these models often suffer from slow sampling speed, which
may require thousands of model feeds to achieve high sample quality. To address this issue, many researchers have focused on accelerating the generating process. For example,
(Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021; Kong and Ping 2021) propose non-Markovian diffusion processes, which allow taking multiple steps at once to accelerate the sampling time.
Several works explore finding short sampling trajectories by
applying search algorithms, e.g., grid search (Chen et al.
2021), dynamic programming (Watson et al. 2021), and differentiable search (Watson et al. 2022). (Salimans and Ho
2022; Song et al. 2023) propose to boost the sampling process via knowledge distillation with the core idea of distilling a multi-step process into a single step.
(Song et al. 2021) establishes a connection between the
denoising process and solving ordinary differential equations (ODE). Such a connection enables the use of numerical methods of differential equations to accelerate the denoising process. While (Song et al. 2021) proposes the use
of higher-order solvers such as Runge-Kutta methods, (Liu
et al. 2022) proposes pseudo-numerical methods to generate
samples along a specific manifold. Another approach proposed by (Karras et al. 2022) is to use Heun’s second-order
method to solve the probability flow ODE.
Some recent attempts aim to refine inefficient sampling
trajectories due to the approximation and optimization errors in training. (Bao et al. 2022b,a) propose to estimate the
optimal variance to correct the potential bias caused by the
imperfect mean estimation. Meanwhile, (Zhang, Niwa, and
Kleijn 2023) introduces an extrapolation operation on two
consecutive sampling steps to make the sampling trajectory
closer to the direction of the real-data point.
One main drawback of those works is that they mostly
focus on sampling efficiency by, for instance, making mod-

Denoising Probabilistic Models (DPMs) represent an emerging domain of generative models that excel in generating diverse and high-quality images. However, most current training methods for DPMs often neglect the correlation between
timesteps, limiting the model’s performance in generating images effectively. Notably, we theoretically point out that this
issue can be caused by the cumulative estimation gap between
the predicted and the actual trajectory. To minimize that gap,
we propose a novel sequence-aware loss that aims to reduce
the estimation gap to enhance the sampling quality. Furthermore, we theoretically show that our proposed loss function
is a tighter upper bound of the estimation loss in comparison
with the conventional loss in DPMs. Experimental results on
several benchmark datasets including CIFAR10, CelebA, and
CelebA-HQ consistently show a remarkable improvement
of our proposed method regarding the image generalization
quality measured by FID and Inception Score compared to
several DPM baselines. Our code and pre-trained checkpoints
are available at https://github.com/VinAIResearch/SA-DPM.

Introduction
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) (Sohl-Dickstein
et al. 2015), inspired by statistical physics, have been shown
to be more effective generative models than prior ones. Typically, a DPM consists of two processes: a forward process
that gradually adds noise to the original data distribution
and a reverse process that learns to iteratively reconstruct
a data instance from the noises. As a progress of that idea,
(Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) proposes Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) which exploit the knowledge about the transition distribution to derive the loss function and guide the training process. Parallel to that work,
(Song and Ermon 2019) uses the score-based model to train
a similar model. More recently, (Song et al. 2021) interprets those two works under the lens of stochastic differential equations. This class of models outperforms prior ones
in terms of generated images’ quality and distribution coverage. While other likelihood-based generative models require
* These authors contributed equally, the order is random.
†

This work was partly done while at HUST
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

14449

