The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Bayesian Optimization for Multiplex Influence Maximization
Zirui Yuan1 , Minglai Shao1 * , Zhiqian Chen2
1

2

School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Mississippi State University, USA
yzr@tju.edu.cn, shaoml@tju.edu.cn, zchen@cse.msstate.edu

write

Abstract

reply

Influence maximization (IM) is the problem of identifying a
limited number of initial influential users within a social network to maximize the number of influenced users. However,
previous research has mostly focused on individual information propagation, neglecting the simultaneous and interactive
dissemination of multiple information items. In reality, when
users encounter a piece of information, such as a smartphone
product, they often associate it with related products in their
minds, such as earphones or computers from the same brand.
Additionally, information platforms frequently recommend
related content to users, amplifying this cascading effect and
leading to multiplex influence diffusion.
This paper first formulates the Multiplex Influence Maximization (Multi-IM) problem using multiplex diffusion models with an information association mechanism. In this problem, the seed set is a combination of influential users and
information. To effectively manage the combinatorial complexity, we propose Graph Bayesian Optimization for MultiIM (GBIM). The multiplex diffusion process is thoroughly
investigated using a highly effective global kernelized attention message-passing module. This module, in conjunction
with Bayesian linear regression (BLR), produces a scalable
surrogate model. A data acquisition module incorporating
the exploration-exploitation trade-off is developed to optimize the seed set further. Extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world datasets have proven our proposed framework
effective. The code is available at https://github.com/ziruiyuan/GBIM.

forward
follow

like

(b). Heterogeneous IM
(a). Canonical IM
Information Association
1st Step

(c). Multi-layer IM
2nd Step

...

1st Step

2nd Step

...
(d). Multiplex IM

Figure 1: The comparison of related IM problems, and u1 is
the initial seed user. (a) Canonical IM in the homogeneous
network. (b) Heterogeneous IM on networks with multiple
node and edge types. (c) Multi-layer IM with users in two
social network platforms. (d) Multiplex IM with three information items {v1 , v2 , v3 }, and (u1 , v1 ) is the seed.

trol, and rumor blocking (Li et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022a).
Most IM literature focuses on the canonical setting, which
only considers an individual information item spread over a
homogeneous social network based on an information diffusion model. Researchers have made great progress in devising various efficient and effective methods to address the
canonical IM problem, utilizing techniques such as simulation, proxy, and sketch (Goyal, Lu, and Lakshmanan 2011;
Borgs et al. 2014; Tang, Shi, and Xiao 2015). In recent
years, IM research has witnessed a growing interest in exploring more realistic scenarios beyond the canonical setting, including Heterogeneous IM and Multi-Layer IM. Heterogeneous IM (Figure 1b) addresses the IM problem in
heterogeneous networks with diverse node and edge types.
Researchers commonly employ techniques involving network schema and meta-paths to construct propagation pathways. Building on this, both traditional and learning-based
methods can be designed to optimize the seed set (Zhan
et al. 2015; Deng et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022b). Multi-Layer
IM (Figure 1c) discusses the cross-layer nature of information dissemination across different social network platforms.
These studies consider the sharing of nodes between networks as a mechanism enabling information to propagate

Introduction
The rapid growth of online social networks has sparked substantial interest among researchers in understanding the dynamics of information dissemination within these networks.
This interest has led to the study of influence maximization
(IM), an optimization problem that aims to maximize the
influence spread within a specific diffusion model by selecting a limited number of seeds (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). IM has garnered considerable attention from both
industry and academia due to its relevance in various realworld applications, including viral marketing, epidemic con* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22475

