The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Representations on the Unit Sphere: Investigating Angular Gaussian
and Von Mises-Fisher Distributions for Online Continual Learning
Nicolas Michel, Giovanni Chierchia, Romain Negrel, Jean-François Bercher
Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM, F-77454 Marne-la-Vallée, France
nicolas.michel@esiee.fr, giovanni.chierchia@esiee.fr, romain.negrel@esiee.fr, jf.bercher@esiee.fr

Abstract

is the loss of previously learned knowledge when learning
new tasks or from new data. Online CL has seen growing
interest in recent years (Guo, Liu, and Zhao 2022; Aljundi
et al. 2019; He and Zhu 2022; Michel et al. 2022; Gu et al.
2022; Prabhu, Torr, and Dokania 2020; Rolnick et al. 2019;
Mai et al. 2022, 2021; Lin et al. 2023), and several variations
have been proposed (Hsu et al. 2018; Mai et al. 2022). This
paper focuses on class-incremental CL.
Among the different approaches for online CL (Mai et al.
2022), memory-based or replay-based methods have shown
the best performances for the online setting (Rolnick et al.
2019; Buzzega et al. 2020; Guo, Liu, and Zhao 2022; Mai
et al. 2022, 2021). In these approaches, a subset of past data
is stored while training. When encountering a new batch
from the stream, another batch is retrieved from memory and
combined with the current batch for training. This mitigates
forgetting by seeing past data along with current data. Recently, representation learning techniques combined with replay strategies have shown impressive performances for unsupervised CL (Fini et al. 2022; Madaan et al. 2022; Davari
et al. 2022) and supervised CL (Mai et al. 2021; Guo, Liu,
and Zhao 2022). However, contrastive learning-based methods (Mai et al. 2021) often require large batch sizes to benefit from negative samples (Gu et al. 2022), and distillationbased methods (Guo, Liu, and Zhao 2022) require knowledge of task boundaries.
In this work, we propose an algorithm for memory-based
representation learning based on a new loss function. Our
loss function is devised from the principle of maximum a
posteriori estimation under the hypothesis that the latent
representations are distributed on the unit sphere. Such a hypothesis explicitly takes into account the fact that normalizing the latent vectors is a standard practice in contrastive
learning. Specifically, we investigate the angular Gaussian
distribution and the Mises-Fisher distribution, both designed
for modeling antipodal symmetric directional data. The peculiarity of the resulting loss function is that the learned representations are pushed toward fixed directions, allowing for
a learning strategy that is resilient to data drift and thus suitable for online continual learning. In summary, the contributions of this work are as follows.

We use the maximum a posteriori estimation principle for
learning representations distributed on the unit sphere. We
propose to use the angular Gaussian distribution, which corresponds to a Gaussian projected on the unit-sphere and derive
the associated loss function. We also consider the von MisesFisher distribution, which is the conditional of a Gaussian in
the unit-sphere. The learned representations are pushed toward fixed directions, which are the prior means of the Gaussians; allowing for a learning strategy that is resilient to data
drift. This makes it suitable for online continual learning,
which is the problem of training neural networks on a continuous data stream, where multiple classification tasks are
presented sequentially so that data from past tasks are no
longer accessible, and data from the current task can be seen
only once. To address this challenging scenario, we propose
a memory-based representation learning technique equipped
with our new loss functions. Our approach does not require
negative data or knowledge of task boundaries and performs
well with smaller batch sizes while being computationally
efficient. We demonstrate with extensive experiments that
the proposed method outperforms the current state-of-the-art
methods on both standard evaluation scenarios and realistic
scenarios with blurry task boundaries. For reproducibility, we
use the same training pipeline for every compared method
and share the code at https://github.com/Nicolas1203/ocl-fd.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks can achieve very impressive performances when trained on independent and identically distributed data sampled from a fixed set of classes. In a realworld scenario, however, it may be desirable to train a model
on a continuous data stream, where multiple classification
tasks are presented sequentially so that the data from the old
tasks are no longer accessible when learning new ones and
data from the current task can be seen only once. This scenario is known as online Continual Learning (CL) and poses
a challenge for standard learning algorithms because the distribution of data changes over time (continual setting), and
data are not accessible more than once (online setting). If
such factors are not adequately taken into account, a trained
model may suffer from Catastrophic Forgetting (CF), which

• We devise a new loss function for representation learning
based on the principle of maximum a posteriori estimation. We investigate both the angular Gaussian distribu-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14350

