The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Shortcut Debiasing for Online Continual Learning
Doyoung Kim, Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, Jihwan Bang, Hwanjun Song, Jae-Gil Lee*
KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{dodokim, dongminpark, yooju.shin, jihwan.bang, songhwanjun, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

: Shortcut Feature

We propose a novel framework DropTop that suppresses
the shortcut bias in online continual learning (OCL) while
being adaptive to the varying degree of the shortcut bias
incurred by continuously changing environment. By the
observed high-attention property of the shortcut bias, highlyactivated features are considered candidates for debiasing.
More importantly, resolving the limitation of the online
environment where prior knowledge and auxiliary data
are not ready, two novel techniques—feature map fusion
and adaptive intensity shifting—enable us to automatically
determine the appropriate level and proportion of the
candidate shortcut features to be dropped. Extensive
experiments on five benchmark datasets demonstrate that,
when combined with various OCL algorithms, DropTop
increases the average accuracy by up to 10.4% and decreases
the forgetting by up to 63.2%.

: Low Transferability

: High Forgetting

Poor initialization to learn an aircraft
Sky
Legs
Wrong prediction as a dog
Previous Task

Current Task

Future Task

Figure 1: Negative effect of the shortcut bias in OCL: low
transferability and high forgetability of shortcut features.

data (i.e., images), and the computational and memory
budgets are typically tight (De Lange et al. 2021). This
limited opportunity for learning exacerbates the shortcut
bias in OCL, because DNNs tend to learn easy-to-learn
features early on (Du et al. 2021). Therefore, we take a step
forward to investigate its adverse effects in OCL.
The shortcut bias hinders the main goal of OCL
that solves the plasticity and stability dilemma for high
transferability and low catastrophic forgetting. That is,
it incurs low transferability and high forgetting in OCL,
because shortcut features do not generalize well to unseen
new classes (Geirhos et al. 2020; Park et al. 2021) and are
no longer discriminative for all classes. Figure 1 illustrates
the negative effect of the shortcut bias in OCL. Regarding
low transferability, if an OCL model learns to use the sky as
a shortcut feature for the current task, it is faced with a bad
initial point for the future task. Regarding high forgetting, if
an OCL model learns to use the dog’s legs for the current
task, it is forced to forget the prior knowledge about the legs
due to the misclassification of the animals other than the dog.
A significant amount of research has gone into
eliminating an undesirable (e.g., shortcut) bias in offline
supervised learning. Representative debiasing methods
require the prior knowledge of a target task to predefine
the undesirable bias for unseen conditions (Bahng et al.
2020; Geirhos et al. 2019; Lee, Kim, and Nam 2019) or
leverage auxiliary data such as out-of-distribution (OOD)
data (Lee et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021). However, neither
prior knowledge nor auxiliary data is available in OCL,
because future tasks are inherently unknown and access

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) often rely on a strong
correlation between peripheral features, which are usually
easy-to-learn, and target labels during the learning
process (Park et al. 2021; Scimeca et al. 2021). Such
peripheral features and learning bias are called shortcut
features and shortcut bias (Geirhos et al. 2019; Hendrycks
et al. 2021; Scimeca et al. 2021; Shah et al. 2020). For
example, DNNs may extract only shortcut features such
as color, texture, and local or background cues; when
classifying dogs and birds, only the legs (i.e., local cue) and
sky (i.e., background cue) could be extracted if they are the
easiest to distinguish between the two classes. The shortcut
bias is an important problem in most computer vision themes
such as image classification (Geirhos et al. 2020).
Online continual learning (OCL) for image classification1
maintains a DNN to classify images from an online stream
of images and tasks, where an upcoming task may include
new classes (De Lange et al. 2021; Rolnick et al. 2019; Bang
et al. 2021; Buzzega et al. 2020). Due to the characteristics
of the online environment, there is not abundant training
* Jae-Gil Lee is the corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Unless otherwise specified, OCL is involved with image
classification in this paper.

13122

