The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CoPL: Contextual Prompt Learning for Vision-Language Understanding
Koustava Goswami, Srikrishna Karanam, Prateksha Udhayanan,
K J Joseph and Balaji Vasan Srinivasan
Adobe Research, Bangalore India
koustavag@adobe.com

Abstract

cepts related to categories seen during training and not to
scale to unseen classes during inference.
To enhance the adaptability of such models, there has
been recent efforts in tuning the associated prompts (instead
of the model weights). Inspired by traditional prompt engineering efforts (Petroni et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020;
Schick and Schütze 2021), there has been work in tuning
discrete prompts from predefined prompt templates (Radford et al. 2021) that help in capturing rich semantics from
user intents and align them to visual contents. However,
since building a rich semantic based prompt templates require domain specific and linguistic knowledge, this apporach is not scalable. The CoOp (Zhou et al. 2022b) algorithm
used ideas from soft-prompting in natural language processing (Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Jiang et al. 2020; Lester,
Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021; Li and Liang 2021; Liu et al.
2021, 2022) to train dynamic learnable prompt vectors with
backpropagation and preserve the semantic relationship between sentences and labels (Liu et al. 2021). However, the
context learned with CoOp in this fashion fails to generalize to unseen classes, leading to the need for dynamically
updating prompts based on the image context, an idea that
was proposed in CoCoOp (Zhou et al. 2022a). This model
was trained by explicitly conditioning the prompts on image feature vectors as tokens where a separate lightweight
neural network (called meta-net in their work) was used to
equally weight all the prompt vectors. Later Yao, Zhang, and
Xu (2023) note that CoOp-based methods suffer from catastrophic knowledge forgetting, where these methods gradually miss out on essential general textual knowledge. This
leads them to propose Knowledge-guided Context Optimization (KgCoOp) where they try to reduce down the distance between hand-crafted prompts and learnable prompts
during training.
In our work, we identify some key issues with the aforementioned architectures. First, the features obtained from
meta-net in CoCoOp (Zhou et al. 2022a) are global in nature and hence susceptible to issues like clutter and noise in
many few-shot and out-of-distribution test cases (we demonstrate this empirically later on). Next, these features are directly added to all the learned prompt vectors, thus resulting in an equal weighting for each prompt. Consequently,
this model is unable to learn which of the prompt vectors
are more semantically relevant and contextually meaningful

Recent advances in multimodal learning has resulted in powerful vision-language models, whose representations are generalizable across a variety of downstream tasks. Recently,
their generalization ability has been further extended by incorporating trainable prompts, borrowed from the natural language processing literature. While such prompt learning techniques have shown impressive results, we identify that these
prompts are trained based on global image features which
limits itself in two aspects: First, by using global features,
these prompts could be focusing less on the discriminative
foreground image, resulting in poor generalization to various
out-of-distribution test cases. Second, existing work weights
all prompts equally whereas intuitively, prompts should be
reweighed according to the semantics of the image. We address these as part of our proposed Contextual Prompt Learning (CoPL) framework, capable of aligning the prompts to
the localized features of the image. Our key innovations over
earlier works include using local image features as part of
the prompt learning process, and more crucially, learning to
weight these prompts based on local features that are appropriate for the task at hand. This gives us dynamic prompts
that are both aligned to local image features as well as aware
of local contextual relationships. Our extensive set of experiments on a variety of standard and few-shot datasets show that
our method produces substantially improved performance
when compared to the current state of the art methods. We
also demonstrate both few-shot and out-of-distribution performance to establish the utility of learning dynamic prompts
that are aligned to local image features.

Introduction
Fully supervised computer vision models for problems like
classification are typically trained on datasets like ImageNet
(Deng et al. 2009a), OpenImages (Kuznetsova et al. 2018),
JFT300M (Kolesnikov et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2017) etc., and
have also proven themselves to be effective for a variety of
downstream tasks via transfer learning (Plested and Gedeon
2022; Guo et al. 2019; Wan et al. 2019). Despite this, it is
challenging to adapt these models to other domains due to
various reasons including limited data and annotation overhead. Additionally, since these models are trained for specific objectives like classification, they tend to capture conCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18090

