The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Low Category Uncertainty and High Training Potential Instance Learning
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Xinyu Zhang1,2 , Meng Kang1,2 , Shuai Lü1,2,3∗
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering (Jilin University), Ministry of Education, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
3
College of Software, Jilin University, China
lus@jlu.edu.cn, {zhang xinyu22, kangmeng20}@mails.jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

Recently, instance contrastive learning achieves good results in unsupervised domain adaptation. It reduces the distances between positive samples and the anchor, increases
the distances between negative samples and the anchor, and
learns discriminative feature representations for target samples. However, most recent methods for identifying positive
and negative samples are based on whether the pseudo-labels
of samples and the pseudo-label of the anchor correspond to
the same class. Due to the lack of target labels, many uncertain data are mistakenly labeled during the training process,
and many low training potential data are also utilized. To address these problems, we propose Low Category Uncertainty
and High Training Potential Instance Learning for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (LUHP). We first propose a weight
to measure the category uncertainty of the target sample. We
can effectively filter the samples near the decision boundary
through category uncertainty thresholds which are calculated
by weights. Then we propose a new loss to focus on samples with high training potential. Finally, for anchors with low
category uncertainty, we propose a sample reuse strategy to
make the model more robust. We demonstrate the effectiveness of LUHP by showing the results of four datasets widely
used in unsupervised domain adaptation.

Accuracy(%)

80
70
60

anchor
low potential
high potential

(a) Training Potential

50

high potential (A P)
low potential (A P)

high potential (A C)
low potential (A C)

2500

5000 7500 10000
Iteration

(b) Classification Accuracy

Figure 1: Low and High Training Potential Samples.

Chandraker 2021) defines samples of the same class cross
domains as positive pairs, and samples of different classes
cross domains as negative pairs. CaCo (Huang et al. 2022)
constructs a semantics-aware dictionary that includes source
and target samples.
However, these methods only divide positive and negative
samples based on whether the classes are the same, without considering the training potential of samples. As shown
in Figure 1 (a), without contrastive training, the distribution
of low training potential data in the feature space satisfies:
samples with the same class as the anchor are close to the anchor, and samples with different classes from the anchor are
far from the anchor. In Figure 1 (b), the model trained with
high training potential samples performs better. And the red
dashed line shows a decrease in accuracy of the model in the
target domain after 5000 iterations. If we focus on low training potential samples, not only does the model fail to learn
highly discriminative target features, but it also suffers from
overfitting.
In addition, previous methods mainly obtain pseudolabels by referring to source data (Sharma, Kalluri, and
Chandraker 2021). Domain shift between source and target distributions during the initial training stage leads to
noisy pseudo-labels which seriously affect the training of
the model in the target data. Data with noisy labels have
high uncertainty and they are distributed around the decision
boundary (Zhang et al. 2021).

Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) applies knowledge or patterns learned from related fields or tasks to new
unlabeled datasets. Some UDA methods (Long et al. 2015,
2017) attempt to learn a metric to quantify domain shift and
minimize this metric to align source and target distributions.
Recently, some works (Ganin et al. 2016; Hong et al. 2018;
Tzeng et al. 2017) introduce the adversarial learning into
UDA to implicitly align source and target distributions by
learning domain invariant features.
The previous methods focus solely on learning domain
agnostic (domain independent) features through global distribution alignment, which has the disadvantage of not considering the more refined class level structure of the target
domain data (Sharma, Kalluri, and Chandraker 2021). To
address this issue, the method based on instance contrastive
learning in UDA is proposed. ILA-DA (Sharma, Kalluri, and
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16881

