The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Consistency-GAN: Training GANs with Consistency Model
Yunpeng Wang1 , Meng Pang1 * , Shengbo Chen2 * , Hong Rao1 *
1

Nanchang University
2
Henan University
408000220012@email.ncu.edu.cn, pangmeng1992@gmail.com, ccb02kingdom@gmail.com, raohong@ncu.edu.cn

Model
GANs
DMs
Ours

Abstract
For generative learning tasks, there are three crucial criteria
for generating samples from the models: quality, coverage/diversity, and sampling speed. Among the existing generative
models, Generative adversarial networks (GANs) and diffusion models demonstrate outstanding quality performance
while suffering from notable limitations. GANs can generate high-quality results and enable fast sampling, their drawbacks, however, lie in the limited diversity of the generated
samples. On the other hand, diffusion models excel at generating high-quality results with a commendable diversity. Yet,
its iterative generation process necessitates hundreds to thousands of sampling steps, leading to slow speeds that are impractical for real-time scenarios. To address the aforementioned problem, this paper proposes a novel ConsistencyGAN model. In particular, to aid in the training of the
GAN, we introduce instance noise, which employs consistency models using only a few steps compared to the conventional diffusion process. Our evaluations on various datasets
indicate that our approach significantly accelerates sampling
speeds compared to traditional diffusion models, while preserving sample quality and diversity. Furthermore, our approach also has better model coverage than traditional adversarial training methods.

High quality
✓
✓
✓

Fast sampling
✓

High diversity

#

✓
✓

✓

#

Table 1: Comparison of GANs, diffusion models, and our
proposed method in terms of three essential criteria for desired sample generation.

the process of training GANs. This approach introduces a
certain level of randomness in the input of the generator network, enabling the generation of more diverse samples. Nevertheless, noise injection complicates the adversarial training between the generator and the discriminator, making it
more challenging for them to estimate the gradient during
backpropagation when updating parameters. Consequently,
this can lead to gradient disappearance, gradient explosion,
and other related problems, ultimately affecting the model’s
stability and the effectiveness of the training process.
Diffusion models (DMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Song et al. 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Karras et al.
2022) generate samples by reversing the diffusion process.
In comparison to GANs, diffusion models exhibit significant improvements in diversity while maintaining comparable sample quality. The reverse diffusion process empowers
the diffusion models to generate samples with a wide range
of diversity from initial noisy samples. However, due to the
reliance on an iterative generative process, diffusion models suffer from slow sampling speed, which limits their applicability in real-time and interactive scenarios. To tackle
this issue, a few attempts have recently been made. For instance, Song et al. (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Song
et al. 2022b,a) propose to expedite the sampling process by
extending the diffusion model to encompass non-Markovian
diffusion processes, while the authors (Wang et al. 2022) incorporate the forward diffusion process to introduce Gaussian mixed-distributed instance noise into the adversarial
network. Although these above-mentioned methods can better capture the diversity of samples, the iterative generation
process still imposes limitations on sampling efficiency, and
cannot completely eliminate the limitation of slow sampling
speed of the traditional diffusion models.
In light of the above, we propose a new adversarial train-

Introduction
Generative models are evaluated based on three primary performance indicators: sampling quality, diversity, and sampling speed of the generated samples. Upon their introduction, GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz, and
Chintala 2016; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Wu
et al. 2019; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020;
Pang et al. 2021a,b; Sauer et al. 2021; Sauer, Schwarz, and
Geiger 2022) demonstrate remarkable capabilities in generating realistic and high-quality samples. However, GANsgenerated samples often lack diversity, indicating that the
generator network tends to produce a limited range of patterns from the data distribution during training, thereby failing to cover the entire data space. This phenomenon is commonly referred to as the “model collapse” (Kodali et al.
2017) problem. To address this issue, Salimans et al. (Salimans et al. 2016) propose a method of injecting noise in
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15743

