The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reward Certification for Policy Smoothed Reinforcement Learning
Ronghui Mu1 , Leandro Soriano Marcolino2 , Yanghao Zhang1 , Tianle Zhang1 ,
Xiaowei Huang1 , Wenjie Ruan1 *
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK
School of Computing & Communication, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
{r.mu, x.huang, t.zhang,y.zhang}@liverpool.ac.uk, l.marcolino@lancaster.ac.uk, w.ruan@trustai.uk
2

Abstract

regard, it is vital to analyse their robustness before their deployment in safety-critical systems (Christiano et al. 2016;
Cheng et al. 2019).
Various empirical defences have been proposed to defend adversarial attacks in RL systems (Manikandan et al.
2011; Pattanaik et al. 2017; Yin et al. 2023), while it has
been demonstrated that even robust models can still be compromised by more advanced attack methods (Russo and
Proutiere 2019). Hence, there is a need for computing provable guarantees for the trained policy to break the ongoing
cycle of attacks and defenses, which is referred to as robustness certification (Huang et al. 2020; Ruan, Yi, and Huang
2021). The majority of studies aiming to provide robustness
certification primarily focus on classification tasks, while the
certification for RL remains largely unexplored.
Compared to classification tasks, certifying RL engages
more challenges due to its sequential decision-making nature (Huang, Jin, and Ruan 2023). To address this obstacle,
recent efforts have focused on certifying a ”smoothed policy” based randomised smoothing strategies. These methods
are distinguished due to they do not require access to the
internal architecture and parameters of the DNNs, which is
referred to as black-box certification. For instance, Wu et al.
(2021) employed Lipschitz continuity to approximate the final output, but this approach resulted in a loose bound. Instead of directly certifying the lower bound, Kumar, Levine,
and Feizi (2021) proposed certifying the reward by breaking it down into several thresholds and then assessing the
probability of the cumulative reward staying above a specific threshold. However, this method proved too restrictive,
leading to a loss of essential information regarding the output reward and resulting in weaker certificates for smoothed
policies. Additionally, both approaches can only handle observation perturbations under the l2 -norm bound. However,
in the real world, adversaries can perturb both observations
and actions within the bounds of various perturbation constraints of the lp -norm.
Thus, this paper focuses on effectively certifying the
lower bound of mean utility for a policy under diverse lp norm perturbations. We present a novel approach based on
the generalisation theorem between distributions. By leveraging this theorem, we demonstrate that determining the
lower bound of expected utility can be achieved by solving
a convex optimisation problem. Doing this enables us to di-

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in safety-critical areas, but it can be weakened by adversarial attacks. Recent studies have introduced “smoothed
policies” to enhance its robustness. Yet, it is still challenging to establish a provable guarantee to certify the bound
of its total reward. Prior methods relied primarily on computing bounds using Lipschitz continuity or calculating the
probability of cumulative reward being above specific thresholds. However, these techniques are only suited for continuous perturbations on the RL agent’s observations and are
restricted to perturbations bounded by the l2 -norm. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a general blackbox certification method, called ReCePS, which is capable
of directly certifying the cumulative reward of the smoothed
policy under various lp -norm bounded perturbations. Furthermore, we extend our methodology to certify perturbations on
action spaces. Our approach leverages f -divergence to measure the distinction between the original distribution and the
perturbed distribution, subsequently determining the certification bound by solving a convex optimisation problem. We
provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis and run experiments in multiple environments. Our results show that our
method not only improves the tightness of certified lower
bound of the mean cumulative reward but also demonstrates
better efficiency than state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
The utilisation of neural networks in Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in safety-critical
domains, such as controlling robots and autonomous driving
(Sallab et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2017; Johannink et al. 2019;
Cai et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023). Nevertheless, recent research has revealed their vulnerability to the presence of adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2014; Madry et al.
2017; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Mu et al.
2021; Jin et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022).
For example, numerous studies have demonstrated that even
well-trained RL policies can suffer significant failures when
directly perturbing the observations of the RL agent (Pattanaik et al. 2018) or in action space (Lin et al. 2017). In this
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21429

