The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CDPNet: Cross-Modal Dual Phases Network for Point Cloud Completion
Zhenjiang Du1 , Jiale Dou2 , Zhitao Liu1 , Jiwei Wei1 , Guan Wang3 , Ning Xie1 * , Yang Yang1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
Yibin Park, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Yibin, China
3
Yangtze Delta Region Institute (Huzhou), University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Huzhou, China
{zhenjiang, doujiale}@std.uestc.edu.cn, {zl425uestc, mathematic6, wangguan12621, seanxiening, dlyyang}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Phase Ⅰ
…

Point cloud completion aims at completing shapes from their
partial. Most existing methods utilized shape’s priors information for point cloud completion, such as inputting the partial and getting the complete one through an encoder-decoder
deep learning structure. However, it is very often to easily
cause the loss of information in the generation process because of the invisibility of missing areas. Unlike most existing methods directly inferring the missing points using shape
priors, we address it as a cross-modality task. We propose a
new Cross-modal Dual Phases Network (CDPNet) for shape
completion. Our key idea is that the global information of the
shape is obtained from the extra single-view image, and the
partial point clouds provide the geometric information. After that, the multi-modal features jointly guide the specific
structural information. To learn the geometric details of the
shape, we chose to use patches to preserve the local geometric feature. In this way, we can generate shapes with enough
geometric details. Experimental results show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on point cloud completion.

Image I

Coarse Point Clouds C

Patch Feature F Ω

Phase Ⅱ

…

…

φ1
φ2
φM-1

φM
Partial Point Clouds P Patch Point Clouds Φ

Dense Point Clouds D

Figure 1: In phase I, we reconstruct a coarse point cloud
from images and segment this point cloud into patches.
In phase II, we combine the image information with the
partial point cloud information to guide the generation of
dense point clouds on the patches. M means the number of
patches.

Introduction
Point cloud has become a popular research topic in autonomous driving, robotics, and remote sensing due to its
numerous practical applications. Nevertheless, in practical
implementations, the acquisition of point cloud data through
3D scanning devices may be adversely influenced by a multitude of factors, including occlusion, inadequate illumination, and suboptimal sensor resolution, which may lead to
the incompleteness of point cloud (Wen et al. 2020). Consequently, point cloud completion has surfaced as an imperative research domain within 3D computer vision and computer graphics (Guo et al. 2020).
The point cloud completion task is to estimate the complete 3D point clouds based on the partial. Recent researches (Yuan et al. 2018; Groueix et al. 2018; Tchapmi
et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2021) for point cloud completion
successfully utilized deep-learning methods and achieved
more plausible and flexible results compared with traditional
geometric-based methods (Thrun and Wegbreit 2005; Pauly

et al. 2005; Shao et al. 2012; Harary, Tal, and Grinspun
2014). The most commonly used approach in deep-learning
methods for point cloud completion is the encoder-decoder
framework. This framework involves extracting a latent code
from the global partial point clouds and decoding the latent code to generate the complete point clouds. Encoding
global shape representation often suffers from the information loss of some structure details on local regions of incomplete point clouds, which should be fully preserved for
further inferring the missing geometric information (Wen
et al. 2021). Remarkably, the human cognitive system is
adept at translating visual constructs derived from 2D images into a comprehensive understanding of 3D objects and
can successfully infer the shape of partial 3D objects based
on 2D experiences (Aiello, Valsesia, and Magli 2022). This
insight lends credence to the notion that the process of point
cloud completion could benefit from integrating 2D images,
thereby furnishing a more holistic depiction of the 3D shape.
In this paper, we propose a method to complete point
clouds by leveraging partial point clouds and the single-view

* Ning Xie is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1635

