The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HiHPQ: Hierarchical Hyperbolic Product Quantization
for Unsupervised Image Retrieval
Zexuan Qiu, Jiahong Liu, Yankai Chen, Irwin King
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zxqiu22, jhliu22, ykchen, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Euclidean Space

Abstract

0. 6 6
0. 6
0. 6
0.

Existing unsupervised deep product quantization methods
primarily aim for the increased similarity between different
views of the identical image, whereas the delicate multi-level
semantic similarities preserved between images are overlooked. Moreover, these methods predominantly focus on the
Euclidean space for computational convenience, compromising their ability to map the multi-level semantic relationships between images effectively. To mitigate these shortcomings, we propose a novel unsupervised product quantization method dubbed Hierarchical Hyperbolic Product
Quantization (HiHPQ), which learns quantized representations by incorporating hierarchical semantic similarity within
hyperbolic geometry. Specifically, we propose a hyperbolic
product quantizer, where the hyperbolic codebook attention
mechanism and the quantized contrastive learning on the hyperbolic product manifold are introduced to expedite quantization. Furthermore, we propose a hierarchical semantics
learning module, designed to enhance the distinction between
similar and non-matching images for a query by utilizing the
extracted hierarchical semantics as an additional training supervision. Experiments on benchmarks show that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

Ragdoll
Sphynx

Horse

Cat
Mammal

Leopard

Spotted

Hyena

Hyperbolic Space

Grazing

Cattle

2.6
1.2
1.0
0.6

Figure 1: Left: Illustration of hierarchical semantics preserved in images. Right: Distance comparison on Euclidean space (top) and hyperbolic space (bottom). The 2dimensional hyperbolic space example is depicted using the
Lorentz model L2 in R3 .

tidis and Avrithis 2014)) are widely used in large-scale image retrieval systems. They rely on well-learned representations and heuristic algorithms for training the quantization
module. Deep supervised PQ methods (Yue et al. 2016; Yu
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Klein and Wolf 2019) have been
developed to learn the neural encoding network and quantization module together using annotated labels. However,
their practical application is challenging due to the high cost
of annotating a large number of images. To address this,
limited unsupervised deep PQ methods have emerged, utilizing reconstruction-based (Morozov and Babenko 2019)
and contrastive objectives (Jang and Cho 2021; Wang et al.
2022) to optimize quantized representations.
Current unsupervised product quantization methods
based on contrastive learning solely focus on striving for
greater similarity between different views of the same image, disregarding the inherent hierarchical semantic structures commonly found in images. For instance, as illustrated
in Figure 1, visual characteristics bring together leopards
and hyenas into a spotted cluster, allowing them to be categorized more coarsely as mammals alongside similar animals like cats. Thus, in order to distinguish between the
closest neighbors of a query and non-matching items during

Introduction
Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search has attracted
considerable interest in contemporary image retrieval systems owing to its remarkable search efficiency and exceptional performance. There are two main branches in ANN
research: Binary Hashing (BH) (Salakhutdinov and Hinton
2009) and Product Quantization (PQ) (Jegou, Douze, and
Schmid 2010). These two approaches both transform data
into binary codes. BH maps high-dimensional data to the
Hamming space, allowing fast distance calculations using
bit-wise XOR operation. However, it has limitations on image similarity due to integer-only distance values. As for PQ,
it decomposes the high-dimensional space and approximates
distances between binary codes using pre-computed realvalued inter-codeword distance, reflecting richer similarity
information. In industrial practice, PQ has been incorporated
into numerous fast retrieval engines (Guo et al. 2020).
The standard PQ (Jegou, Douze, and Schmid 2010) and
its variants(e.g., OPQ (Ge et al. 2013) and LOPQ (KalanCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4614

