The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Adaptive Prompt Tuning for Multi-Domain Collaborative Learning
Shangchao Su, Mingzhao Yang, Bin Li* , Xiangyang Xue*
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{scsu20, mzyang20, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model without disclosing their data.
Previous researches often require training the complete model
parameters. However, the emergence of powerful pre-trained
models makes it possible to achieve higher performance with
fewer learnable parameters in FL. In this paper, we propose
a federated adaptive prompt tuning algorithm, FedAPT, for
multi-domain collaborative image classification with powerful
foundation models, like CLIP. Compared with direct federated
prompt tuning, our core idea is to adaptively unlock specific
domain knowledge for each test sample in order to provide
them with personalized prompts. To implement this idea, we
design an adaptive prompt tuning module, which consists of a
meta prompt, an adaptive network, and some keys. The server
randomly generates a set of keys and assigns a unique key
to each client. Then all clients cooperatively train the global
adaptive network and meta prompt with the local datasets and
the frozen keys. Ultimately, the global aggregation model can
assign a personalized prompt to CLIP based on the domain features of each test sample. We perform extensive experiments
on two multi-domain image classification datasets across two
different settings — supervised and unsupervised. The results
show that FedAPT can achieve better performance with less
than 10% of the number of parameters of the fully trained
model, and the global model can perform well in diverse client
domains simultaneously.

Introduction
As privacy protection gains increasing attention, federated
learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017), a special machine learning paradigm, becomes more popular. FL has been applied
to mobile phone album classification, automatic driving, and
medical image analysis. FL enables multiple parties to cooperatively train a global model without sharing their training
data. In each round of communication, the server sends the
global model to the clients, and each client updates the global
model with the private dataset to obtain the local model. The
server collects the local models for aggregation, and obtains
the global model for the next communication round. In computer vision, FL has been applied to classification (Hsu, Qi,
and Brown 2020; Li, He, and Song 2021; Yang et al. 2023),
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15117

detection (Liu et al. 2020; Su et al. 2023), ReID (Zhuang,
Wen, and Zhang 2021; Zhuang et al. 2020), etc.
Currently used FL techniques (McMahan et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2020; Karimireddy et al. 2020) require all model parameters to be updated from the clients and shared on the
server. As a result, collaborative learning incurs substantial
client training costs, as well as communication costs for both
clients and the server. The non-IID problem of various client
data also poses significant difficulties for the federated learning algorithm. The performance of the global aggregation
model will be impacted when the client datasets come from
diverse data domains. Thus, training a more effective global
model with fewer communication costs by adjusting only a
few parameters remains an open research question.
The emergence of powerful vision-language pre-trained
models, such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), opens up new
avenues for solving this problem. CLIP formalizes object
recognition into image-text matching, rather than an imagelabel mapping problem. Text encoder and image encoder
are two of the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) branches
that are included in CLIP. About 400 million web-crawled
image-text pairs are used for contrastive learning to establish
semantic associations between images and texts. Pre-trained
CLIP performs admirably in the zero-shot image classification task and demonstrates high transferability in a number of
downstream applications. With the powerful representation
ability of CLIP, it becomes possible to fine-tune only a few
parameters for each client in the federated learning scenarios.
Inspired by the promising capabilities of CLIP, in this
research, we propose a federated prompt tuning algorithm,
FedAPT, for multi-domain collaborative image classification in cross-silo federated learning. Consider that there are
multiple participants in diverse data domains; the ultimate
objective is to develop a global classification model through
federated prompt tuning that can perform well in all data
domains. We employ a prompt tuning based strategy to provide learnable prompts for the CLIP. To make the global
prompt adapt to all domains, we propose an adaptive method
to set customized prompts for various test images in order to
address the cross-domain challenge.
The underlying intuition is that images contain domainspecific information. By incorporating this domain-specific
information into prompts, we can better guide the pre-trained
CLIP model to activate relevant knowledge to that domain,

