The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BLADE: Box-Level Supervised Amodal Segmentation
through Directed Expansion
Zhaochen Liu1,2 * , Zhixuan Li3 * , Tingting Jiang1,4†
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, National Key Laboratory
for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
{dreamerliu, ttjiang}@pku.edu.cn, zhixuanli520@gmail.com
Abstract
Perceiving the complete shape of occluded objects is essential
for human and machine intelligence. While the amodal segmentation task is to predict the complete mask of partially
occluded objects, it is time-consuming and labor-intensive
to annotate the pixel-level ground truth amodal masks. Boxlevel supervised amodal segmentation addresses this challenge by relying solely on ground truth bounding boxes and
instance classes as supervision, thereby alleviating the need
for exhaustive pixel-level annotations. Nevertheless, current
box-level methodologies encounter limitations in generating
low-resolution masks and imprecise boundaries, failing to
meet the demands of practical real-world applications. We
present a novel solution to tackle this problem by introducing a directed expansion approach from visible masks to
corresponding amodal masks. Our approach involves a hybrid end-to-end network based on the overlapping region
- the area where different instances intersect. Diverse segmentation strategies are applied for overlapping regions and
non-overlapping regions according to distinct characteristics. To guide the expansion of visible masks, we introduce
an elaborately-designed connectivity loss for overlapping regions, which leverages correlations with visible masks and facilitates accurate amodal segmentation. Experiments are conducted on several challenging datasets and the results show
that our proposed method can outperform existing state-ofthe-art methods with large margins.

Figure 1: An illustration of the overlapping region. The overlapping region of an object is the tightest bounding box that
covers all intersecting areas of its amodal bounding box and
those of other objects, so the occluded portion of each object
should be inside if exists.
critical for accurate object recognition and routine planning
in self-driving (Ao, Ke, and Ehinger 2023).
In computer vision, amodal instance segmentation has
aroused broad concern since it was proposed in AIS (Li
and Malik 2016), which aims to predict complete shapes
of partially occluded objects. However, annotating pixellevel ground-truth amodal masks for such objects is laborintensive and error-prone due to the absence of visible cues
in occluded regions. To mitigate the challenges of pixel-level
annotation, Bayesian-Amodal (Sun, Kortylewski, and Yuille
2022), a weakly supervised approach is proposed that utilizes ground-truth bounding boxes as an alternative supervision signal instead of the intricate ground-truth amodal
masks. This method employs a Bayesian model to effectively address the amodal segmentation problem. Nevertheless, the amodal mask generated by the Bayesian-Amodal
approach exhibits low resolution and uneven boundaries.
This outcome arises from the Bayesian model’s inherent
coarse shape priors under box-level supervision, which inadequately align with the demands of real-world applications.
How to obtain amodal masks with both high-resolution
and accurate boundaries solely through box-level supervision? To deal with this challenge, we propose the Box-Level
supervised Amodal segmentation network through Directed
Expansion (BLADE), a weakly-supervised amodal segmen-

Introduction
Amodal perception is a vital ability of human’s cognitive
system (Nanay 2018; Kanizsa, Legrenzi, and Bozzi 1979)
for inferring the complete shape of occluded objects easily.
Amodal perception shows essential potential for tremendous
real-world applications including autonomous driving (Qi
et al. 2019; Breitenstein and Fingscheidt 2022), robotic gripping (Wada et al. 2018; Wada, Okada, and Inaba 2019) and
novel view synthesis (Li et al. 2022; Gkitsas et al. 2021). For
example, deducting the complete shape and range from the
visible region of target objects (pedestrians or vehicles) is
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3846

