The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EG-NAS: Neural Architecture Search with Fast Evolutionary Exploration
Zicheng Cai1,2 , Lei Chen1 , Peng Liu2,3 , Tongtao Ling1 , Yutao Lai1
2

1
Guangdong University of Technology
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
chenlei3@gdut.edu.cn

Abstract
97.50

Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS) has achieved a
rapid search for excellent architectures by optimizing architecture parameters through gradient descent. However, this
efficiency comes with a significant challenge: the risk of premature convergence to local optima, resulting in subpar performance that falls short of expectations. To address this issue, we propose a novel and effective method called Evolutionary Gradient-Based Neural Architecture Search (EGNAS). Our approach combines the strengths of both gradient descent and evolutionary strategy, allowing for the exploration of various optimization directions during the architecture search process. To begin with, we continue to employ gradient descent for updating network parameters to ensure efficiency. Subsequently, to mitigate the risk of premature convergence, we introduce an evolutionary strategy with
global search capabilities to optimize the architecture parameters. By leveraging the best of both worlds, our method
strikes a balance between efficient exploration and exploitation of the search space. Moreover, we have redefined the
fitness function to not only consider accuracy but also account for individual similarity. This inclusion enhances the
diversity and accuracy of the optimized directions identified
by the evolutionary strategy. Extensive experiments on various datasets and search spaces demonstrate that EG-NAS
achieves highly competitive performance at significantly low
search costs compared to state-of-the-art methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/caicaicheng/EG-NAS.

NSGANet
NSGANetV1
EPCNAS
EAEPSO
DARTS(1st)
DARTS(2st)
ProxylessNAS
PC-DARTS
DARTS𝛽-DARTS
DARTS+PT
EG-NAS

4 X Faster

Test Accuracy (%)

97.45

97.40

97.35

97.20

1.0

0.3

0.1

Search times (GPU-Days)

Figure 1: Speed-performance comparison of our proposed
EG-NAS with various neural architecture search methods on
CIFAR-10.

searching network architectures and effectively addressing
this problem, still faces challenges in terms of expensive
computational power and long search times. For example,
on the CIFAR-10 dataset, AmoebaNet-B (Real et al. 2018),
an evolutionary strategy (EA) based approach, requires 3150
GPU days of search time, while NASNet-A (Zoph et al.
2018), a reinforcement learning (RL) based approach, requires 1800 GPU days of search time. To alleviate the high
search costs in NAS, a gradient-based method called Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS) (Liu, Simonyan,
and Yang 2018) is proposed, which shares weights between
architectures. Compared to costly search strategies such as
AmoebaNet-B and NASNet-A, DARTS can perform the architecture search task in 0.4 GPU-Days, offering a more efficient alternative. Furthermore, PC-DARTS achieves even
faster results, completing the network architecture search in
just 0.1 GPU-Days. However, these gradient-based methods (Xiao et al. 2022a; Chen et al. 2019; Zela et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2021b) still face different dilemmas, and these
dilemmas all ultimately point to one reason, i.e., premature
convergence to a local optimum. In traditional optimization
problems, evolutionary strategy (Hansen and Ostermeier
1996) is a well-responding measure due to its global search
property, which makes it more capable of exploring differ-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), particularly convolution
neural networks (CNNs) such as Inception-v1 (Szegedy
et al. 2015), ResNet (He et al. 2016), and other pioneering network architectures (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Howard et al. 2017), as well as the modern architecture
ConvNeXt (Liu et al. 2022), have played a crucial role in
driving the advancement of computer vision and addressing
various vision-related problems. However, the cost of human design of network architectures is increasing as neural networks advance further, leading to high-cost limitations that prevent researchers from practicing more creative
ideas and discouraging their enthusiasm. The proposed Neural Architecture Search (NAS), as an automated method for
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11159

