The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unify Named Entity Recognition Scenarios via Contrastive Real-Time Updating
Prototype
Yanhe Liu1 , Peng Wang1, 2 * , Wenjun Ke1, 2 * , Guozheng Li1 , Xiye Chen3 , Jiteng Zhao1 , Ziyu Shang1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Nanjing University of Finance & Economics, Nanjing, China
{liuyanhe, pwang, kewenjun, liguozheng, jiteng, ziyus1999}@seu.edu.cn, chemistrymaths2002@gmail.com
Abstract

task-wise

task-wise

batch-wise

Supervised

Class-Incremental

Online

train

Supervised named entity recognition (NER) aims to classify
entity mentions into a fixed number of pre-defined types.
However, in real-world scenarios, unknown entity types are
continually involved. Naive fine-tuning will result in catastrophic forgetting on old entity types. Existing continual
methods usually depend on knowledge distillation to alleviate forgetting, which are less effective on long task sequences.
Moreover, most of them are specific to the class-incremental
scenario and cannot adapt to the online scenario, which is
more common in practice. In this paper, we propose a unified framework called Contrastive Real-time Updating Prototype (CRUP) that can handle different scenarios for NER.
Specifically, we train a Gaussian projection model by a regularized contrastive objective. After training on each batch,
we store the mean vectors of representations belong to new
entity types as their prototypes. Meanwhile, we update existing prototypes belong to old types only based on representations of the current batch. The final prototypes will be used
for the nearest class mean classification. In this way, CRUP
can handle different scenarios through its batch-wise learning. Moreover, CRUP can alleviate forgetting in continual
scenarios only with current data instead of old data. To comprehensively evaluate CRUP, we construct extensive benchmarks based on various datasets. Experimental results show
that CRUP significantly outperforms baselines in continual
scenarios and is also competitive in the supervised scenario.

test

Figure 1: Three learning scenarios of NER. Each icon denotes an entity type.

at least one new entity type and the model are evaluated on
all learned types. (2) Online scenario (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Prabhu, Torr, and Dokania 2020) is similar to the
CI scenario but only one batch or even one sample is available. For continual scenarios, naive fine-tuning will result in
dramatic performance drop on old tasks called catastrophic
forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; French 1999).
To handle this problem, continual learning (Parisi et al.
2019; McCaffary 2021) has been introduced to NER in recent years (Monaikul et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Xia
et al. 2022). However, these methods usually depend on the
knowledge distillation to alleviate forgetting, which are poor
on long task sequences. Moreover, most of them are specific
to the CI scenario and cannot adapt to the online scenario.
Recent studies show that memory-based methods are
quite effective (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Chaudhry
et al. 2019; Han et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019; de Masson D’Autume et al. 2019). These methods typically maintain a memory buffer to store some representative samples
and replay them later. However, they may lead to overfitting
on memorized samples and have to deal with the increment
of the classes. Therefore, mean vectors of representations
called prototypes are used to represent class distributions by
some latest methods (De Lange and Tuytelaars 2021; Mai
et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2022). Instead of the
Softmax linear classification, the nearest class mean classification is conducted between the prototypes and the representations, which is not affected by the increment of the classes.
Nevertheless, prototype-based methods still memorize some
data to update the prototypes after each task.
To address above issues, we propose a unified framework
called Contrastive Real-time Updating Prototype (CRUP)
for different named entity recognition scenarios. It mainly

Introduction
Traditional supervised named entity recognition (NER) aims
to recognize entity mentions from the given text and classify them into the pre-defined types such as Person, Location, Organization and MISC (Li et al. 2020). However, in
the real-world applications, unknown entity types are continually involved. Although the large language models have
shown impressive performance, they still need some techniques to learn new knowledge. As shown in Figure 1, compared with the traditional supervised scenario, two continual scenarios are more common: (1) Class-incremental (CI)
scenario (Li and Hoiem 2017; Wang et al. 2019) provides
a sequence of supervised tasks to learn. Each task involves
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14035

