The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UV-SAM: Adapting Segment Anything Model for Urban Village Identification
Xin Zhang1 , Yu Liu2 * , Yuming Lin2 , Qingmin Liao1 , Yong Li2
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zhangxin4087@163.com, liuyu2419@126.com

Abstract
Urban villages, defined as informal residential areas in or
around urban centers, are characterized by inadequate infrastructures and poor living conditions, closely related to the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) on poverty, adequate
housing, and sustainable cities. Traditionally, governments
heavily depend on field survey methods to monitor the urban
villages, which however are time-consuming, labor-intensive,
and possibly delayed. Thanks to widely available and timely
updated satellite images, recent studies develop computer vision techniques to detect urban villages efficiently. However,
existing studies either focus on simple urban village image
classification or fail to provide accurate boundary information. To accurately identify urban village boundaries from
satellite images, we harness the power of the vision foundation model and adapt the Segment Anything Model (SAM)
to urban village segmentation, named UV-SAM. Specifically,
UV-SAM first leverages a small-sized semantic segmentation model to produce mixed prompts for urban villages,
including mask, bounding box, and image representations,
which are then fed into SAM for fine-grained boundary identification. Extensive experimental results on two datasets in
China demonstrate that UV-SAM outperforms existing baselines, and identification results over multiple years show that
both the number and area of urban villages are decreasing
over time, providing deeper insights into the development
trends of urban villages and sheds light on the vision foundation models for sustainable cities. The dataset and codes
of this study are available at https://github.com/tsinghua-fiblab/UV-SAM.

(a) Narrow alleyways

(b) Older low-rise buildings

Figure 1: Examples of urban villages identified from satellite
images, with appearance characteristics provided. The red
part represents the urban village areas.

aligning well with United Nations’ 11th Sustainable Development Goal (SDG 11)“Making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable” (Nath 2016),
accurately identifying urban villages is essential for both urban planning and governance in future sustainable cities.
Traditionally, urban village identification heavily depends
on field surveys and manual mapping (Zheng et al. 2009),
where urban planners would visit different areas, collect socioeconomic data, and visually identify urban village boundaries. While such methods provide valuable insights, they
are time-consuming, labor-intensive, and limited in spatiotemporal coverage. In recent years, exploring computer
vision techniques with satellite images for urban villages
has gained significant attention. Most studies build image
classification models to classify whether a given satellite
image contains an urban village (Chen et al. 2022; Fan
et al. 2022a,b; Xiao et al. 2023) without boundaries identified, while others explore semantic segmentation models to
identify urban village boundaries in satellite images (Mast,
Wei, and Wurm 2020; Pan et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019).
However, due to the complex background interference in
satellite images and the lack of well-defined boundaries between urban villages and surrounding neighborhoods, existing studies perform poorly in providing accurate urban village boundaries, which further hinders the estimation of the
areas and expansions of urban villages (Kirillov et al. 2023).

Introduction
As a representative type of informal settlement, urban villages are densely populated neighborhoods in both the outskirts and the downtown segments of major Chinese cities,
typically consisting of older low-rise buildings and narrow
alleyways (Wikipedia contributors 2023), as shown in Figure 1. On the one hand, urban villages provide affordable
housing options for migrant workers and low-income citizens, contributing to the socioeconomic fabric of cities. On
the other hand, urban villages often face challenges related
to inadequate infrastructure, limited access to public services, and poor living conditions (Chen et al. 2021). Hence,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22520

