The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SALSA: Semantically-Aware Latent Space Autoencoder
Kathryn E. Kirchoff1 , Travis Maxfield2 , Alexander Tropsha2 * , Shawn M. Gomez3, 4†
1

Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel Hill
2
Eshelman School of Pharmacy, UNC Chapel Hill
3
Department of Pharmacology, UNC Chapel Hill
4
Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering at UNC Chapel Hill and NC State University
kat@cs.unc.edu, tmaxfield@unc.edu, alex tropsha@unc.edu, smgomez@unc.edu
Abstract
In deep learning for drug discovery, molecular representations are often based on sequences, known as SMILES,
which allow for straightforward implementation of natural
language processing methodologies, one being the sequenceto-sequence autoencoder. However, we observe that training
an autoencoder solely on SMILES is insufficient to learn
molecular representations that are semantically meaningful,
where semantics are specified by the structural (graph-tograph) similarities between molecules. We demonstrate by
example that SMILES-based autoencoders may map structurally similar molecules to distant codes, resulting in an
incoherent latent space that does not necessarily respect
the semantic similarities between molecules. To address
this shortcoming we propose Semantically-Aware Latent
Space Autoencoder (SALSA) for molecular representations:
a SMILES-based transformer autoencoder modified with a
contrastive task aimed at learning graph-to-graph similarities
between molecules. To accomplish this, we develop a novel
dataset comprised of sets of structurally similar molecules
and opt for a supervised contrastive loss that is able to incorporate full sets of positive samples. We evaluate semantic awareness of SALSA representations by comparing to
its ablated counterparts, and show empirically that SALSA
learns representations that maintain 1) structural awareness,
2) physicochemical awareness, 3) biological awareness, and
4) semantic continuity.

Figure 1: Given molecule (A) we consider three molecules
whose graphs are structurally similar, being a single graph
edit from (A). The naive autoencoder maps these similar molecules to latent codes of various proximity: (1)
is mapped close to (A), while (3) is mapped far from
(A). In contrast, our proposed autoencoder, SALSA, learns
a semantically-aware space such that structurally similar
molecules are collectively mapped to nearby codes.

Introduction
In drug discovery, learning the underlying semantics that
govern molecular data presents an interesting challenge for
deep learning. Effective learning of semantics is necessary
to be successful in key tasks such as property prediction and
de novo generation, and progress has been made in attempting to solve these tasks (Bilodeau et al. 2022). However, due
to the ambiguous nature of molecular representations, models often fail to adequately capture the underlying semantics
resulting in a disorganized latent space.
In the case of molecular data, semantics is often taskdependent but may amount to various emergent properties
(e.g. structural, physicochemical, and biological properties)

that are intrinsically linked to molecular structure, that is, the
arrangement of constituent atoms and bonds (Honda et al.
2016). Molecular structure can be captured in the form of
a graph, and thus the semantics that govern chemical manifolds may therefore be specified by the graph-to-graph similarities (i.e. structural similarities) between molecules. In
this way, graph edit distance (GED) defines a semantically
meaningful unit of change between molecular entities.
In molecular representation learning, we can conveniently
express molecular structures as linear sequences, known
as simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES)
strings (Weininger 1988) in order to take advantage of recent progress in sequence-to-sequence modeling. Borrowing from advancements made in natural language processing (NLP), many autoencoder-based methods operating on
SMILES sequences have been proposed as they provide

* Corresponding author
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13211

