The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Policy Learning via Offline Skill Diffusion
Woo Kyung Kim, Minjong Yoo, Honguk Woo*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
{kwk2696, mjyoo2, hwoo}@skku.edu

Abstract
Skill-based reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have
shown considerable promise, especially in solving longhorizon tasks via hierarchical structures. These skills, learned
task-agnostically from offline datasets, can accelerate the policy learning process for new tasks. Yet, the application of
these skills in different domains remains restricted due to
their inherent dependency on the datasets, which poses a challenge when attempting to learn a skill-based policy via RL
for a target domain different from the datasets’ domains. In
this paper, we present a novel offline skill learning framework DuSkill which employs a guided Diffusion model to
generate versatile skills extended from the limited skills in
datasets, thereby enhancing the robustness of policy learning for tasks in different domains. Specifically, we devise
a guided diffusion-based skill decoder in conjunction with
the hierarchical encoding to disentangle the skill embedding
space into two distinct representations, one for encapsulating domain-invariant behaviors and the other for delineating the factors that induce domain variations in the behaviors. Our DuSkill framework enhances the diversity of skills
learned offline, thus enabling to accelerate the learning procedure of high-level policies for different domains. Through
experiments, we show that DuSkill outperforms other skillbased imitation learning and RL algorithms for several longhorizon tasks, demonstrating its benefits in few-shot imitation
and online RL.

1

Figure 1: Concept of Offline Skill Diffusion: When a downstream task belongs to the domain different from those of
the training datasets, conventional skill-based learning approaches struggle in learning and choosing suitable skills.
In contrast, our offline skill diffusion expands the skill diversity that goes beyond the training datasets, enabling the
execution of compatible skills for the downstream task. The
skills are discretely represented for visual illustration.
As shown in the left side of Figure 1, where each small
circle denotes a specific skill, conventional skill learning
approaches might experience low performance in the highlevel policy for a downstream task, if the task calls for skills
that differ from the pretrained ones. For instance, suppose
that robotic manipulation skills are learned from the datasets
in the safety-first domain; then, they might heavily lean towards “slow” speed manipulation. In that case, a high-level
policy learned with these skills might fail to adapt efficiently
to the downstream task that involves stringent time constraints. These situations often arise in the environment encompassing diverse domains, as a single task can require different skills depending on the domain it is in. The dependency of conventional skill-based learning approaches on
the specificity of the datasets exacerbates these challenges.
Moreover, it is practically difficult to obtain comprehensive
datasets that span all potential skills for diverse domains.
To tackle these challenges in skill-based learning, we
take a novel approach, offline skill diffusion, aiming to
broaden skill diversity beyond mere imitation from the

Introduction

Skill-based learning demonstrates the potentials in accelerating the adaptation to complex long-horizon tasks by leveraging pretrained skill representations on behavior patterns
from the offline datasets. However, existing approaches in
skill-based reinforcement learning (RL) (e.g., Pertsch, Lee,
and Lim 2020; Pertsch et al. 2021) and skill-based few-shot
imitation learning (e.g., Hakhamaneshi et al. 2022; Du et al.
2023) often operate under the premise that the target domain
for a downstream task was present during skill pretraining.
Thus, policies learned with the pretrained skills might lead
to sub-optimal performance, particularly when the target domain diverges from the domains of the given datasets.
* Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13177

