The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reinforcement Learning and Data-Generation for Syntax-Guided Synthesis
Julian Parsert1 2 , Elizabeth Polgreen2 ,
1

University of Oxford
University of Edinburgh
julian.parsert@gmail.com, elizabeth.polgreen@ed.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Program synthesis is the task of automatically generating code
based on a specification. In Syntax-Guided Synthesis (SyGuS)
this specification is a combination of a syntactic template
and a logical formula, and the result is guaranteed to satisfy
both. We present a reinforcement-learning guided algorithm
for SyGuS which uses Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to
search the space of candidate solutions. Our algorithm learns
policy and value functions which, combined with the upper
confidence bound for trees, allow it to balance exploration
and exploitation. A common challenge in applying machine
learning approaches to syntax-guided synthesis is the scarcity
of training data. To address this, we present a method for
automatically generating training data for SyGuS based on
anti-unification of existing first-order satisfiability problems,
which we use to train our MCTS policy. We implement and
evaluate this setup and demonstrate that learned policy and
value improve the synthesis performance over a baseline by
over 26 percentage points in the training and testing sets. Our
tool outperforms state-of-the-art tool cvc5 on the training set
and performs comparably in terms of the total number of problems solved on the testing set (solving 23% of the benchmarks
on which cvc5 fails). We make our data set publicly available,
to enable further application of machine learning methods to
the SyGuS problem.

Introduction
Syntax-Guided Synthesis (Alur et al. 2013) allows a user to
synthesize code that is guaranteed to satisfy a logical and
a syntactic specification, as shown in Example 1. The logical specification is given as a quantified formula: in the
example, we must find a program such that ∀x, y.f (x, y) ≥
x ∧ f (x, y) ≥ y ∧ f (x, y) = x ∨ x(f, y) = y. The syntactic specification is given as a context-free grammar. Applications of SyGuS include planning (Chasins and Newcomb 2016), deobfuscation (Jha et al. 2010), invariant synthesis (Fedyukovich et al. 2019), verified lifting (Kamil et al.
2016), and generating rewrite rules in SMT solvers (Reynolds
and Tinelli 2017).
Surprisingly, the dominant techniques for SyGuS are still
based on enumerative synthesis (Reynolds et al. 2019; Alur,
Radhakrishna, and Udupa 2017), where the synthesizer exhaustively enumerates a grammar, and checks resulting proCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10670

grams against the specification until a correct solution is
found. Good search heuristics can lead to extreme differences in performance (Reynolds et al. 2019), so one would
expect machine learning techniques to be prominent.
In fact, in programming-by-example (PBE), where the
specification is in the form of input-output (I/O) examples,
the dominant heuristics are now machine-learning based (Balog et al. 2017; Bavishi et al. 2019). In PBE, training data
is easy to generate by taking any program and generating
I/O examples for it. We hypothesize that the reason these
machine-learning techniques have not yet had a significant
impact in SyGuS with logical specifications is the lack of
easily available training data.
We present a synthesis algorithm that can learn its own
heuristics via a reinforcement learning (RL) loop with relatively small quantities of training data. We use a Monte-Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) based approach to search for solutions
within the syntactic specification using policy/value functions.
The policy and value functions are iteratively improved via
an RL loop. To evaluate a candidate program, we use a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solver. Implementing these
techniques we were able to achieve an improvement of over
26 percentage points (34.7% baseline vs 60.9% in the best
iteration) on the testing set, and similar results on the training
set. Compared with the state-of-the-art tool cvc5 (Barbosa
et al. 2022) we can solve 182 problems that cvc5 cannot solve
and on average 25 more problems on the training set while
solving 6 fewer problems on the testing set.
To obtain training data, we develop a novel method for
automatically generating SyGuS problems, based on antiunification. Generating training data for logical specifications
is challenging. In PBE, the standard approach to generating data is to randomly generate solutions and their corresponding input-output specifications. For example, we might
generate the solution (ite(≥ x y) x y) for f , where ite is
the if-then-else operator, and the specification f (2, 1) = 2,
f (2, 2) = 2, f (1, 1) = 1. This approach cannot be easily
applied to SyGuS with logical specifications because, if we
randomly generate solutions, it is extremely hard to infer a
meaningful logical specification that captures that solution
without also revealing the solution in the specification. This
means that any inferred specifications are unlikely to be representative of real SyGuS problems. We could also randomly
generate logical specifications, but these are highly unlikely

