The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FacetCRS: Multi-Faceted Preference Learning for Pricking Filter Bubbles in
Conversational Recommender System
Yongsen Zheng1 , Ziliang Chen2 , Jinghui Qin3 , Liang Lin1 *
1

Sun Yat-sen University
2
Jinan University
3
Guangdong University of Technology
{z.yongsensmile, scape1989}@gmail.com, c.ziliang@yahoo.com, linliang@ieee.org
Abstract

crucial to prick filter bubbles for improving performance of
the CRSs.
Recently, many research efforts have been dedicated to
exploring filter bubbles in offline recommendation without considering user-item interactions (Hussein, Juneja, and
Mitra 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2014; Ribeiro
et al. 2020; Spinelli and Crovella 2020; Tomlein et al.
2021). These offline recommendation approaches primarily
focus on investigating the underlying causes of filter bubbles. Through extensive experiments conducted on largescale recommender systems, two primary factors have been
discovered. The first primary factor is that users with less
diverse preferences are more susceptible to becoming entrapped within filter bubbles. Another primary factor is that
the learning mechanisms employed by the recommender
amplify the filter bubble phenomenon as they tend to prioritize and accentuate a user’s dominant interests. Although
these studies provide valuable insights into the phenomenon
of filter bubbles, they have not adequately addressed the negative impacts of the feedback loop between the user and the
system on the exacerbation of filter bubbles. More recently,
Gao et al. (Gao et al. 2022) have made attempts to mitigate
filter bubbles in Interactive Recommender Systems (IRSs)
by incorporating user-system interactions over time through
offline reinforcement learning, but this strategy cannot allow
users to interact with the system through natural language to
express their true thoughts.
Despite their effectiveness, most existing methods still
suffer from two major limitations: 1) Interactive Strategy.
Most methods primarily focus on addressing filter bubbles
in offline recommendations in the static settings while overlooking the effect of the user-system feedback loop on filter
bubbles. In reality, filter bubbles will be exacerbated when
the user chats with the system over time (Steck 2018; Gao
et al. 2022). Even though a recent study CIRS (Gao et al.
2022) has emerged to combat filter bubbles interactively, its
interaction strategy remains limited largely to rigid and single forms (e.g., click or skip, like or dislike). This fails to allow users to express their diverse, dynamic, and complicated
preferences via natural language utterances, making it not
applicable to real-world conversational recommendations.
2) Preference Exploration. Most previous works (Hussein,
Juneja, and Mitra 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2014;
Ribeiro et al. 2020) have found that modeling users’ diverse

The filter bubble is a notorious issue in Recommender Systems (RSs), which describes the phenomenon whereby users
are exposed to a limited and narrow range of information
or content that reinforces their existing dominant preferences
and beliefs. This results in a lack of exposure to diverse and
varied content. Many existing works have predominantly examined filter bubbles in static or relatively-static recommendation settings. However, filter bubbles will be continuously
intensified over time due to the feedback loop between the
user and the system in the real-world online recommendation.
To address these issues, we propose a novel paradigm, MultiFacet Preference Learning for Pricking Filter Bubbles in Conversational Recommender System (FacetCRS), which aims to
burst filter bubbles in the conversational recommender system
(CRS) through timely user-item interactions via natural language conversations. By considering diverse user preferences
and intentions, FacetCRS automatically model user preference into multi-facets, including entity-, word-, context-, and
review-facet, to capture diverse and dynamic user preferences to prick filter bubbles in the CRS. It is an end-to-end
CRS framework to adaptively learn representations of various levels of preference facet and diverse types of external
knowledge. Extensive experiments on two publicly available
CRS-based datasets demonstrate that our proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance in mitigating filter bubbles and enhancing recommendation quality in CRS.

Introduction
Conversational Recommendation Systems (CRSs) have
emerged as powerful tools for providing personalized recommendations through natural language conversations and
dialogue interactions (Qin et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a;
Mishra, Priya, and Ekbal 2023), which are broadly adopted
in various domains, including online e-commerce (Liu
et al. 2023), music recommendation (Epure and Hennequin
2023), health counseling (Wahbeh et al. 2023), etc. However, CRSs frequently encounter the challenge of filter
bubbles, wherein users are consistently presented with a
restricted range of information and suggestions that are
aligned with their dominant preferences throughout their interactions with the system (Gao et al. 2022). Therefore, it is
* Liang Lin is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9405

