The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cautiously-Optimistic Knowledge Sharing
for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Yanwen Ba1 , Xuan Liu1 * , Xinning Chen1 , Hao Wang1 , Yang Xu1 , Kenli Li1 , Shigeng Zhang2
1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
{yanwenba, xuan liu, chenxinning, wonhow, xuyangcs, lkl}@hnu.edu.cn, sgzhang@csu.edu.cn

Abstract

huge joint state-action spaces that grow exponentially with
the number of agents, and the ideal conditions for deploying
centralized critics are often lacking in reality. In contrast, the
paradigm of decentralized training and decentralized execution (DTDE) (Tan 1993; Tampuu et al. 2017) is more scalable and robust, and more adaptable to harsh real-world conditions, as it does not require a centralized critic.
While the DTDE paradigm has many advantages, it inevitably faces coordination difficulties in collaborative tasks
due to the lack of an explicit centralized coordinator and
partial observability. Agent teams that follow the DTDE
paradigm often need to spend a lot of time exploring to
develop good strategies. To alleviate this problem, some
communication-based MARL methods focus on allowing
proper exchange of local information about observations
among agents while following the DTDE paradigm. This
information can be regarded as the perceptual-level knowledge, allowing agents to make decisions from a broader perspective. It is usually fed directly into the receiver’s network (Jiang and Lu 2018; Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2019;
Ding, Huang, and Lu 2020), which expands the local policy
spaces of agents and significantly increases the training burden. Furthermore, high-dimensional information in the network has uncertainty and uninterpretability.
Unlike general communication-based methods, action
advising shares policy-level rather than perceptual-level
knowledge in a more direct and explainable manner, where
more experienced agents advise less experienced agents on
the best actions and the suggested actions will be executed
directly by the advisees. This scheme speeds up coordination among agents and resembles the common way humans
communicate—we often provide helpful advice based on
our knowledge and beliefs rather than simply providing our
own information. However, agents may give many suboptimal or even poor suggestions, especially in the early stages
of learning. These inappropriate suggestions not only waste
precious communication budget, but also hinder the team
from further exploring better states, diminishing the advantages of action advising in complex environments that require extensive exploration. Furthermore, the suggestions
provided are also one-sided.
To make knowledge sharing more comprehensive and
mitigate the negative impacts of inappropriate knowledge, we propose a novel knowledge sharing framework

While decentralized training is attractive in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) for its excellent scalability
and robustness, its inherent coordination challenges in collaborative tasks result in numerous interactions for agents to
learn good policies. To alleviate this problem, action advising methods make experienced agents share their knowledge
about what to do, while less experienced agents strictly follow the received advice. However, this method of sharing
and utilizing knowledge may hinder the team’s exploration
of better states, as agents can be unduly influenced by suboptimal or even adverse advice, especially in the early stages
of learning. Inspired by the fact that humans can learn not
only from the success but also from the failure of others,
this paper proposes a novel knowledge sharing framework
called Cautiously-Optimistic kNowledge Sharing (CONS).
CONS enables each agent to share both positive and negative
knowledge and cautiously assimilate knowledge from others,
thereby enhancing the efficiency of early-stage exploration
and the agents’ robustness to adverse advice. Moreover, considering the continuous improvement of policies, agents value
negative knowledge more in the early stages of learning and
shift their focus to positive knowledge in the later stages. Our
framework can be easily integrated into existing Q-learning
based methods without introducing additional training costs.
We evaluate CONS in several challenging multi-agent tasks
and find it excels in environments where optimal behavioral
patterns are difficult to discover, surpassing the baselines in
terms of convergence rate and final performance.

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has attracted much attention in recent years due to its ability
to solve complex real-world problems, such as multi-robot
control (Willemsen, Coppola, and de Croon 2021) and traffic scheduling (Zhang et al. 2019). Most of the currently
proposed MARL algorithms follow the paradigm of centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) (Lowe
et al. 2017; Rashid et al. 2018; Son et al. 2019; Peng et al.
2021), where a centralized critic collects information from
all agents during the training phase to learn decentralized
agent policies. However, this paradigm struggles with the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17299

