The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NightRain: Nighttime Video Deraining via Adaptive-Rain-Removal and
Adaptive-Correction
Beibei Lin1 , Yeying Jin1 , Wending Yan2 , Wei Ye2 , Yuan Yuan2 , Shunli Zhang3 , Robby Tan1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
3
Beijing Jiaotong University
{beibei.lin, e0178303}@u.nus.edu, {yan.wending, yewei10, yuanyuan10}@huawei.com,
slzhang@bjtu.edu.cn, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Existing deep-learning-based methods for nighttime video
deraining rely on synthetic data due to the absence of realworld paired data. However, the intricacies of the real world,
particularly with the presence of light effects and low-light
regions affected by noise, create significant domain gaps,
hampering synthetic-trained models in removing rain streaks
properly and leading to over-saturation and color shifts.
Motivated by this, we introduce NightRain, a novel nighttime video deraining method with adaptive-rain-removal and
adaptive-correction. Our adaptive-rain-removal uses unlabeled rain videos to enable our model to derain real-world
rain videos, particularly in regions affected by complex light
effects. The idea is to allow our model to obtain rain-free regions based on the confidence scores. Once rain-free regions
and the corresponding regions from our input are obtained,
we can have region-based paired real data. These paired data
are used to train our model using a teacher-student framework, allowing the model to iteratively learn from less challenging regions to more challenging regions. Our adaptivecorrection aims to rectify errors in our model’s predictions,
such as over-saturation and color shifts. The idea is to learn
from clear night input training videos based on the differences or distance between those input videos and their corresponding predictions. Our model learns from these differences, compelling our model to correct the errors. From extensive experiments, our method demonstrates state-of-theart performance. It achieves a PSNR of 26.73dB, surpassing
existing nighttime video deraining methods by a substantial
margin of 13.7%.

(a) Inputs

(b) MetaRain

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Qualitative results on real-world nighttime
rain videos. First column: Input image. Second column:
MetaRain’s results (Patil et al. 2022b). Third column: Our
results. Zoom-in for better visualization.

models trained on synthetic datasets tend to produce oversaturated and color-shifted results. As shown in Fig. 1, existing nighttime video deraining methods yield over-saturated
light regions and color-shifts in some regions.
Existing daytime video deraining methods (Zhang et al.
2022; Kulkarni, Patil, and Murala 2021; Wang et al. 2022a)
can be retrained to remove nighttime rain streaks. However, these methods are designed for daytime scenes that
do not have complex lighting conditions and the significant
presence of noise in low-light regions. Thus, they struggle
to handle rain streaks in nighttime scenes. Existing singleimage deraining methods (Shi et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2020) can be adapted to remove rain streaks by incorporating alignment and temporal
smoothness priors. Nonetheless, they also encounter challenges from nighttime light effects and low-light regions.
Additionally, alignment becomes problematic in the presence of intricate lighting conditions, rain streaks, and noise
in low-light regions.
To address these challenges, we introduce NightRain, a
novel nighttime video deraining method with two main mod-

Introduction
Nighttime rain videos are adversely affected by several factors, including low light, nighttime light effects (e.g., glow,
glare, and uneven light distribution), rain streaks, etc. Existing nighttime video deraining methods (i.e., (Patil et al.
2022b,a)) rely on paired data for training. Due to the lack of
real-world paired data, these methods are trained using synthetic datasets. However, complex nighttime light effects introduce a significant domain gap between synthetic and realworld rain streak distribution. Consequently, these methods
struggle to effectively remove real-world rain streaks, particularly in the presence of complex light effects. Moreover,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3378

