The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

G2 SAM: Graph-Based Global Semantic Awareness Method for Multimodal
Sarcasm Detection
Yiwei Wei1,5 * , Shaozu Yuan2∗† , Hengyang Zhou5 , Longbiao Wang1,4‡ ,
Zhiling Yan2 , Ruosong Yang2 , Meng Chen3
1

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application,
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
3
Yep AI, Melbourne, Australia
4
Huiyan Technology (Tianjin) Co., Ltd, Tianjin, China
5
China University of Petroleum(Beijing) at Karamay, Karamay, China

Abstract
Multimodal sarcasm detection, aiming to detect the ironic
sentiment within multimodal social data, has gained substantial popularity in both the natural language processing and
computer vision communities. Recently, graph-based studies
by drawing sentimental relations to detect multimodal sarcasm have made notable advancements. However, they have
neglected exploiting graph-based global semantic congruity
from existing instances to facilitate the prediction, which ultimately hinders the model’s performance. In this paper, we
introduce a new inference paradigm that leverages global
graph-based semantic awareness to handle this task. Firstly,
we construct fine-grained multimodal graphs for each instance and integrate them into semantic space to draw graphbased relations. During inference, we leverage global semantic congruity to retrieve k-nearest neighbor instances in semantic space as references for voting on the final prediction.
To enhance the semantic correlation of representation in semantic space, we also introduce label-aware graph contrastive
learning to further improve the performance. Experimental
results demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance in multimodal sarcasm detection. The
code will be available at https://github.com/upccpu/G2SAM.

Figure 1: Examples of applying global semantic congruity
for multimodal sarcasm prediction, where blue dots indicate
sarcasm features while the green dots denote non-sarcasm.

Felbo et al. 2017) employed predefined textual patterns to
identify specific hashtag labels, leveraging lexical indicators and syntactic rules to identify ironic expressions. To
improve the ability to exploit contextual cues, subsequent
studies (Tay et al. 2018; Ghosh and Veale 2017; Xiong et al.
2019) explored the sarcasm contexts or the sentiment of sarcasm makers as additional cues to model the congruence
level of texts, resulting in consistent improvement. However,
relying solely on text modality often fails to fully capture the
sentiments of a post.
Compared to purely textual sarcasm detection, multimodal sarcasm detection has been proven more effective for
the ever-expanding social media platforms, as they provide
supplementary visual cues for sarcasm detection. In recent
years, multimodal sarcasm detection has been extensively
studied, resulting in considerable progress. Schifanella et al.
(2016) adopt attention methods to fuse various modalities.
To improve performance, the following methods (Xu, Zeng,

Introduction
With the growing reliance on social media platforms like
Twitter and Reddit for expressing sentiments, the accurate
detection of ironic posts (Tay et al. 2018; Pan et al. 2020;
Xu, Zeng, and Mao 2020) and efficient analysis of embedded sentiment (Niu et al. 2016; Xu 2017; Yang et al. 2020;
Xu and Mao 2017; Xu, Mao, and Chen 2018) within social media data have garnered significant attention from both
academia and industry.
Early research primarily focused on textual modalities.
Some pattern-based approaches (Davidov, Tsur, and Rappoport 2010; Maynard and Greenwood 2014; Chen 2015;
*

Both authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding authors. Email:{yuanshaozu@jd.com}
‡
Co-corresponding authors with Shaozu Yuan.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9151

