The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Directed Diffusion: Direct Control of Object Placement through Attention
Guidance
Wan-Duo Kurt Ma1 , Avisek Lahiri2 , J.P. Lewis3 * , Thomas Leung2 , W. Bastiaan Kleijn1,2
1

Victoria University of Wellington
2
Google Research
3
NVIDIA Research
mawand@ecs.vuw.ac.nz, jpl@nvidia.com, avisek@google.com, leungt@google.com, bastiaan.kleijn@vuw.ac.nz
Abstract
Text-guided diffusion models such as DALL·E 2, Imagen,
eDiff-I, and Stable Diffusion are able to generate an effectively endless variety of images given only a short text prompt
describing the desired image content. In many cases the images are of very high quality. However, these models often
struggle to compose scenes containing several key objects
such as characters in specified positional relationships. The
missing capability to “direct” the placement of characters and
objects both within and across images is crucial in storytelling, as recognized in the literature on film and animation
theory. In this work, we take a particularly straightforward approach to provide the needed direction. Drawing on the observation that the cross-attention maps for prompt words reflect
the spatial layout of objects denoted by those words, we introduce an optimization objective that produces “activation”
at desired positions in these cross-attention maps. The resulting approach is a step toward generalizing the applicability of
text-guided diffusion models beyond single images to collections of related images, as in storybooks. Directed Diffusion
provides easy high-level positional control over multiple objects, while making use of an existing pre-trained model and
maintaining a coherent blend between the positioned objects
and the background. Moreover, it requires only a few lines to
implement.

Directed object

Edited object

Directing multiple objects

Figure 1: Directed Diffusion2 (DD) augments denoising diffusion text-to-image generation by allowing the position of
specified objects to be controlled with user-specified bounding boxes as highlighted in red. Left: DD generates specified
objects (e.g., insect robot, cat) placed according to the given
bounding boxes. Middle: We can move a synthesized object, and Right: place multiple objects in desired locations.
All the directed objects show the appropriate “contextual”
interaction (e.g. shadows) with the background.

number of denoising steps, and scheduler (Smith 2022). This
is particularly true for complex prompts involving descriptions of several objects. For example, in SD a prompt such
as “a bird flying over a house” fails to generate the house
with some seeds, or renders the bird and house but without
the “on” relationship. These difficulties have led to the creation of “prompt marketplaces” 1 where expert users share
and sell successful settings.
The experimentation becomes prohibitive when the goal
is to use the images for storytelling, which involves established principles for positioning characters relative to each
other and the (virtual) camera (Arijon 1976; Thomas and
Johnston 1981). Text prompts describing the content of an
image do not indicate where objects should be placed, and
indicating desired positions in the prompt usually fails. As
a consequence, extensive and tedious repeated trials are
needed to obtain an image where the desired objects exist
and their generated positions are acceptable.
Research is addressing some limitations of text-guided
diffusion methods, including methods that define new text
tokens to denote specific and consistent character or object
identities, provide mask-guided inpainting of particular regions, manipulate text guidance representations, and miti-

Introduction
Text-to-image models such as DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al.
2022), Imagen (Saharia et al. 2022) and eDiff-I (Balaji et al.
2022) have revolutionized image generation. Platforms such
as Stable Diffusion (StabilityAI 2023) and similar systems
have democratized this capability, as well as presenting new
ethical challenges.
The forementioned systems generate arbitrary images
simply by typing a ”prompt” or description of the desired
image. It is not always highlighted, however, that experimentation and practical experience are often needed if the
user has a particular result in mind. Text-to-image diffusion
methods often fail to produce desired results, requiring repeated trial-and-error experiments with prompt choices including negative prompts, different random seeds, and hyperparameters including the classifier-free guidance scale,
* Work was done at Google Research.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

4098

https://csform.com/best-prompt-marketplaces-for-ai-art
https://hohonu-vicml.github.io/DirectedDiffusion.Page

