The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SkipDiff: Adaptive Skip Diffusion Model for High-Fidelity Perceptual Image
Super-resolution
Xiaotong Luo1 , Yuan Xie2 * , Yanyun Qu1 * , Yun Fu3
1

2

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Northeastern University
xiaotluo@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

S=2

S=4

S=5

S = 10

S = 20

S = 25

S = 50
26.0

T = 100

HR

9.0
8.5

25.5
25.0

8.0

24.5

7.5
7.0

Distortion (PSNR)

Bicubic

Perception (NIQE)

It is well-known that image quality assessment usually meets
with the problem of perception-distortion (p-d) tradeoff. The
existing deep image super-resolution (SR) methods either focus on high fidelity with pixel-level objectives or high perception with generative models. The emergence of diffusion
model paves a fresh way for image restoration, which has the
potential to offer a brand-new solution for p-d trade-off. We
experimentally observed that the perceptual quality and distortion change in an opposite direction with the increase of
sampling steps. In light of this property, we propose an adaptive skip diffusion model (SkipDiff), which aims to achieve
high-fidelity perceptual image SR with fewer sampling steps.
Specifically, it decouples the sampling procedure into coarse
skip approximation and fine skip refinement stages. A coarsegrained skip diffusion is first performed as a high-fidelity
prior to obtaining a latent approximation of the full diffusion. Then, a fine-grained skip diffusion is followed to further refine the latent sample for promoting perception, where
the fine time steps are adaptively learned by deep reinforcement learning. Meanwhile, this approach also enables faster
sampling of diffusion model through skipping the intermediate denoising process to shorten the effective steps of the
computation. Extensive experimental results show that our
SkipDiff achieves superior perceptual quality with plausible
reconstruction accuracy and a faster sampling speed.

0

25
50
75 100
Sampling steps

24.0

0

25 50 75 100
Sampling steps

Figure 1: The observation that different sampling steps induce an approximate monotonic tendency to the image quality. Top: The visual examples of different sampling steps S
(full steps T = 100) on CelebA-HQ for 8× face SR. The SR
result tends to transition from smooth to realistic with the
increase of sampling steps. Bottom: The perception and distortion performance comparison of different sampling steps.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct
a high-resolution (HR) image from its degraded lowresolution (LR) version. Image quality is typically evaluated by several fidelity/distortion measures (e.g., PSNR,
SSIM) or subjective metrics that quantify perceptual quality (e.g., NIQE, LPIPS), which are at odds with each other
and lead to the problem of perception-distortion (p-d) tradeoff (Blau and Michaeli 2018). The existing deep SR methods
include PSNR-oriented (Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023)
and perception-oriented models (Zhang et al. 2022a; Park,
Moon, and Cho 2023). The former aims to minimize pixellevel distortion (e.g., l1 or l2 ), which usually leads to oversmooth results and looks not realistic. The latter pursues to

produce authentic texture details by modeling the target distribution with generative models, e.g., generative adversarial
network (GAN) (Zhang et al. 2022a) and normalizing flow
(Lugmayr et al. 2020). These SR methods focus on either
high fidelity or high perception, but few discuss how to make
a flexible solution for the p-d tradeoff.
Recent advances (Nichol and Dhariwal 2021) in diffusion models (DDPM) shed light on a new pathway for image restoration (Wang, Yu, and Zhang 2023). They generate high-quality SR images by progressive sampling from
a latent distribution (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020). It is observed that different sampling steps induce an approximate

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4017

