The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Image Demoiréing from Unpaired Real Data
Yunshan Zhong1,2 , Yuyao Zhou2,3 , Yuxin Zhang2,3 , Fei Chao2,3 , Rongrong Ji1,2,3,4 *
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University.
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University.
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University.
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory.
{zhongyunshan,yuyaozhou,yuxinzhang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{fchao, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper focuses on addressing the issue of image
demoiréing. Unlike the large volume of existing studies that
rely on learning from paired real data, we attempt to learn
a demoiréing model from unpaired real data, i.e., moiré images associated with irrelevant clean images. The proposed
method, referred to as Unpaired Demoiréing (UnDeM), synthesizes pseudo moiré images from unpaired datasets, generating pairs with clean images for training demoiréing models.
To achieve this, we divide real moiré images into patches and
group them in compliance with their moiré complexity. We
introduce a novel moiré generation framework to synthesize
moiré images with diverse moiré features, resembling real
moiré patches, and details akin to real moiré-free images. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive denoise method to eliminate the low-quality pseudo moiré images that adversely impact the learning of demoiréing models. We conduct extensive experiments on the commonly-used FHDMi and UHDM
datasets. Results manifest that our UnDeM performs better
than existing methods when using existing demoiréing models such as MBCNN and ESDNet-L. Code: https://github.
com/zysxmu/UnDeM.

Figure 1: Illustration of image moiré. Natural moiré patterns are complex in varying thicknesses, frequencies, layouts, and colors across images and within an image.

Primitive research on demoiréing are mostly established
upon image priors (Dabov et al. 2007; Cho et al. 2011)
or traditional machine learning methods (Liu, Yang, and
Yue 2015; Yang et al. 2017a), which are demonstrated to
be inadequate for tackling moiré patterns of drastic variations (Zheng et al. 2021). Fortunately,
the fashionable
真实摩尔纹
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become a de
facto infrastructure for the success of various computer vision tasks including the image demoiréing (He et al. 2020;
Cheng, Fu, and Yang 2019; He et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020;
Sun, Yu, and Wang 2018; Yuan et al. 2019; Zheng et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2022; Liu, Shu, and Wu 2018; Gao et al.
2019). These CNN-based methods are typically trained on
extensive pairs of moiré-free and moiré images in a supervised manner to model the demoiréing mapping. However, it is challenging to collect paired images given the
fact in Fig. 1 that natural moiré patterns are featured with
varying thicknesses, frequencies, layouts, and colors (Zheng
et al. 2021). We can easily access to the moiré images as
well as moiré-free images, but they are mostly unpaired. Although many studies try to capture image pairs from digital
screens (He et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2022), their quality is barricaded by three limitations. First, acquiring high-quality image pairs involves professional camera position adjustments
and even special hardware (Yu et al. 2022). Second, burdensome manpower is required to select well-aligned moiré-free

Introduction
Contemporary society is awash with electronic screens for
presenting images, text, video, etc. With the widespread
availability of portable camera devices such as smartphones,
people have grown accustomed to using them for quick information recording. Unfortunately, a common issue arises
from the intrinsic interference between the camera’s color
filter array (CFA) and LCD subpixel layout of the screen (Yu
et al. 2022), resulting in captured pictures being contaminated with some rainbow-shape stripes, which are also
known as moiré patterns (Sun, Yu, and Wang 2018; Yang
et al. 2017b). These moiré patterns involve varying thickness, frequencies, layouts, and colors, which degrade the
perceptual quality of captured pictures. Consequently, there
has been considerable academic and industrial interest in developing demoiréing algorithms to rectify the issue.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7623

