The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Hyperspectral Images via Diffusion Model and Group-Autoencoder
Super-resolution Network
Zhaoyang Wang1 2 * , Dongyang Li2 3 , Mingyang Zhang1† , Hao Luo2 3 , Maoguo Gong1 ,
1

Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Xidian University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, 310023, Hangzhou, China
3
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
zhaoyangwang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yingtian.ldy@alibaba-inc.com,
myzhang@xidian.edu.cn,michuan.lh@alibaba-inc.com,gong@ieee.org
Spectral Grouping

Abstract
Existing hyperspectral image (HSI) super-resolution (SR)
methods struggle to effectively capture the complex spectralspatial relationships and low-level details, while diffusion
models represent a promising generative model known for
their exceptional performance in modeling complex relations and learning high and low-level visual features. The
direct application of diffusion models to HSI SR is hampered by challenges such as difficulties in model convergence and protracted inference time. In this work, we introduce a novel Group-Autoencoder (GAE) framework that
synergistically combines with the diffusion model to construct a highly effective HSI SR model (DMGASR). Our proposed GAE framework encodes high-dimensional HSI data
into low-dimensional latent space where the diffusion model
works, thereby alleviating the difficulty of training the diffusion model while maintaining band correlation and considerably reducing inference time. Experimental results on both
natural and remote sensing hyperspectral datasets demonstrate that the proposed method is superior to other state-ofthe-art methods both visually and metrically.

Autoencoder

Diffusion

Enc
Low Resolution HSI

Dec

Super Resolution HSI

Figure 1: Our proposed framework combines three key techniques: spectral grouping and fusing techniques, autoencoder techniques and diffusion-based SR network.

them difficult to implement in practical application scenarios and making the SISR methods the research mainstream.
The current state-of-the-art methods in SISR are predominantly CNN-based (Wang et al. 2022), (Liu et al. 2022c)
and the majority of existing methods still suffer from modeling complex spectral-spatial relations and characterizing
local features and global features comprehensively.
Most recently, as a new emerging record-breaking model,
diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), (Nichol and
Dhariwal 2021) shows superior performance in generation
and reconstruction tasks and have started to be explored in
the field of normal images SR (Saharia et al. 2023), with
promising results being reported. In addition, the diffusion
model has been applied to HSI classification (Zhou et al.
2023), demonstrating its effectiveness. The diffusion model
shows great ability in acquiring and learning global information and higher-level detailed texture information (Zhou
et al. 2023), which is ideally suited for handling complex
spectral-spatial relationships and capturing global features
and local features in dealing with HSI SR problems. The
above work has inspired us to investigate the potential of the
diffusion model for enhancing HSI SR.
Compared with natural images, HSI data have massive

Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) offer plenty of information in
the spectral dimension and have been found extensive applications in various fields such as remote sensing (Cloutis
1996), material recognition (Thai and Healey 2002), agriculture (Kersting et al. 2012), medical diagnosis (Fei 2020),
and many others. However, the spatial resolution of HSI images is often relatively low due to the constraints of imaging
hardware, which has a negative impact on subsequent HSI
applications. Therefore, the HSI super-resolution (HSI SR)
task is critical and meaningful to enhance the image quality to better serve the subsequent high-level computer vision
tasks.
HSI SR can be categorized into two groups depending on
whether auxiliary information is required: fusion-based SR
(Hu, Huang, and Deng 2021), (Liu et al. 2020) and singleimage SR (SISR). The fusion-based SR methods require
additional high-resolution (HR) images as an aid, making
* Work done when interning with Dongyang Li at Alibaba.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5794

