The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improved Metric Distortion via Threshold Approvals
Elliot Anshelevich1 , Aris Filos-Ratsikas2 , Christopher Jerrett1 , Alexandros A. Voudouris3
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
3
University of Essex, United Kingdom
eanshel@cs.rpi.edu, aris.filos-ratsikas@ed.ac.uk, jerrec@rpi.edu, alexandros.voudouris@essex.ac.uk
2

Abstract

and the efficiency of the implemented decisions (Xia 2022;
Zhao and Xia 2019; Mandal et al. 2019; Amanatidis et al.
2022a; Boutilier et al. 2015). Indeed, it is often the case that
access to the preferences of the participants (or agents) is
restricted due to lack of enough statistical data, or due to
computational or cognitive limitations in the elicitation process. This leads to the natural question of whether we can
design aggregation rules (or mechanisms) that achieve high
efficiency even when presented with informational restrictions.
This is the main question studied in the literature of distortion (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006; Anshelevich et al.
2021), which measures the deterioration of an aggregate social objective due to limited information about the preferences of the agents. In its original setup (e.g., see (Boutilier
et al. 2015)), limited information is interpreted as having access only to the ordinal preference rankings over the possible outcomes, instead of a complete cardinal utility structure that fully captures the intensity of the preferences. Over
the years, the notion of distortion has been refined to capture different kinds of informational limitations, including
restricted ordinal information (Gross, Anshelevich, and Xia
2017; Kempe 2020), communication complexity (Mandal
et al. 2019; Mandal, Shah, and Woodruff 2020), and query
complexity (Amanatidis et al. 2021, 2022a).
The literature on metric distortion considers scenarios
where the agents and the outcomes exist in a (possibly highdimensional) metric space, and the costs (rather than utilities) are given by distances that satisfy the triangle inequality. The economic interpretation of these distances is typically in terms of the proximity for political or ideological
issues along different axes (e.g., liberal to conservative, or
libertarian to authoritarian). The metric distortion of social
choice mechanisms, firstly studied in the works of Anshelevich and Postl (2017) and Anshelevich et al. (2018), is one
of the most well-studied settings in the context of this literature, with many variants of the main setting being considered
in recent years (see Section 3 of the survey of Anshelevich
et al. (2021) for an overview). Since its inception in 2015
(the conference version of (Anshelevich et al. 2018)), the
“holy grail” of this literature was a mechanism with a metric
distortion of 3 for the social cost objective (i.e., the sum of
costs of all agents), which would match the corresponding
lower bound shown by Anshelevich et al. (2018). The up-

We consider a social choice setting in which agents and alternatives are represented by points in a metric space, and the
cost of an agent for an alternative is the distance between the
corresponding points in the space. The goal is to choose a
single alternative to (approximately) minimize the social cost
(total cost of all agents) or the maximum cost of any agent,
when only limited information about the preferences of the
agents is given. Previous work has shown that the best possible distortion one can hope to achieve is 3 when access to
the ordinal preferences of the agents is given, even when the
distances between alternatives in the metric space are known.
We improve upon this bound of 3 by designing deterministic mechanisms that exploit limited cardinal information.
We
√
show that it is possible to achieve distortion 1 + 2 by using
the ordinal preferences of the agents, the distances between
alternatives, and a threshold approval set per agent that contains all alternatives for whom her cost is within an appropriately chosen factor of her cost for her most-preferred alternative. We show that this bound is the best possible for any
deterministic mechanism in general metric spaces, and also
provide improved bounds for the fundamental case of the line
metric.

1

Introduction

Social choice theory is concerned with aggregating the heterogeneous preferences of individuals over a set of outcomes into a single decision (Brandt et al. 2016). Besides
its many applications in traditional domains, such as political elections or voting for policy issues, social choice theory has also been at the epicenter of areas such as multiagent systems (Ephrati and Rosenschein 1991), recommendation systems (Ghosh et al. 1999), search engines (Dwork
et al. 2001), and crowdsourcing applications (Mao, Procaccia, and Chen 2012). Aggregation methods inspired from social choice theory have also been used in relation to machine
learning, such as for regression and estimation tasks (Caragiannis, Procaccia, and Shah 2016; Chen et al. 2018; Chen,
Shen, and Zheng 2020; Kahng, Kehne, and Procaccia 2020),
as well as virtual democracy (Noothigattu et al. 2018; Kahng
et al. 2019; Peters et al. 2020).
A central theme underpinning many of these applications
is the interplay between the amount of available information
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9460

