The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Independency Adversarial Learning for Cross-Modal Sound Separation
Zhenkai Lin1, 2 , Yanli Ji1, 2 * , Yang Yang1, 3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, UESTC, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC, China
3
Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering of UESTC in Guangdong, China

Abstract
The sound mixture separation is still challenging due to heavy
sound overlapping and disturbance from noise. Unsupervised separation would significantly increase the difficulty.
As sound overlapping always hinders accurate sound separation, we propose an Independency Adversarial Learning
based Cross-Modal Sound Separation (IAL-CMS) approach,
where IAL employs adversarial learning to minimize the correlation of separated sound elements, exploring high sound
independence; CMS performs cross-modal sound separation,
incorporating audio-visual consistent feature learning and interactive cross-attention learning to emphasize the semantic
consistency among cross-modal features. Both audio-visual
consistency and audio consistency are kept to guarantee accurate separation. The consistency and sound independence
ensure the decomposition of overlapping mixtures into unrelated and distinguishable sound elements. The proposed approach is evaluated on MUSIC, VGGSound, and AudioSet.
Extensive experiments certify that our approach outperforms
existing approaches in supervised and unsupervised scenarios.

Figure 1: Motivation of our proposed approach. To enable
unsupervised sound separation, we keep cross-modal semantic consistency and sound mixture consistency and design our cross-modal sound separation (CMS) solution. To
reduce the entanglement of separated sound elements, Independency Adversarial Learning (IAL) is proposed to minimize the correlation between them for obtaining accurate
separation.

Introduction
Sound mixture separation is a challenging task due to significant sound overlap. In recent years, researchers have observed that humans use multi-modal perception to understand complex activities and endeavor to mimic this skill in
sound mixture separation. Specifically, visual information is
adopted to guide the sound separation (Zhao et al. 2018; Tzinis et al. 2022; Tian, Hu, and Xu 2021; Zhou et al. 2023), resulting in improved separation quality. Most existing frameworks require ground truths of single-source sounds to support separation model training in a supervised setting (Zhao
et al. 2018), but the limitation is that single-source sounds
are not always available. The discussion on unsupervised
sound mixture separation is much more challenging but also
very attractive.
We put our attention on the task of unsupervised sound
separation where clean single-source sounds are unknown.
This presents a challenge: separating desired sounds from
heavily overlapping mixtures without ground truths of target

sounds. How to define suitable restraint conditions to accurately extract individual sounds? The Co-Separation framework (Gao and Grauman 2019; Chatterjee et al. 2021a; Ma
et al. 2021) employs category information to assist in separating sound elements from mixtures by referencing other
single-source audios that belong to the same class. However,
the category can not provide sufficient information, being
unable to guarantee a complete and clear separation.
To address the issue, as illustrated in Figure 1, we design
an unsupervised sound mixture separation architecture that
makes sufficient use of the intra-modal and inter-modal consistency as restraint conditions for model training. Instead
of manually mixing two single-source sounds as mixture
sources (Zhao et al. 2018), we directly mix two mixtures
that contain two or more sound sources and use the mixed
results as separation inputs. We guide the accurate separation process by maintaining two types of consistency: audiovisual cross-modal semantic consistency between visual objects and separated sound elements, as well as audio-audio

* Corresponding author. yanliji@uestc.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3522

