The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Transfer Approach Using Graph
Neural Networks in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Tianpei Yang1,2* , Heng You1 , Jianye Hao1 * , Yan Zheng1 , Matthew E. Taylor2,3
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
2
Univeristy of Alberta,
3
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
{tpyang,hengyou,yanzheng,jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn
matthew.e.taylor@ualberta.ca

Abstract

space as the target task, which severely limits generalization to more realistic scenarios where state-action space mismatch usually exists, which we call it cross-domain setting.
Recently, several approaches have explored cross-domain
TL from the following directions. Some works align states
in a common feature space to combat the mismatch using a
state encoder. To train the state encoder, Gupta et al. (2017)
require to collect paired data of two tasks using pre-trained
policies based on time alignment. However, it is expensive
and infeasible in real-world problems that the two agents
will perform at roughly the same rate. Later, Wan et al.
(2020) train the state encoder using mutual information to
ensure a high correlation between the state embeddings and
current states. However, they ignore capturing the dynamic
information of the environment which ultimately leads to
insufficient transfer performance. Some other works learn
both the state and action mappings for transfer. For example, Chen et al. (2019) capture the semantics of actions using the effects on the environment, which is only applicable in discrete-action scenarios. Later, Zhang et al. (2021)
align the environment dynamics using a cycle consistency
constraint. However, this method directly reuses the pretrained source policy on the target task through the mapping in a zero-short transfer manner, which may not achieve
optimal performance. Furthermore, all these above methods
do not support transferring from multiple source tasks. Recently, CAT (You et al. 2022) has initially done this, but it
fails to handle when the number of source policies changes
due to its limitation of learning the one-to-one mapping between each source task and the target task. Since previous
works didn’t solve this problem properly, we argue a suitable method that can handle the multi-source cross-domain
TL problem and is suitable for varying numbers of source
tasks is urgently needed to improve the generalizability and
practicality. Moreover, all the above methods use a multilayer perception (MLP) based structure, which is not capable of capturing sufficient information for state-action alignment. This may even hinder the transfer performance on target tasks with large state-action spaces. Please refer to the
appendix 1 for more information on related work.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel transfer approach called TURRET (Transfer Using gRaph neuRal

Transfer learning (TL) has shown great potential to improve
Reinforcement Learning (RL) efficiency by leveraging prior
knowledge in new tasks. However, much of the existing TL
research focuses on transferring knowledge between tasks
that share the same state-action spaces. Further, transfer from
multiple source tasks that have different state-action spaces
is more challenging and needs to be solved urgently to improve the generalization and practicality of the method in
real-world scenarios. This paper proposes TURRET (Transfer
Using gRaph neuRal nETworks), to utilize the generalization
capabilities of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to facilitate
efficient and effective multi-source policy transfer learning in
the state-action mismatch setting. TURRET learns a semantic
representation by accounting for the intrinsic property of the
agent through GNNs, which leads to a unified state embedding space for all tasks. As a result, TURRET achieves more
efficient transfer with strong generalization ability between
different tasks and can be easily combined with existing Deep
RL algorithms. Experimental results show that TURRET significantly outperforms other TL methods on multiple continuous action control tasks, successfully transferring across
robots with different state-action spaces.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has obtained impressive successes in various domains such as video games
(Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016) and robotics control (Lillicrap et al. 2016). However, DRL still faces the
sample inefficiency problem, requiring considerable environmental interactions. Transfer Learning (TL) has emerged
as a promising technique to significantly reduce DRL sample complexity by leveraging prior knowledge (Taylor and
Stone 2009; Zhu, Lin, and Zhou 2020; Yang et al. 2020a,
2021). Policy transfer is one major class of RL transfer
methods, that focuses on leveraging pre-trained policies on
source tasks to accelerate learning in a target task (Rusu et al.
2016; Schmitt et al. 2018; Parisotto, Ba, and Salakhutdinov
2016; Yang et al. 2020a,b; Tao et al. 2021). However, these
methods assume source tasks share the same state-action
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

16352

https://github.com/tianpeiyang/TURRET code

