The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Temporally and Distributionally Robust Optimization for Cold-Start
Recommendation
Xinyu Lin1 , Wenjie Wang1 * , Jujia Zhao1 , Yongqi Li2 , Fuli Feng3 , Tat-Seng Chua1
1

National University of Singapore
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
{xylin1028, wenjiewang96, zhao.jujia.0913, liyongqi0, fulifeng93}@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

2009). In essence, CF methods learn the CF representations
of users and items from historical interactions and utilize
the learned CF representations to predict the users’ future
interactions. As content production capabilities continue to
advance, recommender systems face the challenge of accommodating an increasing influx of new items (a.k.a. coldstart items1 ). For example, 500 hours of video are uploaded
to YouTube every minute2 . Since the new items lack historical interactions and thereby have no CF representations,
traditional CF methods fail to effectively recommend these
cold items to users, disrupting the ecological balance of
recommender systems on the item side. In light of this, it
is essential to improve the cold-start item recommendation.
Prior literature has integrated item features, such as categories and thumbnails of micro-videos, for cold-start item
recommendation (Shalaby et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022).
These methods essentially learn a feature extractor that
encodes warm items (i.e., items in the training set) into
feature representations and utilizes feature representations to
fit the user-item interactions during training. For inference
for cold items, given the lack of CF counterparts, only
feature representations from the feature extractor are used to
estimate user preference. The key of this paradigm lies in devising training strategies to align feature representations and
user-item interactions, which mainly fall into two research
lines. 1) Robust training-based methods (Volkovs, Yu, and
Poutanen 2017; Du et al. 2020) use both feature representations and CF representations to predict interactions while
CF representations are randomly corrupted to strengthen
the alignment. 2) Auxiliary loss-based methods (Zhu et al.
2020) pay attention to minimizing the distance between the
feature representations and CF representations learned from
interactions via the auxiliary loss, e.g., contrastive loss (Wei
et al. 2021) and GAN loss (Chen et al. 2022).
Despite their success, existing methods suffer from a
critical issue: item features temporally shift from warm
to cold items (Wang et al. 2023b). As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the category features of newly-uploaded items are

Collaborative Filtering (CF) recommender models highly
depend on user-item interactions to learn CF representations,
thus falling short of recommending cold-start items. To
address this issue, prior studies mainly introduce item features (e.g., thumbnails) for cold-start item recommendation.
They learn a feature extractor on warm-start items to align
feature representations with interactions, and then leverage
the feature extractor to extract the feature representations of
cold-start items for interaction prediction. Unfortunately, the
features of cold-start items, especially the popular ones, tend
to diverge from those of warm-start ones due to temporal
feature shifts, preventing the feature extractor from accurately
learning feature representations of cold-start items.
To alleviate the impact of temporal feature shifts, we consider
using Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) to enhance the generation ability of the feature extractor. Nonetheless, existing DRO methods face an inconsistency issue:
the worse-case warm-start items emphasized during DRO
training might not align well with the cold-start item distribution. To capture the temporal feature shifts and combat
this inconsistency issue, we propose a novel temporal DRO
with new optimization objectives, namely, 1) to integrate a
worst-case factor to improve the worst-case performance, and
2) to devise a shifting factor to capture the shifting trend of
item features and enhance the optimization of the potentially
popular groups in cold-start items. Substantial experiments
on three real-world datasets validate the superiority of our
temporal DRO in enhancing the generalization ability of coldstart recommender models.

Introduction
Recommender systems are widely deployed to filter the
overloaded multimedia information on the web for meeting
users’ personalized information needs (He et al. 2017).
Technically speaking, Collaborative Filtering (CF) is the
most representative method (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China
(2022YFB3104701), the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62272437), and Huawei International Pte Ltd.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For simplicity, cold-start items and warm-start items are referred to as cold and warm items, respectively.
2
https://www.statista.com/.

8750

