The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalising Planning Environment Redesign
Alberto Pozanco1 * , Ramon Fraga Pereira2 * , and Daniel Borrajo1†
1
J.P. Morgan AI Research
University of Manchester, UK
{alberto.pozancolancho,daniel.borrajo}@jpmorgan.com
ramon.fragapereira@manchester.ac.uk
2

Abstract

2020), as well as agents’ intentions and environment assumptions (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2021).
Existing research on planning environment design defines
a metric that is able to assess how long (in terms of action progress, i.e., number of observations) an agent can
act in an environment without revealing its intended goal
or plan to the observer (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2021).
Optimising these metrics can force the agent’s behaviour
to be more transparent, ambiguous, or endow predictability (Chakraborti et al. 2019). Most approaches assume that
the environment can only be modified by removing actions.
So, they search over the space of actions’ removal to compute the best set of environment changes for a given metric (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2021). Since this space is usually intractable, existing approaches devise different heuristics and pruning techniques to perform search efficiently depending on the specific metric to be optimised. This results
in metric-dependent approaches that are not robust enough
to generalise across different environment redesign metrics.
In this paper, we propose a metric-agnostic approach to
redesign fully observable and deterministic planning environments. Our main contributions are twofold, as follows:
• Environment Redesign has mainly focused on promoting or impeding the recognition of goals/plans. We argue that the interested party could have other objectives that are not necessarily related to identifying the
agent’s goal/plan. For example, the interested party might
want to redesign the environment such that the agent is
constrained to follow plans that keep certain relationships with some states. This can be beneficial in many
planning settings, such as Anticipatory Planning (Burns
et al. 2012), Counterplanning (Pozanco et al. 2018), Risk
Avoidance and Management (Sohrabi et al. 2018), or
Planning for Opportunities (Borrajo and Veloso 2021).
Thus, we propose novel metrics that can be used to redesign environments for these other settings.
• To generate new environments that optimize our novel
metrics, as well as existing metrics in the literature, we
propose GER, a General Environment Redesign approach
that employs an anytime Breadth-First Search (BFS) algorithm. It exploits recent research on top-quality planning (Katz, Sohrabi, and Udrea 2020) to improve efficiency. While previous approaches have also used BFS
to explore the space of environment modifications, they

In Environment Design, one interested party seeks to affect
another agent’s decisions by applying changes to the environment. Most research on planning environment (re)design
assumes the interested party’s objective is to facilitate the
recognition of goals and plans, and search over the space
of environment modifications to find the minimal set of
changes that simplify those tasks and optimise a particular metric. This search space is usually intractable, so existing approaches devise metric-dependent pruning techniques
for performing search more efficiently. This results in approaches that are not able to generalise across different objectives and/or metrics. In this paper, we argue that the interested
party could have objectives and metrics that are not necessarily related to recognising agents’ goals or plans. Thus, to
generalise the task of Planning Environment Redesign, we develop a general environment redesign approach that is metricagnostic and leverages recent research on top-quality planning to efficiently redesign planning environments according
to any interested party’s objective and metric. Experiments
over a set of environment redesign benchmarks show that our
general approach outperforms existing approaches when using well-known metrics, such as facilitating the recognition of
goals, as well as its effectiveness when solving environment
redesign tasks that optimise a novel set of different metrics.

Introduction
In Environment Design (Zhang, Chen, and Parkes 2009), one
interested party (usually referred to as observer) seeks to
affect another agent’s decisions by applying a minimal set
of changes to the environment. Most research on planning
environment (re)design has focused on cooperative and adversarial settings where the observer aims to facilitate Goal
or Plan Recognition (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009), i.e., infer
the agent’s goal or plan as soon as possible. These tasks are
known as Goal Recognition Design (GRD) (Keren, Gal, and
Karpas 2014) and Plan Recognition Design (PRD) (Mirsky
et al. 2019), respectively, and they have been studied under different interested party objectives, metrics, and observer’s capabilities (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2016b; Kulkarni, Srivastava, and Kambhampati 2019; Shvo and McIlraith
* These authors contributed equally.
†

On leave from Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20230

