The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Ced-NeRF: A Compact and Efficient Method for Dynamic Neural Radiance Fields
Youtian Lin
Nanjing University
Harbin Institute of Technology
linyoutian.loyot@gmail.com

Abstract

D-NeRF Scenes

Rendering photorealistic dynamic scenes has been a focus of
recent research, with applications in virtual and augmented
reality. While the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has shown
remarkable rendering quality for static scenes, achieving realtime rendering of dynamic scenes remains challenging due
to expansive computation for the time dimension. The incorporation of explicit-based methods, specifically voxel grids,
has been proposed to accelerate the training and rendering of
neural radiance fields with hybrid representation. However,
employing a hybrid representation for dynamic scenes results
in overfitting due to fast convergence, which can result in artifacts (e.g., floaters, noisy geometric) on novel views. To address this, we propose a compact and efficient method for dynamic neural radiance fields, namely Ced-NeRF which only
requires a small number of additional parameters to construct
a hybrid representation of dynamic NeRF. Evaluation of dynamic scene datasets shows that our Ced-NeRF achieves fast
rendering speeds while maintaining high-quality rendering
results. Our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art
methods in terms of quality, training and rendering speed.

4 min / 34.2 dB
HyperNeRF Scenes

9 min / 24.4 dB

1

DyNeRF Scenes

21 min / 30.6 dB

Introduction
Figure 1: Our approach leverages a compact auxiliary network to accurately predict scene deformations, enabling the
grid-based neural radiance field to synthesize novel views
of dynamic scenes. Our model achieves impressive stateof-the-art performance, while also ensuring a rapid training speed. We demonstrate our method’s rendering results
on three datasets: D-NeRF (Pumarola et al. 2021), HyperNeRF (Park et al. 2021b), and DyNeRF (Li et al. 2022).
ArXiv version with supplementary materials is available at
https://github.com/Linyou/Ced-NeRF

Rendering photorealistic dynamic scenes presents a significant challenge, yet offers a broad range of applications, including virtual and augmented reality. Recently, there have
been significant advances in novel view synthesis using Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), leading to remarkable rendering
quality for static scenes (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2020; Barron et al. 2021; Neff et al. 2021).
There are numerous attempts to explore the feasibility of
NeRF rendering for dynamic scenes and devise alternative
ways of modeling the time dimension (Park et al. 2021a;
Pumarola et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021b). For
example, D-NeRF (Pumarola et al. 2021) uses a canonical
space to model the motion in the time dimension. However,
achieving real-time rendering of dynamic scenes remains an
elusive goal. This challenge stems not only from the inherent
slowness of the original NeRF but also from the increased
computational time required to model the time dimension of
dynamic view synthesis, resulting in slow training and rendering speeds.

Previous studies have demonstrated that incorporating
explicit-based methods, particularly using voxel grids to
model the local features of a scene, can significantly accelerate the training and rendering of NeRF (Sara Fridovich-Keil
and Alex Yu et al. 2022; Sun, Sun, and Chen 2022a; Müller
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022). These methods also referred to
as hybrid representations (Xie et al. 2022), combine both explicit and implicit representations, resulting in faster convergence and rendering speeds for NeRF. Therefore, it is reasonable to extend the use of hybrid representation to combine with the previous dynamic NeRF methods (Pumarola

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3504

