The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Long-Tailed Partial Label Learning by Head Classifier and
Tail Classifier Cooperation
Yuheng Jia1,2 , Xiaorui Peng1,2 , Ran Wang3,4 * , Min-Ling Zhang1,5 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Machine Learning and Applications,
School of Mathematical Science, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
5
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{yhjia, xiaorui, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn; wangran@szu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In partial label learning (PLL), each instance is associated
with a set of candidate labels, among which only one is correct. The traditional PLL almost all implicitly assume that the
distribution of the classes is balanced. However, in real-world
applications, the distribution of the classes is imbalanced or
long-tailed, leading to the long-tailed partial label learning
problem. The previous methods solve this problem mainly by
ameliorating the ability to learn in the tail classes, which will
sacrifice the performance of the head classes. While keeping
the performance of the head classes may degrade the performance of the tail classes. Therefore, in this paper, we construct two classifiers, i.e., a head classifier for keeping the
performance of dominant classes and a tail classifier for improving the performance of the tail classes. Then, we propose
a classifier weight estimation module to automatically estimate the shot belongingness (head class or tail class) of the
samples and allocate the weights for the head classifier and
tail classifier when making prediction. This cooperation improves the prediction ability for both the head classes and the
tail classes. The experiments on the benchmarks demonstrate
the proposed approach improves the accuracy of the SOTA
methods by a substantial margin. Code and data are available
at : https://github.com/pruirui/HTC-LTPLL.

(a) Sample of PLL

(b) Class distribution of “VOC”

Figure 1: (a) An image with three candidate labels
S={Persian, Chinchilla, Ragdoll}, where the ground truth
label is Ragdoll. (b) The class distribution of the real-world
PLL dataset PASCAL VOC is a long-tailed distribution.

2018), web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010), and face age
estimation (Panis and Lanitis 2014). The key to PLL is label
disambiguation, i.e., finding the correct label from the candidate label set. For instance, (Wang, Zhang, and Li 2022;
Jia, Jiang, and Wang 2023; Jia, Si, and Zhang 2023) used
the similarity of features for disambiguation i.e., if two samples are similar to each other in the features, they are likely
to share the same ground-truth label. (Lv et al. 2020; Jia,
Yang, and Dong 2023) perform disambiguation by dynamically adjusting the confidence of the candidate labels. PiCO
(Wang et al. 2022b) introduces contrastive learning (He et al.
2020) to keep prototypes for disambiguation.
Despite the promise, these PLL methods all explicitly or
implicitly assume that the training samples follow an approximate class-balanced distribution, i.e., each class has
a roughly similar numbers of training samples. However,
the class distribution collected from the real-world applications usually obeys a long-tailed distribution (Zhang et al.
2023; Kang et al. 2020; Menon et al. 2021) i.e., the leading classes have much more samples than the non-leading
classes. As shown in Figure 1(b), the class distribution of the
real-world PLL dataset PASCAL VOC (Hong et al. 2023)
follows a long-tailed distribution. Therefore, the long-tailed
partial label learning (LT-PLL) is a more practical setting.
The long-tailed class distribution makes the current PLL bi-

Introduction
Labeling ambiguity occurs in many real-world scenarios.
For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), a non-expert annotator usually cannot accurately judge whether it is a Persian
cat, a Chinchilla cat, or a Ragdoll cat. A common-used strategy is to treat all the possible labels as the candidate labels,
which leads to the partial label learning (PLL) problems
(Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011). Formally speaking, PLL is a
weakly supervised learning paradigm that allows samples to
be associated with a set of candidate labels, of which only
one is the ground truth label. PLL is more friendly to nonexpert annotators and can greatly reduce the cost of annotation, which has been applied to many applications, such
as automatic face annotation (Chen, Patel, and Chellappa
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12857

