The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Cross Sampling and Frequency-Division Reconstruction for Image
Compressed Sensing
Heping Song1 , Jingyao Gong1 , Hongying Meng2 , Yuping Lai3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, China
Electronic and Electrical Engineering Department, Brunel University London, United Kingdom
3
School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
songhp@ujs.edu.cn, gongjy@stmail.ujs.edu.cn, hongying.meng@brunel.ac.uk, laiyp@bupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep Compressed Sensing (DCS) has attracted considerable
interest due to its superior quality and speed compared to
traditional CS algorithms. However, current approaches employ simplistic convolutional downsampling to acquire measurements, making it difficult to retain high-level features of
the original signal for better image reconstruction. Furthermore, these approaches often overlook the presence of both
high- and low-frequency information within the network, despite their critical role in achieving high-quality reconstruction. To address these challenges, we propose a novel MultiCross Sampling and Frequency Division Network (MCFDNet) for image CS. The Dynamic Multi-Cross Sampling
(DMCS) module, a sampling network of MCFD-Net, incorporates pyramid cross convolution and dual-branch sampling
with multi-level pooling. Additionally, it introduces an attention mechanism between perception blocks to enhance adaptive learning effects. In the second deep reconstruction stage,
we design a Frequency Division Reconstruction Module
(FDRM). This module employs a discrete wavelet transform
to extract high- and low-frequency information from images.
It then applies multi-scale convolution and self-similarity attention compensation separately to both types of information
before merging the output reconstruction results. The MCFDNet integrates the DMCS and FDRM to construct an end-toend learning network. Extensive CS experiments conducted
on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that our MCFDNet outperforms state-of-the-art approaches, while also exhibiting superior noise robustness. The code is available at
github.com/songhp/MCFD-Net.

Figure 1: The work advances the state-of-the-art in image
CS by achieving an enhanced tradeoff between model complexity (as measured by the number of network parameters)
and performance (as indicated by the PSNR metric). Our
proposed methods, highlighted in red, attain this balance.
reconstruction capabilities. In the CS sampling process, assuming a signal x ∈ RN and the sensing matrix Φ ∈ RM ×N
with M
N being the sampling rate, M << N , the CS measurements undergo a linear mapping y = Φx. The CS theory
shows the signal x can be recovered from y by a sparsityinduced optimization problem

Introduction

min ∥Ψx∥0 s.t. y = Φx

The theory of Compressed Sensing (CS) (Candes, Romberg,
and Tao 2006) has experienced rapid development. CS enables the direct sampling of signals at sub-Nyquist-Shannon
rates while preserving the necessary information for accurate reconstruction. This theory finds extensive application in various imaging domains, including remote sensing
transmission (Pan et al. 2013; Ghahremani and Ghassemian
2014), medical imaging (Lustig, Donoho, and Pauly 2007;
Lustig et al. 2008; Yang et al. 2017; Szczykutowicz and
Chen 2010), single-pixel cameras (Duarte et al. 2008; Rousset et al. 2016), owing to its effective image compression and

where Ψx are the sparse coefficients with respect to domain
Ψ, and ∥ · ∥0 denotes the ℓ0 pseudo norm, i,e., the magnitude
of non-zero elements. This gives rise to the two fundamental
issues of CS: (1) how to design sampling matrix and (2) how
to recover the original signal x based on its measurements y.
Recently, deep compressive sensing (DCS) methods (Sun
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; You et al.
2021; Song, Chen, and Zhang 2021) have been developed to
solve these two issues of CS through an end-to-end learning manner, leveraging the robust learning and representation abilities of neural networks. Zheng et al. (2020) introduced RK-CCSNet, a method that employs sequential convolution modules (SCM) to compress image size by means
of filter compression, This approach effectively avoids block

x

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4909

(1)

