The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quality-Diversity Generative Sampling
for Learning with Synthetic Data
Allen Chang1 , Matthew C. Fontaine1 , Serena Booth2 , Maja J. Matarić1 , Stefanos Nikolaidis1
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
{changall, mfontain, mataric, nikolaid}@usc.edu, sbooth@mit.edu
2

Debiasing Color-Biased Shape Classifiers with QDGS

Abstract
Generative models can serve as surrogates for some real data
sources by creating synthetic training datasets, but in doing so they may transfer biases to downstream tasks. We focus on protecting quality and diversity when generating synthetic training datasets. We propose quality-diversity generative sampling (QDGS), a framework for sampling data uniformly across a user-defined measure space, despite the data
coming from a biased generator. QDGS is a model-agnostic
framework that uses prompt guidance to optimize a quality
objective across measures of diversity for synthetically generated data, without fine-tuning the generative model. Using
balanced synthetic datasets generated by QDGS, we first debias classifiers trained on color-biased shape datasets as a
proof-of-concept. By applying QDGS to facial data synthesis, we prompt for desired semantic concepts, such as skin
tone and age, to create an intersectional dataset with a combined blend of visual features. Leveraging this balanced data
for training classifiers improves fairness while maintaining
accuracy on facial recognition benchmarks. Code available
at: https://github.com/Cylumn/qd-generative-sampling.

1

0.85

+0.03

Accuracy

0.80
+0.16

0.75
0.70
0.65

+0.03

+0.16

+0.27

0.60
0.55
0.50

Real
Real + Quality-Diversity

0.98

0.95
0.9
0.85
Red-Triangle / Blue-Square Color Bias

0.8

Figure 1: Fine-tuning color-biased shape classifiers with balanced data generated from QDGS results in higher accuracy across minority shape-color combinations. Standard error bars across 5 trials are shaded in.

Introduction

methods (Balestriero, Bottou, and LeCun 2022). Thus, most
existing generative models suffer from multiple biases that
harm the creation of fair synthetic datasets. When creating
these datasets for training downstream models, it is helpful
to simultaneously consider multiple of these biases.
However, prior methods for sampling debiased synthetic
data tend to focus on removing a single bias at a time,
through single-factor diversity optimization (McDuff et al.
2019; Jain, Memon, and Togelius 2023). By increasing diversity along one dimension at a time, sampling methods
miss the opportunity to generate intersectional datasets.
We leverage the insight that a generative model’s high
dimensionality latent space can often combine underrepresented semantic concepts to create synthetic datasets with a
rich blend of intersectional data. However, the same latent
spaces typically collapse on modes that disproportionately
represent the dominant classes or data attributes. To address
these biases, we propose exploring the latent space to identify and generate underrepresented attribute combinations.
We call this approach quality-diversity generative sampling
(QDGS), a framework using quality-diversity optimization
with prompt guidance for producing synthetic datasets with
a balanced spread of desired features.

Generative models can produce large amounts of synthetic
data at low cost, making them viable surrogates for some
real data sources in model training (Azizi et al. 2023; Tian
et al. 2023). However, generative models suffer from representational biases (Cho, Zala, and Bansal 2023; Friedrich
et al. 2023; Bau et al. 2019), endangering a transfer of bias to
downstream tasks (Jain et al. 2022). We propose a sampling
framework that protects quality and diversity when generating synthetic datasets, and we show that these datasets can
suppress performance decline on minority groups (Fig. 1).
Balancing synthetic datasets is not a trivial task, since
generative models harbor biases that relate to different semantic concepts. Some biases result from training deep generative models to replicate Internet data, where there are
common issues of sampling selection bias. Internet data also
contain social biases that result from disparities in language
use among social groups, eliciting stereotypes and prejudices (Otterbacher 2018). Biases are intensified by selecting training approaches that amplify class and feature imbalances, such as some data augmentation and regularization
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19805

