The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When CEGAR Meets Regression: A Love Story in Optimal Classical Planning
Martı́n Pozo1 , Álvaro Torralba2 , Carlos Linares López1
1

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
2
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
marcosmartin.pozo@alumnos.uc3m.es, alto@cs.aau.dk, carlos.linares@uc3m.es

at each iteration the abstraction is refined based on multiple plans instead of only one. In this paper, we focus on the
notion of flaw, i.e., identifying the reason why the abstract
plan is not an actual plan. In planning, this is always done by
executing the abstract plan on the original task, until some
step in the plan cannot be executed or results in an unexpected effect. While this indeed is a valid interpolation, it is
not necessarily the only one, i.e., there could also be other
reasons why the same abstract plan is not an actual plan.
We introduce regression flaws. Instead of executing the
abstract plan on the initial state, we use regression to identify sets of states that are solved by the suffix of the abstract
plan. This results in a different type of flaw, which focuses
on why the plan suffix fails to solve the task instead of why
the plan prefix fails. Refining the abstraction based on regression flaws maintains all important properties of the overall CEGAR process, such as converging to an optimal plan.
Backward interpolation has also been successfully used in
the context of model-checking (Hajdu and Micskei 2020).
We show that the idea of backward refinements makes even
more sense in the context of planning, where abstractions are
used to estimate goal distance from any reachable state. In
our experiments we notice abstractions obtained with backward refinements are less focused on the initial state, so they
typically converge slower towards the optimal plan and get
lower values when evaluating the initial state. However, the
resulting heuristic is overall more informative, significantly
improving the quality of the heuristic to guide the search.
In fact, replacing the standard forward refinements with
backward ones leads to a significant improvement in the performance in most domains not only when deriving a single
abstraction heuristic, but also when combining multiple abstractions via cost partitioning on the Scorpion planner.
We also experiment with strategies that combine both forward and backward refinements. The results show that they
inherit the strengths of both methods: generating heuristics
that are as informative as with backward refinement and, at
the same time, obtaining heuristics even more informative
for the initial state than the original forward refinements.

Abstract
Counterexample-Guided Abstraction Refinement (CEGAR)
is a prominent technique to generate Cartesian abstractions
for guiding search in cost-optimal planning. The core idea is
to iteratively refine the abstraction, finding a flaw of the current optimal abstract plan. All existing approaches find these
flaws by executing the abstract plan using progression in the
original state space.
Instead, we propose to do backward refinements by using regression from the goals. This results in a new type of flaw,
that can identify invalid plan suffixes. The resulting abstractions are less focused on the initial state, but more informative on average, significantly improving the performance of
current CEGAR-based techniques. Furthermore, they can be
combined with forward refinements in several bidirectional
strategies that provide the benefits of both methods.

Introduction
Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement (CEGAR) is
a method that originated in model-checking (Clarke et al.
2000), where it is widely used to prove that error states
are unreachable. The key idea is to iteratively refine an abstraction by finding an optimal abstract plan, understanding
why it is not an actual plan by using interpolation to find a
logic formula that explains the difference, and changing the
abstraction to reflect the difference. The idea was brought
to planning by Seipp and Helmert (2013b; 2018), using
CEGAR to generate Cartesian abstractions that result in informative admissible heuristics for A∗ search (Hart, Nilsson,
and Raphael 1968). Since then, CEGAR has become one of
the dominant approaches for generating all kinds of abstraction heuristics (Rovner, Sievers, and Helmert 2019; Kreft
et al. 2023). This is best exemplified by the state-of-the-art
Scorpion planner (Seipp 2018), which uses this method to
compute a diverse set of Cartesian abstraction heuristics and
combine them additively (Seipp and Helmert 2013a, 2014)
using saturated cost-partitioning (Katz and Domshlak 2010;
Seipp, Keller, and Helmert 2017, 2020).
But the question of how to guide the refinement process
of CEGAR to generate informative abstractions has comparatively received much less attention. One possibility is
to perform batch refinement (Speck and Seipp 2022), where

Background
We consider tasks in SAS+ representation (Bäckström and
Nebel 1995), where states are described in terms of a set of
variables V , and each v ∈ V has a finite domain, Dv . A

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20238

