The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Translate Meanings, Not Just Words:
IdiomKB’s Role in Optimizing Idiomatic Translation with Language Models
Shuang Li1 , Jiangjie Chen1 * , Siyu Yuan2 , Xinyi Wu1 , Hao Yang3 , Shimin Tao3 , Yanghua Xiao1,4 *
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Huawei Translation Services Center
4
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
{lishuang18, jjchen19, wuxinyi20, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn, syyuan21@m.fudan.edu.cn,
{yanghao30, taoshimin}@huawei.com
Abstract

Idiom KB
Idiom
走马观花

To translate well, machine translation (MT) systems and
general-purposed language models (LMs) need a deep understanding of both source and target languages and cultures. Therefore, idioms, with their non-compositional nature, pose particular challenges for Transformer-based systems, as literal translations often miss the intended meaning. Traditional methods, which replace idioms using existing knowledge bases (KBs), often lack scale and contextawareness. Addressing these challenges, our approach prioritizes context-awareness and scalability, allowing for offline
storage of idioms in a manageable KB size. This ensures efficient serving with smaller models and provides a more comprehensive understanding of idiomatic expressions. We introduce a multilingual idiom KB (I DIOM KB) developed using
large LMs to address this. This KB facilitates better translation by smaller models, such as BLOOMZ (7.1B), Alpaca
(7B), and InstructGPT (6.7B), by retrieving idioms’ figurative meanings. We present a novel, GPT-4-powered metric
for human-aligned evaluation, demonstrating that I DIOM KB
considerably boosts model performance. Human evaluations
further validate our KB’s quality.

Literal meaning
viewing flowers
while riding a horse
Figurative meaning
have a superficial
understanding of
something

Translate into English: 他对历
史兴趣不大，只是"走马观花"地了解一些
基本知识。

It's an
idiom.

Translation: He has no interest
in history, only taking a walk Incorrect
around some flowers to learn
some basic information.
Translation with IdiomKB: He has
no real interest in history,
Great!
just superficial understanding
of some basics.

Figure 1: An example of idiomatic translation from Chinese to English. Current machine translation systems incorrectly translate idiomatic texts based on the literal meaning
of the idiom, resulting in unsatisfactory translation. Incorporating figurative meaning from an idiom knowledge base
(I DIOM KB) improves the translation performance.

machine translation systems do not give special consideration to idioms, resulting in low-quality translations (Salton,
Ross, and Kelleher 2014a; Manojlovic, Dajak, and Bakaric
2017). Transformer-based MT models (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Dankers, Lucas, and Titov 2022) usually treat idioms as
compositional expressions, leading to literal translation errors. As shown in Figure 1, they usually translate idiomatic
texts based on the literal meaning, failing to convey the intended information. One way to address the idiomatic translation problem would be scaling up the model size and
training data, i.e., large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang
et al. 2022; OpenAI 2022), where various strong abilities emerge (Wei et al. 2022a). However, deploying models of such sizes for offline scenarios or real-time responses
is costly and demanding. Therefore, the research question
arises: Can we enable smaller or specialized models to do
idiomatic translation better?
To tackle this challenge, one intuitive solution is to utilize
the figurative meanings of the idioms, which are equivalent
to semantically literal expressions, as support for translation. Recent research in linguistics and education has leveraged this insight to develop idiom knowledge bases (KBs),
which have been employed to evaluate (Cucchiarini, Hubers, and Strik 2020; Wang 2021) and assist (Jiang et al.

Introduction
Idioms are non-compositional expressions whose figurative meanings deviate from the meanings of the constituent
words (literal meanings) (Bobrow and Bell 1973; Swinney
and Cutler 1979; Salton, Ross, and Kelleher 2018; Fadaee,
Bisazza, and Monz 2018). For example, the figurative meaning of the idiom “bite the bullet” is “to endure a painful situation”, deviating from the literal meanings of the constituent
words “bite” and “bullet”. Given the diverse array of idioms
across various cultures and languages, appropriately translating texts that contain idioms (idiomatic texts) has become
an important research problem (Strakšienė et al. 2009; Tzou,
Vaid, and Chen 2017; Shao et al. 2018; Qiang et al. 2023).
However, due to the non-compositionality of idioms, idiomatic translation poses a significant challenge for current
machine translation (MT) systems and general-purposed
language models (LMs). Traditional phrase-based statistical
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18554

