The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FlexKBQA: A Flexible LLM-Powered Framework for Few-Shot Knowledge Base
Question Answering
Zhenyu Li1 * , Sunqi Fan1 * , Yu Gu2 , Xiuxing Li3, 4† , Zhichao Duan1 ,
Bowen Dong1 , Ning Liu5 , Jianyong Wang1†
1
Tsinghua University
The Ohio State University
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
5
Shandong University
2

Abstract
Knowledge base question answering (KBQA) is a critical yet
challenging task due to the vast number of entities within
knowledge bases and the diversity of natural language questions posed by users. Unfortunately, the performance of most
KBQA models tends to decline significantly in real-world
scenarios where high-quality annotated data is insufficient.
To mitigate the burden associated with manual annotation, we
introduce FlexKBQA by utilizing Large Language Models
(LLMs) as program translators for addressing the challenges
inherent in the few-shot KBQA task. Specifically, FlexKBQA
leverages automated algorithms to sample diverse programs,
such as SPARQL queries, from the knowledge base, which
are subsequently converted into natural language questions
via LLMs. This synthetic dataset facilitates training a specialized lightweight model for the KB. Additionally, to reduce the
barriers of distribution shift between synthetic data and real
user questions, FlexKBQA introduces an execution-guided
self-training method to iterative leverage unlabeled user questions. Furthermore, we explore harnessing the inherent reasoning capability of LLMs to enhance the entire framework.
Consequently, FlexKBQA delivers substantial flexibility, encompassing data annotation, deployment, and being domain
agnostic. Through extensive experiments on GrailQA, WebQSP, and KQA Pro, we observe that under the few-shot even
more challenging zero-shot scenarios, FlexKBQA achieves
impressive results with a few annotations, surpassing all previous baselines and even approaching the performance of supervised models, achieving a remarkable 93% performance
relative to the fully-supervised models. We posit that FlexKBQA represents a significant advancement towards exploring
better integration of large and lightweight models. Code is
available at https://github.com/leezythu/FlexKBQA.

Figure 1: An analytical experiment on 500 random samples
of GrailQA dev set (oracle entity linking). FlexKBQA’s performance exhibits a consistently upward trend with the increasing synthetic data size, surpassing all in-context learning models with limited window length. Since our synthetic
data are generated based on 25-shot real data, we also depict the performance of our underlying model (RnG-KBQA)
trained by 25-shot real data as a baseline.

growing size and complexity of knowledge bases (KBs), effective KBQA systems are becoming increasingly important. Many current KBQA systems depend on supervised
training using large sets of manually annotated data. This
approach brings about significant labor challenges for two
main reasons: (1) The substantial size and comprehensive
scope of the KB, coupled with its ever-evolving content, lead
to a vast sample space (Berant et al. 2013; Gu et al. 2021).
This complicates the process of collecting a representative
and exhaustive set of training data. (2) The heterogeneity in
KB schema and design protocols, combined with differences
in the query languages, such as SPARQL (Su et al. 2016), Sexpression (Gu et al. 2021), and KoPL (Cao et al. 2022a),
requires tailored training processes for each KB. This intensifies the labor involved in developing and adapting models
for each distinct KB. Considering these complexities, there

Introduction
Knowledge base question answering (KBQA) plays a crucial role in leveraging the substantial knowledge stored in
knowledge bases and making it accessible to users (Berant
et al. 2013; Yih et al. 2016; Gu et al. 2022). With the ever* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18608

