The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Minibatch Stochastic Three Points Method
for Unconstrained Smooth Minimization
Soumia Boucherouite1 , Grigory Malinovsky2 , Peter Richtárik2 , El Houcine Bergou1
1

College of Computing, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University, Ben Guerir, Morocco
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{soumia.boucherouite,elhoucine.bergou}@um6p.ma, {grigorii.malinovskii,peter.richtarik}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

We assume that we work in the Zero Order (ZO) optimization settings, i.e., we do not have access to the derivatives
of any function fi and only functions evaluations are available. Such situation arises in many fields and may occur due
to multiple reasons, for example: (i) In many optimization
problems, there is only availability of the objective function as the output of a black-box or simulation oracle and
hence the absence of derivative information (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente 2009). (ii) There are situations where the
objective function evaluation is done through an old software. Modification of this software to provide first-order
derivatives may be too costly or impossible (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente 2009; Nesterov and Spokoiny 2017). (iii)
In some situations, derivatives of the objective function are
not available but can be extracted. This necessitates access
and a good understanding of the simulation code. This process is considered invasive to the simulation code and also
very costly in terms of coding efforts (Kramer, Ciaurri, and
Koziel 2011). (iv) In the case of using a commercial software
that evaluates only the functions, it is impossible to compute the derivatives because the simulation code is inaccessible (Kramer, Ciaurri, and Koziel 2011; Conn, Scheinberg,
and Vicente 2009). (v) In the case of having access only to
noisy function evaluations, computing derivatives is useless
because they are unreliable (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente
2009). ZO optimization has been used in many ML applications, for instance: hyperparameters tuning of ML models
(Turner et al. 2021; P.Koch et al. 2018), multi-agent target
tracking (Al-Abri et al. 2021), policy optimization in reinforcement learning algorithms (Malik et al. 2020; Li et al.
2022), maximization of the area under the curve (AUC)
(Ghanbari and Scheinberg 2017), automatic speech recognition (Watanabe and Roux 2014), and the generation of
black-box adversarial attacks on deep neural network classifiers (Ughi, Abrol, and Tanner 2021). Google Vizier system
(Golovin et al. 2017) which is the de facto parameter tuning
engine at Google is also based on ZO optimization.

We present a new zero-order optimization method called
Minibatch Stochastic Three Points (MiSTP), specifically designed to solve stochastic unconstrained minimization problems when only an approximate evaluation of the objective
function is possible. MiSTP is an extension of the Stochastic Three Point Method (STP). The key innovation of MiSTP
is that it selects the next point solely based on the objective
function approximation, without relying on its exact evaluation. At each iteration, MiSTP generates a random search
direction and compares the approximations of the objective
function at the current point, the randomly generated direction and its opposite. The best of these three points is chosen
as the next iterate. We analyze the worst-case complexity of
MiSTP in the convex and non-convex cases and demonstrate
that it matches the most accurate complexity bounds known
in the literature for zero-order optimization methods. We perform extensive numerical evaluations to assess the computational efficiency of MiSTP and compare its performance to
other state-of-the-art methods by testing it on several machine
learning tasks. The results show that MiSTP outperforms or
has comparable performance against state-of-the-art methods
indicating its potential for a wide range of practical applications.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider the following unconstrained finitesum optimization problem:
def 1

min f (x) =

x∈Rd

n
X

n i=1

fi (x)

(1)

where each fi : Rd → R is a smooth objective function. Such kind of problems arises in a large body of machine learning (ML) applications including logistic regression (Conroy and Sajda 2012), ridge regression (Shen et al.
2013), least squares problems (Suykens and Vandewalle
1999), and deep neural networks training. The formulation
(1) can express the distributed optimization problem across
n agents, where each function fi represents the objective
function of agent i, or the optimization problem where each
fi is the objective function associated with the data point i.

One way to solve problem (1) is to approximate the gradient using a gradient estimation technique based only on
function values, and then apply a first-order optimization
method. Nesterov and Spokoiny (2017) extended the Gradient Descent (GD) algorithm to the ZO setting and proposed
RGF (also called ZO-GD) in which the full gradient is replaced by a two-point random gradient estimation. Ghadimi

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20344

