The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causality-Inspired Invariant Representation Learning for Text-Based
Person Retrieval
Yu Liu1,2 , Guihe Qin1,2 , Haipeng Chen1,2 * , Zhiyong Cheng3 , Xun Yang4
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), JiNan, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, HeFei, China
yul20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {qingh, chenhp}@jlu.edu.cn, jason.zy.cheng@gmail.com, xyang21@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-based Person Retrieval (TPR) aims to retrieve relevant
images of specific pedestrians based on the given textual
query. The mainstream approaches primarily leverage pretrained deep neural networks to learn the mapping of visual
and textual modalities into a common latent space for crossmodality matching. Despite their remarkable achievements,
existing efforts mainly focus on learning the statistical crossmodality correlation found in training data, other than the intrinsic causal correlation. As a result, they often struggle to
retrieve accurately in the face of environmental changes such
as illumination, pose, and occlusion, or when encountering
images with similar attributes. In this regard, we pioneer the
observation of TPR from a causal view. Specifically, we assume that each image is composed of a mixture of causal
factors (which are semantically consistent with text descriptions) and non-causal factors (retrieval-irrelevant, e.g., background), and only the former can lead to reliable retrieval
judgments. Our goal is to extract text-critical robust visual
representation (i.e., causal factors) and establish domain invariant cross-modality correlations for accurate and reliable
retrieval. However, causal/non-causal factors are unobserved,
so we emphasize that ideal causal factors that can simulate
causal scenes should satisfy two basic principles: 1) Independence: being independent of non-causal factors, and 2)
Sufficiency: being causally sufficient for TPR across different environments. Building on that, we propose an Invariant
Representation Learning method for TPR (IRLT), that enforces the visual representations to satisfy the two aforementioned critical properties. Extensive experiments on three
datasets clearly demonstrate the advantages of IRLT over
leading baselines in terms of accuracy and generalization.

Figure 1: A toy example of the TPR task on the RSTPReid dataset. Matched/Mismatched images are marked by
green/red rectangles. “C” denotes the causal cues.

task is important but also challenging as it requires accurately modeling of the visual-linguistic alignments.
Towards this end, many TPR models have emerged (Zhu
et al. 2021; Suo et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Jiang and
Ye 2023). They usually employ the identical structural design of “image/text backbone + feature embedding”. This
design involves first extracting image/text features using
the image/text backbone, and then using feature embedding
(method-specific) to embed the extracted image and text features into a joint space that enables cross-modal alignment.
Most recent methods usually utilize unimodal pre-trained
networks (e.g., ResNet (He et al. 2016) and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), BERT (Devlin et al. 2018)) to initialize the
image/text backbone. In addition, recent studies (Yan et al.
2022; Jiang and Ye 2023) show that Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-training (CLIP) model, as a representative work
in visual-language pre-training (VLP), has successfully been
adopted for the TPR task. These methods leverage the abundant multi-modal correspondence information provided by
CLIP, resulting in superior performance compared to unimodal pre-training methods. In summary, recent achievements of TPR should be mainly attributed to the strong ability of pre-trained deep networks in representation learning.
Despite the remarkable achievement in retrieval accuracy,
the typical learning objective of recent efforts usually relies

Introduction
Text-based Person Retrieval (TPR) (Li et al. 2017) aims to
retrieve images of a target person with high semantic relevance to a given linguistic description from a gallery of images. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in
TPR (Ding et al. 2021; Suo et al. 2022; Jiang and Ye 2023)
since the textual query can provide more natural and comprehensive descriptions of pedestrians in practical applications such as crime search and missing person search. This
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14052

