The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CF-NeRF: Camera Parameter Free Neural Radiance Fields with Incremental
Learning
Qingsong Yan1 , Qiang Wang2,* , Kaiyong Zhao3 , Jie Chen4 , Bo Li5 , Xiaowen Chu6,5,* , Fei Deng1,7
1

Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
3
XGRIDS, Shenzhen, China, 4 Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
6
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),Guangzhou, China
7
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
yanqs whu@whu.edu.cn, qiang.wang@hit.edu.cn, kyzhao@xgrids.com, chenjie@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
bli@cse.ust.hk, xwchu@ust.hk, fdeng@sgg.whu.edu.cn
Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields have demonstrated impressive performance in novel view synthesis. However, NeRF and most
of its variants still rely on traditional complex pipelines to
provide extrinsic and intrinsic camera parameters, such as
COLMAP. Recent works, like NeRFmm, BARF, and L2GNeRF, directly treat camera parameters as learnable and estimate them through differential volume rendering. However,
these methods work for forward-looking scenes with slight
motions and fail to tackle the rotation scenario in practice. To
overcome this limitation, we propose a novel camera parameter free neural radiance field (CF-NeRF), which incrementally reconstructs 3D representations and recovers the camera parameters inspired by incremental structure from motion. Given a sequence of images, CF-NeRF estimates camera
parameters of images one by one and reconstructs the scene
through initialization, implicit localization, and implicit optimization. To evaluate our method, we use a challenging realworld dataset, NeRFBuster, which provides 12 scenes under
complex trajectories. Results demonstrate that CF-NeRF is
robust to rotation and achieves state-of-the-art results without
providing prior information and constraints.

Introduction

(a) NeRFmm

(b) SiRENmm

(c) BARF

(d) GARF

(e) L2G-NeRF

(f) CF-NeRF

Figure 1: We select a sequence from NeRFBuster (Warburg
et al. 2023) and use novel views synthesis to compare the
quality of camera parameters from NeRFmm (Wang et al.
2021b), SiRENmm (Guo and Sherwood 2021), BARF (Lin
et al. 2021), GARF (Chng et al. 2022), L2G-NeRF (Chen
et al. 2023) and our method CF-NeRF.

3D reconstruction is a hot topic in computer vision that aims
to recover 3D geometry from RGB images. However, traditional methods contain lots of complex procedures, such
as feature extraction and matching (Lowe 2004; Yi et al.
2016), sparse reconstruction (Agarwal et al. 2011; Wu 2013;
Schonberger and Frahm 2016; Moulon et al. 2016), and
dense reconstruction (Yao et al. 2018; Mi, Di, and Xu 2022;
Yan et al. 2023). Consequently, traditional methods are not
a differential end-to-end reconstruction pipeline and require
high-quality results from each sub-module to achieve accurate results. When the quality of results is poor, it is challenging to identify which module is causing the problem.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021a; Müller et al. 2022) have demonstrated a novel way to render highly realistic novel views

with impressive quality. Without recovering 3D geometry,
NeRF relies on multi-layer perception (MLP) to predict
color and sigma for each point in the scene and samples
several points along a ray to render a pixel through differential volume rendering. Unlike traditional 3D reconstruction, NeRF simplifies the reconstruction into one step and
implicitly represents the 3D scene. Benefiting from the excellent ability of NeRF, it has been further extended to dynamic scenes (Pumarola et al. 2021), large-scale (Turki, Ramanan, and Satyanarayanan 2022), and even surface (Wang
et al. 2021a) and material reconstruction (Boss et al. 2021a).

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6440

