The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

What Do Hebbian Learners Learn?
Reduction Axioms for Iterated Hebbian Learning
Caleb Schultz Kisby1 , Saúl A. Blanco1 , Lawrence S. Moss2
1

Department of Computer Science, Indiana University
2
Department of Mathematics, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408, USA
{cckisby, sblancor, lmoss}@indiana.edu

Abstract
This paper is a contribution to neural network semantics, a
foundational framework for neuro-symbolic AI. The key insight of this theory is that logical operators can be mapped to
operators on neural network states. In this paper, we do this
for a neural network learning operator. We map a dynamic
operator [φ] to iterated Hebbian learning, a simple learning
policy that updates a neural network by repeatedly applying
Hebb’s learning rule until the net reaches a fixed-point. Our
main result is that we can “translate away” [φ]-formulas via
reduction axioms. This means that completeness for the logic
of iterated Hebbian learning follows from completeness of the
base logic. These reduction axioms also provide (1) a humaninterpretable description of iterated Hebbian learning as a kind
of plausibility upgrade, and (2) an approach to building neural
networks with guarantees on what they can learn.

Introduction
The two dominant paradigms of AI, connectionist neural
networks and symbolic systems, have long seemed irreconcilable. Symbolic systems are well-suited for giving explicit
inferences in a human-interpretable language, but are brittle and fail to adapt to new situations. On the other hand,
neural networks are flexible and excel at learning from unstructured data, but are considered black-boxes due to how
difficult it is to interpret their reasoning. In response to this
dichotomy, the field of neuro-symbolic AI has emerged —
a community-wide effort to integrate neural and symbolic
systems, while retaining the advantages of both. Despite the
many different proposals for neuro-symbolic AI (too many to
list! See (Bader and Hitzler 2005; Besold et al. 2017; Sarker
et al. 2022)), there is little agreement on what the interface
between the two ought to be. There is a clear need for a unifying theory that can explain the relationship between neural
networks and symbolic systems (Harmelen 2022).
In fact, there is an up-and-coming foundational theory for
neuro-symbolic systems, which we call neural network semantics. Its key insight is that neural networks can be taken
as models for a formal logic. Moreover, logical operators can
be mapped to operators on neural network states. Alternatively, we can semantically encode classical model operators
into neural operators (and vice-versa).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14894

The central questions this theory aims to answer are:
Soundness. What axioms are sound for neural network operators? Can neural operators be mapped to classical ones in
a sound way? Note that checking soundness is equivalent
to formally verifying properties of nets.
Completeness. What are the complete axioms for neural
network operators? This is equivalent to model building:
Can we build a neural network that obeys a set of logical constraints Γ? Can we build a neural network from a
classical model?
We refer the reader to the landmark survey (Odense and
d’Avila Garcez 2022), which shows that this framework encompasses a wide class of neuro-symbolic systems. We will
discuss other work that we consider part of the core theory in
the next section.
The standard example is the forward propagation operator
Prop over a net N . Active neurons in a state S successively
activate new neurons until eventually the state of the net
stabilizes — Prop(S) returns the state at the fixed point. A
classic result from (Leitgeb 2001) is this: Say conditionals
φ ⇒ ψ are interpreted as
N |= φ ⇒ ψ iff Prop([[φ]]) ⊇ [[ψ]]
i.e., ψ is activated by input φ; or “the net classifies φ as ψ”.
Then, in a binary feed-forward net, Prop is completely axiomatized by the loop-cumulative conditional laws of (Kraus,
Lehmann, and Magidor 1990). The result is robust, and can
be extended to different choices of conditional axioms and
neural network architectures (Leitgeb 2003). The general
takeaway is that forward propagation corresponds to a nonmonotonic conditional.
A central challenge for this theory is to do the same for
neural network learning operators. Our previous work (Kisby,
Blanco, and Moss 2022) considers a simple learning policy
— naı̈ve Hebbian update (“neurons that fire together wire
together”) — on a binary, feed-forward net. Although this
work offers sound axioms for Hebbian learning, the question
of completeness is left open.
Our Contribution. In this paper we tackle the completeness of Hebbian learning. We map a dynamic operator [φ]
instead to iterated Hebbian update Hebb∗ , i.e., “update the
net by repeatedly applying Hebb’s learning rule until a fixedpoint.” Our main result is that we can “translate away” [φ]formulas by reducing them to formulas that reason only about

