The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Modal Latent Space Learning for Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in
Language Models
Liqi He1,† , Zuchao Li1,† * , Xiantao Cai1 , Ping Wang2,3
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
430072, China
2
Center for the Studies of Information Resources, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
3
School of Information Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
heliqi@whu.edu.cn, zcli-charlie@whu.edu.cn, caixiantao@whu.edu.cn, wangping@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
This behavior
will affect the
growth of the
lawn, and the child
should go to the
playground to
play football.

Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning has exhibited impressive
performance in language models for solving complex tasks
and answering questions. However, many real-world questions require multi-modal information, such as text and images. Previous research on multi-modal CoT has primarily
focused on extracting fixed image features from off-the-shelf
vision models and then fusing them with text using attention
mechanisms. This approach has limitations because these vision models were not designed for complex reasoning tasks
and do not align well with language thoughts. To overcome
this limitation, we introduce a novel approach for multimodal CoT reasoning that utilizes latent space learning via
diffusion processes to generate effective image features that
align with language thoughts. Our method fuses image features and text representations at a deep level and improves the
complex reasoning ability of multi-modal CoT. We demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method on multi-modal
ScienceQA and machine translation benchmarks, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on ScienceQA. Overall, our approach offers a more robust and effective solution for multimodal reasoning in language models, enhancing their ability
to tackle complex real-world problems.

Figure 1: Language Thought

lawn (visual modality) , we think of the negative effects of
trampling the grass on the park’s ecological environment and
prepare to told the child to go to the football field (language
thought) . These ideas come from our deep understanding
and reasoning of linguistic and visual information, which
can be called language thought.
In recent years, chain-of-thought (CoT), which involves
a series of intermediate reasoning steps (also known as rationale), has significantly enhanced the complex reasoning
ability of large language models by providing them with access to a portion of language thought (Wei et al. 2022).
Training smaller language-only models with less than 100
billion parameters for CoT reasoning remains a significant
challenge due to hallucination and tend to produce illogical rationales. To address these problems more effectively,
it is crucial to enable large language models to develop a
deeper understanding of multi-modal information and generate more effective language thought. One solution that
has been proposed to help integrate information across visual and linguistic modalities is Multi-Modal CoT (MMCoT) (Zhang et al. 2023b). MM-CoT extracts fixed image
features and text representations and fused them to obtain
multi-modal features. MM-CoT adopts a two-stage framework that includes rationale generation and answer inference, as shown in Figure 2 (c). This approach has been
shown to outperform generating rationale and answer together on question answering tasks (Zhang et al. 2023b).
However, existing multi-modal CoT models rely on fixed
image features extracted by pre-trained vision extraction

Introduction
In our daily lives, we are constantly bombarded with information from various sources, such as text, images, and more.
To make sense of this complex world, we need to be able to
acquire and integrate multi-modal information effectively.
For example, as shown in Figure 1, when we see the slogan ”Please keep off the grass” (language modality) on the
lawn of the park and a child is playing football on the same
* Corresponding author. † Equal contribution. This work was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 62306216), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province
of China (No. 2023AFB816), the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities (No. 2042023kf0133), National Natural
Science Foundation of China [No. 72074171] [No. 72374161].
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18180

