The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Unified Masked Autoencoder with Patchified Skeletons for Motion Synthesis
Esteve Valls Mascaró 1 , Hyemin Ahn 2 , Dongheui Lee1,3 ,
1
Technische Universität Wien (TUWien)
Ulsan National Institute of Science & Technology (UNIST)
3
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
{esteve.valls.mascaro, dongheui.lee}@tuwien.ac.at, hyemin.ahn@unist.ac.kr
2

Abstract
The synthesis of human motion has traditionally been addressed through task-dependent models that focus on specific challenges, such as predicting future motions or filling in intermediate poses conditioned on known key-poses.
In this paper, we present a novel task-independent model
called UNIMASK-M, which can effectively address these
challenges using a unified architecture. Our model obtains
comparable or better performance than the state-of-the-art
in each field. Inspired by Vision Transformers (ViTs), our
UNIMASK-M model decomposes a human pose into body
parts to leverage the spatio-temporal relationships existing
in human motion. Moreover, we reformulate various poseconditioned motion synthesis tasks as a reconstruction problem with different masking patterns given as input. By explicitly informing our model about the masked joints, our
UNIMASK-M becomes more robust to occlusions. Experimental results show that our model successfully forecasts
human motion on the Human3.6M dataset while achieving state-of-the-art results in motion inbetweening on the
LaFAN1 dataset for long transition periods.

Figure 1: Unified architecture for different human motion
synthesis tasks. Green and purple skeletons denote a known
skeleton joint, while light red and green represents our
model prediction over a masked joint.

Kim et al. 2022; Oreshkin et al. 2022) usually leverage bidirectional temporal relationships since both past and future
poses are key for filling the middle poses. However, these
works consider the full-body skeleton as a unique condition,
constraining the generation process. In our work, we additionally consider the motion completion task, where only
independent body parts constrain the motion synthesis in
the future, which enhances the freedom of the generation.
Finally, motion reconstruction is the task of recovering a
given motion subjected to occlusions, as might occur in
real-world applications (Bütepage, Kjellström, and Kragic
2018). Dissecting the motion synthesis field in all these different tasks diminishes the versatility of the models. To overcome this challenge, generative approaches (Cai et al. 2021;
Tevet et al. 2022) have been proposed recently to tackle motion synthesis with a unified stochastic model, but require
high computational resources and are unsuitable for realtime prediction (Tevet et al. 2022) or underperform compared to deterministic models (Cai et al. 2021), as also indicated by Ahn, Valls Mascaro, and Lee (2023).
In this work, we consider both efficiency and versatility as essential characteristics of a model, which should
achieve high performance across multiple tasks. Inspired by

Introduction
Synthesizing plausible human motions is a long-standing
challenge in the computer vision and graphics community.
Due to the high complexity of the field, researchers often
focus on addressing only a specific subset of human motion
synthesis, as the different tasks involve varied input-output
patterns for the model. Unlike previous works, we propose
a unified architecture for solving various motion synthesis
tasks. These different tasks are depicted in Fig. 1 and represent the motivation for the research addressed by this paper.
For instance, the 3D human motion forecasting task aims
to predict the human’s subsequent 3D body trajectory based
only on past observations. In this field, researchers restrict
their model to learning in a causality manner (Jain et al.
2016; Aksan et al. 2021; Valls Mascaro et al. 2022), where
the new pose only depends on the previous frames. However, these causal-based approaches are not well-suited for
the motion inbetweening task, which involves completing
the body poses between the past observations and a known
future pose. Most inbetweening models (Duan et al. 2021;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5261

