The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Guiding a Harsh-Environments Robust Detector via
RAW Data Characteristic Mining
Hongyang Chen1 , Hung-Shuo Tai2 , Kaisheng Ma3*
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
KargoBot.ai, Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
chenhy@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, hungshuotai@didiglobal.com, kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Consumer-grade cameras capture the RAW physical description of a scene and then process the image signals to obtain
high-quality RGB images that are faithful to human visual
perception. Conventionally, dense prediction scenes require
high-precision recognition of objects in RGB images. However, predicting RGB data to exhibit the expected adaptability
and robustness in harsh environments can be challenging. By
capitalizing on the broader color gamut and higher bit depth
offered by RAW data, in this paper, we demonstrate that RAW
data can significantly improve the accuracy and robustness of
object detectors in harsh environments. Firstly, we propose
a general Pipeline for RAW Detection (PRD), along with a
preprocessing strategy tailored to RAW data. Secondly, we
design the RAW Corruption Benchmark (RCB) to address
the dearth of benchmarks that reflect realistic scenarios in
harsh environments. Thirdly, we demonstrate the significant
improvement of RAW images in object detection for lowlight and corrupt scenes. Specifically, our experiments indicate that PRD (using FCOS) outperforms RGB detection by
13.9mAP on LOD-Snow without generating restored images.
Finally, we introduce a new nonlinear method called Functional Regularization (FR), which can effectively mine the
unique characteristics of RAW data. The code is available at
https://github.com/DreamerCCC/RawMining.

Figure 1: (Upper panel) Statistical comparison of RAW and
RGB data. (a) Semantic (Shannon Entropy): Image entropy
measures information content and is used to assess image
complexity. (b) Structural (CEIQ-Contrast (Yan, Li, and Fu
2019)): Based on the contrast assumption, high-contrast images are always more similar to contrast-enhanced images.
Tested on the full dataset of LOD (Hong et al. 2021). (Lower
panel) Visual comparison of RAW versus RGB data.

sensor for processing the whole camera pipeline. Although
the image enhancement algorithm driven by the human eye
sense can improve the visual quality, more is needed to solve
the object recognition problem (Li et al. 2017; Banerjee et al.
2021). On the other hand, visual recognition tasks are represented by object detection (Zhang et al. 2022b; Zou et al.
2023) and semantic segmentation (Zhang et al. 2022a). To
bridge the gap with computational photography in recent
years, the community has tried to post-process the acquired
RGB images in specific situations (Shyam et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2023), such as object detection in the haze (Pham et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2022).
Challenges Deep learning (DL) based object detection
methods (Zhou, Wang, and Krähenbühl 2019; Tian et al.
2019; Tan, Pang, and Le 2020) face challenges in achieving
consistent high efficiency in harsh environments (Bi et al.
2022; Sun et al. 2022). These methods are limited in their
ability to effectively handle the variability and complexity of
environmental factors such as lighting conditions, weather,
and occlusions, which can significantly affect the accuracy
and robustness of detection algorithms. To overcome the interference of extreme weather conditions on the camera in

Introduction
Background The recent advancements in deep neural networks (DNNs) (Liu et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2023) and image signal processing (ISP) (Wu et al. 2019; Chen and Ma
2022) have led to significant progress in low-level vision
imaging tasks, such as image enhancement and image deraining. However, while these techniques have made fundamental breakthroughs in the field, they do not always
translate into valuable solutions for high-level visual recognition tasks (VidalMata et al. 2020; Al Sobbahi and Tekli
2022). Gradually, the research community and industry have
reached a consensus that there is a discrepancy between
human-driven and machine-driven imaging, whereby the visual perception and interpretation of images by humans differs from that of models. On the one hand, ISP is used to
receive the raw signal RAW data (Wang et al. 2023) of the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1063

