The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adventures of Trustworthy Vision-Language Models: A Survey
Mayank Vatsa, Anubhooti Jain, Richa Singh
IIT Jodhpur, India
mvatsa@iitj.ac.in, jain.44@iitj.ac.in, richa@iitj.ac.in

Abstract

Classification Head :
frisbee

Recently, transformers have become incredibly popular in
computer vision and vision-language tasks. This notable rise
in their usage can be primarily attributed to the capabilities
offered by attention mechanisms and the outstanding ability
of transformers to adapt and apply themselves to a variety of
tasks and domains. Their versatility and state-of-the-art performance have established them as indispensable tools for a
wide array of applications. However, in the constantly changing landscape of machine learning, the assurance of the trustworthiness of transformers holds utmost importance. This
paper conducts a thorough examination of vision-language
transformers, employing three fundamental principles of responsible AI: Bias, Robustness, and Interpretability. The primary objective of this paper is to delve into the intricacies
and complexities associated with the practical use of transformers, with the overarching goal of advancing our comprehension of how to enhance their reliability and accountability.

Visual Question
Answering

Pre-training Token :
green
Cross-Modal
Masked Vision and
Language Modeling

VLPM

Text Input: What is
lying on the grass?

Text Input: A [MASK]
frisbee on the grass.
T

T

T

T

Text Tokens

T

V

V

V

V

V

Vision Tokens

Text Input

Figure 1: An example of vision-language model pre-trained
using Cross-Modal Vision-Language Modeling and finetuned for Visual Question Answering.

Introduction

VLPMs continue to grow not only in terms of accuracy but
size as well, as the newer models have parameters in billions and can perform several tasks with human-like accuracy. As shown in Figure 2, compared to 2018, there has
been a big surge in articles about “vision-language transformer” in 2022, nearly 9.5 times more, and an even larger
increase, nearly 12.5 times more, in 2021. A similar trend
is seen with the term ‘vision transformer,’ with roughly 15
times more articles in 2022 compared to 2018 and an astounding approximately 21 times more in 2021. Many of
these models are trained on heavy open-web datasets and
are finetuned for different tasks ranging from classificationbased to generative-based.
(Ross, Katz, and Barbu 2021; Birhane, Prabhu, and Kahembwe 2021; Srinivasan and Bisk 2022) have shown that
these heavy and high-performing models suffer from different biases like gender and cultural bias. A detailed review
of one of the vision-language transformers by (Srinivasan
and Bisk 2022) depicts gender bias, with purse being the
preferred term for the female gender while briefcase being
the preferred term for the male gender. Just like bias, cases
can be made for robustness and interpretability, iterating a
need for a proper study of transformer models. Efforts have
been made to study transformers in this light for vision and
language-based models individually, but collectively, there

Inspired from the performance for language-based tasks
(Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019), transformers were
proposed for vision-based tasks where they process images
as patch tokens (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). Even with the
modality change the basic architecture remained the same.
These architectures were further extended to accommodate
both modalities, giving birth to transformer-based visionlanguage models (Figure 1). Their self-attention module
makes convolutions unnecessary, with (Park and Kim 2022)
stating that multi-head self-attention acts as low-pass filters
while convolutions act like high-pass filters. Their impressive success has been attributed to their ability to model
long-range dependencies and having weak inductive biases,
leading to better generalization. (Long et al. 2022) discusses a general architecture for the Vision-Language Pretrained Models (VLPMs), breaking the architecture into
four categories, namely, Vision-Language Raw Input Data,
Vision-Language Representation, Vision-Language Interaction Model, and Vision-Language Representation. (Long
et al. 2022; Du et al. 2022; Fields and Kennington 2023)
surveys VLPMs based on their architecture, pre-training
tasks and objectives, and downstream tasks, showcasing that
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22650

