The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

E2E-AT: A Unified Framework for Tackling Uncertainty
in Task-Aware End-to-End Learning
Wangkun Xu1 , Jianhong Wang2 , Fei Teng1
1

Department of EEE, Imperial College London, UK
Center for AI Fundamentals, The University of Manchester, UK
wangkun.xu18@imperial.ac.uk, jianhong.wang@manchester.ac.uk, fei.teng@imperial.ac.uk
2

Abstract

then applies the forecast as input to the decision making. In
fact, task-aware cost, which is modeled as a constrained optimization (CO) problem, can benefit from training a more
economical forecast model. Therefore, task-aware end-toend learning is proposed by combining ML and COs. However, the uncertainties involved in E2E learning have not
been fully understood. This paper aims to bridge the gap
from the perspective of robust optimization and adversarial
robustness.
In the literature, E2E learning is also named as (smart)
predict-then-optimize (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022), integrated learning and optimization (Sadana et al. 2023),
as well as decision-focused learning (Wilder, Dilkina, and
Tambe 2019). In the paradigm of contextual optimization, it
appears as early as in (Bengio 1997) and has recently shown
a surge of interest. The E2E model is integrated to minimize the task-aware cost subject to task constraints. As a
result, the CO is first solved in the forward pass to obtain the
optimal decision. In the backward pass, the Jacobian from
the optimal decision to the forecast value needs to be calculated. Among many approaches, this paper adopts the implicit differentiation method, which is more efficient than the
unrolling approach (Domke 2012) and more accurate than
the surrogate loss function approach (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022). Practically, OptNet (Amos and Kolter 2017) applies the implicit function theorem (Krantz and Parks 2002)
to denote the Jacobian after formulating the Karush-KuhnTicher (KKT) condition of parametric quadratic programming (QP), which is further extended to disciplined convex
programming in CvxpyLayers (Agrawal et al. 2019).
E2E learning has been applied to many critical industrial
activities, such as better management of the power system
(Stratigakos et al. 2022; Vohra, Rajaei, and Cremer 2023),
constraint satisfaction in control (Chen et al. 2021), and routing behavior of the transportation network (Liu et al. 2023).
Therefore, it is essential to understand the vulnerability of
this learning framework and to study the associated robust
enhancement. In detail, the E2E model contains three parts:
(a). a parametric forecast model that maps the contextual information (e.g. the input feature) to the interest of forecast;
(b). CO models that take the forecast as input and return
decisions; and (c). a task-aware loss function that encodes
the ultimate goal of decision making. Meanwhile, the parameters of COs and task-aware loss can be classified into

Successful machine learning involves a complete pipeline of
data, model, and downstream applications. Instead of treating them separately, there has been a prominent increase of
attention within the constrained optimization (CO) and machine learning (ML) communities towards combining prediction and optimization models. The so-called end-to-end
(E2E) learning captures the task-based objective for which
they will be used for decision making. Although a large variety of E2E algorithms have been presented, it has not been
fully investigated how to systematically address uncertainties
involved in such models. Most of the existing work considers the uncertainties of ML in the input space and improves
robustness through adversarial training. We extend this idea
to E2E learning and prove that there is a robustness certification procedure by solving augmented integer programming.
Furthermore, we show that neglecting the uncertainty of COs
during training causes a new trigger for generalization errors.
To include all these components, we propose a unified framework that covers the uncertainties emerging in both the input
feature space of the ML models and the COs. The framework
is described as a robust optimization problem and is practically solved via end-to-end adversarial training (E2E-AT).
Finally, the performance of E2E-AT is evaluated by a realworld end-to-end power system operation problem, including
load forecasting and sequential scheduling tasks.

Introduction
ML-based prediction algorithms are widely used in realworld applications, such as load forecasting in power system operation, demand forecasting in retailing, and inventory stock forecasting in commerce* . Although training such
models is straightforwardly a supervised learning problem,
the training criteria may not be aligned with the ultimate
goal of the downstream decision-making tasks. For instance,
the forecast load is further used for generator dispatch in the
power system, and the demand forecasting can be used to
guide manufacturing. That is, the system designer first trains
an ML forecaster using standard statistic training loss, e.g.
the mean squared error (MSE) or cross entropy (CE), and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Our code is available at https://github.com/xuwkk/E2E-AT.
The appendix of this paper can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2312.10587.

16220

