The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reward Penalties on Augmented States for Solving Richly Constrained RL
Effectively
Hao Jiang, Tien Mai, Pradeep Varakantham, Huy Hoang
Singapore Management University
haojiang.2021@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, atmai@smu.edu.sg, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg, mhhoang@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Constrained Reinforcement Learning employs trajectorybased cost constraints (such as expected cost, Value at Risk, or
Conditional VaR cost) to compute safe policies. The challenge
lies in handling these constraints effectively while optimizing
expected reward. Existing methods convert such trajectorybased constraints into local cost constraints, but they rely on
cost estimates, leading to either aggressive or conservative
solutions with regards to cost. We propose an unconstrained
formulation that employs reward penalties over states augmented with costs to compute safe policies. Unlike standard
primal-dual methods, our approach penalizes only infeasible
trajectories through state augmentation. This ensures that increasing the penalty parameter always guarantees a feasible
policy, a feature lacking in primal-dual methods. Our approach
exhibits strong empirical performance and theoretical properties, offering a fresh paradigm for solving complex Constrained RL problems, including rich constraints like expected
cost, Value at Risk, and Conditional Value at Risk. Our experimental results demonstrate superior performance compared to
leading approaches across various constraint types on multiple
benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

There are multiple objectives of interest when handling safety
depending on the type of domain: (a) ensuring safety constraint is never violated; (b) ensuring safety constraint is not
violated in expectation; (c) ensuring the chance of safety constraint violation is small (Value at Risk, VaR) (Lucas and
Klaassen 1998); (d) ensuring the expected cost of violation
is bounded (Conditional Value at Risk, CVaR) (Rockafellar,
Uryasev et al. 2000; Yang et al. 2021); and others. One of
the main models in Reinforcement Learning to ensure safety
is Constrained RL, which employs objective (b) above. Our
focus in this paper is also on Constrained RL but considering
the four types of constraints mentioned above.
Constrained RL problems are of relevance in domains that
can be represented using an underlying Constrained Markov
Decision Problem (CMDP) (Altman 1999). The main challenge in solving Constrained RL problems is the expected
cost constraint, which requires averaging over multiple trajectories from the policy. Such problems have many applications including but not limited to: (a) electric self driving
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19867

cars reaching destination at the earliest while minimizing
the risk of getting stranded on the road with no charge; (b)
robots moving through unknown terrains to reach a destination, while having a threshold on the average risk of passing
through unsafe areas (e.g., a ditch) (Low, Kumar, and Sanner 2023; Pankayaraj and Varakantham 2023). Broadly, they
are also applicable to problems such as robot motion planning (Ono et al. 2015; Moldovan and Abbeel 2012; Chow
et al. 2015a), resource allocation (Mastronarde and van der
Schaar 2010; Junges et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2023; Ling et al.
2023), and financial engineering (Abe et al. 2010; Di Castro,
Tamar, and Mannor 2012).
Research in Constrained RL: Many model free approaches
have been proposed to solve Constrained RL problems. One
of the initial approaches to be developed for addressing such
constraints is the Lagrangian method (Chow et al. 2015b).
However, such an approach does not provide either theoretical or empirical guarantees in ensuring the constraints are
enforced. To counter the issue of safety guarantees, next set
of approaches focused on transforming the cost constraint
over trajectories into cost constraint over local decisions in
many different ways (Gábor, Kalmár, and Szepesvári 1998;
Achiam et al. 2017a; Chow et al. 2019b; Satija, Amortila,
and Pineau 2020; As et al. 2022; Hogewind et al. 2022). In
converting a trajectory based constraint to a local constraint,
there is an estimation of cost involved in the trajectory. Due to
such estimation, transformed cost constraints over individual
decisions are error prone. In problems where the estimation
is not close to the actual, results with such approaches with
regards to cost constraint enforcement are poor (as we demonstrate in our experimental results). Since augmented state has
information of cost incurred so far, our approach does not
have to rely on cost estimation.
State Augmentation in Constrained RL: Prior research
has explored state augmentation in Constrained RL. One
study (Sootla et al. 2022b) focused on "hard" constraints,
like ensuring safe landings with a probability of 1. Another
work (Sootla et al. 2022a) added accumulated costs to states
for policy training. A third approach (Calvo-Fullana et al.
2021) incorporated penalty coefficients from the Lagrangian
into states for policy determination, similar to (Sootla et al.
2022a). Our approach has notable differences. First, we handle various "soft" cost constraints like expected cost and
CVaR, where mere state augmentation is insufficient due to

