The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MDFL: Multi-Domain Diffusion-Driven Feature Learning
Daixun Li, Weiying Xie* , Jiaqing Zhang, Yunsong Li
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
ldx@stu.xidian.edu.cn, wyxie@xidian.edu.cn, jqzhang 2@stu.xidian.edu.cn, ysli@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
High-dimensional images, known for their rich semantic information, are widely applied in remote sensing and other
fields. The spatial information in these images reflects the
object’s texture features, while the spectral information reveals the potential spectral representations across different
bands. Currently, the understanding of high-dimensional images remains limited to a single-domain perspective with performance degradation. Motivated by the masking texture effect observed in the human visual system, we present a multidomain diffusion-driven feature learning network (MDFL) ,
a scheme to redefine the effective information domain that
the model really focuses on. This method employs diffusionbased posterior sampling to explicitly consider joint information interactions between the high-dimensional manifold
structures in the spectral, spatial, and frequency domains,
thereby eliminating the influence of masking texture effects in visual models. Additionally, we introduce a feature reuse mechanism to gather deep and raw features of
high-dimensional data. We demonstrate that MDFL significantly improves the feature extraction performance of highdimensional data, thereby providing a powerful aid for revealing the intrinsic patterns and structures of such data. The
experimental results on three multi-modal remote sensing
datasets show that MDFL reaches an average overall accuracy of 98.25%, outperforming various state-of-the-art baseline schemes. Code available at https://github.com/LDXDU/
MDFL-AAAI-24.

…

…

Figure 1: The forward diffusion process in the spectralspatial domain denoted by I0 , the noised image at time step 0
and time step T denoted by IT , and the feature visualization
results of the hyperspectral image at different time steps.

delve into exploring intelligent interpretation algorithms that
can be effectively applied to high-dimensional data, thereby
improving their classification accuracy and effectiveness.
Multi-modal learning (MML), as a vital endeavor in highdimensional data processing, plays a pivotal role in remote
sensing applications (Zhao et al. 2023) by harnessing essential information from multiple sensor source images to
enhance data acquisition (Feng et al. 2023; Hong et al.
2020). In scenarios where the availability of prior samples
is limited, researchers have begun exploring fusion analysis approaches for high-dimensional data. Many of these approaches leverage Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
architectures for inter-layer fusion. For instance, Hong et al.
(Hong et al. 2022) proposed a deep encoder-decoder network architecture for hyperspectral and LiDAR data classification, effectively capturing spectral and spatial information in a deep latent space. Subsequently, larger-scale models like transformers (Roy et al. 2023) and diffusion model
(Zhao et al. 2023) have emerged. Typically, the optimization of these methods involves two distinct steps: extracting
features from high-dimensional data using large-scale model
architectures, and subsequently classifying the extracted features using a classifier. While these methods mitigate the
curse of dimensionality, their feature extraction process does
not adequately cater to the manifold structures of high-

Introduction
Recently, remarkable strides have been achieved in precise
classification within the realm of natural images, partially
attributing to the distinctive representations found within
the ImageNet dataset (Li et al. 2022a). These representations frequently encompass local structures, repetitive patterns, and hierarchical arrangements (Yao et al. 2019), rendering them advantages for deep learning models. However,
progress in the domain of high-dimensional data analysis
has been relatively sluggish in comparison to that in natural
images due to several factors, including the absence of prior
knowledge, sparse distributions, and low spatial resolutions
(Jiang et al. 2021). Consequently, it becomes imperative to
* Correspond author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8653

