The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Equipping Transformer with the Ability of Systematic Compositionality
Chen Huang, Peixin Qin, Wenqiang Lei* , Jiancheng Lv
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, China
{huangc.scu, qinpeixin.scu, wenqianglei}@gmail.com

Abstract
One of the key factors in language productivity and human
cognition is the ability of systematic compositionality, which
refers to understanding composed unseen examples of seen
primitives. However, recent evidence reveals that the Transformers have difficulty generalizing the composed context
based on the seen primitives. To this end, we take the first
step to propose a compositionality-aware Transformer called
CAT and two novel pre-training tasks to facilitate systematic compositionality. We tentatively provide a successful implementation of a multi-layer CAT on the basis of the especially popular BERT. The experimental results demonstrate
that CAT outperforms baselines on compositionality-aware
tasks with minimal impact on the effectiveness on standardized language understanding tasks.

Similarity Score
LLM Human

Phrase 1

Phrase 2

Safety officer

Security guard

0.6

0.881

Water body

Body water

0.7

0.381

Table 1: Compositionality example from Asaadi, Mohammad, and Kiritchenko (2019). ChatGPT struggles to achieve
human-level language understanding as it fails to align with
human judgments regarding the similarity of phrase pairs
that are formed by different word composition.
as the primitives of phrases, two phrases composed of different words may have similar semantics (e.g., Safety officer and Security guard), while phrases may exhibit different semantics through different combinations (e.g., Water body and Body water). Empirical evidence in Table 1
shows that even the ’omnipotent’ ChatGPT still struggles
to accurately capture the semantic changes among different
word combinations, failing to align with human judgments
regarding the similarity of phrase pairs. One possible explanation is that despite the ability to capture the meaning of
words, current Transformer frameworks fail to develop systematic compositional skills (Dziri et al. 2023; Ma, Zhang,
and Zhu 2023). In contrast, humans certainly do understand
language by learning the meaning of words and composing
more elaborate meanings (Cartuyvels, Spinks, and Moens
2021). Therefore, to achieve human-level language understanding, it is imperative to invest more effort in building
a compositionality-aware model that promotes LLMs with
stronger capabilities in systematic compositionality.
Motivated by this, we take the first step to propose a
Compositionality-Aware Transformer called CAT to facilitate the systematic compositionality, along with two novel
pre-training tasks. 1) As depicted in Fig. 1, CAT introduces two modules: Multi-Primitive Composition and Representation Enhancement, to the vanilla Transformer encoder. These modules enable CAT to learn how to compose primitives and enhance the representation of the vanilla
Transformer encoder, respectively. Specifically, the MultiPrimitive Composition module decomposes a contextual
word representation1 hcont into multiple primitives, which

Introduction
Linguistic research confirms the discreteness of linguistic
symbols and their compositionality to construct larger linguistic expressions (Montague 1970; Frege 1948; Baroni
2020; Akyürek and Andreas 2022). These characteristics are
known as Systematic Compositionality (Fodor and Pylyshyn
1988; Keysers et al. 2019; Lake et al. 2017). For instance,
sentences are built from words and phrases. Such systematic
compositionality fosters humans ability to understand and
generalize to unseen combinations of seen primitives (Lake
et al. 2017) and model complex phenomena (Liu et al. 2021).
Therefore, it is widely recognized as an essential capability
of human intelligence (Ma, Zhang, and Zhu 2023).
However, previous studies have shown that language
models struggle with generalizing through composition
(Cartuyvels, Spinks, and Moens 2021; Lake and Baroni
2018; Loula, Baroni, and Lake 2018). Even for large language models (LLMs), recent evidence suggests that they
still struggle to establish systematic compositionality after
fine-tuning on compositionality-aware datasets (Yu and Ettinger 2021) or prompting with in-context examples (An
et al. 2023). The challenge lies in the fact that the semantics of a group of primitives vary depending on their meanings and how they are combined. Considering examples on
word-level compositionality in Table 1 where words serve
* Correspondence to Wenqiang Lei.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

18289

Here, a word representation is the average of its corresponding

