The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CONSIDER: Commonalities and Specialties Driven
Multilingual Code Retrieval Framework
Rui Li1, 2 , Liyang He1, 2 , Qi Liu1, 2 * , Yuze Zhao1, 2 , Zheng Zhang1, 2 ,
Zhenya Huang1, 2 , Yu Su3 , Shijin Wang2, 4
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application &
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Normal University
4
iFLYTEK AI Research (Central China), iFLYTEK Co., Ltd.
{ruili2000, heliyang, yuzezhao, zhangzheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {huangzhy, qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn,
yusu@hfnu.edu.cn, sjwang3@iflytek.com
User Query:

Abstract

use numpy to create
a onehot vector

Multilingual code retrieval aims to find code snippets relevant
to a user’s query from a multilingual codebase, which plays
a crucial role in software development and expands their application scenarios compared to classical monolingual code
retrieval. Despite the performance improvements achieved by
previous studies, two crucial problems are overlooked in the
multilingual scenario. First, certain programming languages
face data scarcity in specific domains, resulting in limited
representation capabilities within those domains. Second, different programming languages can be used interchangeably
within the same domain, making it challenging for multilingual models to accurately identify the intended programming language of a user’s query. To address these issues,
we propose the CommONalities and SpecIalties Driven Multilingual CodE Retrieval Framework (CONSIDER), which
includes two modules. The first module enhances the representation of various programming languages by modeling
pairwise and global commonalities among them. The second module introduces a novel contrastive learning negative
sampling algorithm that leverages language confusion to automatically extract specific language features. Through our
experiments, we confirm the significant benefits of our model
in real-world multilingual code retrieval scenarios in various
aspects. Furthermore, an evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed CONSIDER framework in monolingual scenarios as well. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/smsquirrel/consider.

(a)

User Selected:
Java Python PHP

user select
Python
codebase
Monolingual

def create_one_hot(l):
label = np.array(l)
...

Code Retrieval System

automatic identification
User Query:

fine-tuning the pretrained BERT model

(b)

Python
codebase
Multilingual

User Selected:
None

?

def train(dataset, E):
model.train()
...

Python
codebase

Monolingual

Figure 1: (a) Monolingual scenarios: the user’s query and selected language guide the system’s choice of model and code
repository. (b) Multilingual scenarios: the retrieval model
autonomously searches for code snippets in a multilingual
library without user-specified language selection.

vancement of artificial intelligence technologies, many advanced monolingual code retrieval methods (Cambronero
et al. 2019; Chen and Zhou 2018; Shuai et al. 2020) have
been proposed and made tremendous progress.
As the scope of application scenarios expands, there has
been a surge in the demand for code retrieval. For example,
software projects hosted on code repositories like GitHub1
and GitLab2 are increasingly developed using multiple programming languages. This trend has led to a growing need
for multilingual code retrieval capabilities (Li, Xu, and Chen
2022; Ma et al. 2023). Compared to monolingual code retrieval, multilingual code retrieval models provide significant advantages. First, they eliminate the requirement for
deploying and maintaining multiple retrieval models for different languages, resulting in cost reduction. Second, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b), multilingual models compare the
similarity between queries and various programming languages, thereby extending the scope of retrieval scenarios.
This capability allows them to retrieve the relevant code

Introduction
Code retrieval is a foundational task in code intelligence
(Mukherjee, Jermaine, and Chaudhuri 2020; Kim et al.
2010). As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), given a natural language query and a selected programming language, the classical monolingual code retrieval model aims to find code
snippets in a large-scale codebase (Haldar et al. 2020; Wan
et al. 2019). This system can assist developers in code reuse
(Shuai et al. 2020; Nie et al. 2016) and understanding the
complex software libraries (Ling et al. 2021). With the ad* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

8679

https://github.com
https://about.gitlab.com/

