The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Supervised Likelihood Estimation with Energy Guidance for Anomaly
Segmentation in Urban Scenes
Yuanpeng Tu1 * , Yuxi Li2 * , Boshen Zhang2 * , Liang Liu2 ,
Jiangning Zhang2 , Yabiao Wang2 † , Cai Rong Zhao1†
1

Dept. of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji Univeristy, Shanghai
2
YouTu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai
{2030809, zhaocairong}@tongji.edu.cn
{yukiyxli, boshenzhang, leoneliu, vtzhang, caseywang}@tencent.com
Abstract

anomalies, some methods take insight from uncertainty estimation and devise a series of proxy tasks (Hendrycks and
Gimpel 2017; Mukhoti and Gal 2018; Malinin and Gales
2018; Grcić, Bevandić, and Šegvić 2022; Tian et al. 2021).
However, they usually design coupled objectives and require retraining of models, which might degrade their performance (Bogdoll, Nitsche, and Zöllner 2022). On the other
hand, to generate training samples with anomaly pixels,
outlier exposure is widely adopted (Bevandić et al. 2019;
Grcić, Bevandić, and Šegvić 2022; Chan, Rottmann, and
Gottschalk 2021) by training with auxiliary data, while these
methods increase the cost due to additional labeling requirements, the adopted auxiliary data is also not guaranteed to be
consistent with realistic scenes. There are also approaches
using an extra reconstruction model and taking the reconstruction error as anomaly parts (Xia et al. 2020; Di Biase
et al. 2021a; Vojir et al. 2021), which affects the efficiency
and their accuracy highly relies on reconstruction quality.
In summary, most previous efforts are designed to capture anomaly samples in classification. Nevertheless, semantic segmentation differs since the its results inherently rely
on spatial context. As shown in Fig. 1, given a pretrained
model (Chen et al. 2018), the same patch yield different semantic uncertainty (measured as entropy of categorical distribution) when it is placed under a different context, even
though the patch is filled with normal pixels. The empirical observation inspires that we can automatically synthesize anomalies from normal pixels via a self-supervised
copy-and-paste manner guided by spatial context. Such
self-supervised paradigm can (1) avoid the cost of explicitly
annotating anomalies and (2) ensure the quality of generated
anomalies by referring to their context. Therefore, we propose a new framework termed as Self-supervised Likelihood
Estimation with Energy Guidance (SLEEG), which extends
off-the-shelf segmentation models to anomaly detectors with
the guidance of energy model (LeCun et al. 2006) while
avoiding the overhead of labeling anomaly data. The SLEEG
framework is designed in a self-teaching paradigm, to properly depict the anomaly area, we propose two anomaly estimators based on the joint distribution of content and anomalies. The first is formulated as a simple task-agnostic classifier to differentiate anomaly and normal pixels. The other
is a task-oriented estimator and can be regarded as residual

Robust autonomous driving requires agents to accurately
identify unexpected areas (anomalies) in urban scenes. To
this end, some critical issues remain open: how to design
advisable metric to measure anomalies, and how to properly generate training samples of anomaly data? Classical effort in anomaly detection usually resorts to pixel-wise uncertainty or sample synthesis, which ignores the contextual
information and sometimes requires auxiliary data with finegrained annotations. On the contrary, in this paper, we exploit the strong context-dependent nature of the segmentation task and design an energy-guided self-supervised framework for anomaly segmentation, which optimizes an anomaly
head by maximizing the likelihood of self-generated anomaly
pixels. For this purpose, we design two estimators to model
anomaly likelihood, one is a task-agnostic binary estimator and the other depicts the likelihood as residual of taskoriented joint energy. Based on the proposed estimators, we
devise an adaptive self-supervised training framework, which
exploits the contextual reliance and estimated likelihood to
refine mask annotations in anomaly areas. We conduct extensive experiments on challenging Fishyscapes and Road
Anomaly benchmarks, demonstrating that without any auxiliary data or synthetic models, our method can still achieve
comparable performance to supervised competitors. Code is
available at https://github.com/yuanpengtu/SLEEG.

Introduction
Recent studies in semantic segmentation have achieved significant advances on close-set benchmarks of urban scenarios (Cordts et al. 2016). However, when it comes to deployment in the wild, it is necessary to enable segmentation models with the ability of anomaly detection.
Essentially, the key of segmentation with anomalies lies
in two aspects: Firstly, the anomaly score should be designed to differentiate anomaly and normal pixels. Second,
extra anomaly data is critical to identify which pixel belongs to anomaly areas. To address these issues, a fresh wave
of approaches are proposed. To measure the likelihood of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21637

