The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SiMA-Hand: Boosting 3D Hand-Mesh Reconstruction by
Single-to-Multi-View Adaptation
Yinqiao Wang1,2 , Hao Xu1,2 , Pheng-Ann Heng1,2 , Chi-Wing Fu1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, CUHK
2
Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR, CUHK
{yqwang, xuhao, pheng, cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Estimating 3D hand mesh from RGB images is a longstanding track, in which occlusion is one of the most challenging problems. Existing attempts towards this task often
fail when the occlusion dominates the image space. In this paper, we propose SiMA-Hand, aiming to boost the mesh reconstruction performance by Single-to-Multi-view Adaptation.
First, we design a multi-view hand reconstructor to fuse
information across multiple views by holistically adopting
feature fusion at image, joint, and vertex levels. Then, we
introduce a single-view hand reconstructor equipped with
SiMA. Though taking only one view as input at inference,
the shape and orientation features in the single-view reconstructor can be enriched by learning non-occluded knowledge from the extra views at training, enhancing the reconstruction precision on the occluded regions. We conduct experiments on the Dex-YCB and HanCo benchmarks with
challenging object- and self-caused occlusion cases, manifesting that SiMA-Hand consistently achieves superior performance over the state of the arts. Code will be released
on https://github.com/JoyboyWang/SiMA-Hand Pytorch.

Figure 1: Framework comparison between our SiMA-Hand
and previous methods. We exploit non-occluded information from the multi-view reconstructor (MVR) and carefully
adopt it to the single-view reconstructor (SVR) through the
proposed single-to-multi-view adaptation techniques. So,
our SVR can learn to extract orientation and shape features,
following the MVR’s, and produce higher quality meshes.

Introduction
Hand-mesh reconstruction from monocular RGB image is
a fundamental and significant task. It has great potential for
many applications, e.g., augmented reality, human-computer
interactions, etc. Yet, to obtain high-quality reconstruction, a
common but very challenging scenario is that self- or objectcaused occlusions often occur, making it hard to infer the
shape and pose of the hand in the occluded parts.
Recently, several methods have been proposed to alleviate the ambiguity of occlusion. Some (Chu et al. 2017; Zhu
et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020a) attempt to extract occlusionrobust features by adopting the spatial attention mechanism.
However, their performance degrades significantly when the
occluded regions dominate the image. Others (Hasson et al.
2020; Yang et al. 2020a; Xu et al. 2023) leverage nonoccluded information from multi-frame inputs. Yet, they often fail when the occlusion persists over nearby frames; also,
cross-frame processing is typically more time-consuming.
To address this issue, another approach is to reconstruct
the hand from multi-view images. Leveraging a neural net-

work, we can effectively build a more complete hand geometry by utilizing 3D cues from different views. POEM (Yang
et al. 2023) attempts to reconstruct the hand mesh based
on the interaction between mesh vertices and 3D points in
the intersection area of different camera frustums. Though
it helps improve the performance, the computational cost is
inevitably largely increased. Besides, the approach requires
a multi-camera set up, which is tedious and expensive to prepare, compared with using commodity hand-held cameras.
In this paper, we present SiMA-Hand, a new framework
formulated with Single-to-Multi-view Adaptation to boost
the hand-mesh reconstruction quality from single-view input. Fig. 1 overviews the method design. Our key insight is
that human hands have limited feasible poses; given a single
view, even the hand is partially occluded, we may still try to
infer its 3D structure in some other views. With this preliminary, we leverage the knowledge of different views from the
multi-view reconstructor (MVR) during the training, to enrich the features extracted by the single-view reconstructor
(SVR) from a single-view input; see again Fig. 1. Using this

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5704

