The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RWMS: Reliable Weighted Multi-Phase for Semi-supervised Segmentation
Wensi Liu, Xiao-Yu Tang* , Chong Yang, Chunjie Yang
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
{ws.liu, xytang, yangchong2020, cjyang999}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is one of the tasks concerned in
the field of computer vision. However, the cost of capturing large numbers of pixel-level annotations is expensive.
Semi-supervised learning can utilize labeled and unlabeled
data, providing new ideas for solving the problem of insufficient labeled data. In this work, we propose a datareliability weighted multi-phase learning method for semisupervised segmentation (RWMS). Under the framework of
self-training, we train two different teacher models to evaluate the reliability of pseudo labels. By selecting reliable data
at the image level and reweighting pseudo labels at the pixel
level, multi- phase training is guided to focus on more reliable
knowledge. Besides, we also inject strong data augmentations
on unlabeled images while training. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our method performs remarkably
well compared to baseline methods and substantially outperforms them, more than 3% on VOC and Cityscapes.

Figure 1: Frameworks for previous methods and our RWMS.
We use an auxiliary model (model 2) to help make reliability
judgments. Reliability is incorporated to guide the process
of retraining and reweighting. More details are illustrated in
the introduction section.

Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning, semantic segmentation plays a crucial role in computer vision. However, fully supervised semantic segmentation methods typically require a large amount of labeled data to achieve accurate segmentation, which limits their feasibility in practical applications. In comparison, semi-supervised semantic segmentation methods leverage unlabeled data to assist model training, thereby improving segmentation performance while reducing annotation costs (Peláez-Vegas,
Mesejo, and Luengo 2023). Prior researches propose to apply consistency regularization (Laine and Aila 2017; Olsson et al. 2021) or entropy minimization (Xie et al. 2020;
Ke et al. 2022)in semi-supervised learning. Recently, the
combination of the aforementioned two methods, such as
FixMatch (Sohn et al. 2020), has shown promising performance. Ke et al. propose a three-stage self-training framework that incorporates consistency regularization into the
self-training process. In general, our approach is a hybrid
method based on classical self-training (Lee et al. 2013) that
combines strong data augmentation as a form of consistency
regularization.

A difficulty faced by self-training is the noise in pseudo
labels, which can contribute incorrect gradient messages to
training. Some methods are used to improve the quality of
pseudo labels, such as refining pseudo labels by auxiliary
network (Li and Zheng 2021), screening according to the
evolving stability of produced pseudo masks during the supervised training phase (Yang et al. 2022), distribution alignment (He, Yang, and Qi 2021), filtering low-confidence labels by pre-defined threshold (Zoph et al. 2020) and so on.
In fact, a single model has limited ability to correct its own
errors. On the contrary, the information provided by the two
different models complements each other, which can assist
in better selection of high-quality pseudo labels. DCT (Qiao
et al. 2018) employs diverse models and learns by maximizing their consensus on unlabeled data (Figure 1(a)). Both
models in CT (Han et al. 2018) choose small-loss examples
for the other model to train (Figure 1(b)). In DMT (Feng
et al. 2022), the loss function is dynamically reweighted according to the disagreement between two models and each
model is trained with pseudo labels generated by the other
(Figure 1(c)).These mutual training methods, despite their
effectiveness, necessitate the maintenance of training for
two models, thereby escalating the computational resource

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3729

