The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Cost-Function Merging for Implicit Hitting
Set WCSP Solving
Javier Larrosa, Conrado Martı́nez, Emma Rollon
Computer Science Department, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
{larrosa, conrado, erollon}@cs.upc.edu

Abstract

(HS) approach (Davies and Bacchus 2013; Berg, Bacchus,
and Poole 2020; Bacchus et al. 2018). The HS approach was
adapted from MaxSAT to WCSP in (Delisle and Bacchus
2013) and a simple algorithm, HS-WCSP, showed some
promising preliminary results. Given the similarity between
MaxSAT and WCSP, we believe that it is worth advancing
further towards efficient HS-based WCSP solvers. In particular, we believe that efficient HS algorithms for WCSP must
take advantage of the more structured language of WCSP
(using cost functions) in contrast to the flatter language of
MaxSAT (using clauses).
What makes WCSPs difficult in practice is that different cost functions often disagree on which assignments are
likely to be good. For example, there are many optimization
problems where the objective function is made of two conflicting components (e.g: risk vs benefit in finances, performance vs robustness in design,...) so optimal solutions corresponds to the best trade-off. Thus, one can think of WCSP
solutions in general as those assignments that make complex
trade-offs among many conflicting cost-functions. In HS algorithms, this phenomenon causes the discovery of many
cores that are identical except for a portion that is different but represents (roughly) a different version of the same
trade-off. When this happens, it translates to a large number
of iterations. In this paper, and for the sake of a theoretical
analysis, we consider the extreme case of this phenomenon
that we call core interchangeability. We define core interchangeability at two levels: symbolic and numeric; and show
that both types can cause HS-WCSP to iterate an exponential number of times.
Motivated by that observation, we propose a method to
overcome the problem. Our approach is to reformulate the
problem by conveniently merging cost functions aiming at
making the space of cores more compact. We propose two
different types of merging: i) symbolic merging, which treats
weights as symbols without being aware of their numerical semantics, and ii) numeric merging, that treats weights
as numbers. We show that symbolic merging is sufficient
for dealing with symbolic interchangeability, but insufficient
for dealing with numeric interchangeability, where only numeric merging renders HS-WCSP feasible. These results
are summarized in Table 1. We complement our theoretical
work empirically. First, we confirm the asymptotic bounds
obtained for our two case study problems and evaluate how

The Implicit Hitting Set (HS) approach has shown very effective for MaxSAT solving. However, only preliminary promising results have been obtained for the very similar Weighted
CSP framework. In this paper we contribute towards both a
better theoretical understanding of the HS approach and a
more effective HS-based solvers for WCSP. First, we bound
the minimum number of iterations of HS thanks to what we
call distinguished cores. Then, we show a source of inefficiency by introducing two simple problems where HS is unfeasible. Next, we propose two reformulation methods that
merge cost-functions to overcome the problem. We provide a
theoretical analysis that quantifies the magnitude of the improvement of each method with respect to the number of iterations of the algorithm. In particular, we show that the reformulations can bring an exponential number of iterations
down to a constant number in our working examples. Finally,
we complement our theoretical analysis with two sets of experiments. First, we show that our results are aligned with real
executions. Second, and most importantly, we conduct experiments on typical benchmark problems and show that costfunction merging may be heuristically applied and it may
accelerate HS algorithms by several orders of magnitude. In
some cases, it even outperforms state-of-the-art solvers.

Introduction
In the Weighted Constraint Satisfaction Problem (WCSP)
framework the goal is to optimize the combined cost of local
cost functions. It includes important problems such as Most
Probable Explanation in probabilistic networks (Dechter
2003; Koller and Friedman 2009) and it has many applications in resource allocation (Cabon et al. 1999), bioinformatics (Viricel et al. 2018), scheduling (Bensana, Lemaı̂tre,
and Verfaillie 1999), etc. State-of-the-art WCSP solvers in
the last two decades follow a branch-and-bound strategy enforcing at each expanded node local consistency properties
that prune unfeasible nodes and provide effective bounds
(Cooper et al. 2010; Larrosa and Schiex 2004; Allouche
et al. 2015).
The MaxSAT problem has much in common with the
WCSP framework. A surprisingly very effective technique
for MaxSAT solving is the so called Implicit Hitting Set
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8057

