The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

One Step Learning, One Step Review
Xiaolong Huang1 , Qiankun Li2, 3 * , Xueran Li4, 5 , Xuesong Gao1
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligent, Chongqing University of Technology, Chongqing, China
Institute of Intelligent Machines, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, China
3
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
5
Anhui University, Hefei, China
{hirox827, xueran.lxr}@gmail.com, qklee@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xuesonggxs@foxmail.com
Abstract

Rehearsal methods (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Rolnick et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020; Merlin et al. 2022), based on the replay mechanism, involve retraining on a subset of stored
upstream samples while learning new tasks. However, this
approach is quite inefficient. EWC (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017)
proposes a regularization-based fine-tuning method that uses
the Fisher information matrix to determine the importance of
weight parameters. This helps adjust the parameters between
upstream and downstream tasks, reducing forgetting. L2-SP
(Xuhong, Grandvalet, and Davoine 2018) uses an L2 penalty
to restrict the updates of parameters, addressing knowledge
forgetting during fine-tuning. However, it is not compatible
with adaptive optimizers (Loshchilov and Hutter 2017; Guan
2023), which may produce the wrong regularization direction. Parameter isolation methods (Jia et al. 2022; Sohn et al.
2023) create new branches or modules for different network
models and tasks for downstream tasks. However, it introduces extra new training parameters, requires certain training skills, and has lower generality than rehearsal methods.
In this paper, we propose a novel fine-tuning method combined with optimizers to solve knowledge forgetting, called
OLOR (One step Learning, One step Review). Specifically,
OLOR introduces a weight rollback term to the weight update term during the fine-tuning stage, allowing the model
to gradually approach the pre-trained weights while learning
the downstream task. This process avoids delay defects and
makes the weights of the upstream and downstream models
more similar. In addition, a layer-wise penalty is devised to
employ penalty decay and the diversified decay rate to adjust the weight rollback levels of layers. Penalty decay combines feature pyramids with transfer learning, giving more
significant weight rollback to shallow layers related to shallow features such as color and texture, and smaller weight
backtracking to deep layers related to deep features such
as semantic information. The diversified decay rate is adjusted to enhance applicability according to the variations
between up and downstream tasks. OLOR with layer-wise
penalty enables each layer of the model to update according to its needs, resulting in superior extraction of generalized features. Finally, OLOR is incorporated into optimizers, thereby introducing negligible extra computational overhead. It also works well with popular optimizers such as
Adam (Loshchilov and Hutter 2017; Guan 2023) and SGD
(Keskar and Socher 2017), meeting specific needs under var-

Visual fine-tuning has garnered significant attention with
the rise of pre-trained vision models. The current prevailing
method, full fine-tuning, suffers from the issue of knowledge
forgetting as it focuses solely on fitting the downstream training set. In this paper, we propose a novel weight rollbackbased fine-tuning method called OLOR (One step Learning,
One step Review). OLOR combines fine-tuning with optimizers, incorporating a weight rollback term into the weight
update term at each step. This ensures consistency in the
weight range of upstream and downstream models, effectively mitigating knowledge forgetting and enhancing finetuning performance. In addition, a layer-wise penalty is presented to employ penalty decay and the diversified decay
rate to adjust the weight rollback levels of layers for adapting varying downstream tasks. Through extensive experiments on various tasks such as image classification, object
detection, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation,
we demonstrate the general applicability and state-of-the-art
performance of our proposed OLOR. Code is available at
https://github.com/rainbow-xiao/OLOR-AAAI-2024.

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of deep learning technology,
numerous large-scale image datasets have been established
(Schuhmann et al. 2022; Russakovsky et al. 2015; Schuhmann et al. 2021), resulting in many promising pre-trained
visual models (Radford et al. 2021; He et al. 2022; Bao et al.
2021). These pre-trained models can effectively solve related but distinct visual tasks through transfer learning and
fine-tuning techniques (Wu, Sun, and Ouyang 2023; Shen
et al. 2021). The fundamental fine-tuning methods are linear probing and full fine-tuning (Zhang, Isola, and Efros
2017). In linear probing, the pre-trained model’s backbone
is frozen, and only the head specific to the downstream task
is trained. However, this approach often restricts the performance of the pre-trained backbone. On the other hand,
full fine-tuning involves training the entire network directly,
but it usually leads to knowledge forgetting (De Lange et al.
2021).
* Corresponding authors (qklee@mail.ustc.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12644

