The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Structured Probabilistic Coding
Dou Hu1,2 , Lingwei Wei1 , Yaxin Liu1,2 , Wei Zhou1 * , Songlin Hu1,2 *
1
2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hudou, weilingwei, liuyaxin, zhouwei, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Most probabilistic embedding methods (Kingma and
Welling 2014; Alemi et al. 2017; Higgins et al. 2017; Fischer 2020; An, Jammalamadaka, and Chong 2023) are (or
can be) built upon the information bottleneck (IB) principle (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 1999; Tishby and Zaslavsky
2015). The principle aims to find a maximally compressed
representation of the input that preserves as much as possible information about the target task, striking a balance between compression and prediction. These IB-based methods
typically involve two parametric modules, i.e., an encoder
and a decoder (Goldfeld and Polyanskiy 2020). Usually, the
encoder maps the input to a probabilistic distribution in the
latent space, and the decoder maps the probabilistic distribution to the output representations in the target task space.
However, under the encoder-decoder architecture, the
process of mapping input data to probability distributions by
the encoder may lose some task-related information, which
is essential for the decoder during the learning process. This
is because probability distributions inherently contain randomness and uncertainty, which may be irrelevant to the
task and interfere with the task prediction process of the decoder. To avoid this, we propose an encoder-only embedding
technology, probabilistic coding, that integrates probabilistic encoding and task prediction into one module. By using variational inference in the output space, we can better
control and utilize randomness and uncertainty of data. The
learned compact representations can fully capture the underlying structure of data, and preserve the effective information from input related to target task. This helps improve
model generalization performance, especially when facing
limited data or noisy labels.
Besides, although probabilistic embedding methods can
capture data uncertainty and complexity, they are restricted
to limited or biased data, which cannot fully represent the
true distribution of the target task. In the process of mapping
input data to probability distributions in the latent space by
the encoder, some task-related important information may
be missing to some extent. The insufficient information lead
to poor task performance on new data and inadequate model
generalization. To improve task prediction ability of the latent representations, we leverage the structured information
of target task space to constrain the learning process of the
probability distribution in latent space. Under the framework
of probabilistic coding, the structured regularization of la-

This paper presents a new supervised representation learning
framework, namely structured probabilistic coding (SPC), to
learn compact and informative representations from input related to the target task. SPC is an encoder-only probabilistic coding technology with a structured regularization from
the target space. It can enhance the generalization ability of
pre-trained language models for better language understanding. Specifically, our probabilistic coding simultaneously performs information encoding and task prediction in one module to more fully utilize the effective information from input
data. It uses variational inference in the output space to reduce randomness and uncertainty. Besides, to better control
the learning process of probabilistic representations, a structured regularization is proposed to promote uniformity across
classes in the latent space. With the regularization term, SPC
can preserve the Gaussian structure of the latent code and
achieve better coverage of the hidden space with class uniformly. Experimental results on 12 natural language understanding tasks demonstrate that our SPC effectively improves
the performance of pre-trained language models for classification and regression. Extensive experiments show that SPC
can enhance the generalization capability, robustness to label
noise, and clustering quality of output representations.

Introduction
Probabilistic embedding (Vilnis and McCallum 2015) is a
flexible representation learning technology whose goal is to
learn the underlying probability distribution of data. In contrast to deterministic embedding (Pereyra et al. 2017; Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow 2017; Gunel et al. 2021), which
maps each data to a fixed vector representation, probabilistic embedding embraces the notion of learning a probability distribution, mapping each data point to a distribution.
These probabilistic embedding approaches can better describe the uncertainty and complexity of data, handle redundant information, and provide better discriminative representations. Probabilistic embedding has been applied to various domains such as computer vision (Oh et al. 2019; Shi
and Jain 2019) and natural language processing (Mahabadi,
Belinkov, and Henderson 2021; Hu et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12491

