The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Taming Binarized Neural Networks
and Mixed-Integer Programs
Johannes Aspman1 , Georgios Korpas1,2 , Jakub Marecek1
1

Department of Computer Science, Czech Technical University, Prague, Czechia
HSBC Lab, Innovation & Ventures, HSBC Holdings, London, United Kingdom
johannes.aspman@cvut.cz, georgios.korpas@hsbc.com, jakub.marecek@cvut.cz

2

Abstract

to poor stationary points (Yin et al. 2018), and thus poor explanations.
Here, we draw a new relationship between binarized neural networks and so-called tame geometry (van den Dries
1998) to address this challenge. We introduce a certain reformulation of the training of BNN, which allows us to make
use of the results of implicit differentiation and non-smooth
optimization when training the BNNs (Davis et al. 2020;
Bolte and Pauwels 2021; Bolte et al. 2021, 2022) and, eventually, to obtain weight updates in the back-propagation that
do correspond to subgradients of the forward paths in common software frameworks built around automated differentiation, such as TensorFlow or PyTorch.
This builds on a long history of work on tame topology
and o-minimal structures (Grothendieck 1997; van den Dries
1998; Kurdyka 1998; Kurdyka, Mostowski, and Parusinski 2000; Fornasiero and Servi 2008; Fornasiero 2010;
Kawakami et al. 2012; Fornasiero 2013; Fujita 2023, e.g.),
long studied in topology, logic, and functional analysis.
Our reformulation proceeds as follows: In theory, the
training of BNNs can be cast as a mixed-integer program
(MIP). We formulate its sub-additive dual, wherein we leverage the insight that conic MIPs admit a strong dual in terms
of non-decreasing subadditive functions. We show that this
dual problem is tame, or definable in an o-minimal structure. This, in turn, makes it possible for the use of powerful
methods from non-smooth optimization when training the
BNN, such as a certain generalized derivative of (Bolte and
Pauwels 2021) that comes equipped with a chain rule. Thus,
one can use backpropagation, as usual in training of neural
networks.
In the process, we establish a broader class of nice MIPs
that admit such a tame reformulation. A MIP is nice if its
feasible set is compact, and the graph of the objective function has only a finite number of non-differentiable points.
This class could be of independent interest, as it may contain
a number of other problems, such as learning causal graphs
(Chen, Dash, and Gao 2021), optimal decision trees (Nemecek, Pevny, and Marecek 2023; Nemecek et al. 2023),
or certain problems in symbolic regression (Austel et al.
2020; Kim, Leyffer, and Balaprakash 2023). We hope that
this could bring closer symbolic approaches, which can often be cast as MIPs, and approaches based on neural networks and backpropagation.

There has been a great deal of recent interest in binarized neural networks, especially because of their explainability. At the
same time, automatic differentiation algorithms such as backpropagation fail for binarized neural networks, which limits
their applicability. We show that binarized neural networks
admit a tame representation by reformulating the problem of
training binarized neural networks as a subadditive dual of a
mixed-integer program, which we show to have nice properties. This makes it possible to use the framework of Bolte et
al. for implicit differentiation, which offers the possibility for
practical implementation of backpropagation in the context
of binarized neural networks.
This approach could also be used for a broader class of
mixed-integer programs, beyond the training of binarized
neural networks, as encountered in symbolic approaches to
AI and beyond.

Introduction
There has been a great deal of recent interest in binarized
neural networks (BNNs) (Hubara et al. 2016; Courbariaux
et al. 2016; Yuan and Agaian 2021), due to their impressive statistical performance (Rastegari et al. 2016, e.g.), the
ease of distributing the computation (Hubara et al. 2016,
e.g.), and especially their explainability. This latter property,
which is rather rarely encountered in other types of neural
networks, stems precisely from the binary representation of
the outputs of activation functions of the network, which
can be seen as logical rules. This explainability is increasingly mandated by regulation of artificial intelligence, including the General Data Protection Regulation and the AI
Act in the European Union, and the Blueprint for an AI Bill
of Rights pioneered by the Office of Science and Technology Policy of the White House. The training of BNNs typically utilizes the Straight-Through-Estimator (STE) (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015; Courbariaux et al. 2016;
Rastegari et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016; Lin, Zhao, and Pan
2017; Bulat and Tzimiropoulos 2017; Cai et al. 2017; Xiang, Qian, and Yu 2017), where the weight updates in backpropagation unfortunately (Alizadeh et al. 2018) do not correspond to subgradients of the forward paths. This can lead
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10935

