The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FlexiBO: A Decoupled Cost-Aware Multi-objective Optimization Approach for
Deep Neural Networks (Abstract Reprint)
Md Shahriar Iqbal1 , Jianhai Su1 , Lars Kotthoff2 , Pooyan Jamshidi1
1

University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
2
University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Iqbal, Su, Kotthoff, and Jamshidi (2023).

mization Approach for Deep Neural Networks. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 77: 645–682.

Abstract
The design of machine learning systems often requires trading off different objectives, for example, prediction error
and energy consumption for deep neural networks (DNNs).
Typically, no single design performs well in all objectives;
therefore, finding Pareto-optimal designs is of interest. The
search for Pareto-optimal designs involves evaluating designs in an iterative process, and the measurements are used
to evaluate an acquisition function that guides the search
process. However, measuring different objectives incurs different costs. For example, the cost of measuring the prediction error of DNNs is orders of magnitude higher than
that of measuring the energy consumption of a pre-trained
DNN as it requires re-training the DNN. Current state-ofthe-art methods do not consider this difference in objective evaluation cost, potentially incurring expensive evaluations of objective functions in the optimization process. In
this paper, we develop a novel decoupled and cost-aware
multi-objective optimization algorithm, which we call Flexible Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization (FlexiBO) to address this issue. For evaluating each design, FlexiBO selects
the objective with higher relative gain by weighting the improvement of the hypervolume of the Pareto region with the
measurement cost of each objective. This strategy, therefore,
balances the expense of collecting new information with the
knowledge gained through objective evaluations, preventing
FlexiBO from performing expensive measurements for little to no gain. We evaluate FlexiBO on seven state-of-the-art
DNNs for image recognition, natural language processing
(NLP), and speech-to-text translation. Our results indicate
that, given the same total experimental budget, FlexiBO discovers designs with 4.8% to 12.4% lower hypervolume error
than the best method in state-of-the-art multi-objective optimization.

References
Iqbal, M. S.; Su, J.; Kotthoff, L.; and Jamshidi, P. 2023.
FlexiBO: A Decoupled Cost-Aware Multi-Objective OptiCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22700

