The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Effective and General Graph Unlearning via Mutual Evolution
Xunkai Li* 1 , Yulin Zhao* 3 , Zhengyu Wu1 ,
Wentao Zhang4, 5 , Rong-Hua Li1, 2 , Guoren Wang1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
Shenzhen Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Shandong University, Shandong, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China
5
National Engineering Labratory for Big Data Analytics and Applications, Beijing, China
{cs.xunkai.li, yulinzhao233}@gmail.com, Jeremywzy96@outlook.com,
wentao.zhang@pku.edu.cn, lironghuabit@126.com, wanggrbit@gmail.com
2

Abstract

significantly impact the predictive performance of trained
GNNs. Two motivations behind the real-world AI deployment of data deletion can be further illustrated as follows:
(i) Data privacy: Deletion of elements takes into account
the ”right to be forgotten” in machine learning, enabling
users to request the removal of sensitive elements used for
training. As a result, this changes node presence and helps
protect data privacy. (ii) Model robustness: The presence
of industry-related noise and fluctuation compromises data
quality. By employing data deletion, the impact of such
noise on contaminating node attributes and edge presence
can be mitigated, leading to enhanced model robustness.

With the rapid advancement of AI applications, the growing needs for data privacy and model robustness have highlighted the importance of machine unlearning, especially in
thriving graph-based scenarios. However, most existing graph
unlearning strategies primarily rely on well-designed architectures or manual process, rendering them less user-friendly
and posing challenges in terms of deployment efficiency. Furthermore, striking a balance between unlearning performance
and framework generalization is also a pivotal concern. To address the above issues, we propose Mutual Evolution Graph
Unlearning (MEGU), a new mutual evolution paradigm that
simultaneously evolves the predictive and unlearning capacities of graph unlearning. By incorporating aforementioned
two components, MEGU ensures complementary optimization in a unified training framework that aligns with the prediction and unlearning requirements. Extensive experiments
on 9 graph benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of MEGU in addressing unlearning requirements
at the feature, node, and edge levels. Specifically, MEGU
achieves average performance improvements of 2.7%, 2.5%,
and 3.2% across these three levels of unlearning tasks when
compared to state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, MEGU
exhibits satisfactory training efficiency, reducing time and
space overhead by an average of 159.8x and 9.6x, respectively, in comparison to retraining GNN from scratch.

To achieve data deletion, machine unlearning (MU) is introduced, aiming to enable trained models to forget the influence of unlearning entities (deleted elements). In general,
the MU strategy contains two crucial modules for practical
demands: (i) Predictive module: It maintains predictive performance for non-unlearning entities; (ii) Unlearning module: It removes the influence of unlearning entities. Given
the distinctive graph-based challenges in real-world deployments, addressing fundamental tasks of graph unlearning
(GU) involves designing strategies for feature, node, and
edge-level operations. Compared to MU in computer vision,
GU poses unique challenges since the extensive entity interactions by GNN training (i.e., message-passing). A naive
approach is to retrain the model from scratch but it suffers
from the high costs of frequent unlearning requests.

Introduction

Recently, graphs have been a trending AI topic. To enable graph learning with human-like intelligence, graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in node- (Chen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022), link(Cai et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2023), and graph-level (Xu et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2022) scenarios.
As most academic works center on training GNN under
experimental settings, its real-world implementation often
requires extra modifications to meet practical demands, such
as the deletion of graph elements. It is critical in practicing data-driven AI applications, where the presence of irrelevant, inaccurate, or privacy-sensitive data elements can

Recently, some approximate-based GU methods are proposed. GIF (Wu et al. 2023) establishes the graph influence
function to capture the relationship between data variations
and model weights, and certified GU approaches (Chien,
Pan, and Milenkovic 2022, 2023) propose a theoretical
framework for approximate unlearning in linear GNNs.
These methods mainly focus on the unlearning module but
overlook the predictive module. As a result, although these
methods offer high flexibility, related research (Mitchell
et al. 2022) highlights potential compromises in their practical performance due to limited consideration for nonunlearning entities. Meanwhile, seeking a balanced tradeoff between generalization boundaries and performance remains challenging in real world deployment. Other GU

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13682

