The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FLAME: A Small Language Model for Spreadsheet Formulas
Harshit Joshi1 * , Abishai Ebenezer4 * , José Cambronero Sanchez2† , Sumit Gulwani2† ,
Aditya Kanade3† , Vu Le2† , Ivan Radiček5† * , Gust Verbruggen2†
1

Stanford University
2
Microsoft, USA
3
Microsoft Research, India
4
University of Washington
5
Demiurg
harshitj@cs.stanford.edu, {abishai.ebenezer.m, ivan.radicek}@gmail.com, {jcambronero, sumitg, kanadeaditya, levu,
gverbruggen}@microsoft.com
Last Mile Repair (LMR)

Abstract

Formula Completion

1.0
0.90

Spreadsheets are a vital tool for end-user data management.
Using large language models for formula authoring assistance in these environments can be difficult, as these models are expensive to train and challenging to deploy due to
their size (up to billions of parameters). We present FLAME,
a transformer-based model trained exclusively on Excel formulas that leverages domain insights to achieve competitive
performance while being substantially smaller (60M parameters) and training on two orders of magnitude less data. We
curate a training dataset using sketch deduplication, introduce
an Excel-specific formula tokenizer, and use domain-specific
versions of masked span prediction and noisy auto-encoding
as pre-training objectives. We evaluate FLAME on formula
repair, formula completion, and similarity-based formula retrieval. FLAME can outperform much larger models, such as
the Davinci (175B) and Cushman (12B) variants of Codex
and CodeT5 (220M), in 10 of 14 evaluation settings for the
repair and completion tasks. For formula retrieval, FLAME
outperforms CodeT5, CodeBERT, and GraphCodeBERT.

Performance on their
respective benchmarks

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
FLAME
(16M)

FLAME
(60M)

CodeT5
(220M)

Codex-Cushman
(12B)

Codex-Davinci
(175B)

Models and their parameter sizes on log scale

Figure 1: Model performance (top-5 candidate cutoff) for
last-mile repair and completion on the benchmark introduced
by (Joshi et al. 2022) and our new benchmark for completion.
Note that Codex-Davinci results are few-shot, and completion is zero-shot for all systems except CodeT5. Completion
results are the fraction of benchmarks successfully completed
(based on sketch match metric) given a 90% prefix.

Introduction
Spreadsheets remain an important data management and processing tool for end-users (Rahman et al. 2020) and estimates
of the number of spreadsheet users are in the billions (Morgan
Stanley). However, despite a large user base, spreadsheet environments still do not have access to nearly the same range of
productivity tools available for general programming environments. The latter typically have code completion, refactoring,
linting, and a wide range of extensions for additional functionality, like generating tests, inserting code snippets, and
summarizing code. Many of these recent advancements in
programming assistance tools are driven by large language
models (LLMs) trained on code (Chen et al. 2021a; Xu et al.
2022; Fried et al. 2022; Nijkamp et al. 2022), and include
features for code completion (GitHub 2021), repair (Joshi
et al. 2022), and automated reviews (Li et al. 2022).
* Work done while at Microsoft
†

Listed in alphabetical order
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12995

To capture the complexity and variety of code and comments in different languages, these models need billions of
parameters (Codex has 12B and 175B variants), are trained
for long periods of time on millions of programs (Incoder was
trained on 159GB of code for 24 days), and result in expensive inference due to hardware requirements. For tasks constrained to a spreadsheet formula language without natural
language interaction, such as repairing a broken spreadsheet
formula, a substantial amount of such models’ expressive
power is left unused. This raises the question: can we substantially reduce the model size by focusing on spreadsheets
and exclusively on the formula-language used to carry out
computations in such an environment?
In this paper, we present FLAME, a Formula LAnguage
Model for Excel trained exclusively on Excel formulas.
FLAME is based on T5-small (Raffel et al. 2020) and has
only 60 million parameters, yet it can compete with much
larger models (up to 175B parameters) on last-mile formula
repair and formula completion. Additionally, we compare
FLAME to CodeT5, CodeBERT, and GraphCodeBERT on

