The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hierarchical Aligned Multimodal Learning for NER on Tweet Posts
Peipei Liu1,2 , Hong Li1,2 * , Yimo Ren1,2 , Jie Liu1,2 , Shuaizong Si1 , Hongsong Zhu1,2 , Limin Sun1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
19 Shucun Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100085 P.R.China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
19 Yuquan Road, Shijingshan District, Beijing 100049 P.R.China
{liupeipei, lihong, zhuhongsong}@iie.ac.cn
Abstract
Mining structured knowledge from tweets using named entity recognition (NER) can be beneficial for many downstream applications such as recommendation and intention
understanding. With tweet posts tending to be multimodal,
multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) has attracted
more attention. In this paper, we propose a novel approach,
which can dynamically align the image and text sequence
and achieve the multi-level cross-modal learning to augment
textual word representation for MNER improvement. To be
specific, our framework can be split into three main stages:
the first stage focuses on intra-modality representation learning to derive the implicit global and local knowledge of
each modality, the second evaluates the relevance between
the text and its accompanying image and integrates different grained visual information based on the relevance, the
third enforces semantic refinement via iterative cross-modal
interactions and co-attention. We conduct experiments on two
open datasets, and the results and detailed analysis demonstrate the advantage of our model.

Penguins[ORG] Top Sharks[ORG]
Bags of mountain air offered
Baby Jasmine[OTHER] is
in Stanley Cup[OTHER] Finals
in smog-addled Chinese city.
dressed and ready to party.
Opener on Late Goal.

a

b

c

Figure 1: The samples for MNER task, where the named entities and their types are highlighted. a: fully relevant (explicit support information), b: partially relevant (implicit
support information), c: entity irrelevant (no entities, no support).
formation while classifying the named entity Baby Jasmine
to OTHER instead of PER.
The core of existing MNER methods is to achieve the
fusion and alignment of visual information and textual information through different cross-modal technologies. The
methods can roughly be divided into four main streams: (1)
(Lu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Arshad et al. 2019; Durant
2021; Wang et al. 2022c) employ pre-trained CNN models
such as ResNet (He et al. 2016) to encode the whole images into a global feature vector, and then augment each
word representation with the global image vector by effective attention mechanism. (2) (Yu et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2022b; Liu et al. 2022) divide the feature map obtained from
the whole image into multiple blocks averagely, and subsequently learn the most valuable vision-aware word representation by modeling the interaction between text sequence
and the visual regions with Transformer or gating mechanism. (3) Some researchers apply object detection models
like Mask RCNN (He et al. 2017) to obtain the visual objects
from the associated image, and then combine the objectlevel visual information and textual word information based
on GNN or cross-modal attention (Wu et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022a,b; Zhao et al.
2022b). (4) There are also some works to explore the derivative knowledge of image content including OCR, image caption, query guidance and other image attributes (Chen et al.
2021b; Jia et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a; Zhao et al. 2022a;

Introduction
In recent years, social media platforms like Twitter and
Facebook have made great development, and they provide
important sources (i.e., tweets) for various applications such
as the identification of cyber-attacks or natural disasters, analyzing public opinion, and mining disease outbreaks (Bruns
and Liang 2012; Ritter et al. 2015). Named entity recognition, the task of detecting and classifying named entities
from unstructured free-form text, is a crucial step to extract the structured information for those downstream applications (Perera et al. 2018; Dionı́sio et al. 2019). With
tweets tending to be multimodal and traditional unimodal
NER methods having challenges to understand these multimedia contents perfectly, multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) has become a new direction and it improves
conventional text-based NER by considering images as additional inputs (Lu et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2022b). For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), the
supplement of visual information can alleviate the semantic
ambiguity and inadequacy problem caused by only text in* The corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18680

