The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dialogue for Prompting: A Policy-Gradient-Based Discrete Prompt Generation for
Few-Shot Learning
Chengzhengxu Li, Xiaoming Liu * , Yichen Wang, Duyi Li, Yu Lan, Chao Shen
Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{czx.li, yichen.wang, liduyi}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {xm.liu, ylan2020, chaoshen}@xjtu.edu.cn

Sampling in Training Set

Abstract

Seeds

Evaluate By Score SUE

Sample1. Review: a film that will enthrall the
whole family. Sentiment: positive. SUE=301.78
Sample2. Review: in the setting, their
struggle is simply too ludicrous and borderline
insulting. Sentiment: negative.
SUE=304.99
… …

Prompt-based pre-trained language models (PLMs) paradigm
has succeeded substantially in few-shot natural language
processing (NLP) tasks. However, prior discrete prompt
optimization methods require expert knowledge to design
the base prompt set and identify high-quality prompts,
which is costly, inefficient, and subjective. Meanwhile, existing continuous prompt optimization methods improve
the performance by learning the ideal prompts through
the gradient information of PLMs, whose high computational cost, and low readability and generalizability are often concerning. To address the research gap, we propose a
Dialogue-comprised Policy-gradient-based Discrete Prompt
Optimization (DP2 O) method. We first design a multi-round
dialogue alignment strategy for readability prompt set generation based on GPT-4. Furthermore, we propose an efficient
prompt screening metric to identify high-quality prompts
with linear complexity. Finally, we construct a reinforcement learning (RL) framework based on policy gradients to
match the prompts to inputs optimally. By training a policy network with only 0.62M parameters on the tasks in
the few-shot setting, DP2 O outperforms the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) method by 1.52% in accuracy on average on four
open-source datasets. Moreover, subsequent experiments also
demonstrate that DP2 O has good universality, robustness and
generalization ability.

Prompt Set Construction

GPT-4
Prompts
Multi-round Dialogue Align
Prompt1. Review: the narrative fails to
connect. Sentiment: negative.
SUE=312.38
Prompt2. Review: a movie combines humor,
emotion, and action perfectly. Sentiment:
… …
positive.
SUE=305.61

Prompt Matching

RL

Input

1. Prompt1 Review: a cinematic delight that
wins the hearts of the audience. Sentiment:
<mask>.
Match Probability P=0.0546
2. Prompt2 Review: a cinematic delight that
wins the hearts of the audience. Sentiment:
<mask>.
Match …Probability
P=0.0159
…

Prediction

Costly human
involvement?
Sorry.

Prompt Enumeration

Fully automatic.

DP2O

Readable?
Transferable?
Continuous Prompting

No.
Yes.

DP2O

Only one prompt for
the whole dataset?
Sample-level
prompt matching.

DP2O

Base Model

Figure 1: An illustration of the procedure and innovation
Q&A of DP2 O. The procedure includes 1) Sampling the
seed set from the training set via SUE; 2) Constructing the
prompt by multi-round dialogue with GPT-4 to align the inputs with the whole training set’s distribution; 3) Employing
an RL agent to match prompts with inputs to predict probabilistically; 4) Feeding all prompt-input pairs to a base PLM
model for downstream tasks and ensemble predictions by
probability weighting.

Introduction

sensitive to prompts (Holtzman et al. 2019; Lester, Al-Rfou,
and Constant 2021). Minor gaps with the same semantics
in prompts may lead PLMs to completely different performances. Therefore, one core issue of the prompt-based
methods is finding high-quality prompts to promote the performance of PLMs.
Currently, prompt optimization methods can be divided
into two categories: discrete prompt optimization and continuous prompt optimization.
Due to the discrete nature of the text, prompts can not
be directly optimized by using the gradient information
from PLMs. Therefore, previous discrete prompt optimization methods heavily relied on the manually designed basic
prompt sets and prompt templates (Jiang et al. 2020; Yuan,
Neubig, and Liu 2021; Haviv, Berant, and Globerson 2021;
Davison, Feldman, and Rush 2019). Moreover, lacking clear
evaluation metrics, prior works often use the supervision

With the continuous development of pre-trained language
models (PLMs) (Liu et al. 2019; Touvron et al. 2023; Anil
et al. 2023), e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) and GPT-4
(OpenAI 2023), prompt-based methods have shown significant rising competitiveness in few-shot downstream tasks
(Schick and Schütze 2020a,b). Unlike the traditional finetuning methods, which require the design of additional
neural network heads according to downstream tasks, the
prompt-based methods join particular extra texts to inputs
to transfer downstream tasks into mask-filling tasks. The
prompt matches the downstream task with the model’s pretraining task, and the potential of the PLMs can be more
comprehensively scheduled. However, PLMs are extremely
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18481

