The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RewriteLM: An Instruction-Tuned Large Language Model for Text Rewriting
Lei Shu∗ , Liangchen Luo, Jayakumar Hoskere, Yun Zhu, Yinxiao Liu,
Simon Tong, Jindong Chen, Lei Meng∗
Google Research
{leishu, luolc, jayakumar, yunzhu, canoee, simon, jdchen, leimeng}@google.com

Abstract

Source Text: The way in which we feed our children determines
how healthy they are. It also determines how nicely they develop
and develop. Children need to be fed a selection of foods each
day in order to make sure their physical, emotional, and mental
health. All foods are from 1 of the basic food groups. Milk
and cheese come from the dairy group, for instance, and green
beans come from the vegetable group. Bread comes from the
grain group and beef comes from the meat group. Chocolate
comes from the fat and sugars group. Our children need so many
servings per day from each of these food groups to maintain
good health.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in creative tasks such as storytelling and Email generation. However, as LLMs are primarily trained on
final text results rather than intermediate revisions, it might
be challenging for them to perform text rewriting tasks. Most
studies in the rewriting tasks focus on a particular transformation type within the boundaries of single sentences. In this
work, we develop new strategies for instruction tuning and reinforcement learning to better align LLMs for cross-sentence
rewriting tasks using diverse wording and structures expressed
through natural languages including 1) generating rewriting
instruction data from Wiki edits and public corpus through
instruction generation and chain-of-thought prompting; 2) collecting comparison data for reward model training through a
new ranking function. To facilitate this research, we introduce
O PEN R EWRITE E VAL, a novel benchmark covers a wide variety of rewriting types expressed through natural language
instructions. Our results show significant improvements over
a variety of baselines.

Instruction: Rewrite the text so that it is easy to understand.
Target Text: What we give our kids to eat affects how healthy
they are and how they grow. Kids need to eat different types
of food each day to stay physically, emotionally, and mentally
healthy. All foods belong to one of the five food groups: dairy,
vegetables, grains, meat and beans, and fruits. Milk and cheese
are dairy foods, green beans are vegetables, bread is a grain, beef
is a meat, and chocolate is a fat and sugar food. To stay healthy,
kids need to eat a certain number of servings from each food
group every day.

Introduction

Instruction: Summarize the text.

Text rewriting plays an essential role in a wide range of
professional and personal written communications. It can
be conceptualized as a form of controllable text generation
(Zhang et al. 2022a) , where a specified textual input is modified based on the user’s requirement. Several categories of
text rewriting have been extensively researched, such as paraphrasing (Siddique, Oymak, and Hristidis 2020; Xu et al.
2012), style transfer (Riley et al. 2020; Zhang, Ge, and Sun
2020; Reif et al. 2021), and sentence fusion (Mallinson et al.
2022).
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown impressive zero-shot capabilities in a wide range of
text generation tasks expressed through natural language
instructions (Chung et al. 2022). However, user expectation
for text rewriting is high and any unintended edits by the
model negatively impact the user’s satisfaction. Given that
the LLMs can be hard to control (Qin et al. 2023) and prone to
generating “hallucinated” content (Ji et al. 2023), we propose
new methods to ensure that the model is properly trained and
evaluated.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Target Text: Feeding children a variety of foods from the five
fundamental food groups (dairy, vegetables, grains, meat, and
fats/sweets) is essential for their overall health and development,
including their physical, emotional, and mental well-being.

Table 1: Rewrite examples. The input for RewriteLM contains an instruction and a source text. The target is a rewrite.
We present one source text and two instructions here for
illustration purpose.
We present a strong model — RewriteLM1 , an instructiontuned large language model for cross-sentence text rewriting.
Similar to InstructGPT (Ouyang et al. 2022), we perform
supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning (RL) steps.
However, InstructGPT heavily relies on human labelers to
collect instruction data (for supervised fine-tuning) and comparison data (for reward training). We instead develop the following data and training strategies with minimal human intervention: 1) For instruction tuning, we extract cross-sentence
1
Github: https://github.com/google-research/google-research/
tree/master/rewritelm

18970

