The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Small Decision Trees With Few Outliers: A Parameterized Perspective
Harmender Gahlawat* and Meirav Zehavi*
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
harmendergahlawat@gmail.com and zehavimeirav@gmail.com

Abstract

this complexity barrier, implementations of several heuristics based on constraint-based and SAT-based techniques
have been proposed to learn small decision trees (Bessiere,
Hebrard, and O’Sullivan 2009; Narodytska et al. 2018; Avellaneda 2020; Schidler and Szeider 2021). In fact, the classical CART heuristic herein is among the top 10 algorithms
of data mining chosen by the ICDM (Steinberg and Colla
2009; Wu et al. 2008).
Despite these efforts, our understanding of the computational complexity of learning small decision trees is limited.
Recently, research of the parameterized complexity of learning small decision trees has attracted a lot of attention (Eiben
et al. 2023; Kobourov et al. 2023; Ordyniak and Szeider
2021; Komusiewicz et al. 2023). Parameterized complexity
theory provides a framework for classifying computational
problems based on both their input size and a parameter that
captures the inherent difficulty of the problem. The key notion in parameterized complexity is that of fixed parameter
tractability (FPT), which restricts the exponential blowup
in the time to be a function only of the chosen parameter. Due to its efficacy, parameterized complexity theory has
been extensively used to understand the complexity of several problems arising in AI and ML; see, e.g. (Bäckström
et al. 2012; Bessiere et al. 2008; Bredereck et al. 2017; Ganian et al. 2018; Gaspers et al. 2017). An important framework within parameterized complexity is that of kernelization, polynomial-time preprocessing with a parametric guarantee. Due to its profound impact, kernelization was termed
“the lost continent of polynomial time” (Fellows 2006). Kernelization is specifically useful in practical applications as it
has shown tremendous speedups in practice (Gao 2009; Guo
and Niedermeier 2007; Niedermeier and Rossmanith 2000;
Weihe 1998).
The input to a decision tree learning algorithm is a classification instance (CI) E, which is a set of examples labeled
either positive or negative, where each example is defined
over the same set of features F that can take values from a
linearly ordered domain D. We define these concepts (along
with other definitions) in Section . Now, in DTS (resp.,
DTD), the input is a positive integer s (resp., d) and a CI
E, and the goal is to decide whether there exists some decision tree (DT) of size at most s (resp., depth at most d) that
“classifies” each example of E correctly. The size of a DT T
is the number of test nodes in T and the depth of a T is the

Decision trees are a fundamental tool in machine learning for
representing, classifying, and generalizing data. It is desirable
to construct “small” decision trees, by minimizing either the
size (s) or the depth (d) of the decision tree (DT). Recently,
the parameterized complexity of D ECISION T REE L EARN ING has attracted a lot of attention. We consider a generalization of D ECISION T REE L EARNING where given a classification instance E and an integer t, the task is to find a “small”
DT that disagrees with E in at most t examples. We consider
two problems: DTSO and DTDO, where the goal is to construct a DT minimizing s and d, respectively. We first establish that both DTSO and DTDO are W[1]-hard when parameterized by s + δmax and d + δmax , respectively, where δmax
is the maximum number of features in which two differently
labeled examples can differ. We complement this result by
showing that these problems become FPT if we include the
parameter t. We also consider the kernelization complexity
of these problems and establish several positive and negative
results for both DTSO and DTDO.

Introduction
Decision trees is a fundamental tool in the realm of machine learning with applications spanning classification,
regression, anomaly detection, and recommendation systems (Larose and Larose 2014; Murthy 1998; Quinlan
1986). Because of their ability to represent complex labeled
datasets through a sequence of simple binary decisions, they
provide a highly interactive and interpretable model for data
representation (Darwiche and Hirth 2020; Doshi-Velez and
Kim 2017; Goodman and Flaxman 2017; Lipton 2018; Monroe 2018). It is of interest to have small trees, as they require fewer tests to classify data and are easily interpretable.
Moreover, small trees are expected to generalize better to
new data, i.e., minimizing the number of nodes reduces the
chances of overfitting (Bessiere, Hebrard, and O’Sullivan
2009). However, as problem instances grow in size and complexity, efficiently learning small decision trees becomes a
challenging task. In particular, it is NP-hard to decide if a
given dataset can be represented using a decision tree of a
certain size or depth (Laurent and Rivest 1976). To deal with
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12100

