The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SPEAL: Skeletal Prior Embedded Attention Learning for Cross-Source Point
Cloud Registration
Kezheng Xiong1 , Maoji Zheng1 , Qingshan Xu2 , Chenglu Wen1 * , Siqi Shen1 * , Cheng Wang1
1

Xiamen University
Nanyang Technological University
{xiongkezheng, zhengmaoji}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, qingshan.xu@ntu.edu.sg, {clwen, siqishen, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn,
2



GeoTrans.

Abstract

PCAM

Point cloud registration, a fundamental task in 3D computer
vision, has remained largely unexplored in cross-source point
clouds and unstructured scenes. The primary challenges arise
from noise, outliers, and variations in scale and density. However, neglected geometric natures of point clouds restrict the
performance of current methods. In this paper, we propose
a novel method, termed SPEAL, to leverage skeletal representations for effective learning of intrinsic topologies of
point clouds, facilitating robust capture of geometric intricacy. Specifically, we design the Skeleton Extraction Module
to extract skeleton points and skeletal features in an unsupervised manner, which is inherently robust to noise and density variances. Then, we propose the Skeleton-Aware GeoTransformer to encode high-level skeleton-aware features. It
explicitly captures the topological natures and inter-pointcloud skeletal correlations with the noise-robust and densityinvariant skeletal representations. Next, we introduce the Correspondence Dual-Sampler to facilitate correspondences by
augmenting the correspondence set with skeletal correspondences. Furthermore, we construct a challenging novel crosssource point cloud dataset named KITTI CrossSource for
benchmarking cross-source point cloud registration methods.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments are conducted to demonstrate our approach’s superiority and robustness on both cross-source and same-source datasets. To the
best of our knowledge, our approach is the first to facilitate
point cloud registration with skeletal geometric priors.

Predator
CoFiNet
HRegNet
⭐SPEAL (Ours)


  




Figure 1: Impossible Triangle of Current Methods. Registration recalls under different settings are shown: KITTI
Odometry (Same-Source), KITTI CrossSource and the lowoverlap test split of KITTI CrossSource. Existing methods
fail to perform as well as SPEAL on all three challenging
circumstances.

In unstructured scenes, the complex natural scenes and
objects often make it difficult to learn discriminative features for registration. This results in degraded performance
of registration algorithms. In the case of cross-source data,
challenges mainly arise from partial overlap, as well as considerable differences in scale and density, leading to difficulties in effective feature matching. The combination of noise
and outliers from different sources further downgrades the
quality of correspondences. Existing methods either focus
solely on same-source point clouds, or overlook the intrinsic
topological natures of the point clouds. This leads to suboptimal results for challenging scenarios such as cross-source
point cloud registration and unstructured scenes.
We have observed that skeletons serve as an efficient and
robust geometric representation for point clouds, exhibiting significant potential in various point cloud understanding tasks (Shi et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2021). They can effectively encode the geometric intricacy of point clouds. Inspired by this, we propose a novel transformer-based approach, termed Skeletal Prior Embedded Attention Learning
(SPEAL), to address the aforementioned challenges. Our
method utilizes skeletal geometric priors to learn discriminative features for accurate and robust correspondences. To the

Introduction
Point cloud registration is an essential task in graphics,
vision, and robotics. It aims at estimating a rigid transformation to align two partially overlapping frames of
point clouds. Recently, there has been a surge of interest
in learning-based point cloud registration methods. These
methods have made significant progress in addressing the
sparsity, partial overlap, and complex distribution of point
clouds in large outdoor scenes (Lu et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2021a; Yew and Lee 2022; Qin et al. 2022). However, the
practical application and advances in point cloud acquisition
present more challenges for point cloud registration, including unstructured scenes and cross-source data.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6279

