The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Attack and Defense for Reinforcement Learning
Jeremy McMahan, Young Wu, Xiaojin Zhu, Qiaomin Xie
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jmcmahan@wisc.edu, yw@cs.wisc.edu, jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu, qiaomin.xie@wisc.edu

Abstract

tacker has the power to manipulate each aspect of the
victim-environment interaction. In particular, the attacker
can change: (i) the environment’s state (state attacks), (ii)
the victim’s observation (observation attacks), (iii) the action taken by the victim (action attacks), and (iv) the reward received by the victim (reward attacks). When the environment is fully-observable, observation attacks translate
to well-studied perceived-state attacks. We refer to all of
these attack surfaces by online manipulation attacks. The
attacker may use a subset or all of these attack surfaces to
optimize its own expected reward from the attack, which often corresponds to minimizing the victim’s value. However,
the attacker cannot perform arbitrary manipulations without
raising suspicion. Hence, the attacker must restrict its manipulations to a predefined set of stealthy attacks. On the
other hand, the attacker-aware victim seeks to choose a defense policy whose value is provably robust even under the
worst possible stealthy attack.
From the attacker’s perspective, it faces an optimal control problem: it needs to strategically choose stealthy attacks
to optimize its value. Unlike typical control problems, the
attacker must deal with the uncertainty of the victim’s actions in addition to that of the stochastic environment. Thus,
the attacker’s problem involves a multi-agent feature. For
any fixed victim policy π, we can view the attacker’s problem as computing its best response attack to the victim’s
chosen π. From the victim’s perspective, we argue it faces
a Stochastic Stackelberg game: it needs to choose a policy that achieves maximum value in the environment under the attacker’s best-response attack. A defense policy designed following this principle ensures neither the victim nor
the attacker would benefit from deviating from their chosen
policies, and so an equilibrium would be achieved. This implies that regardless of the attack, the defense policy always
achieves at least the game’s optimal value. However, computing optimal Stackelberg strategies for stochastic games is
NP-hard. Thus, both the attacker and the victim are faced
with challenging optimization problems.
Although the attack and defense problems are of great
importance, complete solutions have yet to be discovered.
For the attack problem, most works focus on the empirical aspects, lacking theoretical guarantees. Provably optimal attacks have only been devised for the special case of
test-time, perceived-state attacks (Russo and Proutiere 2021;

To ensure the usefulness of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in
real systems, it is crucial to ensure they are robust to noise and
adversarial attacks. In adversarial RL, an external attacker has
the power to manipulate the victim agent’s interaction with
the environment. We study the full class of online manipulation attacks, which include (i) state attacks, (ii) observation attacks (which are a generalization of perceived-state attacks), (iii) action attacks, and (iv) reward attacks. We show
the attacker’s problem of designing a stealthy attack that maximizes its own expected reward, which often corresponds to
minimizing the victim’s value, is captured by a Markov Decision Process (MDP) that we call a meta-MDP since it is
not the true environment but a higher level environment induced by the attacked interaction. We show that the attacker
can derive optimal attacks by planning in polynomial time
or learning with polynomial sample complexity using standard RL techniques. We argue that the optimal defense policy
for the victim can be computed as the solution to a stochastic Stackelberg game, which can be further simplified into a
partially-observable turn-based stochastic game (POTBSG).
Neither the attacker nor the victim would benefit from deviating from their respective optimal policies, thus such solutions
are truly robust. Although the defense problem is NP-hard,
we show that optimal Markovian defenses can be computed
(learned) in polynomial time (sample complexity) in many
scenarios.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has become a staple with a
plethora of applications including the breakthrough ChatGPT (Ouyang et al. 2022). With the growth of RL applications, it is critical to understand the security threats posed
to RL and how to defend against them. In many applications,
noisy measurements can cause the agent-environment interaction to evolve entirely differently than what one would expect in theory. Even worse, malicious attackers can strategically modify the agent-environment interaction to induce
catastrophic outcomes for the agent. If RL methods are to be
used in diverse and critical settings, it is essential to ensure
these RL algorithms are robust to potential attacks.
In adversarial RL, a victim agent interacts with an environment while being disrupted by an attacker. The atCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14332

