The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EPSD: Early Pruning with Self-Distillation for Efficient Model Compression
Dong Chen1,2 * , Ning Liu2 * , Yichen Zhu2 , Zhengping Che2 , Rui Ma1† ,
Fachao Zhang2 , Xiaofeng Mou2 , Yi Chang1 , Jian Tang2†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
2
Midea Group
chendong21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {ruim, yichang}@jlu.edu.cn,
{liuning22, zhuyc25, chezp, zhangfc, mouxf, jiantang22}@midea.com

Abstract
Neural network compression techniques, such as knowledge
distillation (KD) and network pruning, have received increasing attention. Recent work ‘Prune, then Distill’ reveals
that a pruned student-friendly teacher network can benefit
the performance of KD. However, the conventional teacherstudent pipeline, which entails cumbersome pre-training of
the teacher and complicated compression steps, makes pruning with KD less efficient. In addition to compressing models,
recent compression techniques also emphasize the aspect of
efficiency. Early pruning demands significantly less computational cost in comparison to the conventional pruning methods as it does not require a large pre-trained model. Likewise,
a special case of KD, known as self-distillation (SD), is more
efficient since it requires no pre-training or student-teacher
pair selection. This inspires us to collaborate early pruning with SD for efficient model compression. In this work,
we propose the framework named Early Pruning with SelfDistillation (EPSD), which identifies and preserves distillable
weights in early pruning for a given SD task. EPSD efficiently
combines early pruning and self-distillation in a two-step process, maintaining the pruned network’s trainability for compression. Instead of a simple combination of pruning and SD,
EPSD enables the pruned network to favor SD by keeping
more distillable weights before training to ensure better distillation of the pruned network. We demonstrated that EPSD
improves the training of pruned networks, supported by visual and quantitative analyses. Our evaluation covered diverse
benchmarks (CIFAR-10/100, Tiny-ImageNet, full ImageNet,
CUB-200-2011, and Pascal VOC), with EPSD outperforming
advanced pruning and SD techniques.

Figure 1: Comparison of different model compression
schemes. (a) PKD (Park and No 2022) follows four steps
to combine pruning and KD. (b) Our Early Pruning with SD
(EPSD) needs only two steps for compression.

Guo, Ouyang, and Xu 2020; Huang et al. 2023), knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al. 2014), parameter quantization (Hubara et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2022) and low-rank
decomposition (Zhang et al. 2015). Among them, KD and
pruning have received increasing attention.
The concept behind KD is to train a smaller student
network to approximate a larger, pre-trained teacher network with higher accuracy (Hinton et al. 2014). The cost
of pre-training and the capacity gap issue between teachers and students inevitably limit the usage of KD (Mirzadeh
et al. 2020; Xu and Liu 2019). To overcome these limitations, self-distillation (SD) is proposed to enable students
to distill knowledge from themselves (Shen et al. 2022;
Yang et al. 2019; Zhang, Bao, and Ma 2021; Zhang et al.
2019). Namely, SD allows the student network to learn from
its predictions (Mobahi, Farajtabar, and Bartlett 2020), enabling a more streamlined training procedure that requires
much fewer computational resources. However, the potential risk in SD is that the student could result in overfitting
if the training process is not properly regularized (Kim et al.
2021). Therefore, regularizing the student model becomes
crucial to ensure effective knowledge transfer.
Network pruning removes the redundancy inside the original network and generates a sub-network with comparable accuracy performance (LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1989;

Introduction
Resource-limited edge devices struggle to handle the computational demands of large deep neural networks (DNNs).
Therefore, compressing deep models is crucial to eliminate
redundancy, facilitating the effective deployment of DNNs
on edge devices (Gong et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Guo, Xu,
and Ouyang 2023). Various compression methods have been
well studied, including network pruning (Han et al. 2015;
* These authors contributed equally. This work was done during

Dong Chen’s internship at Midea Group.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11258

