The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Distilling Autoregressive Models to Obtain High-Performance Non-autoregressive
Solvers for Vehicle Routing Problems with Faster Inference Speed
Yubin Xiao1 , Di Wang2,3 , Boyang Li4 , Mingzhao Wang1 ,
Xuan Wu1 , Changliang Zhou5 , You Zhou1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
WeBank-NTU Joint Research Institute on Fintech, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
Abstract

et al. 2022; Hou et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2023). Most NNs used
to solve VRPs adopt the Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al. 2017) with an encoder-decoder framework, where the
decoder produces solutions in an Autoregressive (AR) manner by generating each node conditioned on the previously
generated nodes. Although the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models (Hou et al. 2023) exhibit better performance than conventional VRP solvers. Because the AR process of these
SOTA models is not parallelizable and each node is generated using a computationally intensive NN (Joshi et al.
2022), their inference speed becomes much slower as the
problem size increases. Furthermore, when employing commonly used sampling techniques like beam search, AR models often suffer from diminishing returns w.r.t. beam size and
exhibit limited search parallelism due to the computational
dependencies between beams (Koehn and Knowles 2017).
In an effort to improve the inference speed of models for
solving VRPs, several Non-Autoregressive (NAR) models
have been developed. These models generate solutions in a
one-shot manner, allowing for highly parallelized inference.
They treat VRP as a link prediction task and adopt Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) to maximize the edges’
likelihood of being selected in the VRP solution (Joshi et al.
2022). However, most NAR models employ complex Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) that take both node coordinates
and distances between nodes as the inputs, requiring more
computationally intensive operations compared to Transformers which only rely on node coordinates. Consequently,
the inference speed of NAR models may not meet the anticipated tight timeline. More importantly, NAR models typically exhibit inferior performance compared to AR models. This can be attributed to the lack of order-dependent information during training (Joshi et al. 2022) and the NAR
model’s tendency to make less confident node selections
during inference, as reported in our finding (see Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose a novel method called Guided
Non-Autoregressive Knowledge Distillation (GNARKD)
to boost the performance and computational efficiency of
NAR models. Inspired by Knowledge Distillation (KD),
which involves transforming knowledge from a complex
model (i.e., teacher) to a more compact one (i.e., student).

Neural construction models have shown promising performance for Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs) by adopting either the Autoregressive (AR) or Non-Autoregressive (NAR)
learning approach. While AR models produce high-quality
solutions, they generally have a high inference latency due
to their sequential generation nature. Conversely, NAR models generate solutions in parallel with a low inference latency
but generally exhibit inferior performance. In this paper, we
propose a generic Guided Non-Autoregressive Knowledge
Distillation (GNARKD) method to obtain high-performance
NAR models having a low inference latency. GNARKD removes the constraint of sequential generation in AR models while preserving the learned pivotal components in the
network architecture to obtain the corresponding NAR models through knowledge distillation. We evaluate GNARKD by
applying it to three widely adopted AR models to obtain NAR
VRP solvers for both synthesized and real-world instances.
The experimental results demonstrate that GNARKD significantly reduces the inference time (4∼5× faster) with acceptable performance drop (2∼3%). To the best of our knowledge, this study is first-of-its-kind to obtain NAR VRP solvers
from AR ones through knowledge distillation.

Introduction
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is a well-known optimization problem in the field of transportation and logistics
(Kim et al. 2015). VRP has been extensively studied over the
past few decades, leading to the development of numerous
exact (Applegate et al. 2007) and (approximate) heuristics
solvers (Helsgaun 2017). Nonetheless, the adoption of VRP
solvers in the real world remains challenging when (near)
optimal routes need to be determined in real-time with diverse and rapidly changing constraints (Carić et al. 2008).
Most conventional VRP solvers are unable to produce highquality solutions within a reasonably short time period in
real-world scenarios (Li et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2021).
As a promising alternative, Neural Networks (NNs) have
been widely applied to solve VRPs in recent years (Hudson
* Corresponding author (zyou@jlu.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20274

