The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NuScenes-QA: A Multi-Modal Visual Question Answering Benchmark for
Autonomous Driving Scenario
Tianwen Qian1 , Jingjing Chen2† , Linhai Zhuo2 , Yang Jiao2 , Yu-Gang Jiang2
1

2

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{twqian19, chenjingjing, lhzhuo19, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, yjiao23@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce a novel visual question answering (VQA) task
in the context of autonomous driving, aiming to answer natural language questions based on street-view clues. Compared to traditional VQA tasks, VQA in autonomous driving scenario presents more challenges. Firstly, the raw visual data are multi-modal, including images and point clouds
captured by camera and LiDAR, respectively. Secondly, the
data are multi-frame due to the continuous, real-time acquisition. Thirdly, the outdoor scenes exhibit both moving foreground and static background. Existing VQA benchmarks
fail to adequately address these complexities. To bridge this
gap, we propose NuScenes-QA, the first benchmark for VQA
in the autonomous driving scenario, encompassing 34K visual scenes and 460K question-answer pairs. Specifically,
we leverage existing 3D detection annotations to generate
scene graphs and design question templates manually. Subsequently, the question-answer pairs are generated programmatically based on these templates. Comprehensive statistics
prove that our NuScenes-QA is a balanced large-scale benchmark with diverse question formats. Built upon it, we develop a series of baselines that employ advanced 3D detection
and VQA techniques. Our extensive experiments highlight
the challenges posed by this new task. Codes and dataset are
available at https://github.com/qiantianwen/NuScenes-QA.

Figure 1: NuScenes-QA is a multi-modal, multi-frame,
outdoor dataset that differs significantly from other VQA
benchmarks in terms of visual data.

system through question answering, fortifying their trust in
its capabilities.
Despite the notable progress made by the VQA community, models trained on existing VQA datasets (Goyal et al.
2017; Hudson and Manning 2019) have limitations in addressing the complexities of autonomous driving scenario.
This limitation is primarily caused by the difference in visual
data between self-driving scenario and existing VQA benchmarks. For instance, to answer question like “Are there any
moving pedestrians in front of the stopped bus?”, it is necessary to locate and identify the bus, pedestrians, and their status accurately. This requires the model to effectively leverage the complementary information from images and point
clouds to understand complex scenes and capture object dynamics from multiple frames of data streams. Therefore, it
is essential to explore VQA in the context of multi-modal,
multi-frame and outdoor scenario. However, existing VQA
benchmarks cannot satisfy all these conditions simultaneously, as illustrated in Fig. 1. For instance, although 3D-QA
(Azuma et al. 2022) and the self-driving scenario both focus
on understanding the structure and spatial relationships of
objects, 3D-QA is limited to single-modal (i.e., point cloud),

Introduction
Autonomous driving is a rapidly developing field with immense potential to improve transportation safety and efficiency with advancements in sensor technologies and computer vision. As the increasing maturity of traditional perceptual techniques such as 3D object detection (Liu et al.
2023; Jiao et al. 2023b) and tracking (Chen et al. 2023),
autonomous driving systems are progressing towards enhanced interpretability and flexible human-car interactivity.
In this context, visual question answering (VQA) (Antol
et al. 2015) can play a critical role. On one hand, VQA possesses interactive and entertainment, enabling passengers to
perceive their surroundings through language and enhancing the user experience of intelligent driving systems. On
the other hand, users can verify the correctness of perception
†

Correspondence to: Jingjing Chen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4542

