The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Heterogeneous Test-Time Training for Multi-Modal Person Re-identification
Zi Wang1 , Huaibo Huang2 , Aihua Zheng3 * , Ran He2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
2
MAIS & CRIPAC, CASIA, Beijing, China
3
Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of
Multimodal Cognitive Computation, School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
ziwang1121@foxmail.com, huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, ahzheng214@foxmail.com, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Multi-modal person re-identification (ReID) seeks to mitigate challenging lighting conditions by incorporating diverse modalities. Most existing multi-modal ReID methods
concentrate on leveraging complementary multi-modal information via fusion or interaction. However, the relationships
among heterogeneous modalities and the domain traits of unlabeled test data are rarely explored. In this paper, we propose
a Heterogeneous Test-time Training (HTT) framework for
multi-modal person ReID. We first propose a Cross-identity
Inter-modal Margin (CIM) loss to amplify the differentiation among distinct identity samples. Moreover, we design
a Multi-modal Test-time Training (MTT) strategy to enhance
the generalization of the model by leveraging the relationships in the heterogeneous modalities and the information existing in the test data. Specifically, in the training stage, we
utilize the CIM loss to further enlarge the distance between
anchor and negative by forcing the inter-modal distance to
maintain the margin, resulting in an enhancement of the discriminative capacity of the ultimate descriptor. Subsequently,
since the test data contains characteristics of the target domain, we adapt the MTT strategy to optimize the network
before the inference by using self-supervised tasks designed
based on relationships among modalities. Experimental results on benchmark multi-modal ReID datasets RGBNT201,
Market1501-MM, RGBN300, and RGBNT100 validate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. The codes can be found
at https://github.com/ziwang1121/HTT.

Figure 1: (a) Traditional multi-modal training exclusively
utilizes labeled training data. (b) The proposed heterogeneous test-time training additionally leverages unlabeled test
data for optimization.

The majority of multi-modal ReID methods (Zheng et al.
2021; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022d; Guo et al. 2022)
place more emphasis on the fusion or interaction of modalities. The current multi-modal ReID methods can be categorized into traditional multi-modal training, using only labeled training data, and trained under the constraints of supervised and unsupervised loss, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
However, there are two common but rarely explored clues
in the multi-modal person ReID. (1) The relationships between heterogeneous modalities. The multi-modal ReID
methods employ various losses to supervise network learning. Cross-entropy (CE) loss can force the network to distinguish different identities, as shown in Fig. 2 (a). Fig. 2
(b) illustrates that after calculating the distance between
the anchor and the positive/negative, triplet loss (Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) ensures the difference between them is larger than the predetermined margin. As
shown in Fig. 2 (c), the multi-modal margin (3M) loss
(Wang et al. 2022d) is designed to increase the distance
among the intra-identity modalities. Nevertheless, the distinction between the final person descriptors is predominantly governed by inter-modal disparities. The discriminative potency of the final descriptor can be enhanced by
constraining inter-modal relationships, which are pivotal yet
disregarded by these methodologies. (2) The unlabeled
multi-modal test data. Samples in the training and test sets
possess distinct identities and might originate from diverse

Introduction
The task of multi-modal person re-identification (ReID) has
attracted increasing attention as a result of the advancement
of machine learning technology and the concentration of social security issues. Different from the primary objectives of
single-modal ReID methods and cross-modal ReID methods, multi-modal ReID aims to alleviate the issue of insufficient information in single-modal ReID and spectral disparity in cross-modal ReID. Zheng et al. (Zheng et al. 2021)
propose the multi-modal person ReID, introducing complementary information among various modalities. The benchmark multi-modal dataset is comprised of data from visible (RGB), near-infrared (NI), and thermal infrared (TI).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5850

