The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Chinese Spelling Correction as Rephrasing Language Model
Linfeng Liu* , Hongqiu Wu* , Hai Zhao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{linfengliu, wuhongqiu}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Input:

Abstract
This paper studies Chinese Spelling Correction (CSC), which
aims to detect and correct the potential spelling errors in a
given sentence. Current state-of-the-art methods regard CSC
as a sequence tagging task and fine-tune BERT-based models on sentence pairs. However, we note a critical flaw in the
process of tagging one character to another, that the correction is excessively conditioned on the error. This is opposite
from human mindset, where individuals rephrase the complete sentence based on its semantics, rather than solely on
the error patterns memorized before. Such a counter-intuitive
learning process results in the bottleneck of generalizability
and transferability of machine spelling correction. To address
this, we propose Rephrasing Language Model (ReLM), where
the model is trained to rephrase the entire sentence by infilling additional slots, instead of character-to-character tagging.
This novel training paradigm achieves the new state-of-theart results across fine-tuned and zero-shot CSC benchmarks,
outperforming previous counterparts by a large margin. Our
method also learns transferable language representation when
CSC is jointly trained with other tasks.

!"#$%&'()*+,
Age to dismantle the engine when it fails.
Seen error pattern:
&. (age) -> &. (remember)
Mapping

Output: !"#$%&-()*+,
Remember to dismantle the engine when it fails.
(a) Tagging spelling correction
Input:

!"#$%&'()*+,
Age to dismantle the engine when it fails.
Semantics:
What to do with engine when…

Rephrasing
Output: !"#$%&.()*+,
Not to dismantle the engine when it fails.
(b) Human spelling correction

Introduction

Figure 1: Comparison of tagging spelling correction and human spelling correction.

Chinese Spelling Correction (CSC) is a fundamental natural language processing task to detect and correct the potential spelling errors in a given Chinese text (Yu and Li 2014;
Xiong et al. 2015). It is crucial for many downstream applications, e.g, named entity recognition (Yang, Wu, and Zhao
2023), optical character recognition (Afli et al. 2016), web
search (Martins and Silva 2004; Gao et al. 2010).
Current state-of-the-art methods regard CSC as a sequence tagging task and fine-tune BERT-based models on
sentence pairs (Devlin et al. 2019). On top of this, phonological and morphological features are further injected to
enhance the tagging process (Huang et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021a; Lv et al. 2022).
While sequence tagging has become the prevailing
paradigm in CSC, in this paper, we note a critical flaw coming with performing character-to-character tagging, which
is counter to natural human mindset. CSC is a special form
of tagging, where the majority of characters are the same between the source and target sentences. As a result, the model

is allowed to greatly memorize those mappings between the
error and correct characters during training and simply copy
the other characters, to still achieve a decent score on the
test set. It means that the resultant correction will be excessively conditioned on the original error itself, while ignoring
semantics of the entire sentence. We showcase a concrete example in Figure 1. In (a), the model has been exposed to an
edit pair (correct age to remember) during previous training.
Now it encounters a new error age during testing and still
corrects it to remember. It reflects that the tagging model
doggedly memorizes the training errors and fails to fit in the
context. However, this is far from human spelling correction.
In (b), when a person sees a sentence, he first commits the
underlying semantics to his mind. Then, he rephrases the
sentence based on his linguistic knowledge from the past,
though this process will not be explicitly written down, and
eventually decides how the sentence should be corrected.
For example, here, it is easy for a person to correct age to

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18662

