The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Efficient Knowledge Transfer Strategy for Spiking Neural Networks
from Static to Event Domain
Xiang He1, 2 * , Dongcheng Zhao1 * , Yang Li1, 2 * , Guobin Shen1, 3 ,
Qingqun Kong1, 2, 3† , Yi Zeng1, 2, 3, 4†
1

Brain-inspired Cognitive Intelligence Lab, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
{hexiang2021, zhaodongcheng2016, liyang2019, shenguobin2021, qingqun.kong, yi.zeng}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

training SNNs has been a critical area of extensive academic
research. The training of SNNs is mainly divided into the
following three categories: gradient backpropagation-based
methods (Wu et al. 2018, 2019; Zheng et al. 2021; Shen,
Zhao, and Zeng 2022a; Li et al. 2022c; Deng et al. 2022),
spiking time-dependent plasticity (STDP)-based methods
(Diehl and Cook 2015; Hao et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2020;
Dong et al. 2022), and conversion-based methods (Han,
Srinivasan, and Roy 2020; Bu et al. 2021; Li and Zeng 2022;
Liu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022b). With these proposed algorithms, SNNs show excellent performance in various complex scenarios (Stagsted et al. 2020; Godet et al. 2021; Sun,
Zeng, and Zhang 2021; Cheni et al. 2021). In particular,
SNNs have shown promising results in processing neuromorphic, event-based data due to their ability to process
information in the time dimension (Xing, Di Caterina, and
Soraghan 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Viale et al. 2021).

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are rich in spatio-temporal
dynamics and are suitable for processing event-based neuromorphic data. However, event-based datasets are usually less
annotated than static datasets. This small data scale makes
SNNs prone to overfitting and limits their performance. In
order to improve the generalization ability of SNNs on eventbased datasets, we use static images to assist SNN training on
event data. In this paper, we first discuss the domain mismatch
problem encountered when directly transferring networks
trained on static datasets to event data. We argue that the inconsistency of feature distributions becomes a major factor
hindering the effective transfer of knowledge from static images to event data. To address this problem, we propose solutions in terms of two aspects: feature distribution and training strategy. Firstly, we propose a knowledge transfer loss,
which consists of domain alignment loss and spatio-temporal
regularization. The domain alignment loss learns domaininvariant spatial features by reducing the marginal distribution distance between the static image and the event data.
Spatio-temporal regularization provides dynamically learnable coefficients for domain alignment loss by using the output features of the event data at each time step as a regularization term. In addition, we propose a sliding training strategy,
which gradually replaces static image inputs probabilistically
with event data, resulting in a smoother and more stable training for the network. We validate our method on neuromorphic datasets, including N-Caltech101, CEP-DVS, and NOmniglot. The experimental results show that our proposed
method achieves better performance on all datasets compared
to the current state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/Brain-Cog-Lab/Transfer-for-DVS.

The visual neuromorphic data mainly refers to the dataset
collected by Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) (SerranoGotarredona and Linares-Barranco 2013). DVS is a bioinspired visual sensor that operates differently from conventional cameras. Instead of capturing images at a fixed
rate, the DVS measures intensity changes at each pixel asynchronously and records the time (t), position (x, y), and polarity (p) of the intensity change in the form of an event
stream. DVS has been gaining popularity in various applications due to their high dynamic range, high temporal resolution, and low latency (Gallego et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2018;
Stoffregen et al. 2019; Gallego et al. 2020). Despite these advantages, the long and expensive shooting process is still a
significant challenge for event cameras, which makes event
data acquisition difficult and small in scale, thus limiting its
further development. In contrast, static datasets are larger in
scale and more accessible. Pre-trained deep neural networks
can transfer well to other static datasets. However, applying a pre-trained model on a static dataset directly to event
data often yields suboptimal results. This result highlights a
sharp challenge: While static images intuitively provide rich
spatial information that may benefit event data, exploiting
this knowledge remains a difficult problem. For this reason,
efficiently uncovering and utilizing the knowledge in static
datasets to benefit event data is important for the widespread

Introduction
As the third generation of neural networks, spiking neural
networks (SNNs) (Maass 1997) are known for their rich
neurodynamic properties in the spatial-temporal domain and
event-driven advantages (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019).
Due to the non-differentiable properties of spiking neurons,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

512

