The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

OWQ: Outlier-Aware Weight Quantization
for Efficient Fine-Tuning and Inference of Large Language Models
Changhun Lee1 * , Jungyu Jin2 * , Taesu Kim3 , Hyungjun Kim3 , Eunhyeok Park2
1

Department of Convergence IT Engineering, POSTECH
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
3
SqueezeBits Inc.
{changhun.lee, jgjin0317}@postech.ac.kr, {taesu.kim, hyungjun.kim}@squeezebits.com, eh.park@postech.ac.kr
Abstract

reduced communication costs (Park et al. 2023). Advanced
studies (Frantar et al. 2023; Park et al. 2023) have shown that
matrix multiplication with 3-bit weight and fp16 activation
exhibits remarkable performance improvements on a single
GPU compared to the case with fp16 weight and activation
on multiple GPUs. Weight quantization of LLMs could resolve the memory and performance issues of LLMs jointly.
Previously, OPTQ (Frantar et al. 2023), also known as
GPTQ (Frantar et al. 2022), introduced a layer-wise posttraining quantization (PTQ) method based on the optimal
brain compression (OBC) algorithm (Frantar and Alistarh
2022). Notably, the compressed 3-bit OPT-175B model outperforms the fp16 OPT-30B model, even though they have
similar memory footprints. The compressed model now occupies around 63 GB, allowing deployment on a single A100
GPU. However, there is room for improvement. OPT-175B
still experiences some degradation with 3-bit quantization,
and this effect is more pronounced in smaller models. Given
that various model sizes are optimal for different scenarios,
maintaining their accuracy remains highly important.
On the other hand, weight quantization broadens its
application to task-specific fine-tuning. For example,
QLoRA (Dettmers et al. 2023) enables the fine-tuning of the
quantized LLMs for target tasks by incorporating low-rank
high-precision tensors into the quantized dense matrix. During this process, only the added tensors are updated, while
the quantized path remains unchanged. This method is gaining attention as it allows for efficient fine-tuning with reduced memory consumption while mitigating the drawback,
quantization errors, during fine-tuning. However, the quality
of the low-precision dense matrix is often overlooked, even
though its suboptimal quality could diminish the benefits
of fine-tuning. Even for the adaptation, high-quality weight
quantization is essential.
In this paper, we introduce a new weight quantization technique, Outlier-aware Weight Quantization (OWQ).
OWQ is specifically designed considering the unique
characteristics of LLMs, the presence of activation outliers (Dettmers et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2022b; Xiao et al.
2022). Our analysis reveals that these outliers play a key role
in the quality degradation of weight quantization. Based on
this finding, we design OWQ that applies a mixed-precision
quantization considering the sensitivity of each weight column. Extensive analysis indicates that the 3.1-bit OWQ

Large language models (LLMs) with hundreds of billions
of parameters require powerful server-grade GPUs for inference, limiting their practical deployment. To address this
challenge, we introduce the outlier-aware weight quantization (OWQ) method, which aims to minimize LLM’s footprint through low-precision representation. OWQ prioritizes
a small subset of structured weights sensitive to quantization, storing them in high-precision, while applying highly
tuned quantization to the remaining dense weights. This
sensitivity-aware mixed-precision scheme reduces the quantization error notably, and extensive experiments demonstrate
that 3.1-bit models using OWQ perform comparably to 4bit models optimized by OPTQ. Furthermore, OWQ incorporates a parameter-efficient fine-tuning for task-specific adaptation, called weak column tuning (WCT), enabling accurate
task-specific LLM adaptation with minimal memory overhead in the optimized format. OWQ represents a notable advancement in the flexibility, efficiency, and practicality of
LLM optimization literature. The source code is available at
https://github.com/xvyaward/owq.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al. 2020; Radford
et al. 2019; Scao et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2022) demonstrate impressive generation performance
on a wide range of complex language tasks, triggering explosive growth in LLM-based applications. However, the extensive memory and computational demands are major obstacles to the widespread use of LLMs, not only for training but for inference as well. For instance, using fp16, the
GPT3-175B model necessitates approximately 330 GB of
space merely to store model parameters, which eventually
costs hundreds of thousands of dollars to build the system
with multiple server-grade GPUs. For the widespread adoption of LLMs, it is crucial to minimize such serving costs.
Recently, weight quantization has emerged as an attractive optimization method for LLMs (Frantar et al. 2023). By
storing parameters into low-precision representation, storage space can be considerably saved, and this also introduces
performance benefits by addressing memory bottlenecks and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13355

