The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Distilling Reliable Knowledge for Instance-Dependent Partial Label Learning
Dong-Dong Wu* , Deng-Bao Wang* , Min-Ling Zhang†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{dongdongwu, wangdb, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010; Xu et al. 2022), and
multimedia content analysis (Zeng et al. 2013).
The major difficulty of PLL lies in label ambiguity, which
means the ground-truth label is unknown during training.
Over the past decade, non-deep label disambiguation methods have been proposed (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Zhang and Yu 2015; Feng and An 2019; Wang, Li, and
Zhang 2019). However, these methods are inefficient for
large-scale datasets and high-dimensional features. With the
emergence of deep learning, deep PLL methods have been
explosively studied (Lv et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2020; Wen
et al. 2021; Wu, Wang, and Zhang 2022; Wang et al. 2022b;
Qiao, Xu, and Geng 2023; Xu et al. 2023; Jia and Zhang
2022). For example, self-training techniques are utilized in
(Lv et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2021) to progressively identify the
ground-truth label during training. Wu, Wang, and Zhang
(2022) develop a regularized training framework preserving manifold structure of feature space and label space. Recently, various popular techniques such as contrastive learning (Wang et al. 2022b; He et al. 2022), graph neural network (Lyu, Wu, and Feng 2022), optimal transport (Wang
et al. 2022a), meta-learning (Xie, Sun, and Huang 2021),
have been exploited in deep PLL. However, these studies assume that each false label has a random or fixed probability
of being the candidate label. Realistically, annotators prefer to select candidate labels related to the true label, making candidate labels instance-dependent. To cope with the
instance-dependent partial label learning (IDPLL) problem,
Xu et al. (2021) employ variational inference to estimate
the latent label distribution. Xia et al. (2022) perform contrastive learning by utilizing the additional information acquired from the ambiguity. Nevertheless, these methods are
either have high computational complexity and difficulty in
optimization, or rely on ideal assumptions.
In this paper, we attempt to address IDPLL by leveraging
the distillation framework (Allen-Zhu and Li 2020; Mobahi,
Farajtabar, and Bartlett 2020) due to its computational efficiency (Kim et al. 2021) and training stability (Furlanello
et al. 2018). In this framework, the label confidences produced by the teacher model are distilled to guide the student
model training, as suggested in (Xu, Lv, and Geng 2019; Jia
et al. 2018). However, we found that the distillation framework faces limitations, as illustrated in “Before rectification” in Figure 1, where the label confidence does not com-

Partial label learning (PLL) refers to the classification task
where each training instance is ambiguously annotated with
a set of candidate labels. Despite substantial advancements
in tackling this challenge, limited attention has been devoted
to a more specific and realistic setting, denoted as instancedependent partial label learning (IDPLL). Within this contex,
the assignment of partial labels depends on the distinct features of individual instances, rather than being random. In this
paper, we initiate an exploration into a self-distillation framework for this problem, driven by the proven effectiveness and
stability of this framework. Nonetheless, a crucial shortfall is
identified: the foundational assumption central to IDPLL, involving what we term as partial label knowledge stipulating
that candidate labels should exhibit superior confidence compared to non-candidates, is not fully upheld within the distillation process. To address this challenge, we introduce D IRK,
a novel distillation approach that leverages a rectification process to DIstill Reliable Knowledge, while concurrently preserves informative fine-grained label confidence. In addition,
to harness the rectified confidence to its fullest potential, we
propose a knowledge-based representation refinement module, seamlessly integrated into the D IRK framework. This
module effectively transmits the essence of similarity knowledge from the label space to the feature space, thereby amplifying representation learning and subsequently engendering
marked improvements in model performance. Experiments
and analysis on multiple datasets validate the rationality and
superiority of our proposed approach.

Introduction
Partial label learning (PLL) is a prominent weakly supervised learning paradigm, which has been studied a lot in
the past decade (Guillaumin, Verbeek, and Schmid 2010;
Xu, Lv, and Geng 2019; Lv et al. 2020). PLL refers to the
classification task where each training instance is associated
with a set of candidate labels, among which only one is the
ground-truth label. This problem arises naturally in various
real-world scenarios, such as automatic image annotation
(Briggs, Fern, and Raich 2012; Liu and Dietterich 2012),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15888

