The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Expressivity of Recurrent Neural Cascades
Nadezda Alexandrovna Knorozova1 , Alessandro Ronca2
1

RelationalAI
University of Oxford
nadezda.knorozova@relational.ai, alessandro.ronca@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

The acyclic structure of the cascade architecture naturally allows for so-called constructive learning methods, cf. (Fahlman 1990; Reed and Marks II 1999). These
methods construct the network architecture dynamically
during the training, often yielding smaller networks, faster
training and improved generalisation. One such method is
recurrent cascade correlation, which builds the architecture incrementally adding one recurrent neuron at a time
(Fahlman 1990). RNCs emerge naturally here from the fact
that existing nodes will not depend on nodes added later.
RNCs also admit learning methods for fixed architectures,
such as backpropagation through time, cf. (Werbos 1990),
where only the weights are learned. For these methods the
advantage of the cascade architecture comes from the reduced number of weights.
A central question is whether the advantages of the cascade architecture come at the cost of a reduced expressivity compared to the fully-connected architecture. The studies so far have shown that there exist regular languages that
are not captured by RNCs with monotone activation such as
tanh (Giles et al. 1995). However, an exact characterisation
of their expressitivity is still missing. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the inability to capture all regular languages
is a limitation of the cascade architecture, or rather of the
considered activation functions. We continue this investigation and provide new insights in the capabilities of RNCs to
capture regular languages.

Recurrent Neural Cascades (RNCs) are the recurrent neural
networks with no cyclic dependencies among recurrent neurons. This class of recurrent networks has received a lot of
attention in practice. Besides training methods for a fixed architecture such as backpropagation, the cascade architecture
naturally allows for constructive learning methods, where recurrent nodes are added incrementally one at a time, often
yielding smaller networks. Furthermore, acyclicity amounts
to a structural prior that even for the same number of neurons
yields a more favourable sample complexity compared to a
fully-connected architecture.
A central question is whether the advantages of the cascade
architecture come at the cost of a reduced expressivity. We
provide new insights into this question. We show that the regular languages captured by RNCs with sign and tanh activation with positive recurrent weights are the star-free regular languages. In order to establish our results we develop
a novel framework where capabilities of RNCs are assessed
by analysing which semigroups and groups a single neuron is
able to implement. A notable implication of our framework
is that RNCs can achieve the expressivity of all regular languages by introducing neurons that can implement groups.

Introduction
Recurrent Neural Cascades (RNCs) are a class of recurrent
networks that has been successfully applied in many different areas, including information diffusion in social networks
(Wang et al. 2017), geological hazard predictions (Zhu et al.
2020), automated image annotation (Shin et al. 2016), braincomputer inference (Zhang et al. 2018), and optics (Xu et al.
2020). In the cascade architecture neurons can be layed out
into a sequence so that every neuron has access to the output of all preceding neurons as well as to the external input;
and at the same time, it has no dependency on the subsequent neurons. Compared to fully-connected networks, the
cascade architecture has half of the connections. It immediately implies that RNCs have a more favourable sample
complexity, or dually better generalisation capabilities. This
is evident from the fact that the VC dimension of recurrent
networks depends directly on the number of connections
(Koiran and Sontag 1998).

Our contribution. We develop an analysis of the capabilities of RNCs establishing the following expressivity results.
• RNCs with sign or tanh activations capture the star-free
regular languages. The expressivity result already holds
when recurrent weights are restricted to be positive.
• RNCs with sign or tanh activations and positive recurrent
weights do not capture any regular language that is not
star-free.
• Allowing for negative recurrent weights properly extends
the expressivity of RNCs with sign and tanh activations
beyond the star-free regular languages.
• We show that in principle the expressivity of RNCs can
be extended to all regular languages. It suffices to identify appropriate recurrent neurons. In particular, neurons
that can implement finite simple groups. As a first step,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10589

