The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AesFA: An Aesthetic Feature-Aware Arbitrary Neural Style Transfer
Joonwoo Kwon1 * , Sooyoung Kim1 * , Yuewei Lin2 † , Shinjae Yoo2 † , Jiook Cha1 †
1

Seoul National University
Brookhaven National Laboratory
{pioneers, rlatndud0513, connectome}@snu.ac.kr, {ywlin, sjyoo}@bnl.gov
2

Abstract
Neural style transfer (NST) has evolved significantly in recent
years. Yet, despite its rapid progress and advancement, existing NST methods either struggle to transfer aesthetic information from a style effectively or suffer from high computational costs and inefficiencies in feature disentanglement due
to using pre-trained models. This work proposes a lightweight
but effective model, AesFA—Aesthetic Feature-Aware NST.
The primary idea is to decompose the image via its frequencies to better disentangle aesthetic styles from the reference
image while training the entire model in an end-to-end manner to exclude pre-trained models at inference completely. To
improve the network’s ability to extract more distinct representations and further enhance the stylization quality, this
work introduces a new aesthetic feature: contrastive loss. Extensive experiments and ablations show the approach not only
outperforms recent NST methods in terms of stylization quality, but it also achieves faster inference. Codes are available
at https://github.com/Sooyyoungg/AesFA.

Figure 1: Top: The Starry Night by Vincent Van Gogh. The
styles have a strong correlation with spatial information, as
evidenced by the presence of whirling patterns and expressionistic yellow stars in the “sky”. Bottom: Compared with
other NST methods, our method can faithfully transfer styles
while ensuring the spatial information.

Introduction

information. For example, Gatys et al. (Gatys, Ecker, and
Bethge 2016) use gram matrices, while Huang et al. (Huang
and Belongie 2017) employ mean and variance alignment
to obtain a style representation. Despite their success, they
rely solely on summary statistics. Thus, they lack spatial information representation. In fact, style representations are
highly correlated to spatial information. For example, Vincent van Gogh’s The Starry Night (Figure 1) has expressionistic yellow stars and a moon that dominate the upper center
and right, while dynamic swirls fill the center of the sky.
In pondering the style of this painting, its focal point primarily resides in the sky rather than the village or cypress
trees. Therefore, when transferring The Starry Night’s style,
the expected style output likely would be the dynamic swirls
and expressionistic yellow stars in the sky. From this point
of view, spatial information keenly matters in style representations. However, most NST algorithms fail to recognize
such distinct spatial styles due to their spatial-independent
style representations, leading to stylizations lacking in spatial coherence (refer to the bottom panel in Figure 1).
To enhance stylization, we propose a lightweight yet effective model that we call, Aesthetic Feature-Aware Arbitrary NST, or AesFA. AesFA overcomes prior NST limitations by encoding style representations while retaining

Neural Style Transfer (NST) is an artistic application that
transfers the style of one image to another while preserving
the original content. Initially introduced by (Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge 2016), this area has gained substantial momentum with the advancement of deep neural networks. Despite
such progress, a significant chasm persists between authentic artwork and synthesized stylizations. Existing NST methods, as shown in Figure 1, struggle to capture essential aesthetic features, such as tones, brushstrokes, textures, grains,
and the local structure from style images, leading to discordant colors and irrelevant patterns. Ideally, the goal of using
NST is to extract a style from the image and transfer it to
content, necessitating representations that capture both image semantics and stylistic changes. This work focuses on
defining these style representations.
In the context of painting, style representations are defined by attributes, such as overall color and/or the local
structure of brushstrokes. Most NST algorithms define style
representations as spatially agnostic features to encode this
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13310

