The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Wavelet-Driven Spatiotemporal Predictive Learning:
Bridging Frequency and Time Variations
Xuesong Nie1 , Yunfeng Yan1 * , Siyuan Li1,2 , Cheng Tan1,2 , Xi Chen3 , Haoyuan Jin1 ,
Zhihang Zhu1 , Stan Z. Li2 , Donglian Qi1
1
Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
School of Engineering, Westlake University, Zhejiang, China
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
xuesongnie@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Spatiotemporal predictive learning is commonly modeled with two methods: recurrent-based and recurrent-free
frameworks shown in Figure 1. Many mainstream recurrentbased methods (Chang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022) suggested leveraging models with stacked recurrent units to
capture the temporal dependencies. Inspired by the success
of long short-term memory (LSTM) networks (Hochreiter
et al. 1997) in sequence modeling, ConvLSTM (Shi et al.
2015), PredRNN (Wang et al. 2017), PredRNN++ (Wang
et al. 2018a), and MIM (Wang et al. 2019) propose various variants to improve the performance of vanilla LSTM,
called MetaLSTM, such as ConvLSTM, ST-LSTM, CausalLSTM, and MIM-LSTM. Thus we abstract the general
framework of recurrent-based models shown in Figure 1,
which consists of two main parts: (i) various LSTM variants called MetaLSTM. (ii) the information flow modes between different recurrent units. Despite the advantages of
the recurrent-based framework in long-term prediction, the
heavy computational effort limits its further application. Recently, recurrent-free methods (Tan et al. 2022, 2023a) with
the advantage of parallelization has been proposed for spatiotemporal learning. As shown in Figure 1(a), we demonstrated the recurrent-free framework representing various
variants of SimVP (Gao et al. 2022), which also consists of
two main parts: (i) spatial 2D Encoder-Decoder. (ii) latent
feature Spatio-Temporal Translator. Despite greater computational efficiency, the above methods have performance
gaps in real-world scenarios due to single-scale architecture,
2D operations, and irrobust spatiotemporal translators.

Spatiotemporal predictive learning is a paradigm that empowers models to learn spatial and temporal patterns by predicting future frames from past frames in an unsupervised
manner. This method typically uses recurrent units to capture
long-term dependencies, but these units often come with high
computational costs and limited performance in real-world
scenes. This paper presents an innovative Wavelet-based SpatioTemporal (WaST) framework, which extracts and adaptively controls both low and high-frequency components at
image and feature levels via 3D discrete wavelet transform
for faster processing while maintaining high-quality predictions. We propose a Time-Frequency Aware Translator
uniquely crafted to efficiently learn short- and long-range
spatiotemporal information by individually modeling spatial frequency and temporal variations. Meanwhile, we design a wavelet-domain High-Frequency Focal Loss that effectively supervises high-frequency variations. Extensive experiments across various real-world scenarios, such as driving scene prediction, traffic flow prediction, human motion
capture, and weather forecasting, demonstrate that our proposed WaST achieves state-of-the-art performance over various spatiotemporal prediction methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/xuesongnie/WaST.

Introduction
Spatiotemporal predictive learning has recently seen significant progress. Central to data-driven spatiotemporal predictive learning is the generation of future frames based on
historical frames, with applications including traffic flow
prediction (Fang et al. 2019), weather forecasting (Reichstein et al. 2019), physical scene comprehension (Xu et al.
2019), early activity recognition (Wang et al. 2018b), and
vision-based predictive control (Gupta et al. 2022). Leveraging these massive unlabeled data, these models can selfsupervised uncover complex spatial and temporal dependencies, forecasting future events from past data. With the
abundance of spatiotemporal data, unsupervised pretraining
strategies using these techniques show promise for enhancing universal representation learning across various visual
tasks (Tan et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2023).

In this work, we present a novel Wavelet-based SpatioTemporal (WaST) prediction scheme to tackle existing performance gaps. Our solution relies on multi-level
3D Discrete Wavelet Transform (3D-DWT), which decomposes data into low- and high-frequency wavelet subbands.
We introduce 3D-Wavelet Embedding and Reconstruction
modules to embed the wavelet prior and perform detailoriented reconstruction respectively. To learn intricate frequency features and temporal dynamics, we propose a TimeFrequency Aware Translator (TF-Aware Translator) realized via frequency-mixer and temporal-mixer to extract and
adaptively control both low- and high-frequency components in multi-level wavelet space. We argue that traditional mean square error loss makes it hard to focus on de-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4334

