The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

High-Order Structure Based Middle-Feature Learning for
Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification
Liuxiang Qiu1,2 * , Si Chen2 * , Yan Yan1† , Jing-Hao Xue3 , Da-Han Wang2 , Shunzhi Zhu2
1

2

Xiamen University, China
Xiamen University of Technology, China
3
University College London, UK

Abstract

A major challenge of VI-ReID is the large modality discrepancy between VIS and IR images. To reduce the modality discrepancy, existing VI-ReID methods can be divided
into image-level and feature-level methods. The image-level
methods (Dai et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2022),
generate middle-modality or new modality images based on
generative adversarial networks (GAN). However, the GANbased methods easily suffer from the problems of color inconsistency or loss of image details. Hence, the generated
images may not be reliable for subsequent classification.
The feature-level methods (Ye et al. 2021b; Lu, Zou, and
Zhang 2023; Zhang et al. 2022) follow a two-step learning
pipeline (i.e., they first extract features for VIS and IR images, and then map these features into a common feature
space). Generally, these methods have two issues. On the
one hand, they often ignore high-order structure information
of features (i.e., the different levels of dependence across
local features), which can be important for matching crossmodality images. On the other hand, they usually directly
minimize the distances between VIS and IR features in the
common feature space. However, such a manner increases
the difficulty of learning a reasonable common feature space
due to the large modality discrepancy.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose
a novel high-order structure based middle-feature learning
network (HOS-Net), which consists of a backbone, a shortand long-range feature extraction (SLE) module, a highorder structure learning (HSL) module, and a common feature space learning (CFL) module, for VI-ReID. The key
novelty of our method lies in the novel formulation of exploiting high-order structure information and middle features to learn a discriminative and reasonable common feature space, greatly alleviating the modality discrepancy.
Specifically, given a VIS-IR image pair, the SLE module (consisting of a convolutional branch and a Transformer
branch) extracts short-range and long-range features. Then,
the HSL module models the dependence on short-range and
long-range features based on a whitened hypergraph. Finally, the CFL module learns a common feature space by
generating and leveraging middle features. In the CFL module, instead of directly adding or concatenating features from
different modalities and ranges, we leverage graph attention
to properly align these features, obtaining middle features.
Based on it, a modality-range identity-center contrastive

Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) aims to
retrieve images of the same persons captured by visible (VIS)
and infrared (IR) cameras. Existing VI-ReID methods ignore
high-order structure information of features while being relatively difficult to learn a reasonable common feature space
due to the large modality discrepancy between VIS and IR
images. To address the above problems, we propose a novel
high-order structure based middle-feature learning network
(HOS-Net) for effective VI-ReID. Specifically, we first leverage a short- and long-range feature extraction (SLE) module to effectively exploit both short-range and long-range
features. Then, we propose a high-order structure learning
(HSL) module to successfully model the high-order relationship across different local features of each person image based on a whitened hypergraph network. This greatly
alleviates model collapse and enhances feature representations. Finally, we develop a common feature space learning
(CFL) module to learn a discriminative and reasonable common feature space based on middle features generated by
aligning features from different modalities and ranges. In particular, a modality-range identity-center contrastive (MRIC)
loss is proposed to reduce the distances between the VIS, IR,
and middle features, smoothing the training process. Extensive experiments on the SYSU-MM01, RegDB, and LLCM
datasets show that our HOS-Net achieves superior state-ofthe-art performance. Our code is available at https://github.
com/Jaulaucoeng/HOS-Net.

Introduction
Over the past few years, person re-identification (ReID) has
attracted increasing attention due to its significant importance in surveillance and security applications. A large number of single-modality person ReID methods have been proposed based on visible (VIS) cameras. However, these methods may fail under low-light conditions. Unlike VIS cameras, infrared (IR) cameras are less affected by illumination
changes. Recently, visible-infrared person re-identification
(VI-ReID), which leverages both VIS and IR cameras, has
been developed to match cross-modality person images, mitigating the limitations of single-modality person ReID.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author (email: yanyan@xmu.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4596

