The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data-Augmented Curriculum Graph Neural Architecture Search
under Distribution Shifts
Yang Yao1 , Xin Wang1,2 * , Yijian Qin1 , Ziwei Zhang1 , Wenwu Zhu1,2 * , Hong Mei3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
MoE Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies, Peking University
{yaoyang21,qinyj19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin wang,zwzhang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, meih@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

works (Wei et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2020b) mainly focused on
searching for one architecture for a given dataset. This strategy works well for independently and identically distributed
(I.I.D.) datasets, where the training data and testing data
come from the same distribution. However, in graph classification datasets with distribution shifts between training
and testing, the architectures found using the training dataset
may generalize poorly to data under a different distribution.
GRACES (Qin et al. 2022) is the sole work to consider
distribution shifts and out-of-distribution generalization in
graph NAS. They attempt to produce customized architectures by learning the feature of different graphs through decoupling graph encoding, and then using the feature information to customize the architecture for each graph. By producing different architectures for each graph, it is possible to
achieve great performance in tasks with distribution shifts.
However, customizing the architecture for datasets with
distribution shifts still faces several important challenges.
The existing graph NAS methods designed for datasets with
distribution shifts failed to consider data augmentation during training, which has been proven by existing works (Zhao
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022a; You et al. 2020) to be able
to improve generalization. Merely learning from the graphs
present in the training dataset often fails to effectively capture the crucial graph structural information, thus impacting the performance of customized architectures in existing
works. Additionally, since distribution shifts exist between
the training dataset and the test distribution, the importance
of different graphs in enabling the model to learn key information in real-world distribution can vary significantly. Existing methods have treated all data equally without considering their importance, which leads to inferior performance.
In order to solve these challenges, we propose a Dataaugmented Curriculum Graph Neural Architecture Search
(DCGAS) approach to produce customized architectures
from graph data. To enable better generalization ability with
limited training data, we design an embedding-guided data
generator to generate new data for training. It adds an
embedding guidance module to a discrete graph diffusion
model, allowing for the generation of graphs with similar
structures to a given graph. Moreover, to better facilitate important graphs in the training dataset for further enhancing
OOD generalization ability, we use a two-factor uncertaintybased curriculum weighting strategy to schedule the training

Graph neural architecture search (NAS) has achieved great
success in designing architectures for graph data processing.
However, distribution shifts pose great challenges for graph
NAS, since the optimal searched architectures for the training graph data may fail to generalize to the unseen test graph
data. The sole prior work tackles this problem by customizing
architectures for each graph instance through learning graph
structural information, but fails to consider data augmentation during training, which has been proven by existing works
to be able to improve generalization. In this paper, we propose Data-augmented Curriculum Graph Neural Architecture
Search (DCGAS), which learns an architecture customizer
with good generalizability to data under distribution shifts.
Specifically, we design an embedding-guided data generator, which can generate sufficient graphs for training to help
the model better capture graph structural information. In addition, we design a two-factor uncertainty-based curriculum
weighting strategy, which can evaluate the importance of data
in enabling the model to learn key information in real-world
distribution and reweight them during training. Experimental
results on synthetic datasets and real datasets with distribution shifts demonstrate that our proposed method learns generalizable mappings and outperforms existing methods.

Introduction
Graph neural networks have achieved great success in processing non-Euclidean data such as social networks, traffic
networks, molecular structures, etc. They use the information of adjacent nodes to update the features of nodes, and
can capture the structure of graph data. In recent years, many
excellent graph neural networks, such as GCN (Kipf and
Welling 2017), GAT (Velickovic et al. 2018), and GIN (Xu
et al. 2019), have been designed for various datasets and
tasks. However, manually designing network architectures
requires expert knowledge and significant amounts of effort.
With the rise of neural architecture search (NAS), graph
neural architecture search methods have been used to customize graph neural network architectures for different
datasets and tasks. Compared to manually designed networks, graph NAS methods (Gao et al. 2020a; Zhou et al.
2022a) have achieved better results. Existing graph NAS
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16433

