The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UFDA: Universal Federated Domain Adaptation with Practical Assumptions
Xinhui Liu1, 2 , Zhenghao Chen2 , Luping Zhou2 , Dong Xu3 , Wei Xi1 * ,
Gairui Bai1 , Yihan Zhao1 , Jizhong Zhao1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
liuxinhui@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhenghao.chen@sydney.edu.au, xiwei@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Source 1

Conventional Federated Domain Adaptation (FDA) approaches usually demand an abundance of assumptions,
which makes them significantly less feasible for real-world
situations and introduces security hazards. This paper relaxes
the assumptions from previous FDAs and studies a more practical scenario named Universal Federated Domain Adaptation
(UFDA). It only requires the black-box model and the label
set information of each source domain, while the label sets
of different source domains could be inconsistent, and the
target-domain label set is totally blind. Towards a more effective solution for our newly proposed UFDA scenario, we propose a corresponding methodology called Hot-Learning with
Contrastive Label Disambiguation (HCLD). It particularly
tackles UFDA’s domain shifts and category gaps problems by
using one-hot outputs from the black-box models of various
source domains. Moreover, to better distinguish the shared
and unknown classes, we further present a cluster-level strategy named Mutual-Voting Decision (MVD) to extract robust
consensus knowledge across peer classes from both source
and target domains. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method achieves comparable performance for our UFDA scenario with much fewer
assumptions, compared to previous methodologies with comprehensive additional assumptions.

Black-box

...

Source Model 1
Assumption 1

Source M

Target

Black-box
Source Model 1
Category Gaps

...

2

Black-box

Black-box

Source Model M

Source Model M

Assumption 2

Target Label Sets

Black-box

Black-box

Source Model

Source Model

Target Data

Target Data

B2FDA

UFDA

!

?

Assumption 1: Label sets in different source domains perfect match.
Assumption 2: Label sets in source and target domains perfect match.

Figure 1: Overview of Federated Domain Adaptation for
Black-Box Models (B2 FDA) (left), and our proposed Universal Federated Domain Adaptation (UFDA) (right). Different than B2 FDA, where the label set consistency among
different source domains (i.e., Assumption 1) and between
source and target domains (i.e., Assumption 2) are required,
our UFDA scenario allows the label set diversity of source
domains and the target domain.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Mohassel
and Zhang 2017; Mohassel and Rindal 2018) allows models
to be optimized across decentralized devices while keeping
data localized, where no clients are required to share their
local confidential data with other clients or the centralized
server. Traditional FL often struggles to produce models that
can effectively generalize to new unlabeled domains from
clients due to the barrier presented by domain shifts (Yang
et al. 2019). To address this, Federated Domain Adaptation
(FDA) (Fantauzzo et al. 2022; Gilad-Bachrach et al. 2016)
are proposed and achieved tremendous success as it allows
knowledge transfer from decentralized source domains to
an unlabeled target domain using Domain Adaption (DA)
techniques. Nonetheless, current FDA scenarios often operate under the presumption that model parameters or gra-

dients are optimized based on the source domain. However,
acquiring such information in real-world situations is exceptionally challenging due to commercial confidentiality. Also,
exposing such information introduces potential risks such as
model misuse and white-box attacks.
To establish a relaxed condition, Federated Domain Adaptation with Black-Box Models (B2 FDA) (Wu et al. 2021;
Liang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023) is introduced, where
the target-domain client can only access the application
programming interfaces (APIs) of various source domains.
However, most existing B2 FDA approaches assume that the
label sets of different source domains must perfectly align
with each other and that of the target domains. This assumption is particularly challenging to fulfill in real-world
scenarios. First, source data can originate from vastly diverse domains. For example, the biometric data of a single client could stem from unrelated sources like the medical domain (e.g., clinical records from different hospitals)

* Wei Xi is the Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14026

