The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Symbolic Regression Enhanced Decision Trees for Classification Tasks
Kei Sen Fong1 , Mehul Motani1, 2
1

2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
N.1 Institute for Health, Institute for Digital Medicine (WisDM), Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
fongkeisen@u.nus.edu, motani@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

a model can be evaluated by the number of cognitive visual
chunks (e.g., number of DT nodes) (Lage et al. 2019; Abdul
et al. 2020).
Traditional DT algorithms partition a dataset on axisparallel splits. In a tree node with n data points and d features (i.e., [x1 , x2 , ...xd ]), each split is in the form of xi > k,
representing an axis-parallel hyperplane. The small class of
possible splits may lead to bloated and less explainable trees,
such as the tree shown in Fig. 1a when solving the XOR
classification task from MLxtend (Raschka 2018) shown in
Fig. 1b. This weakness becomes more apparent in real-world
applications with a large number of features, d, where it is
much harder to prune and simplify the tree. Furthermore,
unlike the XOR classification task, decision boundaries in
real-world problems are rarely axis-parallel.
To address the problems above, oblique DT (ODT)
(Heath, Kasif, and Salzberg 1993; Murthy, Kasif, and
Salzberg 1994; Ganaie, Tanveer, and Suganthan 2020;
Montañana, Gámez, and Puerta 2021), which utilizes
oblique linear hyperplanes to partition the dataset, has been
proposed. ODT is also known as multivariate DT in other
literature (Brodley and Utgoff 1995). The d-dimensional hyPd
perplanes are stored in the form H(x) = hd+1 + i=1 hi xi ,
where H = {h1 , h2 , . . . , hd+1 } is the hyperplane, x =
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ) is a datapoint and hd+1 represents the constant term (Heath, Kasif, and Salzberg 1993). ODTs have
been shown to be both smaller and more accurate than DT
(Murthy, Kasif, and Salzberg 1994). However, this comes
at the cost of having a splitting rule involving all d input
features, making ODT more susceptible to adversarial data
noise. This also potentially makes ODT less explainable
(Abdul et al. 2020; Lage et al. 2019).
Our proposed Symbolic Regression (SR)-Enhanced DT
(SREDT) addresses the weaknesses of DT and ODT.
SREDT utilizes SR to discover a richer class of splitting
rules, resulting in single splits that would have otherwise
required multiple splits by DT and ODT. For instance, in
the earlier example of XOR classification by DT (shown in
Fig. 1), a single SR split shown in Fig. 2a yields the true
decision boundary shown in Fig. 2b. SREDT is also highly
explainable – achieved through compactness (Zhang et al.
2022; Lage et al. 2019; Abdul et al. 2020) and rich class of
functions (Abdul et al. 2020). Furthermore, SREDT allows
for short inference time.

We introduce a conceptually simple yet effective method to
create small, compact decision trees – by using splits found
via Symbolic Regression (SR). Traditional decision tree (DT)
algorithms partition a dataset on axis-parallel splits. When the
true boundaries are not along the feature axes, DT is likely
to have a complicated structure and a dense decision boundary. In this paper, we introduce SR-Enhanced DT (SREDT)
– a method which utilizes SR to increase the richness of
the class of possible DT splits. We evaluate SREDT on both
synthetic and real-world datasets. Despite its simplicity, our
method produces surprisingly small trees that outperform
both DT and oblique DT (ODT) on supervised classification tasks in terms of accuracy and F-score. We show empirically that SREDTs decrease inference time (compared to
DT and ODT) and argue that they allow us to obtain more explainable descriptions of the decision process. SREDT also
performs competitively against state-of-the-art tabular classification methods, including tree ensembles and deep models. Finally, we introduce a local search mechanism to improve SREDT and evaluate it on 56 PMLB datasets. This
mechanism shows improved performance on 77.2% of the
datasets, outperforming DT and ODT. In terms of F-Score,
local SREDT outperforms DT and ODT in 82.5% and 73.7%
of the datasets respectively and in terms of inference time,
local SREDT requires 25.8% and 26.6% less inference time
than DT and ODT respectively.

Introduction
Traditional decision tree (DT) and its ensembles have been
shown to have state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance for tabular classification problems, despite advances in deep learning for tabular data (Borisov et al. 2021; Shwartz-Ziv and
Armon 2022). Beyond quantitative performance, DT has
been shown to have one of the best degrees of explainability among classification models as well (Xu et al. 2019;
Kaya, Gurpinar, and Ali Salah 2017; Mahbooba et al. 2021;
Blanco-Justicia and Domingo-Ferrer 2019; Došilović, Brčić,
and Hlupić 2018). The structure of a single DT makes it easy
to explain how a prediction is obtained. However, DTs with
many leaves and large depth still suffer from poor explainability (Zhang et al. 2022), which is consistent with cognitive psychology theories which shows that explainability of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12033

