The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Secure Distributed Sparse Gaussian Process Models
Using Multi-Key Homomorphic Encryption
Adil Nawaz1 , Guopeng Chen1 , Muhammad Umair Raza1 , Zahid Iqbal2 ,
Jianqiang Li3 , Victor C.M. Leung1 , Life Fellow, IEEE, Jie Chen1 *
1

College of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
College of Electronics & Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
{adilnawaz, chenguopeng2021, umair}@email.szu.edu.cn, zahidaryan@szu.edu.cn, lijq@szu.edu.cn, vleung@ieee.org
Abstract

tonomous vehicles, require high quality models that guarantee reliable solutions without compromising security and
privacy of local data (Lederer et al. 2021).

Distributed sparse Gaussian process (dGP) models provide an
ability to achieve accurate predictive performance using data
from multiple devices in a time efficient and scalable manner.
The distributed computation of model, however, risks exposure of privately owned data to public manipulation. In this
paper we propose a secure solution for dGP regression models using multi-key homomorphic encryption. Experimental
results show that with a little sacrifice in terms of time complexity, we achieve a secure dGP model without deteriorating the predictive performance compared to traditional nonsecure dGP models. We also present a practical implementation of the proposed model using 15 Nvidia Jetson Nano Developer Kit modules to simulate a real-world scenario. Thus,
secure dGP model plugs the data security issues of dGP and
provide a secure and trustworthy solution for multiple devices
to use privately owned data for model computation in a distributed environment availing speed, scalability and robustness of dGP.

Gaussian Process (GP) models have very good prediction
accuracy and provide accurate estimates of uncertainty in
prediction, hence proving to be one of the best candidates
in critical applications such as healthcare or finance which
require risk-averse solutions. However, achieving data security in full Gaussian process (FGP) model is expensive in
terms of computation because it involves a large number of
arithmetic operations with increase in data size. A secure
FGP model proposed by (Fenner and Pyzer-Knapp 2020)
uses fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) (Brakerski 2012)
in a client-server scenario, where a GP model at server computes predictions for client using client’s data. However, despite careful implementation, secure FGP model is impractical in real-world applications due to its very poor scalability and high memory and time complexity. In an approach
to approximate the GP model in a distributed setting, (Chen
et al. 2013) proposed dGP models computed over a cluster of
computing devices thus providing access to data for model
computation without the need to share it on a central server.
Compared to traditional sparse GP approximation (Snelson
and Ghahramani 2005; Rasmussen 2003; Seeger, Williams,
and Lawrence 2003; Csató and Opper 2002), dGP models
are more efficient because computation load is shared among
a set of collaborating computing devices which enables application of such models in real-time. In dGP computation,
each device uses its local data to compute a local summary which is a data structure comprising of a mean vector and covariance matrix comprising of the expected values
and covariances among realized outputs respectively. The local summaries of all the devices involved in computation of
dGP model are aggregated into a global summary, which is
then used for predictions on unobserved data. This setting
reduces the time and memory complexity compared to centralized full and sparse GP models. The predictive posterior
distribution has lower uncertainty around the region closer to
observed data points due to higher covariance among unobserved and observed points in close proximity realized data,
therefore, in this setting, privacy of the local data of each device is not preserved, where an adversary can use the local
summary structure to predict particular devices’ local data.

Introduction
Increase in adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) devices for
various tasks has caused explosive growth in the generation
of distributed data in recent years. This phenomenon has the
potential to enable novel machine learning (ML) applications in domains such as smart healthcare, finance, smart
homes or autonomous vehicles. However, in such applications, data is distributed among several devices separated in
space, such as different healthcare institutions, financial institutions, research facilities or the end-users. Training ML
models traditionally requires spatially dispersed, heterogeneous data to be collected at a centralized server, entailing
several challenges like high volumes, communication complexity, secure management and processing. Additionally,
competition, bureaucratic red-tape and data security laws,
such as the European Union General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR) also restrict collection of distributed data
by centralized servers for training ML models (Horvitz and
Mulligan 2015). Moreover, physical and safety-critical applications, such as control systems in medical robots or au* Corresponding author (email: chenjie@szu.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14431

