The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VELMA: Verbalization Embodiment of LLM Agents for Vision and Language
Navigation in Street View
Raphael Schumann1 , Wanrong Zhu2 , Weixi Feng2 , Tsu-Jui Fu2 ,
Stefan Riezler1,3 , William Yang Wang2
1

Computational Linguistics, Heidelberg University, Germany
2
University of California, Santa Barbara
3
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
{rschuman, riezler}@cl.uni-heidelberg.de, {wanrongzhu, weixifeng, tsu-juifu, william}@cs.ucsb.edu
Abstract

Navigate to the described target location!
Action Space: forward, left, right, turn_around, stop
Navigation Instructions:

Incremental decision making in real-world environments is
one of the most challenging tasks in embodied artificial intelligence. One particularly demanding scenario is Vision and
Language Navigation (VLN) which requires visual and natural language understanding as well as spatial and temporal
reasoning capabilities. The embodied agent needs to ground
its understanding of navigation instructions in observations
of a real-world environment like Street View. Despite the impressive results of LLMs in other research areas, it is an ongoing problem of how to best connect them with an interactive visual environment. In this work, we propose VELMA,
an embodied LLM agent that uses a verbalization of the trajectory and of visual environment observations as contextual
prompt for the next action. Visual information is verbalized
by a pipeline that extracts landmarks from the human written
navigation instructions and uses CLIP to determine their visibility in the current panorama view. We show that VELMA is
able to successfully follow navigation instructions in Street
View with only two in-context examples. We further finetune the LLM agent on a few thousand examples and achieve
around 25% relative improvement in task completion over the
previous state-of-the-art for two datasets.

"Orientate yourself such that a blue bench is on your right, go to the
end of the block and make a right. Follow the park on your left and
make a right at the intersection. Pass the black ﬁre hydrant on your
right and stop when you get to a gray door on the brown building."
Action Sequence:
There is a blue bench on your left.
1. turn_around
There is a blue bench on your right.
2. forward
There is a 3-way intersection.
3. right
4. forward
There is a park on your left.
5. forward
There is a park on your left.
6. forward
There is a 4-way intersection.
7. <next word prediction>

Figure 1: Prompt sequence used to utilize LLMs for VLN
in Street View. Verbalized observations of the visual environment are in green and appended to the prompt at each
step. Agent actions (blue) are acquired by LLM next word
prediction. Highlighting of text for visual presentation only.
Full navigation trajectories are, on average, 40 steps long.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), which have shown impressive reasoning capabilities in traditional natural language
processing tasks, are increasingly used as the reasoning engine of embodied agents for, e.g., household robots (Shridhar et al. 2020), video games (Wang et al. 2023) and indoor navigation (Zhou, Hong, and Wu 2023). These tasks are
mostly based on simulations that either feature computergenerated images with a fixed set of displayable objects and
textures, or are limited in scale and trajectory length. In this
paper, we present a verbalization embodiment of an LLM
agent (VELMA) for urban vision and language navigation
in Street View. The unique challenge of this task is the combination of a large-scale environment derived from an actual
road network, real-world panorama images with dense street
scenes, and long navigation trajectories. The agent needs to
ground its understanding of the navigation instructions in
the observable environment and reason about the next action to reach the target location. The navigation instructions

are written by humans and include open-ended landmark
references and directional indications intended to guide the
agent along the desired path. In order to leverage the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, we use embodiment by verbalization, a workflow where the task, including the agent’s
trajectory and visual observations of the environment, is verbalized, thus embodying the LLM via natural language. Figure 1 shows the verbalization at step 7 of the current trajectory for a given navigation instance. At each step, the LLM
is prompted with the current text sequence in order to predict the next action. Then the predicted action is executed
in the environment, and the new observations are verbalized
and appended to the prompt. This is repeated until the agent
eventually predicts to stop.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:
(i) We introduce VELMA, to our knowledge, the first LLM-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18924

