The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Diffusion Model with State Estimation for Degradation-Blind Inverse Imaging
Liya Ji1 * , Zhefan Rao1 * , Sinno Jialin Pan2 , Chenyang Lei3† , Qifeng Chen1†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
CAIR, HKISI-CAS
{lji, zraoac}@connect.ust.hk, sinnopan@cuhk.edu.hk, leichenyang7@gmail.com, cqf@ust.hk

Abstract

et al. 2020) by adding the constraints to improve the quality of reconstructed images. Due to the impressive generative ability brought by denoising diffusion models (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Rombach et al. 2021), applying diffusion models
for inverse problems may enable us to fill in the missing information with a more powerful knowledge prior about the
distribution of the unknown clean images.
There are two directions in the field of diffusion-based inverse problems. Firstly, some works (Saharia et al. 2022b,a;
Rombach et al. 2021) formulate inverse imaging problems
as conditional diffusion models and convert the measurements into the condition embeddings of the diffusion models. However, this direction is computationally expensive
since the diffusion models must be trained from scratch
when a new inverse imaging task comes. Secondly, some
works (Chung, Sim, and Ye 2022; Lugmayr et al. 2022;
Kawar et al. 2022a; Chung et al. 2022c; Kawar et al. 2022b;
Chung et al. 2022b; Wang, Yu, and Zhang 2022) adjusts
the intermediate state of pre-trained diffusion models at test
time by utilizing the image degradation operator. This direction fails in scenarios where the image degradation operator is unknown. In addition, their reconstruction process
is not convenient for real-world applications, especially for
non-deterministic inverse imaging problems, such as motion deblurring and inpainting, as their approaches require
the motion kernels or inpainting masks as input. There are
some works (Chung et al. 2022a; Ben Fei 2023) to tackle the
degradation-blind inverse imaging problems with diffusion
models. These approaches need the assumption of the form
of degradation operators. On the contrary, our approach is
degradation-blind, which does not need image degradation
information as a prior.
Our key design is proposing a State Estimator to learn the
way to incorporate the noised measurements into the intermediate state of diffusion models at every timestep. More
specifically, the State Estimator automatically estimates the
weighting mask for the noised measurements and the intermediate state of diffusion models. The output of the State
Estimator varies from different states in order to guide the
diffusion model to the desired region on the data manifold.
With the design of the State Estimator, our model has
two advantages over existing baselines. Firstly, we use less
data and time to train the model compared to the conditional

Solving the task of inverse imaging problems can restore unknown clean images from input measurements that have incomplete information. Utilizing powerful generative models,
such as denoising diffusion models, could better tackle the illposed issues of inverse problems with the distribution prior
of the unknown clean images. We propose a learnable stateestimator-based diffusion model to incorporate the measurements into the reconstruction process. Our method makes efficient use of the pre-trained diffusion models with computational feasibility compared to the conditional diffusion models, which need to be trained from scratch. In addition, our
pipeline does not require explicit knowledge of the image
degradation operator or make the assumption of its form, unlike many other works that use the pre-trained diffusion models at the test time. The experiments on three typical inverse
imaging problems (both linear and non-linear), inpainting,
deblurring, and JPEG compression restoration, have comparable results with the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Computational photography strives to produce visually
pleasing images that faithfully depict the original scenes
they represent (Ongie et al. 2020). However, due to physical limitations such as loss of details during image transmission or out-of-focus when capturing the photograph, the
measurements we obtain may only contain inaccurate or incomplete information. A wide range of problems, such as
deblurring, deraining, or JPEG compression restoration, at
the heart of computational photography, reduces to the crucial task of solving inverse imaging problems, which aims to
reconstruct unknown images from given measurements (Diamond et al. 2017).
Measurements are usually obtained through an image
degradation operator from unknown clean images in the setting of inverse imaging problems. However, it is difficult that
an inverse imaging problem is always ill-posed, so multiple
images can fit a measurement even though they do not look
like natural images at all. Utilizing the deep generative prior
is beneficial to solve the ill-posed inverse problems (Pan
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2471

