The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Probabilistic Neural Circuits
Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires
Centre for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems (AASS), Örebro University, Sweden

Abstract

root layer
(Layer 3)

Probabilistic circuits (PCs) have gained prominence in recent
years as a versatile framework for discussing probabilistic
models that support tractable queries and are yet expressive
enough to model complex probability distributions. Nevertheless, tractability comes at a cost: PCs are less expressive
than neural networks. In this paper we introduce probabilistic
neural circuits (PNCs), which strike a balance between PCs
and neural nets in terms of tractability and expressive power.
Theoretically, we show that PNCs can be interpreted as deep
mixtures of Bayesian networks. Experimentally, we demonstrate that PNCs constitute powerful function approximators.

1

×

×

×

sum-product layer
(Layer 2)
×

×

×

×

×

×

leaf layer
(Layer 1)
X1

Introduction

In recent years probabilistic circuits (PCs) (also called sumproduct networks) (Darwiche 2003; Poon and Domingos
2011) have emerged as an assembly language to talk about
tractable probabilistic models and inference therein (Vergari
et al. 2021). The core idea is quite simple: we start with a
set of independent random variables and construct complex
probability distribution by recursively adding and multiplying
them together. There are two common ways of interpreting
PCs. Firstly, we can consider them to be hierarchical mixture
models. Secondly, we look at them as neural nets consisting
of sums, products, and atomic probability distributions.
Most of the recent advances in the field adhere to the
second perspective: use an overparametrized probabilistic
model and fit it to data using gradient based methods by
leveraging discrete GPUs (Peharz et al. 2019; Dang et al.
2021). The computation units of such circuits are organized
in a layered fashion. We give an example in Figure 1.
A major advantage of PCs is their ability to answer certain
queries in polynomial time – given that adequate restrictions
are imposed on a circuit’s structure (Vergari et al. 2021). An
example of such a tractable query would be the computation of conditional probabilities for so-called smooth and
decomposable PCs (Darwiche 2001, 2003).
This tractability, however, comes at a hefty price: the properties imposed on PCs in order to ensure polynomial time
queries limit their expressive power (Martens and Medabalimi 2014; Sharir and Shashua 2018; Zhang, Juba, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17280

X1

X2

X2

X3

X3

X4

X4

Figure 1: Layered probabilistic circuit following the construction of (Shih, Sadigh, and Ermon 2021). Data (modeled as
random variables) is first fed into the leaf layer at the bottom.
The output of the leaf layer is a mixture of distributions produced by the sum units. In the sum-product layer (Layer 2)
mixtures of random variables are combined by taking pairwise products, these are then again mixed using sum units.
Finally, the root layer (at the top) gives us the joint probability
distribution. The red edges indicate functional dependencies
not present in traditional probabilistic circuits but present in
probabilistic neural circuits.
Van den Broeck 2021). This is in contrast to general neural networks and even sum-product networks with fewer
structural constraints (Delalleau and Bengio 2011; Kileel,
Trager, and Bruna 2019). Martens and Medabalimi (2014)
have shown that decomposability is in fact a necessary condition for tractable marginal inference.
Nevertheless, using the concepts of conditional smoothness and conditional decomposability (Sharir and Shashua
2018), we study in this paper the space of models that lie
in between probabilistic circuits and neural networks. Concretely, we make the following contributions:
1. We introduce conditional probabilistic circuits, from
which we construct probabilistic neural circuits (PNCs),
which we interpret as deep mixtures of Bayesian nets.
2. We provide a prescription to construct layered PNCs.
3. We provide an implementation of layered PNCs and experimentally study their expressive power.
Our work is influenced by that of Sharir and Shashua
(2018). We discuss the relationship to their approach (dubbed
sum-product-quotient networks) in Section 5.

