The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Video Frame Prediction from a Single Image and Events
Juanjuan Zhu* , Zhexiong Wan* , Yuchao Dai†
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University
{juanjuanzhu2022, wanzhexiong}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, the task of Video Frame Prediction (VFP), which
predicts future video frames from previous ones through extrapolation, has made remarkable progress. However, the performance of existing VFP methods is still far from satisfactory due to the fixed framerate video used: 1) they have difficulties in handling complex dynamic scenes; 2) they cannot
predict future frames with flexible prediction time intervals.
The event cameras can record the intensity changes asynchronously with a very high temporal resolution, which provides rich dynamic information about the observed scenes. In
this paper, we propose to predict video frames from a single
image and the following events, which can not only handle
complex dynamic scenes but also predict future frames with
flexible prediction time intervals. First, we introduce a symmetrical cross-modal attention augmentation module to enhance the complementary information between images and
events. Second, we propose to jointly achieve optical flow
estimation and frame generation by combining the motion
information of events and the semantic information of the
image, then inpainting the holes produced by forward warping to obtain an ideal prediction frame. Based on these, we
propose a lightweight pyramidal coarse-to-fine model that
can predict a 720P frame within 25 ms. Extensive experiments show that our proposed model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art frame-based and event-based VFP
methods and has the fastest runtime. Code is available at
https://npucvr.github.io/VFPSIE/.

(a) Frame Interpolation

(b) Event-based Frame Interpolation

(c) Frame Prediction

(d) Event-based Frame Prediction

Figure 1: Differences between VFI, event-based VFI, VFP
and event-based VFP. VFI methods require the image (and
events) after the target time t, while image-based VFP is
subject to the limited complexity of motion expressed in
fixed frame rate inputs. Event-based VFP can solve the
above problems, and this paper focuses on the minimal setup
of combining a single frame with the following events.
the previous frames. In Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, even the state-ofthe-art VFP methods, their performances deteriorate quickly
as the motion complexity increases. This is mainly due to
the fixed framerate inputs, which limit the ability to capture complex dynamics beyond the sampling frequency. Another major issue is that they cannot predict future frames at
flexible time intervals, i.e., consecutive in-between frames or
across multiple frames. These factors limit the performance
and real-world applications of existing VFP methods.
The event camera, as a new kind of bio-inspired sensor, can capture the asynchronous brightness change of each
pixel. As the event camera captures high-speed motion with
a low data bandwidth and a high temporal resolution with
millisecond accuracy, it provides critical and complementary information to images and is widely used in motion estimation (Ding et al. 2022; Wan et al. 2023), object tracking (Wang et al. 2023) and etc. In this paper, we investigate a
new and minimal setup for event-enhanced video frame prediction, where we predict the next frames from a single RGB
image (providing contextual information) and the following
events (providing rich motion information).
Apparently, this task is closely related to video frame interpolation (VFI) with events, where the intermediate frames

Introduction
Video frame prediction (VFP) aims to predict future frames
from previous frames, which has broad applications in autonomous driving, robotics planning and weather forecasting. Existing VFP methods usually take previous image sequences as input to predict a sequence of future frames
with the same framerate as the inputs (simplified diagram in
Fig. 1). By exploiting various network architectures, the performance of VFP has been significantly improved. However,
due to the limitations of frame-based cameras in capturing
complex scenes, it is still challenging by only exploiting
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7748

