The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LimeAttack: Local Explainable Method for Textual Hard-Label Adversarial Attack
Hai Zhu1 3 * , Qingyang Zhao2 , Weiwei Shang1 , Yuren Wu3 , Kai Liu4
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Xidian University
3
Ping An Technology
4
Lazada
SA21218029@mail.ustc.edu.cn,21151213588@stu.xidian.edu.cn,wwshang@ustc.edu.cn,leifive@163.com,baiyang.lk@alibabainc.com
Abstract
Natural language processing models are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Previous textual adversarial attacks adopt
model internal information (gradients or confidence scores) to
generate adversarial examples. However, this information is
unavailable in the real world. Therefore, we focus on a more
realistic and challenging setting, named hard-label attack, in
which the attacker can only query the model and obtain a discrete prediction label. Existing hard-label attack algorithms
tend to initialize adversarial examples by random substitution
and then utilize complex heuristic algorithms to optimize the
adversarial perturbation. These methods require a lot of model
queries and the attack success rate is restricted by adversary
initialization. In this paper, we propose a novel hard-label attack algorithm named LimeAttack, which leverages a local
explainable method to approximate word importance ranking,
and then adopts beam search to find the optimal solution. Extensive experiments show that LimeAttack achieves the better
attacking performance compared with existing hard-label attack under the same query budget. In addition, we evaluate
the effectiveness of LimeAttack on large language models
and some defense methods, and results indicate that adversarial examples remain a significant threat to large language
models. The adversarial examples crafted by LimeAttack are
highly transferable and effectively improve model robustness
in adversarial training.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are widely applied in the
natural language processing field and have achieved great
success (Kim 2014; Devlin et al. 2019; Minaee et al. 2021;
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). However, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are correctly classified
samples altered by some slight perturbations (Jin et al. 2020;
Papernot et al. 2017; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016).
These adversarial perturbations are imperceptible to humans
but can mislead the model. Adversarial examples seriously
threaten the robustness and reliability of DNNs, especially in
some security-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving
and toxic text detection (Yang et al. 2021; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2018)). Therefore, adversarial examples
have attracted enormous attention on adversarial attacks and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19759

defenses in computer vision, natural language processing and
speech (Szegedy et al. 2013; Carlini and Wagner 2018; Yu
et al. 2022). It is more challenging to craft textual adversarial
examples due to the discrete nature of language along with
the presence of lexical, semantic, and fluency constraints.
According to different scenarios, textual adversarial attacks
can be briefly divided into white-box attacks, score-based
attacks and hard-label attacks. In a white-box setting, the
attacker utilizes the model’s parameters and gradients to generate adversarial examples (Goodman, Zhonghou et al. 2020;
Jiang et al. 2020). Score-based attacks only adopt class probabilities or confidence scores to craft adversarial examples (Jin
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Ma, Shi, and Guan 2020; Zhu,
Zhao, and Wu 2023). However, these attack methods perform poorly in reality due to DNNs being deployed through
application programming interfaces (APIs), and the attacker
having no access to the model’s parameters, gradients or probability distributions of all labels (Ye et al. 2022b). In contrast,
under a hard-label scenario, the model’s internal structures,
gradients, training data and even confidence scores are unavailable. The attacker can only query the black-box victim
model and get a discrete prediction label, which is more
challenging and realistic. Additionally, most realistic models
(e.g., HuggingFace API, OpenAI API) usually have a limit
on the number of calls. In reality, the adversarial examples
attack setting is hard-label with tiny model queries.
Some hard-label attack algorithms have been proposed (Yu
et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2022b; Maheshwary, Maheshwary, and
Pudi 2021; Ye et al. 2022a). They follow two-stages strategies: i) generate low-quality adversarial examples by randomly replacing several original words with synonyms, and
then ii) adopt complex heuristic algorithms (e.g., genetic algorithm) to optimize the adversary perturbation. Therefore,
these attack methods usually require a lot of queries and the
attack success rate and quality of adversarial examples are
limited by adversary initialization. On the contrary, scorebased attacks calculate the word importance based on the
change in confidence scores after deleting one word. Word
importance ranking improves attack efficiency by preferring
to attack words that have a significant impact on the model’s
predictions (Jin et al. 2020). However, score-based attacks
cannot calculate the word importance in a hard-label setting
because deleting one token hardly changes the discrete prediction label. Therefore, we want to investigate such a problem:

