The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Separate the Wheat from the Chaff:
Model Deficiency Unlearning via Parameter-Efficient Module Operation
Xinshuo Hu* , Dongfang Li* , Baotian Hu† , Zihao Zheng, Zhenyu Liu, Min Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
{yanshek.woo, crazyofapple, melfeszheng, lzy1252439718}@gmail.com,
{hubaotian, zhangmin2021}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been widely used in
various applications but are known to suffer from issues related to untruthfulness and toxicity. While parameter-efficient
modules (PEMs) have demonstrated their effectiveness in
equipping models with new skills, leveraging PEMs for deficiency unlearning remains underexplored. In this work, we
propose a PEMs operation approach, namely Extractionbefore-Subtraction (Ext-Sub), to enhance the truthfulness
and detoxification of LLMs through the integration of “expert” PEM and “anti-expert” PEM. Remarkably, even antiexpert PEM possess valuable capabilities due to their proficiency in generating fabricated content, which necessitates
language modeling and logical narrative competence. Rather
than merely negating the parameters, our approach involves
extracting and eliminating solely the deficiency capability
within anti-expert PEM while preserving the general capabilities. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in terms
of truthfulness and detoxification, we conduct extensive experiments on LLMs, encompassing additional abilities such
as language modelling and mathematical reasoning. Our empirical results demonstrate that our approach effectively improves truthfulness and detoxification, while largely preserving the fundamental abilities of LLMs.

Figure 1: The average accuracy and 4-gram generation repetition scores of TruthfulQA from the Alpaca-GPT4 model,
under varying weights λ of subtraction (Section ). Our approach (Ext-Sub) consistently improves truthfulness without
text degeneration, while previous PEMs operation method,
direct subtraction (Zhang et al. 2023; Ilharco et al. 2023),
leads to performance decreases and harmful degeneration as
λ increases.

Introduction
“There’s some good in the worst of us and some evil
in the best of us.” – Martin Luther King, Jr.

Parameter-efficient modules (PEMs), such as LoRA (Hu
et al. 2022), can enable LLMs to acquire new abilities more
efficiently, but utilization of PEMs operation for deficiency
unlearning (Liu et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022) is underexplored.
Recent studies have demonstrated the advantages of model
parameter ensembles in enhancing performance (Matena
and Raffel 2022; Jin et al. 2023), while others have explored
the arithmetic operations of PEMs to combine and eliminate
skills acquired by different modules (Zhang et al. 2023; Ilharco et al. 2023). This paper conducts a deep exploration
of the operations of PEMs and their potential for enhancing model truthfulness and detoxification, which enhance an
“expert” parameter-efficient tuned model by leveraging unlearning from another “anti-expert” PEM.
One of the primary challenges in model unlearning is
how to identify and extract undesirable deficiency features
from anti-expert PEMs. In contrast to classification tasks,

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al.
2020; Ouyang et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023) has emerged
as a powerful tool for various natural language processing
tasks. However, a critical drawback of these models is their
tendency to generate untruthful and toxic texts (Lin, Hilton,
and Evans 2022; Welbl et al. 2021). Although LLMs possess the capability to produce natural and human-like answers, they suffer from issues of unreliability, unsafety, and
untruthful (Ji et al. 2023; Deng et al. 2023). Prior research
has demonstrated that even highly potent language models
can generate false or toxic responses to user queries (Li et al.
2023a; Liu, Zhang, and Liang 2023; Zhao et al. 2023).
*

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

18252

