The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Explainable Origin-Destination Crowd Flow Interpolation via Variational
Multi-Modal Recurrent Graph Auto-Encoder
†

Qiang Zhou1,* , Xinjiang Lu2, , Jingjing Gu1 , Zhe Zheng1 , Bo Jin3 , Jingbo Zhou2
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
Baidu Research, Beijing, China
3
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{zhouqnuaacs, gujingjing, zhengzhe}@nuaa.edu.cn, {luxinjiang, zhoujingbo}@baidu.com, jinbo@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract
Origin-destination (OD) crowd flow, if more accurately inferred at a fine-grained level, can potentially enhance the efficacy of various urban applications. In practice, for mining
OD crowd flow with effect, the problem of spatially interpolating OD crowd flow occurs because of the ineluctable
missing values. This problem is further complicated by the
inherent scarcity and noise nature of OD crowd flow data.
In this paper, we propose an uncertainty-aware interpolative
and explainable framework, namely UApex, for realizing reliable and trustworthy OD crowd flow interpolation. Specifically, we first design a Variational Multi-modal Recurrent
Graph Auto-Encoder (VMR-GAE) for uncertainty-aware OD
crowd flow interpolation. A key idea here is to formulate
the problem as semi-supervised learning on directed graphs.
Next, to mitigate the data scarcity, we incorporate a distribution alignment mechanism to introduce supplementary
modals into variational inference. Then, a dedicated decoder
with a Poisson prior is proposed for the task. Moreover, to
make VMR-GAE more trustworthy, we develop an efficient
and uncertainty-aware explainer that can explain spatiotemporal topology via the Shapley value. Extensive experiments
on two real-world datasets validate that VMR-GAE outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines. Also, an exploratory empirical study shows that the proposed explainer can generate
meaningful spatiotemporal explanations.

(a) Citywide OD crowd flow shows high sparsity (compared to the
aggregated in/out-flow) with varying patterns at different times.

(b) The crowd flow from region (c) Great deviations exist in
190 to 193 show great deviation crowd flow observed between
on different days.
different OD pairs.

Figure 1: The citywide OD crowd flow usually depicts not
only sparsity but also uncertainty.

proposed a sparsity-aware multi-task framework for OD matrix prediction. To predict OD-based ride-hailing demands,
DiDi (Ke et al. 2021) evades the sparsity in OD matrix
by directly modeling correlations between OD pairs. However, these works neglect the noise and uncertainty in OD
crowd flow data. Some researchers have paid attention to
the uncertainty-aware OD prediction. For example, (Li et al.
2022) leveraged the Bayesian approximation to quantify the
uncertainty in OD demand, whereas, the proposed approach
can hardly extrapolate unseen OD demands.
As the crowd flow data becomes more fine-grained, more
data quality issues come to light. As shown in Fig. 1(a),
the citywide OD crowd flow is sparse most of the time
compared to the aggregated in/out-flow observed within regions. Hence, the innate data scarcity makes it challenging
to learn effective representations without enough context.
Meanwhile, Fig. 1(b) and 1(c) show that the crowd flow is
highly uncertain temporally and spatially. Thus, it is critical
to quantify the uncertainty of OD crowd flow.
Since the advancement in spatiotemporal data mining

Introduction
Inferring human mobility at a more fine-grained level, i.e.,
origin-destination (OD) crowd flow, can benefit various new
applications in the urban computing area. For example,
with the cross-region OD crowd flow rather than the incoming/out-going flow in a region, the decision-making for
alleviating traffic jams can be more efficient by focusing on
the problematic OD pairs without excessive traffic restrictions. Therefore, it is the importance of OD crowd flow that
has attracted attention from both academia and industry.
For instance, (Xu et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2021b) were devoted to overcoming the
sparsity in OD crowd flow prediction. (Wang et al. 2019c)
* This work was done when the first author was an intern at

Baidu Research.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9422

