The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Image Safeguarding: Reasoning with Conditional Vision Language Model
and Obfuscating Unsafe Content Counterfactually
Mazal Bethany1, 2, * , Brandon Wherry1, 2, * , Nishant Vishwamitra1 , Peyman Najafirad1, 2,

†

1

University of Texas at San Antonio
2
Secure AI and Autonomy Lab
{mazal.bethany, brandon.wherry, nishant.vishwamitra, peyman.najafirad}@utsa.edu

Abstract

flag and obfuscate (i.e, make the image safer by blurring
sensitive regions) such images (Bethany et al. 2023). This
process involves obfuscating (e.g. by blurring or blocking)
unsafe image regions in the image (Li et al. 2017) along
with generating a rationale that backs up the decision to
obfuscate the flagged images (Meta 2022).
The image obfuscation process faces two critical problems regarding how much of the unsafe image is obfuscated
and why it is obfuscated: First, the decision to deem an
image unsafe and obfuscate it demands providing a rationale for the decision. For example, Instagram moderators are
required to provide a legal rationale (Bronstein 2021; Are
2020) to back up their decision (Tenbarge 2023). Existing
visual reasoning methods (Li et al. 2022, 2023; Dai et al.
2023) are severely limited for unsafe images such as sexually explicit, cyberbullying, and self-harm since they cannot
provide a rationale grounded in attributes that are specific
to such images, such as rude hand gestures in cyberbullying
images (Vishwamitra et al. 2021), or sensitive body parts in
sexually-explicit images (Binder 2019). Second, the unsafe
image needs minimal obfuscation while still depicting the
safe regions for evidence collection and investigation (Billy
Perrigo 2019). For instance, human moderators need to determine the age of the person in the image (e.g., in child sexual abuse material (CSAM) investigations), look for identifiers (e.g., tattoos, scars, and unique birthmarks), and determine their location information (e.g., landmarks, geographical features, and recognizable surroundings). Current segmentation techniques (Chandrasekaran et al. 2021; Vermeire
et al. 2022; Bethany et al. 2023) cannot minimally identify
the regions and consequently impede investigations that pertinently need full details of the remaining safe regions.
In this work, we take the first step towards addressing
a pertinent, but overlooked problem of the image moderation process in social media platforms. Our major objective is to first identify and minimally obfuscate the sensitive
regions in an unsafe image such that the safe regions are
unaltered to aid an investigation, and then provide an accurate rationale for doing so, that is grounded in unsafe image attributes (e.g., private body parts, rude gestures or hateful symbols). To this end, we address this problem in two
steps: (1) we develop a novel unsafe image rationale generation method called ConditionalVLM (i.e., conditional vision
language model) that leverages the state-of-the-art large lan-

Social media platforms are being increasingly used by malicious actors to share unsafe content, such as images depicting sexual activity, cyberbullying, and self-harm. Consequently, major platforms use artificial intelligence (AI)
and human moderation to obfuscate such images to make
them safer. Two critical needs for obfuscating unsafe images is that an accurate rationale for obfuscating image regions must be provided, and the sensitive regions should be
obfuscated (e.g. blurring) for users’ safety. This process involves addressing two key problems: (1) the reason for obfuscating unsafe images demands the platform to provide an
accurate rationale that must be grounded in unsafe imagespecific attributes, and (2) the unsafe regions in the image
must be minimally obfuscated while still depicting the safe
regions. In this work, we address these key issues by first
performing visual reasoning by designing a visual reasoning model (VLM) conditioned on pre-trained unsafe image
classifiers to provide an accurate rationale grounded in unsafe image attributes, and then proposing a counterfactual
explanation algorithm that minimally identifies and obfuscates unsafe regions for safe viewing, by first utilizing an
unsafe image classifier attribution matrix to guide segmentation for a more optimal subregion segmentation followed
by an informed greedy search to determine the minimum
number of subregions required to modify the classifier’s output based on attribution score. Extensive experiments on uncurated data from social networks emphasize the efficacy
of our proposed method. We make our code available at:
https://github.com/SecureAIAutonomyLab/ConditionalVLM

Introduction
Social media is being increasingly misused by bad actors
to share sexually explicit, cyberbullying, and self-harm
content (Hendricks 2021; Chelmis and Yao 2019; Adler and
Chenoa Cooper 2022). However, social media platforms
are required by law to safeguard their users against such
images (Exon 1996), as well as provide a rationale for why
such images are flagged (Cabral et al. 2021) for the purpose
of transparency. In response, major platforms have deployed
AI and human-based content moderation techniques to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

774

