The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fast Machine Unlearning without Retraining through Selective Synaptic
Dampening
Jack Foster* 1,2 , Stefan Schoepf* 1 , Alexandra Brintrup1,2
1

University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering
2
The Alan Turing Institute
{jwf40, ss2823, ab702}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

The challenge of machine unlearning can be thought of
as a multi-objective task, conducting forgetting without degrading model performance on the remaining data. Nguyen
et al. (2022) refers to this trade-off in terms of design requirements, referring to performance preservation as keeping the model completeness, and unlearning efficiency as
timeliness and light-weightiness. Timeliness is a key constraint, as full retraining of a model without the to-beforgotten data would yield the desired results but doing so
is time and resource-intensive. Similarly, light-weightiness
refers to what preparation is necessary for the unlearning
process, such as storing a list of samples and parameter updates for every training batch as in Graves, Nagisetty, and
Ganesh (2021). This adds significant overhead and cannot
be performed post-hoc.
Current state-of-the-art approaches rely on various retraining or fine-tuning steps in order to preserve model performance while unlearning the specified data (Tarun et al.
2023a,b; Chundawat et al. 2023a,b; Graves, Nagisetty, and
Ganesh 2021). This can add overhead and, importantly,
mandates that the training data be stored permanently.
In this paper, we propose Selective Synaptic Dampening
(SSD), a retraining-free, post hoc unlearning approach to
enable lightweight and timely unlearning. We achieve this
by distinguishing between generalized and specialized information, prioritising the protection of generalized, broadly
useful information while dampening parameters that are specialized towards to-be-forgotten samples. SSD builds on
the finding that overparameterised ML models are prone to
memorization of training data (Lee, Lee, and Shin 2011;
Feldman 2020; Carlini et al. 2019). Thus, we contend that
targeting this specialized information can induce forgetting
while minimising influence on the generalization capability of the model. The remaining information in the model
is generalized and therefore not violating individual privacy
(e.g., the ability to detect the shape of a person versus detecting Jane Smith). We use the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix (FIM) to identify these specialized parameters.
Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto (2020a) have also proposed a
retraining-free unlearning approach based on the FIM, but
as shown by Tarun et al. (2023b) and our own benchmarks,
their approach does not meet key design criteria. First, the
computational effort exceeds retraining and takes orders of
magnitude longer than the unlearning method of Tarun et al.

Machine unlearning, the ability for a machine learning model
to forget, is becoming increasingly important to comply with
data privacy regulations, as well as to remove harmful, manipulated, or outdated information. The key challenge lies in
forgetting specific information while protecting model performance on the remaining data. While current state-of-theart methods perform well, they typically require some level
of retraining over the retained data, in order to protect or
restore model performance. This adds computational overhead and mandates that the training data remain available
and accessible, which may not be feasible. In contrast, other
methods employ a retrain-free paradigm, however, these approaches are prohibitively computationally expensive and do
not perform on par with their retrain-based counterparts. We
present Selective Synaptic Dampening (SSD), a novel twostep, post hoc, retrain-free approach to machine unlearning
which is fast, performant, and does not require long-term storage of the training data. First, SSD uses the Fisher information matrix of the training and forgetting data to select parameters that are disproportionately important to the forget
set. Second, SSD induces forgetting by dampening these parameters proportional to their relative importance to the forget set with respect to the wider training data. We evaluate
our method against several existing unlearning methods in
a range of experiments using ResNet18 and Vision Transformer. Results show that the performance of SSD is competitive with retrain-based post hoc methods, demonstrating
the viability of retrain-free post hoc unlearning approaches.

Introduction
Modern machine learning (ML) models are trained on vast
amounts of data, much of which may be sensitive, private,
or copyrighted. To address threats posed by large-scale data
collection, authorities are enacting data privacy regulations
that afford individuals the right to request the deletion of
their data (e.g., GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017)).
Despite the increasing need to facilitate forgetting, there is
much work to be done in designing such algorithms. The
process of forgetting information within an ML model is referred to as machine unlearning.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12043

