The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generative Calibration of Inaccurate Annotation for Label Distribution Learning
Liang He1 , Yunan Lu1,2 , Weiwei Li3 , Xiuyi Jia1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{heliang, luyn, jiaxy}@njust.edu.cn, liweiwei@nuaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is an effective learning
paradigm for handling label ambiguity. When applying LDL,
it typically requires datasets annotated with label distributions. However, obtaining supervised data for LDL is a challenging task. Due to the randomness of label annotation, the
annotator can produce inaccurate annotation results for the
instance, affecting the accuracy and generalization ability of
the LDL model. To address this problem, we propose a generative approach to calibrate the inaccurate annotation for LDL
using variational inference techniques. Specifically, we assume that instances with similar features share latent similar
label distributions. The feature vectors and label distributions
are generated by Gaussian mixture and Dirichlet mixture,
respectively. The relationship between them is established
through a shared categorical variable, which effectively utilizes the label distribution of instances with similar features,
and achieves a more accurate label distribution through the
generative approach. Furthermore, we use a confusion matrix
to model the factors that contribute to the inaccuracy during
the annotation process, which captures the relationship between label distributions and inaccurate label distributions.
Finally, the label distribution is used to calibrate the available
information in the noisy dataset to obtain the ground-truth label distribution.

Figure 1: The GCIA Model. The feature vectors x and true
label distributions y are generated by Gaussian mixture and
Dirichlet mixture, respectively. The label given by the annotator is obtained from the ground-truth label distribution
after concept confusion.

2020), sentiment analysis (Jia et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021) and
so on.
Label distribution learning (LDL) primarily focuses on
the establishment of prediction function from features to label distributions, utilizing instances annotated by label distributions. However, generating large and high-quality labeled datasets is a challenging task due to the common presence of inaccurate annotation (Xu and Zhou 2017). Tasks
with high subjectivity, like sentiment analysis and topic classification, have their annotation data quality significantly influenced by the skill set, experience, and knowledge level of
the annotators (Frénay and Verleysen 2013). For instance,
in the process of annotating a sentiment mining dataset, an
annotator might mistakenly label “happy” as “surprised”.
This subjectivity can introduce erroneous annotations, resulting in inaccurate LDL datasets. Training on such inaccurate datasets may undermine the performance of LDL models.
LEVI (Xu et al. 2020) uses variational methods to solve
the label enhancement (Xu, Liu, and Geng 2019) problem.
Inspired by this, to alleviate the inaccurate annotations in
LDL datasets, we propose a Generative Calibration model
of Inaccurate Annotation (GCIA) to infer the true label distribution. Specifically, given a LDL dataset, which lacks
any additional information apart from the feature space and
the inaccuracy label space, we can only infer the ground-

Introduction
Label polysemy, the situation where an instance can be described by multiple labels, is ubiquitous in real-world applications. To quantify label polysemy, two typical forms of
labeling have been widely studied. The first is the logical
label (Zhang and Zhou 2013), which directly assigns an instance a vector of logical values (0/1) to indicate whether
each label is relevant to the instance. The second is the label distribution (Geng 2016), which assigns to the instance a
real-valued vector with probability distribution form (called
label distribution) to indicate the relative importance among
labels. Since label distribution provides more semantic information about label polysemy, it has been widely applied
in many practical applications, such as age estimation (Shen
et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2018; Hou et al. 2017), head pose estimation (Liu et al. 2019; Geng and Xia 2014; Xu and Wang
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12394

