The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

YTCommentQA: Video Question Answerability in Instructional Videos
Saelyne Yang1 * , Sunghyun Park2 , Yunseok Jang3 * , Moontae Lee2,4
1
KAIST,
LG AI Research,
3
University of Michigan,
4
University of Illinois Chicago
saelyne@kaist.ac.kr, {sunghyun.park, moontae.lee}@lgresearch.ai, yunseokj@umich.edu
2

Abstract
Instructional videos provide detailed how-to guides for various tasks, with viewers often posing questions regarding the
content. Addressing these questions is vital for comprehending the content, yet receiving immediate answers is difficult.
While numerous computational models have been developed
for Video Question Answering (Video QA) tasks, they are primarily trained on questions generated based on video content,
aiming to produce answers from within the content. However,
in real-world situations, users may pose questions that go beyond the video’s informational boundaries, highlighting the
necessity to determine if a video can provide the answer. Discerning whether a question can be answered by video content
is challenging due to the multi-modal nature of videos, where
visual and verbal information are intertwined. To bridge this
gap, we present the YTCommentQA dataset, which contains
naturally-generated questions from YouTube, categorized by
their answerability and required modality to answer – visual,
script, or both. Experiments with answerability classification
tasks demonstrate the complexity of YTCommentQA and
emphasize the need to comprehend the combined role of visual and script information in video reasoning. The dataset is
available at https://github.com/lgresearch/YTCommentQA.

1

Figure 1: A question on video can be either (1) unanswerable
by video, (2) answerable by visual, (3) answerable by script,
or (4) answerable when both visual and script are present.
The figure shows an example of (4), where the question is
answerable with the understanding of both visual and script.

Introduction

Instructional videos present a procedural guide on how to
perform a task through visual demonstrations and verbal explanations (Miech et al. 2019). As people watch and follow the videos, they naturally have questions regarding the
video content, such as clarifying a certain part or adapting
the instructional content to their own situations (Madden,
Ruthven, and McMenemy 2013; Poché et al. 2017). Providing appropriate answers to these questions is crucial for
people to comprehend and follow instructions effectively.
However, addressing every question promptly can pose challenges for video creators.
At the same time, extensive research has been conducted
in the domain of Video Question Answering (Video QA),
which aims to provide answers to questions about video content (Colas et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2020a). However, the majority of models are trained on

datasets labeled by crowd workers or domain experts who
were instructed to create both questions and answers based
on the video content (Colas et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2020), or those generated with automated methods
(Yang et al. 2020a). Yet, questions from real-world users
can include queries that go beyond the scope of what can
be answered within the video while questions still remain
relevant to the content. These queries may necessitate additional knowledge such as domain or creator-specific knowledge (Zhao et al. 2021). To avoid generating false information, it is essential to determine whether a given question can
be answered within the video. However, to our knowledge,
there has been limited prior research on video answerability.
The Video Answerability task poses significant challenges due to the multi-modal nature of videos, where information is conveyed through both visual and verbal channels.
A simplistic approach to determine answerability is to ex-

* Work done at LG AI Research
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19359

