The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Estimating On-Road Transportation Carbon Emissions from Open Data of Road
Network and Origin-Destination Flow Data
Jinwei Zeng, Yu Liu* , Jingtao Ding, Jian Yuan, Yong Li
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
zengjw17@gmail.com, liuyu2419@126.com

Abstract
Accounting for over 20% of the total carbon emissions, the
precise estimation of on-road transportation carbon emissions
is crucial for carbon emission monitoring and efficient mitigation policy formulation. However, existing estimation methods typically depend on hard-to-collect individual statistics of
vehicle miles traveled to calculate emissions, thereby suffering from high data collection difficulty. To relieve this issue
by utilizing the strong pattern recognition of artificial intelligence, we incorporate two sources of open data representative
of the transportation demand and capacity factors, the origindestination (OD) flow data and the road network data, to build
a Hierarchical hEterogeneous graph learning method for oNroad Carbon Emission estimation (HENCE). Specifically, a
hierarchical graph consisting of the road network level, community level, and region level is constructed to model the
multi-scale road network-based connectivity and travel connection between spatial areas. Heterogeneous graphs consisting of OD links and spatial links are further built at both the
community level and region level to capture the intrinsic interactions between travel demand and road network accessibility. Extensive experiments on two large-scale real-world
datasets demonstrate HENCE’s effectiveness and superiority with R2 exceeding 0.75 and outperforming baselines by
9.60% on average, validating its success in pioneering the use
of artificial intelligence to empower carbon emission management and sustainability development. The implementation
codes are available at this link: https://github.com/tsinghuafib-lab/HENCE.

Figure 1: Visualization of road network scale and per capita
transportation demand for counties of the United States. The
lighter color corresponds to the higher emission.

magnitude is fundamental for formulating targeted and efficient carbon mitigation policies (Zhang et al. 2019).
On-road carbon emissions are primarily affected by travel
demands and road network conditions (Gomez-Ibanez et al.
2009): While travel demands generally determine the approximate travel distance level, the road network connectivity and layout impact the routing and traffic situations.
Existing on-road carbon emission estimation methods typically rely on collected travel miles statistics to learn how
the region’s travel demand is satisfied by the road network’s
connectivity, thereby calculating the corresponding carbon
emission. Specifically, these emission estimation methods
collect mileage data from either the roadway perspective
or the vehicle perspective. Roadway-based methods monitor flows on each road to calculate the corresponding total
vehicle miles traveled, while vehicle-based methods aggregate individual vehicle trajectory statistics to obtain the total miles (Gately, Hutyra, and Wing 2019; Gately, Hutyra,
and Sue Wing 2015; Perugu 2019; Hui et al. 2007). The
collected mileage data are then multiplied by the empirical emission per unit mileage statistic to calculate the onroad carbon emissions (Liu et al. 2015). Since both types
of methods collect data with a bottom-up paradigm where
the coverage and precision of the collected individual data
are highly required, they all suffer from high data collection

Introduction
Alarmed by the global warming trend, countries are making joint efforts to mitigate carbon emissions and achieve
sustainable development (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 2015; Lashof and
Ahuja 1990). On-road transportation carbon emissions, taking up a large share of 28% of the total carbon emissions
in the United States (Citaristi 2022), is the crucial and prioritized carbon mitigation target (Song et al. 2012; Wang,
Chen, and Fujiyama 2015). Thereby, it is essential to develop techniques to precisely estimate on-road carbon emissions since the comprehension of emission distribution and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22493

