The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Complexity of Credulous and Skeptical Acceptance
in Epistemic Argumentation Framework
Gianvincenzo Alfano, Sergio Greco, Francesco Parisi, Irina Trubitsyna
Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics and System Engineering,
University of Calabria, Italy
{g.alfano, greco, fparisi, i.trubitsyna}@dimes.unical.it

Abstract

a

Dung’s Argumentation Framework (AF) has been extended
in several directions. Among the numerous proposed extensions, three of them seem to be of particular interest and have
correlations between them. These extensions are: constrained
AF (CAF), where AF is augmented with (strong) constraints;
epistemic AF (EAF), where AF is augmented with epistemic
constraints; and incomplete AF (iAF), where arguments and
attacks can be uncertain. While the complexity and expressiveness of CAF and iAF have been studied, that of EAF has
not been explored so far. In this paper we investigate the complexity and expressivity of EAF. To this end, we first introduce the Labeled CAF (LCAF), a variation of CAF where
constraints are defined over the alphabet of labeled arguments. Then, we investigate the complexity of credulous and
skeptical reasoning and show that: i) EAF is more expressive
than iAF (under preferred semantics), ii) although LCAF is
a restriction of EAF where modal operators are not allowed,
these frameworks have the same complexity, iii) the results
for LCAF close a gap in the characterization of the complexity of CAF. Interestingly, even though EAF has the same complexity as LCAF, it allows modeling domain knowledge in a
more natural and easy-to-understand way.

b

c

d

a

b

c

d

Figure 1: AFs Λ1 (left) and Λ3 (right) of Examples 1 and 3.

complete (co), preferred (pr), stable (st), and semi-stable
(sst) (Dung 1995; Caminada 2006)—have been defined for
AF, leading to the characterization of σ-extensions, that intuitively consist of the sets of arguments that can be collectively accepted under semantics σ ∈ {gr, co, st, pr, sst}.
Example 1. Consider AF Λ1 = hA1 = {a, b, c, d}, R1 =
{(a, b), (b, c), (c, d), (d, c)}i whose graph is shown in Figure 1 (left). Λ1 describes the following scenario. A party
planner invites Alice (a), Bob (b), Carl (c) and David (d) to
join a party. Alice replies that she will join the party. However, (i) Bob replies that he will join the party if Alice does
not; (ii) Carl replies that he will join the party if both Bob
and David do not; (iii) David replies that he will join the
party if Carl does not. This situation can be modeled by AF
Λ1 , where an argument x states that “(the person whose initial is) x joins the party”. Under the preferred (stable, and
semi-stable) semantics, Λ1 has extensions E1 = {a, c} and
E2 = {a, d}, meaning that either Alice and Carl, or Alice
and David will attend the party.
2

Introduction
In the last decades, Formal Argumentation has become an
important research field in the area of knowledge representation and reasoning (Gabbay et al. 2021). Argumentation has potential applications in several contexts, including
e.g. modeling dialogues, negotiation (Amgoud, Dimopoulos, and Moraitis 2007; Dimopoulos, Mailly, and Moraitis
2019), and persuasion (Prakken 2009). Dung’s Argumentation Framework (AF) is a simple yet powerful formalism
for modeling disputes between two or more agents (Dung
1995). An AF consists of a set of arguments and a binary attack relation over the set of arguments that specifies the interactions between arguments: intuitively, if argument a attacks argument b, then b is acceptable only if a is not. Hence,
arguments are abstract entities whose status is entirely determined by the attack relation. An AF can be seen as a directed graph, whose nodes represent arguments and edges
represent attacks. Several semantics—e.g. grounded (gr),

Argumentation semantics can be also defined in terms
of labelling (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011). Intuitively, a σ-labelling for an AF is a total function L assigning to each argument the label in if it is accepted,
out if it is rejected, and und if it is undecided under σ.
For instance, L1 = {in(a), out(b), in(c), out(d)} and
L2 = {in(a), out(b), out(c), in(d)} are the σ-labellings
for AF Λ1 of Example 1 under semantics σ ∈ {st, pr, sst}.
Herein, L1 and L2 correspond to E1 and E2 , respectively.
Despite the expressive power and generality of Dung’s
framework, in some cases it is difficult to accurately model
domain knowledge by an AF in a natural and easy-tounderstand way. For this reason, Dung’s framework has been
extended by introducing further constructs, such as preferences (Amgoud and Cayrol 1998; Modgil and Prakken
2013; Alfano et al. 2022b, 2023b,f) weights (Bistarelli and
Santini 2019, 2021; Bistarelli, Rossi, and Santini 2018),
supports (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2013; Cohen et al.
2018; Cayrol, Cohen, and Lagasquie-Schiex 2021; Gonzalez

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10423

