The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Leaving the Nest:
Going beyond Local Loss Functions for Predict-Then-Optimize
Sanket Shah1 , Bryan Wilder2 , Andrew Perrault3 , Milind Tambe1
1

Harvard University
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Ohio State University
sanketshah@g.harvard.edu, bwilder@andrew.cmu.edu, perrault.17@osu.edu, milind_tambe@harvard.edu
2

Abstract
Predict-then-Optimize is a framework for using machine learning to perform decision-making under uncertainty. The central
research question it asks is, “How can we use the structure of
a decision-making task to tailor ML models for that specific
task?” To this end, recent work has proposed learning taskspecific loss functions that capture this underlying structure.
However, current approaches make restrictive assumptions
about the form of these losses and their impact on ML model
behavior. These assumptions both lead to approaches with
high computational cost, and when they are violated in practice, poor performance. In this paper, we propose solutions
to these issues, avoiding the aforementioned assumptions and
utilizing the ML model’s features to increase the sample efficiency of learning loss functions. We empirically show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art results in four domains from
the literature, often requiring an order of magnitude fewer
samples than comparable methods from past work. Moreover,
our approach outperforms the best existing method by nearly
200% when the localness assumption is broken.

1

Introduction

Predict-then-Optimize (PtO) (Donti, Amos, and Kolter 2017;
Elmachtoub and Grigas 2021) is a framework for using machine learning (ML) to perform decision-making under uncertainty. As the name suggests, it proceeds in two steps—first,
an ML model is used to make predictions about the uncertain
quantities of interest, then second, these predictions are aggregated and used to parameterize an optimization problem
whose solution provides the decision to be made. Many realworld applications require both prediction and optimization,
and have been cast as PtO problems. For example, recommender systems need to predict user-item affinity to determine which titles to display (Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe
2019), while portfolio optimization uses stock price predictions to construct high-performing portfolios (Bengio 1997).
In the context of AI for Social Good, PtO has been used
to plan intervention strategies by predicting how different
subgroups will respond to interventions (Wang et al. 2022).
The central research question of PtO is, “How can we use
the structure of an optimization problem to learn predictive
models that perform better for that specific decision-making
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14902

task?". In this paper, we refer to the broad class of methods used to achieve this goal as Decision-Focused Learning
(DFL). Recently, multiple papers have proposed learning
task-specific loss functions for DFL (Chung et al. 2022; Lawless and Zhou 2022; Shah et al. 2022). The intuition for these
methods can be summarized in terms of the Anna Karenina
principle—while perfect predictions lead to perfect decisions,
different kinds of imperfect predictions have different impacts on downstream decision-making. Such loss functions,
then, attempt to use learnable parameters to capture how
bad different kinds of prediction errors are for the decisionmaking task of interest. For example, a Mean Squared Error
(MSE) loss may be augmented with tunable parameters to assign different weights to different true labels. Then, a model
trained on such a loss is less likely to make the kinds of errors
that affect the quality of downstream decisions.
Learning task-specific loss functions poses two major challenges. First, learning the relationship between predictions
and decisions is challenging. To make learning this relationship more tractable, past approaches learn different loss functions for each instance of the decision-making task, each
of which locally approximates the behavior of the optimization task. However, the inability to leverage training samples
across different such instances can make learning loss functions sample inefficient, especially for approaches that require
a large number of samples to learn. This is especially problematic because creating the dataset for learning these loss
functions is the most expensive part of the overall approach.
In this paper, rather than learning separate loss functions for
each decision-making instance, we learn a mapping from the
feature space of the predictive model to the parameters of
different local loss functions. This ‘feature-based parameterization’ gives us the best of both worlds—we retain the
simplicity of learning local loss functions while still being
able to generalize across different decision-making instances.
In addition to increasing efficiency, this reparameterization
also ensures that the learned loss functions are Fisher Consistent—a fundamental theoretical property that ensures that,
in the limit of infinite data and model capacity, optimizing
for the loss function leads to optimal decision-making. Past
methods for learning loss functions do not satisfy even this
basic theoretical property!
The second challenge with learning loss functions is that it
presents a chicken-and-egg problem—to obtain the distribu-

