The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DAG-Aware Variational Autoencoder for Social Propagation Graph Generation
Dongpeng Hou1, 2 , Chao Gao2 * , Xuelong Li2 , Zhen Wang3, 1, 2†
1

School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University

rumor

Ada

Fans

No

Verif No

Elva

node feature alignment
true

No

Verif Yes

rumor

…

propagation data in platforms

1.0
rumor
rumor
0.8
authentic
true
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 5 depth
10 15 20
1.0
rumor
rumor EVAL
0.8
authentic
true
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2 3diameter
4 5 6 7 8

CCDF

Jane

Propagation models in social networks are critical, with extensive applications across various fields and downstream
tasks. However, existing propagation models are often oversimplified, scenario-specific, and lack real-world user social
attributes. These limitations detaching from real-world analysis lead to inaccurate representations of the propagation process in social networks. To address these issues, we propose
a User Features Attention-based DAG-Aware Variational
Autoencoder (DAVA) for propagation graph generation. First,
nearly 1 million pieces of user attributes data are collected.
Then DAVA can integrate the analysis of propagation graph
topology and corresponding user attributes as prior knowledge. By leveraging a lightweight attention-based framework
and a sliding window mechanism based on BFS permutations
weighted by user influence, DAVA significantly enhances
the ability to generate realistic, large-scale propagation data,
yielding graph scales ten times greater than those produced
by existing SOTA methods. Every module of DAVA has flexibility and extension that allows for easy substitution to suit
other generation tasks. Additionally, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of DAVA, one focus is the effectiveness of
generated data in improving the performance of downstream
tasks. During the generation process, we discover the Credibility Erosion Effect by modifying the generation rules, revealing a social phenomenon in social network propagation.

Fans

No

Verif
Yes
……

CCDF

Fans

Abstract

guide

CCDF

2

data analysis

generation

Figure 1: The illustration of a novel propagation graph generation grounded in real-world propagation data. Recognizing that propagation is user-driven, we analyze the propagation data in social media, emphasizing unique user attributes
and propagation structures. These analyses guide our graph
generation closely mirroring real-world propagation.

One of the widely used traditional propagation models
in the social network is information cascade models, which
provide a basis for understanding and analyzing the spread
of information, and behaviors in various scenarios (Shakarian et al. 2015). However, these propagation models are often tailored for specific scenarios and depend on simplistic assumptions. Further, some deep learning submodules,
easily integrated into downstream tasks, adeptly capture
complex relationships and patterns in information propagation (Xia et al. 2021; Ling et al. 2022). However, propagation models based on representation learning in deep frameworks are often latent and lack direct interpretability, making it difficult to understand the underlying mechanisms.
In summary, the most significant drawback of the aforementioned methods is their detachment from real-world
data (Chen, Castillo, and Lakshmanan 2022; Guille et al.
2013), which leads to a weak capacity to characterize propagation dynamics in actual scenarios. Therefore, the motivation of this paper is to conduct research based on real propagation data from social media and propose a framework that
effectively reflects the real propagation process. However,
there are two existing challenges. First, we recognize that
propagation in social networks is user-driven (Li et al. 2022),
but existing propagation data barely contains user information, resulting in propagation based directed acyclic graph
(DAG) in social media that only has a topological structure
without assigning user attributes to nodes. Second, the cost
of obtaining real propagation datasets is high, and due to

Introduction
In recent years, the analysis of propagation models in social networks has attracted growing attention due to their
considerable impact on various aspects of society (Leskovec
et al. 2007; Vosoughi, Roy, and Aral 2018). Numerous applications within the realm of social networks are fundamentally based on the propagation process. Examples include
influence assessment (Xia et al. 2021), locating the diffusion source (Wang et al. 2023), and user profiling (Jiang,
Ren, and Ferrara 2023), all of which rely on different propagation models. Consequently, by employing these models
in conjunction with downstream tasks, far-reaching implications can be observed across a wide range of fields, such as
politics, public health, and marketing (Goel et al. 2016).
* Corresponding author: cgao@nwpu.edu.cn
†

Corresponding author: w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8508

