The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepSaDe: Learning Neural Networks That Guarantee Domain Constraint
Satisfaction
Kshitij Goyal1 , Sebastijan Dumancic2 , Hendrik Blockeel1
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
kgoyal40@gmail.com, s.dumancic@tudelft.nl, hendrik.blockeel@kuleuven.be
2

Abstract

violations in the training set, but it does not necessarily eliminate them. Moreover, even when it does, this does not guarantee that other instances (outside the training set) cannot
violate the constraint. Alternatively, for some model types,
such as neural networks, the architecture of the model can
be chosen in such a way that certain types of constraints are
guaranteed to be satisfied for each possible input (not just
training data) (Sivaraman et al. 2020; Hoernle et al. 2022).
But this is typically possible only for specific combinations
of model and constraint types.
This raises the question of whether generality and certainty can be combined. Is it possible to come up with a
generally applicable approach that guarantees the satisfaction of constraints not only on the training set but on the
entire input space, and this for any kind of model? A step in
this direction was made by Goyal, Dumancic, and Blockeel
(2023), who propose a relatively general solution for linear
models. Their approach translates the learning problem into
a MaxSMT setting. MaxSMT stands for Maximum Satisfiability Modulo Theories. It is an extension of SAT solving
that can take background theories into account (e.g., for reasoning about the real numbers) and that distinguishes soft
and hard constraints: it returns a solution that satisfies all
hard constraints and as many soft constraints as possible.
Goyal, Dumancic, and Blockeel (2023) model the requirements as hard constraints and maximize the fit to the data using soft constraints. Their approach works for a wide range
of constraint types but only handles linear models, and assumes a bounded input domain.
In this paper, we substantially extend the applicability
of that approach by showing how it can be used to train
feedforward neural networks. Two key modifications to the
network’s architecture and training procedure suffice for
achieving this: (1) propagating the constraints over the network layers to the last layer, which involves adding skip connections (He et al. 2016) that copy the input to the penultimate layer and deriving bounds on the penultimate layer
from the bounds on the input (Sunaga 1958), and (2) training the network using a hybrid procedure that uses MaxSMT
to determine the weights in the output layer and gradient descent for all other weights. We demonstrate that with these
changes, neural networks can be trained that have good performance and guarantee the satisfaction of given constraints.
In the following, we first describe the problem setting, then

As machine learning models, specifically neural networks,
are becoming increasingly popular, there are concerns regarding their trustworthiness, especially in safety-critical applications, e.g., actions of an autonomous vehicle must be safe.
There are approaches that can train neural networks where
such domain requirements are enforced as constraints, but
they either cannot guarantee that the constraint will be satisfied by all possible predictions (even on unseen data) or they
are limited in the type of constraints that can be enforced.
In this work, we present an approach to train neural networks
which can enforce a wide variety of constraints and guarantee
that the constraint is satisfied by all possible predictions. The
approach builds on earlier work where learning linear models
is formulated as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP). To
make this idea applicable to neural networks, two crucial new
elements are added: constraint propagation over the network
layers, and weight updates based on a mix of gradient descent and CSP solving. Evaluation on various machine learning tasks demonstrates that our approach is flexible enough
to enforce a wide variety of domain constraints and is able to
guarantee them in neural networks.

1

Introduction

Widespread use of state-of-the-art machine learning (ML)
techniques has given rise to concerns regarding the trustworthiness of these models, especially in safety-critical and
socially-sensitive domains. For example, in autonomous vehicles that employ ML approaches to predict the next action,
the actions must be safe. Such domain requirements can often be formulated as logical constraints on combinations of
inputs and outputs (e.g., whenever the input satisfies some
condition A, the output must satisfy condition B). Crucially,
these domain constraints must be satisfied for all possible
inputs to the model, not just the training data. This has motivated researchers to develop approaches that can train models that satisfy a given constraint for all possible predictions.
A general approach to enforcing constraints in ML models is to include a regularization term in the cost function,
which typically adds a cost for every violation of a constraint
in the training set (e.g., Xu et al. (2018); Diligenti, Gori, and
Sacca (2017)). Such an approach can reduce the number of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12199

