The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Who Knows the Answer?
Finding the Best Model and Prompt for Each Query
Using Confidence-Based Search
Walter Gerych1 * , Yara Rizk2 , Vatche Isahagian2 , Vinod Muthusamy2 , Evelyn Duesterwald2 ,
Praveen Venkateswaran2
1

MIT CSAIL
IBM Research
wgerych@mit.edu, yara.rizk@ibm.com, vatchei@ibm.com, vmuthus@us.ibm.com, duester@us.ibm.com,
praveen.venkateswaran@ibm.com
2

Abstract

the performance of LLMs in general has been shown to be
highly sensitive to the prompt template or instructions that
they are conditioned on (Zhao et al. 2021). These facts combine to lead to the central question that is the focus of this
work: Given an input for a user, how can we determine
which LLM and which prompt template to use?
A reasonable method for choosing which LLM and
prompt template to use is to select the conditioned model
that is most confident in its response. Ideally, we could determine the confidence of each model and prompt template pair
and then select a return from the most confident pair. Recent
works have proposed methods for measuring the confidence
of LLMs (Kadavath et al. 2022; Lin, Hilton, and Evans 2022;
Kuhn, Gal, and Farquhar 2023; Lin, Trivedi, and Sun 2023),
using techniques such as measuring the semantic similarity
between multiple samples from the model (Kuhn, Gal, and
Farquhar 2023; Lin, Trivedi, and Sun 2023). However, existing confidence approaches require obtaining at least one
(and often many) response from a model before confidence
can be estimated. This is not feasible to do when choosing
between multiple model and prompt template options; calculating the confidence of all pairs would incur a quadratic
number of LLM calls for each user input. This is an unreasonable expense, in terms of time and compute resources.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of selecting the most
confident LLM and prompt template pair using an estimated
confidence that does not require observing the output of each
model during inference. More specifically, we assume that
we have access to (potentially unlabeled) datasets of examples for a set of tasks that we can compute model confidence
on in an offline setting. Using this data, we aim to predict
what the model confidences would be when given new instances from similar tasks.
There are several challenges that must be overcome to
achieve this. First, we require that the confidence prediction
must be inexpensive to calculate - as we need to make this
confidence prediction for each LLM-prompt template pair
for each input from the user. Second, the confidence calculation can not leverage the response from the model itself
- again due to computational expense. Third, it is not trivial to compute confidence given only the input to the LLM
- a natural choice, given that the output is not accessible.
More specifically, the standard ways of computing features

There are increasingly many large language models (LLMs)
available to the public. While these LLMs have exhibited impressive abilities on a variety of task, any individual LLM in
particular may do well on some tasks and worse on others.
Additionally, the performance of these models is heavily dependent on the choice of prompt template. For instance, they
exhibit sensitivity to the few shot examples chosen or brittleness to the wording of instructions. Moreover, a prompt
template that makes a model perform well for one input may
not be the optimal template for another input. This necessitates an approach for adaptively selecting LLM and prompt
template pairs for each input. Recent work has shown that
the accuracy of an LLM’s responses is correlated with the
LLM’s confidence in the response. Thus, a natural choice for
selecting which model and prompt template to use is to select the pair that is most confident in its response. However,
existing confidence metrics are expensive to calculate, necessitating multiple calls to each LLM and prompt pair. We thus
propose an approach to predict the confidence of each pair using an auxiliary regression model that is inexpensive to run.
Using this auxiliary model, we select the LLM and prompt
template with the highest predicted confidence for a given input. Results on a range of benchmark datasets show that our
confidence-based instance-level prompt search method consistently improves the performance of LLMs.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on a range of tasks such as question answering (Robinson, Rytting, and Wingate 2022), text summarization (Zhang et al. 2023), and search (Spatharioti et al.
2023). While some leading LLMs such as GPT-4 (OpenAI
2023) show good performance on a wide variety of tasks,
these models are closed-source. Fortunately, many opensource language models, such as FLAN-T5 (Chung et al.
2022) and BLOOM (Scao et al. 2022), have been made freely
available to the community. These open source models generally perform well on some tasks, or for some inputs, and
poorly on others (Jiang, Ren, and Lin 2023). Additionally,
* Walter performed this work during his internship at IBM Research.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18065

