The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Intrinsic Action Tendency Consistency for Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Junkai Zhang1,2 , Yifan Zhang1,3,4 * , Xi Sheryl Zhang1,3,4 , Yifan Zang1,2 , Jian Cheng1,3,4
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing
4
Nanjing Artificial Intelligence Research of AI
{zhangjunkai2021, xi.zhang, zangyifan2019}@ia.ac.cn, {yfzhang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Efficient collaboration in the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm remains a challenge in
cooperative multi-agent systems. We identify divergent action
tendencies among agents as a significant obstacle to CTDE’s
training efficiency, requiring a large number of training samples to achieve a unified consensus on agents’ policies. This
divergence stems from the lack of adequate team consensusrelated guidance signals during credit assignments in CTDE.
To address this, we propose Intrinsic Action Tendency Consistency, a novel approach for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. It integrates intrinsic rewards, obtained
through an action model, into a reward-additive CTDE (RACTDE) framework. We formulate an action model that enables surrounding agents to predict the central agent’s action tendency. Leveraging these predictions, we compute a
cooperative intrinsic reward that encourages agents to match
their actions with their neighbors’ predictions. We establish
the equivalence between RA-CTDE and CTDE through theoretical analyses, demonstrating that CTDE’s training process
can be achieved using agents’ individual targets. Building on
this insight, we introduce a novel method to combine intrinsic rewards and CTDE. Extensive experiments on challenging
tasks in SMAC and GRF benchmarks showcase the improved
performance of our method.

Figure 1: The illustration of the consistent action tendency.
In (a) and (b), our agents’ health value is lower than the
enemies’. At this point, attacking either Enemy 1 or 2 simultaneously are the two best team policies. In (a), Agent 1
and Agent 2 attack enemies separately without agreeing on
a team policy. On the contrary, agents in (b) achieve a consistent goal policy and agree to attack a common enemy. To
reflect the policy consistency among agents, we propose the
concept of action tendency. It reflects the policy distribution
of agents toward different actions. We propose this action
tendency notion to distinguish it from policy, which is usually the epsilon-greedy of Q functions only concerning the
largest output in value-based approaches.

that agents can only access their local observations, resulting in unstable environments. Scalability refers to the challenge that the joint spaces of states and actions increase exponentially as the number of agents grows. To tackle these
issues, Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) paradigm is proposed (Sunehag et al. 2017), which
allows agents to access the global state in the training stage
and take actions individually. Given the CTDE paradigm,
massive deep MARL methods have been proposed including VDN (Sunehag et al. 2017), QMIX (Rashid et al. 2020),
QTRAN (Son et al. 2019), QPLEX (Wang et al. 2020b) and
so forth. Their excellent performance can be attributed to
the credit assignments, as rewards are critical as the most direct and fundamental instructional signals to drive behaviors
(Silver et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2021; Mguni et al. 2021).
However, it turns out that the sparse team rewards provided by many MAS environments cannot supply sufficient
guidance for coordination behaviors, which results in inefficient training (Matignon, Laurent, and Le Fort-Piat 2012).

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms have shown the great capacity and potential to
solve various real-world multi-agent tasks, such as automatic vehicles control (Sallab et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2020b),
traffic intelligence (Cao et al. 2012; Mushtaq et al. 2023;
Wiering et al. 2000), resource management (Motlaghzadeh
et al. 2023; Sallab et al. 2017), game AI (Berner et al. 2019;
Lin et al. 2023) and robot swarm control (Dahiya et al. 2023;
Hüttenrauch, Šošić, and Neumann 2017). In a cooperative
multi-agent system (MAS), every agent relies on their local observation to cooperate toward a team goal and the
environment feedbacks a shared team reward. There exist
two major challenges in cooperative MAS: partial observability and scalability. Partial observability refers to the fact
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17600

