The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parallel Vertex Diffusion for Unified Visual Grounding
Zesen Cheng1,2 , Kehan Li1,2 , Peng Jin1,2 , Siheng Li4
Xiangyang Ji4 , Li Yuan1,2,3 , Chang Liu4 † , Jie Chen1,3,2 †
1

2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
(a) Sequential Vertex Generation (Autoregressive Model)

Abstract
Unified visual grounding (UVG) capitalizes on a wealth of
task-related knowledge across various grounding tasks via
one-shot training, which curtails retraining costs and taskspecific architecture design efforts. Vertex generation-based
UVG methods achieve this versatility by unified modeling
object box and contour prediction and provide a text-powered
interface to vast related multi-modal tasks, e.g., visual question answering, and captioning. However, these methods typically generate vertexes sequentially through autoregression,
which is prone to be trapped in error accumulation and heavy
computation, especially for high-dimension sequence generation in complex scenarios. In this paper, we develop Parallel Vertex Diffusion (PVD) based on the parallelizability of
diffusion models to accurately and efficiently generate vertexes in a parallel and scalable manner. Since the coordinates fluctuate greatly, it typically encounters slow convergence when training diffusion models without geometry constraints. Therefore, we consummate our PVD by two critical
components, i.e., center anchor mechanism and angle summation loss, which serve to normalize coordinates and adopt a
differentiable geometry descriptor from the point-in-polygon
problem of computational geometry to constrain the overall
difference of prediction and label vertexes. These innovative
designs empower our PVD to demonstrate its superiority with
state-of-the-art performance across various grounding tasks.

(b) Parallel Vertex Diffusion (Diffusion Model)

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) Sequential Vertex Generation and (b) our Parallel Vertex Diffusion. The former is
easily trapped in error accumulation and heavy computation.
The latter parallel refines all vertexes for conquering these
issues. The related referring expression is “center baseman”.

Vertex generation is an advanced UVG scheme because
its compatibility with text generation enables unifying visual grounding with other multi-modal tasks (e.g., VQA,
Caption), potentially providing an interface to build a multimodal universal model (Chen et al. 2022b). Previous vertex generation methods represent boxes and masks as vertex sequences of variable length and sequentially generate them via an autoregressive model (Zhu et al. 2022).
They easily get stuck in error accumulation when scaling to high-dimension vertex number settings, causing inferior fitting to objects with complex contours. This flaw is
mainly attributed to the sequential nature of autoregressive
model (Lin et al. 2020) because upstream error vertexes will
perturb the prediction of downstream vertexes during sequential generation. In Fig. 1(a), we find that sequential vertex generation methods easily generate error vertexes when
upstream vertexes don’t hit the right object. Moreover, these
methods require heavy computations when scaling to highdimension data, because the iterations sharply increase with
the data dimension (Chen et al. 2023b).
In this work, we design Parallel Vertex Diffusion (PVD)
to generate vertexes by adopting the diffusion to model the
distribution of object box and contour. Owing to the parallel nature of the diffusion model, PVD can accurately and

Introduction
Visual grounding is an essential vision-language task that establishes a fine-grained correspondence between images and
texts by grounding a given referring expression on an image (Li et al. 2022). This task is divided into two sub-tasks
based on the manner of grounding: Referring Expression
Comprehension (REC) based on bounding box (Hu et al.
2016), and Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) based on
mask (Hu, Rohrbach, and Darrell 2016). REC and RIS are
chronically regarded as separate tasks with different technology routes, requiring complex task-specific design and
repeated training. Since they share high similarities, Unified
Visual Grounding (UVG) is proposed to simultaneously perform REC and RIS via single-shot training, reducing the retraining cost and task-specific design labor (Zhu et al. 2022).
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1326

