The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unraveling Pain Levels: A Data-Uncertainty Guided Approach for Effective Pain
Assessment
Xinwei Ji1 , Xiaomin Chang1 , Wei Li1 , Albert Y. Zomaya1
1

The University of Sydney
xiji3593@uni.sydney.edu.au, xcha8737@uni.sydney.edu.au, weiwilson.li@sydney.edu.au, albert.zomaya@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

its fundamental mechanisms (Van Der Miesen, Lindquist,
and Wager 2019), the search for objective biomarkers to elucidate pain mechanisms remains a pressing need (Tracey,
Woolf, and Andrews 2019).

Pain, a primary reason for seeking medical help, requires
essential pain assessment for effective management. Studies have recognized electrodermal activity (EDA) signaling’s
potential for automated pain assessment, but traditional algorithms often ignore the noise and uncertainty inherent in
pain data. To address this, we propose a learning framework
predicated on data uncertainty, introducing two forms: a)
subject-level stimulation-reaction drift; b) ambiguity in selfreporting scores. We formulate an uncertainty assessment using Heart Rate Variability (HRV) features to guide the selection of responsive pain profiles and reweight subtask importance based on the vagueness of self-reported data. These
methods are integrated within an end-to-end neural network
learning paradigm, focusing the detector on more accurate insights within the uncertainty domain. Extensive experimentation on both the publicly available BioVid dataset and the
proprietary Apon dataset demonstrates our approach’s effectiveness. In the BioVid dataset, we achieved a 6% enhancement over the state-of-the-art methodology, and on the Apon
dataset, our method outperformed baseline approaches by
over 20%.

Pre-experimental

Experimental

No Pain

Mild

Moderate
Pain tolerance
Severe

VRS

Uncertainty
37.5℃

37.5℃
(a)

NRS

0

(b)

10

Figure 1: Examples of uncertainty in pain stimulation experiments include: (a) the inconsistency in stimulation-reaction,
where pain perception varies between the pre-experiment
and the formal experiment, and changes over time; (b) the
uncertainty in subjective pain assessment, which increases
as the rating approaches the middle of the pain scale.
The AI-PCA system utilizes facial expressions and biosignals as inputs. While facial expression data can be noisy
and resource-intensive in real medical settings, physiological signals, e.g., electrocardiograms (ECG), EDA, electromyograms (EMG), electroencephalograms (EEG), respiratory rates, and blood pressures are preferred due to their
objectivity and lower equipment requirements. Biosignalbased methods have emerged as effective means for pain
assessment, focusing on feature learning in time, frequency,
and wavelet domains, along with sequence learning methods
like LSTM and attention mechanisms.
Existing methods often overlook the intrinsic uncertainty
present in pain data, potentially compromising the accuracy
of pain assessment algorithms. These algorithms, based on
noisy data and approximate models, can produce inaccurate
results, influencing physician decision-making and interpretation of intervention effects (Madden et al. 2021). To fully
harness the potential of machine learning algorithms in the
AI-PCA system, it is crucial to quantify this uncertainty,
typically represented as data uncertainty. Data uncertainty
in pain data manifests as sensor noise, cognitive ambiguity
in active reports, and drift in experimental pain responsestimulus. Each one could significantly impact pain assessment. It is unrealistic to assume noiseless sensors or control
for changes in subject responses to experimental stimuli, let

Introduction
Pain assessment is crucial for healthcare professionals in
devising effective pain management plans. Effective pain
assessment involves a blend of subjective reports, objective measures, and computational models to gauge pain levels. Despite being the current gold standard, self-reported
pain scales are inherently variable and subjective (Kong,
Posada-Quintero, and Chon 2021), and are challenging to
administer with infants or individuals with communication
difficulties. Complementing self-reports, objective measures
like physiological indicators (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure,
facial expressions) and behavioral indicators (e.g., mobility, sleep patterns) can provide valuable pain-related information. Leveraging Artificial Intelligence-Assisted PatientControlled Analgesia (AI-PCA) (Wang et al. 2020), objective and continuous pain state evaluation can be achieved
through algorithmic approaches. However, due to the complexity of pain as a phenomenon (von Hehn, Baron, and
Woolf 2012) and the lack of identified biomarkers reflecting
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22167

