The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spanning the Spectrum of Hatred Detection: A Persian Multi-Label Hate Speech
Dataset with Annotator Rationales
Zahra Delbari1 , Nafise Sadat Moosavi2 , Mohammad Taher Pilehvar3
1

Tehran Institute for Advanced Studies, Khatam University, Iran
2
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
3
Cardiff University, United Kingdom
z.delbari@khatam.ac.ir, n.s.moosavi@sheffield.ac.uk, pilehvarmt@cardiff.ac.uk
Abstract

hate speech. Researchers have delved into various facets of
hate speech, encompassing aggression (Kumar et al. 2018),
cyberbullying (Chen and Li 2020), harassment (Stoop et al.
2019), racism (Field et al. 2021) and sexism (Chiril et al.
2020).1 However, many of these solutions heavily rely on the
availability of annotated datasets for training or evaluation,
a resource that is often lacking, particularly for low-resource
languages such as Persian.
To our knowledge, there are only three datasets for hate
speech detection for this language (Ataei et al. 2022; Mozafari, Farahbakhsh, and Crespi 2022; Alavi, Nikvand, and
Shamsfard 2021). Unfortunately, among these, only ParsOFF (Ataei et al. 2022) is accessible to the public. While
the dataset remains a valuable resource, it is essential to acknowledge its reliance on a weak heuristic during the data
collection stage, resulting in a relatively trivial set of instances. Notably, over half of the tweets labeled as offensive
in this dataset were collected using a simple search for offensive keywords. This methodology introduces potential bias
towards these specific terms, thereby achieving a high accuracy in distinguishing offensive from non-offensive posts,
even with a straightforward BERT-based model.
In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap by introducing a
Persian hate speech dataset that is curated based on a more
rigorous procedure. Referred to as P HATE, this dataset comprises over 7,000 Persian Twitter posts, each manually annotated by two annotators. The dataset follows a hierarchical
structure, with posts initially classified at the top level as either normal or hate. The hate category is further divided by
at least one of the three possible sub-labels: violence, hate,
and vulgar. Consequently, the task in P HATE is characterized
as a multi-level multi-label classification setup.
Beyond the hate speech tags, P HATE extends its scope
by incorporating information about the target of the hateful conduct, which may pertain to an individual or a group.
This additional feature not only enriches the dataset but also
opens avenues for various downstream applications. For example, it enables initiatives to address online violence directed at specific groups, such as women journalists. Moreover, each instance in P HATE is accompanied by human ra-

With the alarming rise of hate speech in online communities, the demand for effective NLP models to identify instances of offensive language has reached a critical point.
However, the development of such models heavily relies on
the availability of annotated datasets, which are scarce, particularly for less-studied languages. To bridge this gap for
the Persian language, we present a novel dataset specifically
tailored to multi-label hate speech detection. Our dataset,
called P HATE, consists of an extensive collection of over
seven thousand manually-annotated Persian tweets, offering a rich resource for training and evaluating hate speech
detection models on this language. Notably, each annotation in our dataset specifies the targeted group of hate
speech and includes a span of the tweet which elucidates
the rationale behind the assigned label. The incorporation of
these information expands the potential applications of our
dataset, facilitating the detection of targeted online harm or
allowing the benchmark to serve research on interpretability of hate speech detection models. The dataset, annotation guideline, and all associated codes are accessible at
https://github.com/Zahra-D/Phate.

1

Introduction

Hate speech is a pervasive problem in our societies which is
particularly amplified by social media.
Hate speech encompasses various forms of communication that specifically target individuals or groups, with the
intention of attacking, dehumanizing, inciting violence, promoting discrimination, or fostering hostility. These harmful
actions are based on perceived characteristics such as race,
ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation, political beliefs, social class, disability, or appearance. Expressions of
this nature seek to demean, marginalize, or inflict harm on
others, creating a hostile environment and perpetuating hatred, prejudice, and inequality. The lasting impact on mental
health at the individual level, coupled with the societal-level
consequence of normalizing prejudice and discrimination,
underscores the critical need for developing effective methods to identify and address hate speech.
In response to this pressing need, a substantial body of research has emerged focusing on the automated detection of

1
While there have been some attempts to unify the taxonomy
and set of labels in different datasets (Fortuna, Soler, and Wanner
2020), hate speech remains a highly subjective task, leading to significant variations across existing work.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17889

