The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sample-and-Bound for Non-convex Optimization
Yaoguang Zhai* , Zhizhen Qin* , Sicun Gao
University of California, San Diego
yazhai@ucsd.edu, zhizhenqin@ucsd.edu, sicung@ucsd.edu

Abstract

over the domain to systematically prune the space towards
global optima. Such algorithms typically employ rigorous
techniques (e.g., linear relaxation (Yanover et al. 2006) and
interval arithmetic (Hickey, Ju, and Van Emden 2001; Araya
and Reyes 2016)) for bounding the functions and systematically explore the solution space. The size of the search tree
can quickly become exponential in the number of dimensions and is the major bottleneck for scaling up.
We propose an approach that combines the benefits of
sampling-based and tree-based approaches as well as interval bounding and local optimization techniques, by taking
advantage of the recent progress in Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) methods. We assume that the analytic form of the
objective function is known over a compact domain, so that
we can use interval bounding (Araya and Reyes 2016) on the
function value and its local first-order and second-order information in different parts of the MCTS design. A key feature of the Monte Carlo trees is that the growth of the tree is
driven by samples rather than partitions, and hence the name
Sample-and-Bound. By associating the analytic and estimated properties of adjustable neighborhoods around each
sample, we design the MCTS algorithm to best balance exploration and exploitation based on the important numerical
properties of the objective function. We evaluate the proposed algorithms against a wide range of existing algorithms
and analyze the importance of various hyper parameters.

Standard approaches for global optimization of non-convex
functions, such as branch-and-bound, maintain partition trees
to systematically prune the domain. The tree size grows exponentially in the number of dimensions. We propose new
sampling-based methods for non-convex optimization that
adapts Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to improve efficiency. Instead of the standard use of visitation count in Upper Confidence Bounds, we utilize numerical overapproximations of the objective as an uncertainty metric, and also
take into account of sampled estimates of first-order and
second-order information. The Monte Carlo tree in our approach avoids the usual fixed combinatorial patterns in growing the tree, and aggressively zooms into the promising regions, while still balancing exploration and exploitation. We
evaluate the proposed algorithms on high-dimensional nonconvex optimization benchmarks against competitive baselines and analyze the effects of the hyper parameters.

Introduction
Non-convex global optimization problems are pervasive
in engineering (Mistakidis and Stavroulakis 2013; Campi,
Garatti, and Ramponi 2015), computer science (Liu and Lu
2014; Jain, Kar et al. 2017), and economics (Bao and Mordukhovich 2010). The problem is well-known to be NPhard, and the practical challenge lies in distinguishing the
global optimum from exponentially many potential local optima (Jain, Kar et al. 2017; Yang 2019).
Existing approaches to non-convex optimization can be
largely categorized into sampling-based methods and treesearch methods. Sampling-based approaches, such as simulated annealing (SA) (Henderson, Jacobson, and Johnson 2003) and cross-entropy (CE) (De Boer et al. 2005),
explore the solution space through random sampling and
guided search strategies with the minimal assumptions
about the objective function. Sampling methods can be designed to asymptotically converge towards the global optimum, but suffer from the curse-of-dimensionality in practice. Tree search and interval-based optimization methods
(Gurobi Optimization 2023; Ninin 2016) leverage various
branch-and-bound techniques that maintain a partition tree

Related Work
Some classical approaches to global optimization explore
the search space by sampling without explicitly building
models of the objective function. Common techniques in this
category include stochastic methods such as SA (Henderson, Jacobson, and Johnson 2003) and CE (De Boer et al.
2005), as well as deterministic schemes like Nelder-Mead
(NM) (Gao and Han 2012). SA (Henderson, Jacobson, and
Johnson 2003) uses a probability-driven search process to
escape local minima. CE (De Boer et al. 2005), on the other
hand, is a technique that iteratively updates the probability distribution on the search space to look for optimal regions. NM method (Gao and Han 2012) is a deterministic
sampling approach, which maintains a simplex within the
search space and updates its vertexes based on evaluations
at selected points.
Sampling-based approaches have recently been combined

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20847

