The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LLMRG: Improving Recommendations through Large Language Model
Reasoning Graphs
Yan Wang1 * , Zhixuan Chu1 * † , Xin Ouyang1 , Simeng Wang1 , Hongyan Hao1 , Yue Shen1 , Jinjie
Gu1 , Siqiao Xue1 , James Zhang1 , Qing Cui1 , Longfei Li1 , Jun Zhou1 , Sheng Li2
1
Ant Group
University of Virginia
{luli.wy,chuzhixuan.czx,xin.oyx,simeng.wsm,hongyanhao.hhy,zhanying,jinjie.gujj,siqiao.xsq,james.z,cuiqing.cq,longyao.llf,
jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com, shengli@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

has sought to enhance recommendations by incorporating
graph-structured information, which provides valuable contextual data beyond standard tabular data formats. However,
even these more advanced knowledge graphs used in recommendation systems still lack the ability to perform complex
reasoning or inference - simply overlaying factual relationships is not enough to enable a system to deeply understand
users’ interests and generate insightful recommendations.
In parallel, tremendous progress in large language models (LLMs) has demonstrated powerful new capacities for
reasoning, inference, and logic without the need for explicit
training on such tasks. These models exhibit remarkable aptitudes for causal, logical, and analogical reasoning, illuminating new opportunities to leverage their strengths to develop superior knowledge representations that can capture
nuanced semantic relationships between users’ interests. By
leveraging LLMs to reason behavioral sequences and comprehend user interests at a deeper conceptual level, there is
immense potential to revolutionize next-generation recommendation systems (Chu et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2023).
Therefore, we propose using an LLM to construct personalized reasoning graphs for recommendation systems. The
LLM inputs a user’s profile and behavioral sequences and
outputs a graphical representation linking concepts through
chained causal and logical reasoning. This results in an
expansive graph embedding higher-level semantic relationships between the user’s interests and behaviors. We then
apply graph neural networks to learn a dense feature representation that summarizes the graph’s structure and meaning. This graph embedding is provided as additional input
to a conventional recommendation model. Our approach allows recommendations to consider conceptual relationships
derived through reasoning while still benefiting from the recommendation abilities of traditional models. Moreover, the
graph provides interpretability by surfacing the explicit reasoning behind recommendations.
We designed four interlocking modules, powered by large
language models (LLMs), to construct personalized reasoning graphs that model each user’s interests: 1) a chained
graph reasoning module that conducts chained causal and
logical reasoning, 2) a divergent extension module that expands the graph by associating and reasoning about the
user’s interests, 3) a self-verification and scoring module that

Recommendation systems aim to provide users with relevant
suggestions, but often lack interpretability and fail to capture
higher-level semantic relationships between user behaviors
and profiles. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that
leverages large language models (LLMs) to construct personalized reasoning graphs. These graphs link a user’s profile and behavioral sequences through causal and logical inferences, representing the user’s interests in an interpretable
way. Our approach, LLM reasoning graphs (LLMRG), has
four components: chained graph reasoning, divergent extension, self-verification and scoring, and knowledge base selfimprovement. The resulting reasoning graph is encoded using
graph neural networks, which serves as additional input to improve conventional recommender systems, without requiring
extra user or item information. Our approach demonstrates
how LLMs can enable more logical and interpretable recommender systems through personalized reasoning graphs.
LLMRG allows recommendations to benefit from both engineered recommendation systems and LLM-derived reasoning graphs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of LLMRG on
benchmarks and real-world scenarios in enhancing base recommendation models.

Introduction
Recommendation systems are now prevalent across the internet, smartly surfacing personalized content and products
to users based on their individual profiles and historical
behavioral data. However, most recommendation systems
rely solely on conventional machine learning techniques,
which can only identify patterns and relationships within
sequences of interactions without actually comprehending
the true meaning or semantics behind the items themselves.
Devoid of any logical or causal reasoning capacities (Li
and Chu 2023; Chu, Rathbun, and Li 2021), these recommender systems struggle to effectively capture the full spectrum of conceptual relationships and connections spanning
a user’s diverse interests and behavioral patterns over time.
In addition, recent work (Wang et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2021; Wu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Sheu et al. 2021)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19189

