The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quad Bayer Joint Demosaicing and Denoising Based on Dual Encoder Network
with Joint Residual Learning
Bolun Zheng1* , Haoran Li1 * † , Quan Chen1 † , Tingyu Wang1, 2 , Xiaofei Zhou1 , Zhenghui Hu3 ,
Chenggang Yan1
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Xiasha No.2 Street, Hangzhou, 310018, Zhejiang, China.
Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University, Semiconductor Chip Industrial Park, 323000, Zhejiang, China.
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Binjiang No.18 Chuanghui Street, 310018, Zhejiang, China.
{blzheng, cgyan, chenquan}@{hdu.edu.cn}, lhr970315@gmail.com, wongtyu@foxmail.com, zxforchid@outlook.com,
zhenghuihu2013@163.com
2

Abstract
The recent imaging technology Quad Bayer color filter array (CFA) brings great imaging performance improvement
from traditional Bayer CFA, but also serious challenges for
demosaicing and denoising during the image signal processing (ISP) pipeline. In this paper, we propose a novel dual
encoder network, namely DRNet, to achieve joint demosaicing and denoising for Quad Bayer CFA. The dual encoders
are carefully designed in that one is mainly constructed by
a joint residual block to jointly estimate the residuals for demosaicing and denoising separately. In contrast, the other one
is started with a pixel modulation block which is specially
designed to match the characteristics of Quad Bayer pattern
for better feature extraction. We demonstrate the effectiveness of each proposed component through detailed ablation
investigations. The comparison results on public benchmarks
illustrate that our DRNet achieves an apparent performance
gain (0.38dB to the second best) from the state-of-the-arts
and balances performance and efficiency well. The experiments on real-world images show that the proposed method
could enhance the reconstruction quality from the native ISP
algorithm.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The Bayer CFA vs. the Quad Bayer CFA. (b)
PSNR vs. Running time consumption on Urban100 dataset.

different color filter arrangement (Kim and Kim 2019). This
filter array has the advantage of improving the noise performance of the image sensor by merging adjacent pixels and
allowing pixels of the same color to be combined into larger
pixels (Agranov et al. 2017). However, such special structure brings great challenges of accurate texture and color
reconstruction, because the gap of neighbor colors is certainly enlarged. Directly applying even the SOTA demosaicing method for Bayer CFA for a Quad Bayer image would
lead to a poor result (Figure. 4(b)).
The demosaicing and denoising are two key points for reconstructing high-quality RGB images from RAW images
captured by Quad Bayer CFA. Directly conducting existing
demosaicing for Bayer CFA on a Quad Bayer CFA image
would introduce serious visual artifacts (Kim et al. 2019;
Tan, Chen, and Hua 2018). Besides, the denoising is also
taken into consideration in the remosacing methods to further enhance the finally reconstructed RGB images (Yang
et al. 2022). However, these methods hardly ever consider
the full reconstruction model against the joint demosaicing and denoising task. The additional computational cost
brought by remosacing methods should also be seriously
considered due to the limited computation resource of edge
devices.

Introduction
The demands for camera capabilities have significantly increased, due to the widespread use of smartphones. However, the smartphone camera certainly suffers from the limited sensor size to achieve high-quality imaging (Ignatov,
Gool, and Timofte 2020). To overcome this limitation, researchers try to turn to pixel-binning with a non-Bayer color
filter array (CFA) pattern to capture more authentic scene information in a smaller sensor size, which has been proven effective for capturing images of high quality in low-light conditions (Yoo, Im, and Paik 2015). Among these non-Bayer
CFA, the Quad Bayer CFA (show in Figure. 1(a)) is one of
the most popular solutions.
The Quad Bayer is an extended version of the Bayer,
which expands each pixel into four sub-pixels and uses a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Haoran Li and Quan Chen
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7552

