The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multimodal Event Causality Reasoning with Scene Graph Enhanced
Interaction Network
Jintao Liu, Kaiwen Wei* , Chenglong Liu
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liujintao201, weikaiwen19, liuchenglong20}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

Textual

Multimodal event causality reasoning aims to recognize the
causal relations based on the given events and accompanying image pairs, requiring the model to have a comprehensive grasp of visual and textual information. However, existing studies fail to effectively model the relations of the objects
within the image and capture the object interactions across the
image pair, resulting in an insufficient understanding of visual
information by the model. To address these issues, we propose a Scene Graph Enhanced Interaction Network (SEIN)
in this paper, which can leverage the interactions of the generated scene graph for multimodal event causality reasoning.
Specifically, the proposed method adopts a graph convolutional network to model the objects and their relations derived from the scene graph structure, empowering the model
to exploit the rich structural and semantic information in the
image adequately. To capture the object interactions between
the two images, we design an optimal transport-based alignment strategy to match the objects across the images, which
could help the model recognize changes in visual information
and facilitate causality reasoning. In addition, we introduce a
cross-modal fusion module to combine textual and visual features for causality prediction. Experimental results indicate
that the proposed SEIN outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on the Vis-Causal dataset.

Event1

Event2

A girl throws a plate in the air

A dog jumps to catch the plate

Visual

SGG

Scene
Graph

holding

front

SGG

holding

Interaction

front
holding
near

near

Reasoning

Visual Perception
Textual Description

Result

Event1

Causal

Event2

Figure 1: An example of employing scene graph for multimodal event causality reasoning, which could provide rich
structural and semantic information for visual understanding of the image.

Introduction

Jain (2021) utilized both videos and natural language captions to infer visual-semantic commonsense knowledge with
causal rationalization. Afterward, Ma and Tong (2022) combined visual perception and linguistic commonsense to enhance daily events causality reasoning and exploited object
features to refine visual perception. Despite promising advancements achieved by existing studies, they still tend to
overlook the importance of the following two critical concerns:
(1) The relations between objects in the image. Previous works mainly focus on global features or object features
of the image, ignoring the significance of modeling the relations between objects. We contend that the relations between paired objects are crucial for understanding the structural and semantic information of the image. As shown in
Fig. 1, for the first image, if the model could discern a girl
is holding a plate and a dog is near the girl, it would better
comprehend the visual semantic information conveyed by
this image. Recently, scene graph generation (SGG), which

Understanding causality from multimodal daily events is a
challenging task and has attracted increasing attention from
the community. Take Fig. 1 as an example, the reasoning
model should be able to identify the causal relations between
the two events based on A girl throws a plate in the air and
A dog jumps to catch the plate as well as their associated
image pairs. This task exhibits extensive applications in text
and vision domains, including visual commonsense reasoning (Hildebrandt et al. 2020), dense video captioning (Iashin
and Rahtu 2020), and machine reading comprehension (Rajani et al. 2019).
Recently, many studies have concentrated on this task.
Zhang et al. (2021) have embarked on extracting causal relations from time-consecutive images by incorporating event
descriptions and visual context representations. Chadha and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8778

