The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DreamIdentity: Enhanced Editability for Efficient Face-Identity Preserved
Image Generation
Zhuowei Chen1,2 * , Shancheng Fang1 , Wei Liu2 , Qian He2 , Mengqi Huang1 , Zhendong Mao1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
ByteDance
{chenzw01, huangmq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn {zdmao, fangsc}@ustc.edu.cn {liuwei.jikun, heqian}@bytedance.com

Abstract

S*

While large-scale pre-trained text-to-image models can synthesize diverse and high-quality human-centric images, an
intractable problem is how to preserve the face identity and
follow the text prompts simultaneously for conditioned input
face images and texts. Despite existing encoder-based methods achieving high efficiency and decent face similarity, the
generated image often fails to follow the textual prompts.
To ease this editability issue, we present DreamIdentity,
to learn edit-friendly and accurate face-identity representations in the word embedding space. Specifically, we propose
self-augmented editability learning to enhance the editability for projected embedding, which is achieved by constructing paired generated celebrity’s face and edited celebrity images for training, aiming at transferring mature editability
of off-the-shelf text-to-image models in celebrity to unseen
identities. Furthermore, we design a novel dedicated faceidentity encoder to learn an accurate representation of human
faces, which applies multi-scale ID-aware features followed
by a multi-embedding projector to generate the pseudo words
in the text embedding space directly. Extensive experiments
show that our method can generate more text-coherent and
ID-preserved images with negligible time overhead compared
to the standard text-to-image generation process.

S* in the
snow

S* wearing S*, fauvism
rainbow scarf painting

S*, banksy
painting

Figure 1: Given only one facial image, our model DreamIdentity can efficiently generate countless identity-preserved
and text-coherent images in different contexts without any
test-time optimization. The unique word S∗ denotes the input face-identity, which can be combined with text prompts
to generate various identity-preserved images.

to associate a unique word (denoted as S*) with the identity by optimizing its word embedding (Gal et al. 2023a)
or tuning the model parameters (Ruiz et al. 2023; Kumari
et al. 2022) for multiple images from the same face identity. Nevertheless, this process is highly inefficient, requiring
at least minute-level optimization and substantial memory
overhead. Therefore, to get rid of the optimization process
for each face identity, several recent encoder-based methods
(Shi et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023) propose to directly map the
global image features (typically, CLIP (Radford et al. 2021)
features) into a word embedding (S∗) and local grid features
are incorporated by introducing extra injection branch in the
T2I backbone. The model is then trained with the objective
of reconstructing the input image itself. Despite their efficiency and decent performance in maintaining ID similarity,
these methods may struggle to follow the text prompts.
We argue that the inferior editability problem of existing
optimization-free works stems from reconstruction-biased
and inaccurate identity feature representation in the word
embedding space. On one side, given an input face image
I, existing methods aim to learn a unique word S∗ so that
the S∗ can reconstruct I. The learned S∗ does incorporate key identity information. However, it also captures as
many ID-irrelevant details as possible from the input image
to minimize the reconstruction loss, such as its style and do-

Introduction
Diffusion-based large-scale text-to-image (T2I) models
(Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Rombach et al.
2022) have revolutionized the field of visual content creation recently. With the help of these T2I models, it is now
possible to create vivid and expressive human-centric images easily. An exciting application of these models is that,
given a specific person’s face in our personal life (our family members, friends, etc.), they can create different scenes
associated with this identity using textual prompts.
Deviated from the standard T2I task, as shown in Fig.1,
this task requires the model to have the ability to preserve
input face identity (i.e., ID-preservation) while adhering to
textual prompts (i.e., editability). A plausible solution is to
personalize a pre-trained T2I model (Gal et al. 2023a; Ruiz
et al. 2023; Kumari et al. 2022), which involves learning
* Author did this work during his internship at ByteDance.
†

Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1281

