The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Pan-Sharpening via Mutually Guided Detail Restoration
Huangxing Lin1 , Yuhang Dong2 , Xinghao Ding2 , Tianpeng Liu1 * , Yongxiang Liu1
1

College of Electronic Science, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
huangxinglin92@gmail.com, dongyh@stu.xmu.edu.cn, dxh@xmu.edu.cn, liutianpeng2004@nudt.edu.cn,
lyx bible@sina.com

Abstract
Pan-sharpening is a task that aims to super-resolve the lowresolution multispectral (LRMS) image with the guidance of
a corresponding high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) image.
The key challenge in pan-sharpening is to accurately modeling the relationship between the MS and PAN images. While
supervised deep learning methods are commonly employed to
address this task, the unavailability of ground-truth severely
limits their effectiveness. In this paper, we propose a mutually guided detail restoration method for unsupervised pansharpening. Specifically, we treat pan-sharpening as a blind
image deblurring task, in which the blur kernel can be estimated by a CNN. Constrained by the blur kernel, the pansharpened image retains spectral information consistent with
the LRMS image. Once the pan-sharpened image is obtained,
the PAN image is blurred using a pre-defined blur operator. The pan-sharpened image, in turn, is used to guide the
detail restoration of the blurred PAN image. By leveraging
the mutual guidance between MS and PAN images, the pansharpening network can implicitly learn the spatial relationship between the two modalities. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed method significantly outperforms existing
unsupervised pan-sharpening methods.

(a) Supervised training

(b) Our method

Figure 1: The conventional supervised training framework
(a) and our proposed unsupervised training framework (b).
PSNet and PDNet denote pan-sharpening network and PAN
deblurring network, respectively. PANblur is the blurry
counterpart of the PAN image.

methods. These methods can be well-suited for various
satellite images, but their effectiveness is hampered by the
heavy reliance on hand-crafted features.
Recently, deep learning methods (Jin et al. 2022) have
also been applied to pan-sharpening due to their powerful
feature extraction capabilities. By utilizing a large amount of
labeled data for training, supervised pan-sharpening methods significantly outperform traditional methods in restoring spectral and spatial details. However, the ground-truth
for pan-sharpening does not exist. A commonly adopted
alternative is to synthesize training data by reducing the
size of PAN and LRMS images following the Wald’s protocol (Wald, Ranchin, and Mangolini 1997), with the original LRMS images serving as the ground-truth. The networks trained using these reduced-resolution data overlook
the scale variations in the test data, resulting in a degradation
of their restoration quality for actual full-resolution samples
(Ciotola et al. 2022).
To address the limitations of supervised methods, there
has been a growing interest in unsupervised pan-sharpening
methods that do not rely on ground-truth. Unsupervised pansharpening methods require some prior knowledge to guide
the reconstruction toward more realistic high-resolution images. For instance, a simple way to ensure spectral fidelity is

Introduction
Many Earth observation satellites can provide lowresolution multispectral (LRMS) images and high spatial
resolution panchromatic (PAN) images simultaneously. The
objective of pan-sharpening is to fuse the complementary information from the LRMS and PAN images to generate high
spatial resolution multispectral (HRMS) images. HRMS images contain rich spectral and spatial information that is beneficial for various remote sensing tasks, such as land cover
classification, change detection, and target tracking.
Pan-sharpening has consistently remained a vibrant subject of interest in the remote sensing community. Over the
past few decades, numerous techniques have emerged to
achieve improved pan-sharpening effects. Traditional pansharpening methods (Deng et al. 2022) primarily encompass
three categories: component substitution (CS), multi resolution analysis (MRA) and variational optimization (VO)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3386

