The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

i-Rebalance: Personalized Vehicle Repositioning for Supply Demand Balance
Haoyang Chen1 , Peiyan Sun1 , Qiyuan Song1 , Wanyuan Wang1 ,
Weiwei Wu1 , Wencan Zhang2 , Guanyu Gao3 , Yan Lyu1 *
1

Southeast Univeristy, China
National University of Singapore
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{hy chen, spy, qiyuan song, wywang, weiweiwu}@seu.edu.cn, wencanz@u.nus.edu, gygao@njust.edu.cn,
lvyanly@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Ride-hailing platforms have been facing the challenge of balancing demand and supply. Existing vehicle reposition techniques often treat drivers as homogeneous agents and relocate
them deterministically, assuming compliance with the reposition. In this paper, we consider a more realistic and drivercentric scenario where drivers have unique cruising preferences and can decide whether to take the recommendation
or not on their own. We propose i-Rebalance, a personalized
vehicle reposition technique with deep reinforcement learning (DRL). i-Rebalance estimates drivers’ decisions on accepting reposition recommendations through an on-field user
study involving 99 real drivers. To optimize supply-demand
balance and enhance preference satisfaction simultaneously,
i-Rebalance has a sequential reposition strategy with dual
DRL agents: Grid Agent to determine the reposition order of
idle vehicles, and Vehicle Agent to provide personalized recommendations to each vehicle in the pre-defined order. This
sequential learning strategy facilitates more effective policy
training within a smaller action space compared to traditional
joint-action methods. Evaluation of real-world trajectory data
shows that i-Rebalance improves driver acceptance rate by
38.07% and total driver income by 9.97%. The code for our
approach is available at https://github.com/Haoyang-Chen/iRebalance.

Figure 1: Impact of recommendation order. a) Initial scenario: Recommending four idle vehicles in Grid 5. Each
prefers two neighboring grids, rejecting non-preferred options to stay at the current grid. The supply-demand gap
δ is color-coded: red signifies shortage, and green indicates excess idle vehicles. b) Two recommendation orders
C ≻ D ≻ B ≻ A (top row) and A ≻ B ≻ C ≻ D (bottom row) lead to different supply-demand balances due to
drivers’ diverse preferences.
erence (Zhang et al. 2020a,b). Imposing repositioning mandates on drivers would lead to unpleasant working experiences and cause driver loss on ride-hailing platforms.
To this end, we are motivated to consider a more realistic
and driver-centric scenario where drivers could freely accept
or reject reposition recommendations. This requires generating personalized reposition recommendation to improve the
probability of acceptance. However, the challenges are:
1) Subjective driver acceptance to reposition recommendation. Drivers can decide whether to accept recommendations in most ride-hailing platforms on their own. However,
there has been lacking studies on under which circumstances
and how likely the driver would accept the reposition recommendation. Such decision-making from real drivers should
be collected for accurate decision modeling.
2) Personalized repositioning. To incorporate unique preferences of drivers, we have to jointly decide each individual
driver to visit a specific location. However, learning such a
joint action can be challenging due to the large action space.
For a smaller action space, we could reposition vehicles one
by one, however, the reposition order of vehicles impacts the
resulting supply-demand balance, due to the fact that drivers
with diverse preferences may reject unsatisfactory recommendation. Take Figure 1 as an example of recommending
four vehicles in Grid 5 to address the supply-demand gap

Introduction
Taxi and ride-hailing services have been facing supplydemand imbalances. Thousands of drivers spend almost
50% of their working time cruising on road for passengers (Zong et al. 2018). Meanwhile, thousands of travel demands got unserved due to limited vehicle supply nearby.
There have been efforts on reposition idle vehicles to demanding locations for supply-demand balance with deep reinforcement learning (DRL) techniques (Qin et al. 2022;
Yang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021). By interacting with actual
travel demands, these methods can adapt to the complex and
dynamic environment and coordinate competing drivers.
However, these techniques hypothesize that all the drivers
unquestionably adhere to the reposition recommendation
and follow the recommended cruising route. This is impractical because every driver has a unique cruising pref* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

46

