The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AltDiffusion: A Multilingual Text-to-Image Diffusion Model
Fulong Ye1,2 * † , Guang liu2 * ‡ , Xinya Wu2 , Ledell Wu2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
fulong ye@bupt.edu.cn
{liuguang, yxwu, wuyu}@baai.ac.cn

Abstract

help of translation tools, which may lead to translation error and information loss, especially in some culture-specific
concepts. For example, the name of the famous Chinese
painter Baishi Qi may be translated as ”white stone” in English. And the translation process is getting more complex
when it comes to mixed language prompts. Intuitively, a T2I
generative model uses native languages directly without additional translation steps have no such problems. Recently,
some scholars have begun to develop multilingual T2I diffusion models. Taiyi-Bilingual(Wang et al. 2022b), ERNIEViLG 2.0(Feng et al. 2023) are T2I bilingual models that
support both Chinese and English. However, these T2I diffusion models are still limited by the scarcity of language
varieties.
To address the problem, we propose a novel multilingual T2I diffusion model, which is capable of processing eighteen languages1 that cover 46.94% of the world’s
first-language speakers and 27.64% of the world’s secondlanguage speakers, named AltDiffusion(AD), along with an
efficient training approach. We first train a multilingual text
encoder based on the knowledge distillation(Chen et al.
2022) to enhance the language capability to support eighteen languages. Then, the parameters of the text encoder are
frozen and plugged into a pretrained English-only diffusion
model. Next, we propose a two-stage training schema to enhance the language capability of the diffusion model. In the
first stage, we train the K, V matrix in cross-attention of
the UNet on a multilingual dataset LAION 5B(Schuhmann
et al. 2022) to align the embedding space between the UNet
and the text encoder. In the second stage, all parameters of
the UNet are unfrozen to improve the quality of the generated images using LAION Aesthetics(Shing and Sawada
2022a). In addition, a classifier-free guidance training technique is employed to further improve the generation quality. It is worth noting that our training approach possesses
strong generality and can support any pretrained T2I diffusion models.
To evaluate our AD model, we introduce a benchmark
including two evaluation datasets that focus on two aspects of multilingual generation, respectively. For general

Large Text-to-Image(T2I) diffusion models have shown a
remarkable capability to produce photorealistic and diverse
images based on text inputs. However, existing works only
support limited language input, e.g., English, Chinese, and
Japanese, leaving users beyond these languages underserved
and blocking the global expansion of T2I models. Therefore, this paper presents AltDiffusion, a novel multilingual
T2I diffusion model that supports eighteen different languages. Specifically, we first train a multilingual text encoder based on the knowledge distillation. Then we plug
it into a pretrained English-only diffusion model and train
the model with a two-stage schema to enhance the multilingual capability, including concept alignment and quality improvement stage on a large-scale multilingual dataset. Furthermore, we introduce a new benchmark, which includes
Multilingual-General-18(MG-18) and Multilingual-Cultural18(MC-18) datasets, to evaluate the capabilities of T2I diffusion models for generating high-quality images and capturing culture-specific concepts in different languages. Experimental results on both MG-18 and MC-18 demonstrate that
AltDiffusion outperforms current state-of-the-art T2I models, e.g., Stable Diffusion in multilingual understanding, especially with respect to culture-specific concepts, while still
having comparable capability for generating high-quality images. All source code and checkpoints could be found in
https://github.com/superhero-7/AltDiffuson.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been an emerging interest in large
Text-to-Image(T2I) diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion(SD)(Rombach et al. 2022), Imagen(Saharia et al. 2022)
and DALLE2(Ramesh et al. 2022), due to their remarkable
ability to produce photorealistic and diverse images based on
text input. A limitation of these large T2I diffusion models
is that they only support prompts in English, which is inconvenient for non-English users, e.g., Spanish or French. NonEnglish users usually utilize T2I diffusion models with the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.
†
Work done during internship with Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence.
‡
Corresponding Author.

1

Eighteen languages: English, Chinese, Japanese, Thai, Korean,
Hindi, Ukrainian, Arabic, Turkish, Vietnamese, Polish, Dutch, Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, French, and Russian.

6648

