The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pure-Past Action Masking
Giovanni Varricchione1 , Natasha Alechina2,1 , Mehdi Dastani1 ,
Giuseppe De Giacomo3 , Brian Logan4,1 , Giuseppe Perelli5
1

Utrecht University
2
Open University
3
University of Oxford
4
University of Aberdeen
5
Sapienza University of Rome
g.varricchione@uu.nl, natasha.alechina@ou.nl, m.m.dastani@uu.nl,
giuseppe.degiacomo@ox.ac.uk, brian.logan@abdn.ac.uk, giuseppe.perelli@di.uniroma1.it
Abstract

by (default or sampled) safe ones; action projection, e.g.,
(Cheng et al. 2019), where unsafe actions are replaced by
projecting them to the safe action space; and action masking,
e.g., (Krasowski, Wang, and Althoff 2020), where the agent
is able to choose actions only from the safe action space.
However, most provably safe approaches to RL are Markovian, that is, the set of actions which are considered “safe” is
based only on the current state. There has been some work in
which safety constraints are expressed in temporal logic. For
example, shields (Alshiekh et al. 2018; ElSayed-Aly et al.
2021) is an action masking approach in which safety constraints are expressed in Safety LTL. The use of temporal
logic means safety constraints can be specified over execution traces rather than states, allowing a much richer set of
non-Markovian safety constraints to be used, e.g., “do not
close the valve if it was opened within the last three seconds” (Alshiekh et al. 2018). However, generating a shield
from a Safety LTL specification requires solving a safety
game over an abstraction of the underlying MDP and is double exponential in the size of the Safety LTL specification.
Moreover, the agent must learn in the resulting doubly exponential product MDP.
In this paper, we present Pure-Past Action Masking
(PPAM), a novel, lightweight approach to safe reinforcement learning. In PPAM, safety specifications are expressed
in Pure Past Linear-time Temporal Logic (PPLTL) (De Giacomo et al. 2020). PPLTL is a variant of Linear-time Temporal Logic in which formulas are evaluated over finite traces
and only past modalities are allowed. PPLTL formulas have
a very natural interpretation: the formula must be true at
the end of the trace and is evaluated “backwards”. Many
specifications about actions are easier and more natural to
express when referring to the past (Lichtenstein, Pnueli,
and Zuck 1985), and past temporal logics have been used
in closely related problems with non-Markovian aspects,
e.g., non-Markovian models in reasoning about actions (Gabaldon 2011), non-Markovian rewards in MDPs (Bacchus,
Boutilier, and Grove 1996), and expressing norms in multiagent systems (Alechina et al. 2015). PPAM has the same
expressive power as shields but has significantly lower computational complexity (linear overhead in the state size).
Moreover, the features used in the safety constraint need not
be the same as those used by the learning agent, allowing

We present Pure-Past Action Masking (PPAM), a lightweight
approach to action masking for safe reinforcement learning.
In PPAM, actions are disallowed (“masked”) according to
specifications expressed in Pure-Past Linear Temporal Logic
(PPLTL). PPAM can enforce non-Markovian constraints, i.e.,
constraints based on the history of the system, rather than
just the current state of the (possibly hidden) MDP. The features used in the safety constraint need not be the same as
those used by the learning agent, allowing a clear separation
of concerns between the safety constraints and reward specifications of the (learning) agent. We prove formally that an
agent trained with PPAM can learn any optimal policy that
satisfies the safety constraints, and that they are as expressive
as shields, another approach to enforce non-Markovian constraints in RL. Finally, we provide empirical results showing
how PPAM can guarantee constraint satisfaction in practice.

1

Introduction

While AI agents based on reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) have been remarkably successful in a
variety of domains, ensuring the safety of agents developed
using learning remains a major research challenge (Amodei
et al. 2016; Hadfield-Menell et al. 2017; Orseau and Armstrong 2016). Achieving safe and robust behaviour using state-of-the-art learning algorithms and a single reward function is challenging (Leike et al. 2017). In simulated environments, agents are able to explore the whole
action space, regardless of the consequences of their actions. However, in safety-critical applications where agents
must learn in the real environment, such as autonomous cars
(Mirchevska et al. 2018; Kendall et al. 2019), or chemical
processes (Zhou, Li, and Zare 2017; Savage et al. 2021), unconstrained exploration can lead to catastrophic failure, both
during training and following deployment. In such cases,
it is necessary to ensure that that only safe actions are explored during learning. Such approaches are termed “provably safe” in (Krasowski et al. 2023).
A number of approaches to provably safe RL have been
proposed in the literature, including: action replacement,
e.g., (Hunt et al. 2021), where unsafe actions are replaced
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21646

