The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Tail-STEAK: Improve Friend Recommendation for Tail Users via Self-Training
Enhanced Knowledge Distillation
Yijun Ma1 , Chaozhuo Li2 , Xiao Zhou1 *
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
mayj hedgehog@ruc.edu.cn, lichaozhuobupt@163.com, xiaozhou@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are commonly employed in
collaborative friend recommendation systems. Nevertheless,
recent studies reveal a notable performance gap, particularly for users with limited connections, commonly known
as tail users, in contrast to their counterparts with abundant
connections (head users). Uniformly treating head and tail
users poses two challenges for tail user preference learning:
(C1) Label Sparsity, as tail users typically possess limited labels; and (C2) Neighborhood Sparsity, where tail users exhibit sparse observable friendships, leading to distinct preference distributions and performance degradation compared
to head users. In response to these challenges, we introduce
Tail-STEAK, an innovative framework that combines selftraining with enhanced knowledge distillation for tail user
representation learning. To address (C1), we present TailSTEAKbase , a two-stage self-training framework. In the first
stage, only head users and their accurate connections are utilized for training, while pseudo links are generated for tail
users in the second stage. To tackle (C2), we propose two data
augmentation-based self-knowledge distillation pretext tasks.
These tasks are seamlessly integrated into different stages
of Tail-STEAKbase , culminating in the comprehensive TailSTEAK framework. Extensive experiments, conducted on
state-of-the-art GNN-based friend recommendation models,
substantiate the efficacy of Tail-STEAK in significantly improving tail user performance. Our code and data are publicly
available at https://github.com/antman9914/Tail-STEAK.

(a) Degree Distribution

(b) Degree-Related Evaluation
Results

Figure 1: Empirical study of degree-related bias in friend
recommendation

2022), which high-degree users, or head users, can provide.
However, most real-world social networks follow power-law
node degree distribution (Adamic et al. 2001), where the majority of users are tail users with few links, as shown in Figure 1(a). As a result, due to limited observable interactions,
the preference of tail users is hard to learn, leading to inferior
performance in downstream recommendation tasks. As empirically demonstrated in Figure 1(b), for friend recommendation on Deezer and Last.FM social networks based on two
state-of-the-art GNN-based models Simple-HGN (Lv et al.
2021) and LightGCN (He et al. 2020), the degree-specific
predictive accuracy is approximately proportional to node
degree. We denote this phenomenon as degree-related bias.
Regrettably, contemporary recommendation algorithms often treat head users and tail users uniformly, resulting in the
under-representation of tail users. This bottleneck is deemed
unacceptable in real-world networks. Therefore, this paper
is dedicated to enhancing tail user preference learning for
friend recommendation with limited structural information.
We contend that mitigating degree-related bias in friend
recommendation introduces two challenges: (C1) Label
Sparsity, where the scarcity of labels for tail users complicates preference learning, leading to an imbalance between
head and tail users; and (C2) Neighborhood Sparsity, as the
sparse interactions of tail users create a distinct preference
distribution compared to head users, posing challenges in accurate anticipation and potentially resulting in a preference

Introduction
Friend recommender systems play a crucial role in various real-world applications, facilitating the discovery of potential social relationships and enhancing user engagement.
The cornerstone of friend recommendation lies in learning effective user representations (Zhou et al. 2019). Recently, inspired by the development of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), higher-order collaborative signals in social
networks have been exploited for user representation learning and achieved significant improvement (Sankar et al.
2021). Despite their success, GNNs usually need qualified
and abundant structural connections to learn effective user
representations (Liu, Nguyen, and Fang 2021; Zheng et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8895

