The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Noise-Aware Image Captioning with Progressively Exploring Mismatched Words
Zhongtian Fu1 * , Kefei Song1 * , Luping Zhou2 , Yang Yang1†
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
2
The University of Sydney, Sydney 2052, Australia
ztfu@njust.edu.cn, kfsong@njust.edu.cn, luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au, yyang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

age descriptions, and visually impaired people use captioning models to experience the visual world.
Indeed, image captioning research focuses on learning
generators between heterogeneous image-text modalities.
This involves comprehending the given image through computer vision techniques and generating corresponding descriptions using natural language processing. Initially, researchers explored the encoder-decoder architecture (Yang
et al. 2019a; Zhang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019c) with
CNNs (Albawi, Mohammed, and Al-Zawi 2017) as image encoders and LSTM (Greff et al. 2017) as text decoders (Vinyals et al. 2015). To consider local and global
features simultaneously, (Huang et al. 2019) used image regions to decode image segmentations sequentially to words,
adding attention mechanisms to focus on specific image
regions during decoding. With the advancement in multihead self-attention-based Transformers, they improved the
modeling of intra-modal and inter-modal relationships, leading to better captions (Cornia et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2022). Notably, effective deep captioning requires large-scale image-text pairs, such as CLIP
using 400 million image-text pairs for training (Radford
et al. 2021), typically collected from the internet to reduce labor costs. However, an issue is the presence of noisy
image-text pairs, where mismatches significantly degrade
model performance. Researchers have attempted to address
this by explicitly weighting image-text pairs (Huang et al.
2019, 2021), with smaller weights indicating more noise.
Yet, noisy samples in image captioning scenarios are finegrained, differing from coarse-grained label noise in noisy
label learning. Figure 1 illustrates different noise levels:
matched, partially matched, and mismatched. The degree
of noise is a continuous value from 0 to 1, where 0 denotes mismatched or useless pairs, and 1 means matched or
clean pairs. Partially matched pairs still contain useful wordregion pairs, with lower noise degrees indicating more useful
pairs. Thus, the noisy image-text pair can be considered the
ground truth sentence containing incorrect words.
Along this line, in this paper, we mitigate the influence
of noisy image-text pairs by fine-grained exploring mismatched words and progressively conducting more reliable
pseudo-word-labels. Naturally, we propose a Noisy-aware
Image Captioning method (NIC), which learns image-text
pairs with the newly designed reliability evaluation mecha-

Image captioning aims to automatically generate captions for
images by learning a cross-modal generator from vision to
language. The large amount of image-text pairs required for
training is usually sourced from the internet due to the manual cost, which brings the noise with mismatched relevance
that affects the learning process. Unlike traditional noisy label learning, the key challenge in processing noisy image-text
pairs is to finely identify the mismatched words to make the
most use of trustworthy information in the text, rather than
coarsely weighing the entire examples. To tackle this challenge, we propose a Noise-aware Image Captioning method
(NIC) to adaptively mitigate the erroneous guidance from
noise by progressively exploring mismatched words. Specifically, NIC first identifies mismatched words by quantifying
word-label reliability from two aspects: 1) inter-modal representativeness, which measures the significance of the current word by assessing cross-modal correlation via prediction
certainty; 2) intra-modal informativeness, which amplifies the
effect of current prediction by combining the quality of subsequent word generation. During optimization, NIC constructs
the pseudo-word-labels considering the reliability of the origin word-labels and model convergence to periodically coordinate mismatched words. As a result, NIC can effectively
exploit both clean and noisy image-text pairs to learn a more
robust mapping function. Extensive experiments conducted
on the MS-COCO and Conceptual Caption datasets validate
the effectiveness of our method in various noisy scenarios.

Introduction
In reality, people perceive information from various modalities like vision, hearing, and smell. With the development of
artificial intelligence, especially deep learning, multi-modal
learning has received increasing attention (Hossain et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2020, 2021). Image captioning is one of
the important downstream tasks, which aims to automatically generate meaningful descriptions for images and has a
wide range of applications in daily lives (Hossain et al. 2019;
Baltrusaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019; Yang et al. 2023).
For example, E-commerce benefits from quick product im* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12091

