The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

READ-PVLA: Recurrent Adapter with Partial Video-Language
Alignment for Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning in Low-Resource
Video-Language Modeling
Thong Nguyen1 , Xiaobao Wu2 , Xinshuai Dong3 , Khoi Le4 , Zhiyuan Hu1 ,
Cong-Duy Nguyen2 , See-Kiong Ng1 , Anh Tuan Luu2
1

Institute of Data Science (IDS), National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore;
3
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
4
VinAI Research, Vietnam
Abstract

of the difficulty of collecting video-language data (Pan et al.
2022), fully fine-tuning these over-parameterized models in
low-resource scenarios, where limited training data is available, leads to instability and sub-optimal performance (Jiang
et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023).
To address these shortcomings, adapters are proposed as
a parameter-efficient solution for finetuning video-language
pretrained transformers (Jiang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2023; Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022; Chen et al.
2022). The strategy is to add additional adaptation module
to each layer of the pre-trained network and only the adaptation modules are trained during fine-tuning to improve
the parameter-performance trade-off. These modules rely
on non-linear projections to downproject video-language inputs into low-dimensional space then up-project them back
to the original high-dimensional space. However, such projections consider video frames and textual words as separate tokens, thus ignoring the intrinsic temporal dependency
among video frames or textual words. Without such dependency information, it is difficult to reason about temporal
context in the video to properly ground the language (e.g.
in Figure 1, determine the expression of the girl after, not
before, the proposal), or coherently link the entities in the
summary (e.g. in Figure 1, recap the chronological order of
bolt removing and puller threading). Moreover, because at
fine-tuning time only adaptation modules are trained using
limited video-language data, little attention is paid to the information flow that starts from the raw video-language inputs till the low-dimensional space of the adaptation modules. This may result in losing essential task-related information and carrying noise into these modules (Tsai et al.
2020; Han, Chen, and Poria 2021).
To resolve the first issue, we propose a novel adapter architecture, REcurrent ADapter (READ), for video-language
modeling tasks. The key idea is to incorporate the recurrent
modeling ability into the adaptation module to capture the
temporal dependency of video frames and language entities
(Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). As such, we formulate READ as a parameter-efficient bottleneck with a sequence of operations including feature dimension reduction,
recurrent modeling, and feature dimension recovery. Since
the incorporated recurrent computation works in the low dimension (e.g. 4-dimensional), our READ module stands as a

Fully fine-tuning pretrained large-scale transformer models
has become a popular paradigm for video-language modeling tasks, such as temporal language grounding and videolanguage summarization. With a growing number of tasks
and limited training data, such full fine-tuning approach leads
to costly model storage and unstable training. To overcome
these shortcomings, we introduce lightweight adapters to the
pre-trained model and only update them at fine-tuning time.
However, existing adapters fail to capture intrinsic temporal relations among video frames or textual words. Moreover, they neglect the preservation of critical task-related information that flows from the raw video-language input into
the adapter’s low-dimensional space. To address these issues,
we first propose a novel REcurrent ADapter (READ) that
employs recurrent computation to enable temporal modeling capability. Second, we propose Partial Video-Language
Alignment (PVLA) objective via the use of partial optimal
transport to maintain task-related information flowing into
our READ modules. We validate our READ-PVLA framework through extensive experiments where READ-PVLA
significantly outperforms all existing fine-tuning strategies
on multiple low-resource temporal language grounding and
video-language summarization benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Video-language modeling is a challenging problem since it
involves understanding both video and language modalities.
For example, temporal language grounding (TLG) model
comprehends video detail and language query to localize semantically related video moments (Figure 1 (left)), or videolanguage summarization (VLS) model extracts information
from both video content and language transcript to write the
summary (Figure 1 (right)).
Previous video-language modeling methods (Liu et al.
2022; Lei, Berg, and Bansal 2021; Yu et al. 2021) employ
pretrained Transformer models such as Unified Multimodal
Transformer (UMT) (Liu et al. 2022) and Vision-Guided
BART (VG-BART) (Yu et al. 2021), and fine-tune all the parameters of these models for every single task. This results in
substantial storage overhead since each task demands storing a separate model (Zhang et al. 2023). Moreover, because
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18824

