The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Integer Is Enough: When Vertical Federated Learning Meets Rounding
Pengyu Qiu1,2 , Yuwen Pu1 , Yongchao Liu2* , Wenyan Liu1,2 , Yun Yue2 , Xiaowei Zhu2 , Lichun Li2 ,
∗
∗
Jinbao Li3 , Shouling Ji1
1

Zhejiang University
2
Ant Group
3
Qilu University of Technology
qiupys@zju.edu.cn, yw.pu@zju.edu.cn, yongchao.ly@antgroup.com, enxuan.lwy@antgroup.com, yueyun.yy@antgroup.com,
robert.zxw@antgroup.com, licun.llc@zmxy.com.cn, Lijinb@sdas.org, sji@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

numbers for further processing; while other solutions involves complex designs (Moon and Lee 2020). These solutions can consume additional time and resources.

Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) is a solution increasingly
used by companies with the same user group but differing
features, enabling them to collaboratively train a machine
learning model. VFL ensures that clients exchange intermediate results extracted by their local models, without sharing
raw data. However, in practice, VFL encounters several challenges, such as computational and communication overhead,
privacy leakage risk, and adversarial attack. Our study reveals
that the usage of floating-point (FP) numbers is a common
factor causing these issues, as they can be redundant and contain too much information. To address this, we propose a new
architecture called rounding layer, which converts intermediate results to integers. Our theoretical analysis and empirical
results demonstrate the benefits of the rounding layer in reducing computation and memory overhead, providing privacy
protection, preserving model performance, and mitigating adversarial attacks. We hope this paper inspires further research
into novel architectures to address practical issues in VFL.

Privacy Leakage While protecting intermediate results
from being accessed in plain text is crucial, research has
found that there are still privacy leakage risks (Luo et al.
2020; Qiu et al. 2022a). For instance, in a two-party scenario, one curious party can reconstruct the other party’s
intermediate results using approximation methods, with the
knowledge of the server’s model and one sample’s posteriors. Empirical evidence has shown that the reconstructed
intermediate results are close to the original ones and can be
used to infer samples’ raw features and relations (He, Zhang,
and Lee 2019). These leakages of information reveal that
even intermediate results carry too much information.
Adversarial Attacks As VFL is a distributed system, the
presence of malicious parties is inevitable. This presents a
challenge for applications of VFL, as it is necessary to mitigate adversarial attacks when one party uploads crafted adversarial features. Existing defense methods are available
but can result in additional costs. A key question is whether
there is a more economical way to achieve the same goal or
reduce the overall cost of mitigating adversarial attacks in
VFL. From the empirical study on the adversarial attacks,
we find that FP numbers may exacerbate the sensitivity of
the deep learning model, thereby making it more vulnerable
to adversarial attacks.
Based on the analysis above, we speculate that the usage of FP numbers may be a common factor contributing to
the issues encountered in VFL. To address these issues, we
propose a new architecture called the rounding layer, which
converts intermediate results to integers. This architecture
can be easily incorporated into existing VFL frameworks.
The benefits of this approach include:

Introduction
Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) (Yang et al. 2019) has
become a popular solution for companies with the same
group of users but different features, enabling them to collaboratively train a model. In popular frameworks like FATE
(Liu et al. 2021), clients submit intermediate results extracted by their local models instead of raw data. The server
then aggregates these intermediate results for further computation and returns corresponding gradients for training. Homomorphic Encryption (HE) (Zhang and Zhu 2020; Zhang
et al. 2018) is used in the framework to provide the confidentiality of these intermediate results, which enables the
computation to be executed in an encrypted form. However,
despite the usage of HE, there are several challenges inherent in this design.
Computational Overhead While HE provides privacy
protection, it can require significant computational resources
for training and inference, particularly when calculations involve floating-point (FP) numbers. Indeed, HE cannot directly apply to calculations involving FP numbers. A naive
solution is that FP numbers must be converted to fixed-point

1. Enabling HE calculations without transformation;
2. Compressing the intermediate results;
3. Expanding the robust boundary of samples.
The proposed architecture addresses the following questions:

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• How to continue backward propagation through the
rounding layer?

14704

