The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PNeSM: Arbitrary 3D Scene Stylization via Prompt-Based Neural Style Mapping
Jiafu Chen1 , Wei Xing1∗ , Jiakai Sun1 , Tianyi Chu1 , Yiling Huang1
Boyan Ji1 , Lei Zhao1 * , Huaizhong Lin1∗ , Haibo Chen2 , Zhizhong Wang1∗
1

Zhejiang University
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{chenjiafu, wxing, csjk, chutianyi, ji by, cszhl, linhz, endywon}@zju.edu.cn,
huangyiling@hotmail.com, hbchen@njust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

scene stylization. It fixes the geometry of the scene and
changes only the appearance by using a hypernetwork to
predict parameters for calculating artistic appearance. To
further improve the visual quality of stylization, several approaches (Huang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; NguyenPhuoc, Liu, and Xiao 2022; Fan et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023)
have been developed. StylizedNeRF (Huang et al. 2022)
and SNeRF (Nguyen-Phuoc, Liu, and Xiao 2022) are proposed to mutually optimize image stylization module and
scene appearance representation to fuse the stylization ability of 2D stylization network with the 3D consistency provided by NeRF. ARF (Zhang et al. 2022) minimizes the distance between each feature vector in an image rendered from
NeRF and its nearest neighbor feature vector in the given
style image. INS (Fan et al. 2022) simultaneously changes
both the geometry and appearance to enable a more flexible stylization by stylizing shape tweaks on the scene surface. StyleRF (Liu et al. 2023) transforms the grid features
of the scene according to the reference style. However, despite valuable efforts, these methods still entangle geometry
and appearance to some extent, necessitating re-training for
a new scene.
In this work, we propose the first framework for arbitrary
3D scene stylization, which can not only transfer arbitrary
styles but also stylize arbitrary 3D scenes with only one stylization model. The key insight is a Prompt-based Neural
Style Mapping (PNeSM) which disentangles the geometry
and appearance of a 3D scene by mapping the appearance
into a 2D style pattern space and then stylizes the appearance in the 2D style pattern space via a prompt-based 2D
stylization algorithm.
3D scene disentanglement consists of two main parts: UV
mapping and appearance mapping. Inspired by (Xiang et al.
2021), the UV mapping trains a UV mapping network to
project the 3D real-world coordinates into a 2D (UV) style
pattern space. Different from (Xiang et al. 2021), we use
voxel-grid representation instead of MLP for fast training
and use a stylization network rather than manual operation to
change the appearance. Thanks to the complete separation of
geometry and appearance, the stylization can be conducted
in a unified style pattern space. The appearance mapping reconstructs the original appearance of the scene, which maps
the projected style pattern coordinate to the radiance color
through an MLP.

3D scene stylization refers to transform the appearance of a
3D scene to match a given style image, ensuring that images
rendered from different viewpoints exhibit the same style as
the given style image, while maintaining the 3D consistency
of the stylized scene. Several existing methods have obtained
impressive results in stylizing 3D scenes. However, the models proposed by these methods need to be re-trained when
applied to a new scene. In other words, their models are coupled with a specific scene and cannot adapt to arbitrary other
scenes. To address this issue, we propose a novel 3D scene
stylization framework to transfer an arbitrary style to an arbitrary scene, without any style-related or scene-related retraining. Concretely, we first map the appearance of the 3D
scene into a 2D style pattern space, which realizes complete
disentanglement of the geometry and appearance of the 3D
scene and makes our model be generalized to arbitrary 3D
scenes. Then we stylize the appearance of the 3D scene in the
2D style pattern space via a prompt-based 2D stylization algorithm. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
framework is superior to SOTA methods in both visual quality and generalization.

Introduction
3D scene stylization is an important editing task in vision
and graphics, which facilitates the creation of new artistic
scenes. Given a 3D scene and a style image, 3D scene stylization models can generate stylized images of the scene
from arbitrary novel views. Naively applying approaches designed for image/video stylization to 3D scenes often leads
to inconsistent results due to the lack of 3D information. To
handle the inconsistency problem, several methods (Huang
et al. 2021; Höllein, Johnson, and Nießner 2022; Cao et al.
2020; Kopanas et al. 2021) have explored 3D scene stylization based on explicit representations (e.g., meshes, voxels
and point clouds). However, their discrete representation of
scenes will lead to a loss of precision in geometry.
Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al. 2020) proposes to use neural networks for continuous scene modelling. Due to its excellent performance in reconstructing both geometry and appearance, Stylizing-3Dscene (Chiang et al. 2022) first introduces NeRF for 3D
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1091

