The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Prior and Prediction Inverse Kernel Transformer for Single Image Defocus
Deblurring
Peng Tang1,6 , Zhiqiang Xu1 * , Chunlai Zhou2 , Pengfei Wei3 , Peng Han4 , Xin Cao5 , Tobias Lasser 6
1

Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
Computer Science, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Speech and Audio Team, Bytedance AI Lab, Singapore
4
Computer Science, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Unviversity of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
6
Schoold of CIT, CIIP group in Munich Institute of Bioengineering, Tecinical University of Munich, Garching, Germany
tangp@in.tum.de, zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae, czhou@ruc.edu.cn, wpf89928@gmail.com
penghan study@foxmail.com, xin.cao@unsw.edu.au, lasser@in.tum.de
Abstract

Xu, and Jia 2015; Liu et al. 2020) usually approximate the
blur kernel with the prior kernel, either Gaussian (Shi, Xu,
and Jia 2015; Park et al. 2017; Karaali and Jung 2017; Liu
et al. 2020; Quan, Wu, and Ji 2021; Lee et al. 2019) or disc
(D’Andrès et al. 2016; Bando and Nishita 2007) kernels,
to reduce the complexity. Under the approximation, these
methods first estimate a defocus map to derive the blur kernel. During the estimation, they only need to focus on optimizing the kernel size. Given the estimated defocus map,
non-blind deconvolutions (Fish et al. 1995) are done to restore a sharp image. However, the kernel shapes in a realworld defocused image could be more complex than a prior
kernel, which will cause an inaccurate defocus map estimation and consequently affect the deblurring quality.
Recently, learning-based approaches using deep neural
networks (DNNs) (Abuolaim and Brown 2020; Son et al.
2021; Lee et al. 2021; Ruan et al. 2022; Quan, Wu, and Ji
2021) were proposed, which significantly improve the performance of the SIDD task compared to traditional twostage approaches. Most learning-based approaches, such as
DPDNet (Abuolaim and Brown 2020), IFAN (Lee et al.
2021), KPAC (Son et al. 2021), and DRBNet (Ruan et al.
2022), adopt an end-to-end training scheme which learns
a mapping directly from a blurry image to a sharp image.
However, the mapping learned by the end-to-end scheme is
specific to images within the training dataset. It thus makes
such mapping methods not robust enough to defocused images outside the training set. DMENet (Lee et al. 2019) and
GKMNet (Quan, Wu, and Ji 2021) integrate the prior kernels
approximation into the learning pipeline to reduce the complexity of the defocus deblurring. However, they still suffer
from issues similar to traditional two-stage approaches, i.e.,
they are unable to effectively handle irregular blur whose
shape cannot be approximated by prior kernels.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning approach, i.e., Prior-and-Prediction Inverse Kernel Transformer (P2 IKT) consisting of prior and prediction inverse
kernel block (P2 IKB) and scale recurrent transformer (SRT),
to tackle the above issues for single image defocus deblurring. We consider that defocus blur is either amenable

Defocus blur, due to spatially-varying sizes and shapes, is
hard to remove. Existing methods either are unable to effectively handle irregular defocus blur or fail to generalize
well on other datasets. In this work, we propose a divide-andconquer approach to tackling this issue, which gives rise to
a novel end-to-end deep learning method, called prior-andprediction inverse kernel transformer (P2 IKT), for single image defocus deblurring. Since most defocus blur can be approximated as Gaussian blur or its variants, we construct an
inverse Gaussian kernel module in our method to enhance
its generalization ability. At the same time, an inverse kernel prediction module is introduced in order to flexibly address the irregular blur that cannot be approximated by Gaussian blur. We further design a scale recurrent transformer,
which estimates mixing coefficients for adaptively combining the results from the two modules and runs the scale recurrent “coarse-to-fine” procedure for progressive defocus deblurring. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our
P2 IKT outperforms previous methods in terms of PSNR on
multiple defocus deblurring datasets.

Introduction
In an image captured by a camera, objects in the focal plane
will appear sharp, otherwise blurry. The further away the objects are from the focal plane, the more blurry they are. This
phenomenon is the so-called defocus blur (Quan, Wu, and
Ji 2021). In photography, sometimes, defocus blur is an intentional artistic effect. However, in many computer vision
tasks such as face recognition (Hua et al. 2012), biomedical imaging (Lefkimmiatis, Bourquard, and Unser 2011),
and object detection (Dai et al. 2016), defocus blur is undesired as it affects the image quality and results in degrading
performance. In such cases, single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) is crucial in many related high-level vision tasks
(Campisi and Egiazarian 2017).
Two-stage approaches (Cho and Lee 2017; D’Andrès
et al. 2016; Karaali and Jung 2017; Park et al. 2017; Shi,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5145

