The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Explicit Visual Prompts for Visual Object Tracking
Liangtao Shi1,2 , Bineng Zhong1,2 * , Qihua Liang1,2 , Ning Li1,2 , Shengping Zhang3 , Xianxian Li1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University
2
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-Source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
slt@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn
ningli65536@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, lixx@gxnu.edu.cn
Template

Abstract

Search

How to effectively exploit spatio-temporal information is crucial to capture target appearance changes in visual tracking.
However, most deep learning-based trackers mainly focus on
designing a complicated appearance model or template updating strategy, while lacking the exploitation of context between consecutive frames and thus entailing the when-andhow-to-update dilemma. To address these issues, we propose
a novel explicit visual prompts framework for visual tracking,
dubbed EVPTrack. Specifically, we utilize spatio-temporal
tokens to propagate information between consecutive frames
without focusing on updating templates. As a result, we cannot only alleviate the challenge of when-to-update, but also
avoid the hyper-parameters associated with updating strategies. Then, we utilize the spatio-temporal tokens to generate explicit visual prompts that facilitate inference in the current frame. The prompts are fed into a transformer encoder
together with the image tokens without additional processing. Consequently, the efficiency of our model is improved
by avoiding how-to-update. In addition, we consider multiscale information as explicit visual prompts, providing multiscale template features to enhance the EVPTrack’s ability to handle target scale changes. Extensive experimental
results on six benchmarks (i.e., LaSOT, LaSOText , GOT10k, UAV123, TrackingNet, and TNL2K.) validate that our
EVPTrack can achieve competitive performance at a realtime speed by effectively exploiting both spatio-temporal and
multi-scale information. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/EVPTrack.

Search

Model
(a) Trackers with an initial template.

Tracking Result
update

Teamplate_T

Search

Template

Model

Search

Tracking Result

(b) Trackers with a dynamic template.
Template

Token
Search_T-1
Search_T
Search_T+1

Search_T-1

Model
Token

Search_T

Model
Token

Search_T+1

Model
Token

(c) Ours explicit visual prompts tracker.Tracking Results

Figure 1: Comparison of tracking frameworks. (a) The
framework with an initial template(Bertinetto et al. 2016;
Chen et al. 2021). (b) The framework with a dynamic template(Yan et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2022). (c) Our EVPTrack
framework uses tokens to propagate spatio-temporal information.

Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task in computer vision that aims to locate targets in subsequent frames of a
video given an arbitrary target in the first frame. It plays an
important role in traffic flow monitoring, human-computer
interaction, surveillance, security, etc. Although various topperforming trackers have been proposed over the years, it is
still challenging due to target appearance changes, deformation, occlusions, background clutter, and other factors.
In recent years, deep learning-based trackers (Bertinetto
et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018, 2019; Chen et al. 2020, 2021;
Ye et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023) have achieved excellent

performance and efficiency with their powerful representation capabilities, leading the rapid development of the tracking field. Generally speaking, as shown in Fig. 1, they can
be divided into two categories: the trackers with an initial
fixed template and the trackers with a dynamic template.
The representative trackers with an initial fixed template include siamese-based trackers (Bertinetto et al. 2016; Li et al.
2018, 2019; Chen et al. 2020) and transformer-based trackers (Chen et al. 2021; Ye et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023).
The siamese-based trackers formulate the tracking task as
a similarity learning problem, matching the initial state of
the target with the search frame image to estimate a new
target state. The transformer-based trackers introduce attention mechanisms(Vaswani et al. 2017) that are utilized

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4838

