The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robustness Verification of Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Control Systems
Using Reward Martingales
Dapeng Zhi1 , Peixin Wang2 * , Cheng Chen1 , Min Zhang1 *
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
2
University of Oxford
zhi.dapeng@163.com, peixin.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk, {chchen,zhangmin}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has gained prominence
as an effective approach for control systems. However, its practical deployment is impeded by state perturbations that can
severely impact system performance. Addressing this critical
challenge requires robustness verification about system performance, which involves tackling two quantitative questions: (i)
how to establish guaranteed bounds for expected cumulative
rewards, and (ii) how to determine tail bounds for cumulative
rewards. In this work, we present the first approach for robustness verification of DRL-based control systems by introducing
reward martingales, which offer a rigorous mathematical foundation to characterize the impact of state perturbations on system performance in terms of cumulative rewards. Our verified
results provide provably quantitative certificates for the two
questions. We then show that reward martingales can be implemented and trained via neural networks, against different types
of control policies. Experimental results demonstrate that our
certified bounds tightly enclose simulation outcomes on various DRL-based control systems, indicating the effectiveness
and generality of the proposed approach.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is gaining widespread
adoption in various control systems, including safety-critical
ones like power systems (Zhang, Tu, and Liu 2023; Wan et al.
2023) and traffic signal controllers (Liu and Ding 2022; Chen
et al. 2020). As these systems collect state information via
sensors, uncertainties inevitably originate from sensor errors,
equipment inaccuracy, or even adversarial attacks (Zhang
et al. 2020; Wan, Zeng, and Sun 2022; Zhang et al. 2023).
In real-world scenarios, the robustness guarantee of their
performance is of utmost importance when they are subjected
to reasonable environmental perturbations and adversarial
attacks. Failing to do so could lead to critical errors and a
significant decline in performance, which may cause fatal
consequences in safety-critical applications.
A DRL-based control system’s robustness can be reflected
in its performance variation, i.e., the cumulative rewards,
when the system is perturbed (Lütjens, Everett, and How
2019). The robustness verification refers to two quantitative
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19992

questions: (i) how to establish guaranteed bounds for expected cumulative rewards, and (ii) how to determine their
tail bounds. However, the verification is a very challenging task. Firstly, DRL-based control systems are complex
cyber-physical systems, making formal verification difficult
(Deshmukh and Sankaranarayanan 2019). Secondly, the inclusion of opaque AI models like Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) adds complexity to the problem (Larsen et al. 2022).
Thirdly, performance is measured statistically rather than by
analytical calculations, lacking theoretical guarantees.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for formally
verifying the robustness of DRL-based control systems. By
leveraging the concept of martingales from probabilistic programming (Chakarov and Sankaranarayanan 2013; Wang
et al. 2019; Wang 2022), we establish provable upper and
lower bounds for the expected cumulative rewards of DRLbased control systems under state perturbations. Specifically,
we define upper reward supermartingales (URS) and lower
reward submartingales (LRS) and prove they provide theoretical guarantees in the system’s certified reward range. We
then extend our analysis to encompass tail bounds of rewards,
utilizing a combination of martingales and Hoeffding’s inequality (Hoeffding 1994). This refined approach can derive
upper bounds for tail probabilities that show the deviation of
system performance from predefined thresholds, offering a
comprehensive understanding of the system’s robustness.
We further show that reward martingales can be efficiently
implemented and trained as DNNs, as ranking martingales
are trained (Lechner et al. 2022), against various control
policies. Given a DRL-based control system, we define a
corresponding loss function and train a DNN repeatedly until
the DNN satisfies the conditions of being a reward martingale
or timeout. We identify that computing expected rewards is
the difficult part in checking whether a trained DNN is a
reward martingale and it varies in the training approaches
of policies. If policies are implemented by DNNs on infinite
and continuous state space, we take advantage of the overapproximation-based method (Lechner et al. 2022). We also
propose an analytical method to compute expected values
precisely when policies are trained on discretized abstract
state space in recently emerging approaches (Jin et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022; Drews, Albarghouthi, and D’Antoni 2020).
We intensively evaluate the effectiveness of our approach
on four classic control problems, namely, MountainCar, Cart-

