The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reward-Respecting Subtasks for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (Abstract
Reprint)
Richard S. Sutton1,2,3,4 , Marlos C. Machado1,2,3,4 , G. Zacharias Holland1 , David Szepesvari1 ,
Finbarr Timbers1 , Brian Tanner1 , Adam White1,2,3,4
1

DeepMind, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
3
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
4
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Canada
2

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Sutton, Machado, Holland, Szepesvari, Timbers,
Tanner, and White (2023).

Abstract
To achieve the ambitious goals of artificial intelligence, reinforcement learning must include planning with a model of
the world that is abstract in state and time. Deep learning has
made progress with state abstraction, but temporal abstraction has rarely been used, despite extensively developed theory based on the options framework. One reason for this is
that the space of possible options is immense, and the methods previously proposed for option discovery do not take
into account how the option models will be used in planning. Options are typically discovered by posing subsidiary
tasks, such as reaching a bottleneck state or maximizing the
cumulative sum of a sensory signal other than reward. Each
subtask is solved to produce an option, and then a model of
the option is learned and made available to the planning process. In most previous work, the subtasks ignore the reward
on the original problem, whereas we propose subtasks that
use the original reward plus a bonus based on a feature of the
state at the time the option terminates. We show that option
models obtained from such reward-respecting subtasks are
much more likely to be useful in planning than eigenoptions,
shortest path options based on bottleneck states, or rewardrespecting options generated by the option-critic. Reward respecting subtasks strongly constrain the space of options and
thereby also provide a partial solution to the problem of option discovery. Finally, we show how values, policies, options, and models can all be learned online and off-policy
using standard algorithms and general value functions.

References
Sutton, R. S.; Machado, M. C.; Holland, G. Z.; Szepesvari,
D.; Timbers, F.; Tanner, B.; and White, A. 2023. Rewardrespecting subtasks for model-based reinforcement learning.
Artificial Intelligence, 324: 104001.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22713

