The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FT-GAN: Fine-Grained Tune Modeling for Chinese Opera Synthesis
Meizhen Zheng1,2 * , Peng Bai1,2 * , Xiaodong Shi1,2† , Xun Zhou1 , Yiting Yan1
2

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian and Taiwan
(Xiamen University), Ministry of Culture and Tourism, China
{midon, baipeng}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, mandel@xmu.edu.cn, {xzhou, eatingyan}@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

2022; Wu and Shi 2023), and the synthesized singing voice
has been natural enough and relatively expressive. However,
despite the profound cultural heritage and broad audience
base of Chinese operas, the research on automatic opera synthesis has lagged behind compared to singing voice synthesis and speech synthesis due to the scarcity of publicly available high-quality opera datasets. Therefore, to fill the gap to
some extent and to promote the research on opera synthesis,
in this paper, we take the most famous opera in Fujian and
Taiwan as the primary research focus and construct an accurately annotated Gezi Opera Audio-Text alignment dataset
(GOAT), which can be used for opera synthesis research
with controllability in lyrics, role, tune, and other potential
aspects.

Although singing voice synthesis (SVS) has made significant progress recently, with its unique styles and various genres, Chinese opera synthesis requires greater attention but is
rarely studied for lack of training data and high expressiveness. In this work, we build a high-quality Gezi Opera (a
type of Chinese opera popular in Fujian and Taiwan) audiotext alignment dataset and formulate specific data annotation
methods applicable to Chinese operas. We propose FT-GAN,
an acoustic model for fine-grained tune modeling in Chinese
opera synthesis based on the empirical analysis of the differences between Chinese operas and pop songs. To further
improve the quality of the synthesized opera, we propose
a speech pre-training strategy for additional knowledge injection. The experimental results show that FT-GAN outperforms the strong baselines in SVS on the Gezi Opera synthesis task. Extensive experiments further verify that FT-GAN
performs well on synthesis tasks of other operas such as
Peking Opera. Audio samples, the dataset, and the codes are
available at https://zhengmidon.github.io/FTGAN.github.io/.

Chinese operas differ from pop songs in that their rhythmic changes are more complex and diverse than pop songs
(Wu et al. 2020). Specifically, some characters in a Chinese opera aria often undergo multiple pitch changes (also
known as slurs), while pop songs usually follow a single
pitch for each character. In addition, the duration variance
of phonemes in Chinese operas is so large that sometimes
even a single phoneme can be sung for tens of seconds.
These fine-grained tune styles incur difficulties in opera synthesis. In this work, we attempt to overcome these difficulties through data annotation and model architecture design. Specifically, for the voice characteristics of Gezi Opera
(which also exist in other Chinese operas), we design two
data annotation strategies, namely, vowel morphing and vocal run, to align and annotate the data more precisely. In
terms of modeling, although some singing voice synthesis
models such as FastSpeech2 (Ren et al. 2020) and DiffSinger (Liu et al. 2022) perform well in singing voice synthesis tasks, their synthesized operas are unsatisfactory because they do not model the fine-grained tunes typical of
opera. In this work, we propose FT-GAN, an acoustic model
designed for fine-grained tune modeling in Chinese opera
synthesis. In addition, from the perspective of pronunciation
and linguistics, we abstract the general Hokkien speech into
specific Gezi Opera and propose a speech pre-training strategy further to improve the performance and robustness of the
model. The experimental results show that FT-GAN outperforms the strong baselines in SVS on the Gezi Opera synthesis task. Extensive experiments further verify that FT-GAN
has good performance on the Peking Opera synthesis task as

Introduction
Opera is a unique genre of singing with regional characteristics. There are many famous operas worldwide, such as
Italian operas and Chinese operas. Chinese opera is a stage
performing art that utilizes various performance techniques
(including singing, reciting, acting, and acrobatic fighting).
With its long history, it has developed a unique system of
role types (the male lead, the female lead, the painted face,
and the clown) and a wide variety of tunes. In addition, Chinese operas have been influenced by different regional cultures to evolve into more diverse types. The most direct manifestation of the regional nature of opera is the use of dialects
for singing, for example, Gezi Opera is sung in Hokkien.
These characteristics make opera synthesis significant and
yet challenging at the same time.
Just as many datasets of pop song (Wang et al. 2022b;
Tamaru et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022a; Wilkins et al. 2018)
have been released one after another, the models and methods of singing voice synthesis have been continuously developed (Chen et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2019; Kim, Kang, and Lee
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19697

