The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Prompt to Transfer: Sim-to-Real Transfer for Traffic Signal Control with Prompt
Learning
Longchao Da1 , Minquan Gao2 , Hao Mei 1 , Hua Wei1 *
1

Arizona State University
Johns Hopkins University
{longchao, hmei7, hua.wei}@asu.edu, mgao40@jh.edu
2

Vanilla GAT

Abstract

How does snowy weather
influence the acc. and
𝑠!"#
dece. for the vehicles?

Numerous solutions are proposed for the Traffic Signal Control (TSC) tasks aiming to provide efficient transportation
and alleviate traffic congestion. Recently, promising results
have been attained by Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods
through trial and error in simulators, bringing confidence in
solving cities’ congestion problems. However, performance
gaps still exist when simulator-trained policies are deployed
to the real world. This issue is mainly introduced by the system dynamic difference between the training simulators and
the real-world environments. In this work, we leverage the
knowledge of Large Language Models (LLMs) to understand
and profile the system dynamics by a prompt-based grounded
action transformation to bridge the performance gap. Specifically, this paper exploits the pre-trained LLM’s inference ability to understand how traffic dynamics change with weather
conditions, traffic states, and road types. Being aware of the
changes, the policies’ action is taken and grounded based on
realistic dynamics, thus helping the agent learn a more realistic
policy. We conduct experiments on four different scenarios to
show the effectiveness of the proposed PromptGAT’s ability to
mitigate the performance gap of reinforcement learning from
simulation to reality (sim-to-real).

Policy 𝜋!
𝐸"#$

𝑎"! 𝑔∅ (·,·)

𝑓∅! (𝑠&, 𝑎& )

ℎ∅" (𝑠̂&(), 𝑠& )

When it snows, road
Prompt GAT
Prompt Dynamics
surface is slippery, traction
Policy 𝜋!
is reduced. Vehicles have
difficulty gaining traction, 𝑠
𝑓∅! (𝑠&, 𝑎&, 𝓧𝒕)
!"#
resulting in smaller acc.
𝑎"! 𝑔∅ (·,·)
ℎ∅" (𝑠̂&(), 𝑠& )
𝐸
and dece. rates.
"#$

(a) Knowledge about dynamic (b) Comparison between vanilla
changes from LLMs
GAT and our proposed method

Figure 1: Integrating knowledge from LLMs into Grouned
Action Transformation (GAT). (a) LLMs have implicit human
knowledge about the change in dynamics. (b) Comparisons
between vanilla GAT and our proposed PromptGAT, with
GAT integrating a prompt-based dynamics modeling module.

transferring policies learned in simulation to real-world
scenarios (sim-to-real) (Hanna and Stone 2017; Da et al.
2023b,c). The key idea behind GAT is to induce simulator
dynamics to resemble those of the real world, where policy
learning takes place in simulation, and dynamics learning
relies on real-world data.
In the GAT framework, the dynamics model, also known as
the forward model fϕ+ , plays a crucial role. It takes the current state st and action at as inputs and predicts the possible
next state st+1 in the real world. Traditional GAT methods
focus on learning fϕ+ solely based on real-world data, while
these approaches enable the forward model to be accurately
fitted to real-world dynamics, it requires a substantial amount
of real-world data covering the entire state distribution to
achieve accurate predictions.
One limitation of conventional GAT methods is their struggle to handle unobserved states in the real world. When the
policy encounters states that have not been previously observed in the real-world data, the learned forward model may
predict st+1 with significant errors. This is particularly evident under extreme weather conditions or rare events that are
infrequently represented in the training data. In contrast, human knowledge allows us to infer the behavior of the system
under such unique conditions. For example, we as humans
understand that during extreme weather, vehicles tend to
move slower with smaller acceleration and deceleration rates,

Introduction
Traffic Signal Control (TSC) is a critical task aimed at improving transportation efficiency and alleviating congestion
in urban areas (Wei et al. 2021). Reinforcement Learning
(RL) methods have shown promising results in tackling TSC
challenges through trial and error in simulators (Ghanadbashi
and Golpayegani 2022; Mei et al. 2023; Noaeen et al. 2022;
Ducrocq and Farhi 2023; Zang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020;
Haydari and Yılmaz 2020; Du et al. 2023; Vlachogiannis et al.
2023), bringing hope for solving cities’ traffic congestion issues. While simulation is a valuable tool for control tasks in
the real world with low cost, notable performance gaps arise
when deploying simulator-trained policies to real-world environments (Da et al. 2023b,c), mainly due to differences in
system dynamics between training simulators and the actual
road conditions.
Grounded Action Transformation (GAT) is a framework
designed to address the performance gaps that arise when
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

82

