The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Symmetric Self-Paced Learning for Domain Generalization
Di Zhao∗1 , Yun Sing Koh1 , Gillian Dobbie1 , Hongsheng Hu2 , Philippe Fournier-Viger3
1

School of Computer Science, University of Auckland
2
CSIRO’s Data61
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering Shenzhen University
dzha866@aucklanduni.ac.nz, {y.koh, g.dobbie}@auckland.ac.nz, Hongsheng.Hu@data61.csiro.au, philfv@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

mains by leveraging labelled data from multiple source domains. Existing DG methods fall into three categories (Zhou
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022): data augmentation (Zhou et al.
2020), domain invariant representation (Wang et al. 2022),
and learning strategy (Arpit et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022).
However, current DG methods uniformly weigh all training examples, presenting them to the model randomly, overlooking the potential benefits of structured data presentation
based on example difficulty (Soviany et al. 2022). From an
optimization perspective, training in a structured order can
be seen as a continuation method (Bengio et al. 2009), providing a series of optimization objectives, where proceeding
objectives serve as a pre-training process that helps to optimize and regularize the succeeding objectives (Wang, Chen,
and Zhu 2021). Analogously, in human learning, learning
knowledge in a structured order yields notable advantages
over a randomized approach (Bengio et al. 2009).
Yet, selecting the optimal structured order in the context
of DG poses challenges. Conventional methods typically
train models in an easy-to-hard order, progressively expanding the training set from simpler to more complex examples,
resulting in a bias towards easy examples (Wang, Chen, and
Zhu 2021). In domain generalization, easy examples are often from domains with small domain gaps. Overemphasizing these examples while overlooking hard examples hampers the model’s generalizability to domains with large domain gaps. Another problem that arises is how to measure
the difficulty of examples. Existing methods either utilize
predefined difficulty measures (Curriculum Learning) (Bengio et al. 2009) or dynamically update example difficulty
with training loss (Self-Paced Learning) (Kumar, Packer,
and Koller 2010). However, predefined difficulty measures
do not integrate the model’s feedback, while training loss
raises an inaccurate difficulty measurement issue when different examples yield identical training losses.
To address the challenges, we propose a novel learning
strategy named Symmetric Self-Paced Learning (SSPL) for
domain generalization, which is depicted in Figure 1. The
contributions of our work are threefold:

Deep learning methods often suffer performance degradation
due to domain shift, where discrepancies exist between training and testing data distributions. Domain generalization mitigates this problem by leveraging information from multiple
source domains to enhance model generalization capabilities
for unseen domains. However, existing domain generalization
methods typically present examples to the model in a random manner, overlooking the potential benefits of structured
data presentation. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel
learning strategy, Symmetric Self-Paced Learning (SSPL),
for domain generalization. SSPL consists of a Symmetric
Self-Paced training scheduler and a Gradient-based Difficulty
Measure (GDM). Specifically, the proposed training scheduler initially focuses on easy examples, gradually shifting emphasis to harder examples as training progresses. GDM dynamically evaluates example difficulty through the gradient
magnitude with respect to the example itself. Experiments
across five popular benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed learning strategy.

Introduction
Most machine learning algorithms assume that training
(source domains) and testing (target domain) data are independent and identically distributed. Violating this assumption may cause model performance degradation due to a lack
of generalization ability in handling domain shifts (Ghifary
et al. 2015; Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). Domain Adaptation (DA) (Pan and Yang 2009; Fernando et al. 2013) is an
intuitive solution to deal with domain shifts by utilizing target domain data to align the distribution between the source
and target domains (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015) or to finetune the model trained on source domains (Long et al. 2015).
However, in many scenarios where target domain data is unavailable, large-scale data collection and annotation is prohibitively expensive. For example, in traffic scene semantic segmentation, capturing data that encompasses all traffic
scenes under all weather conditions is infeasible (Yue et al.
2019). Domain generalization (DG) (Li et al. 2018) is an
emerging solution to relax the constraints inherent in domain
adaptation methods. DG aims to learn a universal representation that can effectively generalize to unseen target do-

• We demonstrate that presenting examples in a structured
order can effectively improve the model’s generalization
ability to unseen domains. The proposed learning strategy
effectively improves the model’s generalizability, particularly in domains with large domain gaps.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16961

