The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding Surprising Generalization Phenomena in Deep Learning
Wei Hu
University of Michigan
vvh@umich.edu

Deep learning has exhibited a number of surprising generalization phenomena that are not captured by classical statistical learning theory. In my new faculty highlight talk, I will
survey some of my work on the theoretical characterizations
of several such intriguing phenomena:
• Implicit regularization: A major mystery in deep learning is that deep neural networks can often generalize well
despite their excessive expressive capacity. Towards explaining this mystery, it has been suggested that commonly used gradient-based optimization algorithms enforce certain implicit regularization which effectively
constrains the model capacity.
• Benign overfitting: In certain scenarios, a model can perfectly fit noisily labeled training data, but still archives
near-optimal test error at the same time, which is very
different from the classical notion of overfitting.
• Grokking: In certain scenarios, a model initially achieves
perfect training accuracy but no generalization (i.e. no
better than a random predictor), and upon further training, transitions to almost perfect generalization.
Theoretically establishing these properties often involves
making appropriate high-dimensional assumptions on the
problem as well as a careful analysis of the training dynamics.
Papers that will be surveyed in this talk are Arora et al.
(2019); Frei et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2020); Lyu et al. (2024);
Xu et al. (2024).

Lyu, K.; Jin, J.; Li, Z.; Du, S. S.; Lee, J. D.; and Hu, W.
2024. Dichotomy of Early and Late Phase Implicit Biases
Can Provably Induce Grokking. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Xu, Z.; Wang, Y.; Frei, S.; Vardi, G.; and Hu, W. 2024. Benign overfitting and grokking in relu networks for xor cluster
data. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.

References
Arora, S.; Cohen, N.; Hu, W.; and Luo, Y. 2019. Implicit regularization in deep matrix factorization. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 32.
Frei, S.; Vardi, G.; Bartlett, P.; Srebro, N.; and Hu, W. 2023.
Implicit Bias in Leaky ReLU Networks Trained on HighDimensional Data. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.
Hu, W.; Xiao, L.; Adlam, B.; and Pennington, J. 2020. The
surprising simplicity of the early-time learning dynamics of
neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33: 17116–17128.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22669

