The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Understanding and Improving Optimization in Predictive Coding Networks
Nicholas Alonso1 , Jeffrey Krichmar1,2 , Emre Neftci3,4
1

Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, Irvine
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
3
Electrical Engineering and Information Technology RWTH Aachen, Germany
4
Peter Grünberg Institute, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany
nalonso2@uci.edu, jkrichma@uci.edu, e.neftci@fz-juelich.edu
2

Abstract

circuits. Then weights are updated to further reduce free energy. Unlike BP, IL does not require a segregated feedback
stream. Instead, its recurrent circuitry requires feed-forward
and feedback signals to interact with each other. Further, like
the brain and in contrast to BP, IL performs Hebbian-like
updates that are local in space and time (Whittington and
Bogacz 2017).
Previous work has found that networks trained with IL
performed competitively with BP on classification and selfsupervised tasks that use small and medium sized images
(Whittington and Bogacz 2017; Alonso and Neftci 2021;
Salvatori et al. 2021, 2022a; Alonso et al. 2022; Song et al.
2022). Recent work has even found some noticeable performance advantages over BP/SGD (e.g., (Alonso et al. 2022;
Song et al. 2022)), such as faster loss reduction and convergence with small mini-batches. These results suggest that IL
may be useful in certain machine learning and neuromorphic
computing applications, such as online learning scenarios
which require small mini-batches. However, there are several challenges preventing IL from easily being applied to
engineering problems: 1) IL is much more computationally
expensive than BP due primarily to IL’s expensive inference
phase. 2) IL has only achieved comparable performance to
BP when memory expensive optimizers like Adam are used.
Without any optimizer, IL convergence is prone to fall in
poor local minima (Alonso et al. 2022), and the reason why
this happens is not well understood. 3) IL sometimes shows
speedups in loss reduction and convergence over BP (Alonso
et al. 2022; Song et al. 2022), but the robustness of these
speedups across models and tasks is unknown. In this paper,
we tackle these challenges through the following contributions:
1. We develop and test a non-standard implementation of
IL’s inference phase, called sequential inference, which
propagates errors more quickly through the network allowing for a significant reduction of the computational
cost of IL.
2. We show that IL weight updates are drastically smaller
in magnitude in early layers, which may lead the network to get caught in poor local minima near the initial parameters. We develop a custom optimizer called
Matrix Update Equalization (MQ) to address this problem. MQ requires no significant increase in memory or
computation compared to IL and our simulations provide

Backpropagation (BP), the standard learning algorithm for artificial neural networks, is often considered biologically implausible. In contrast, the standard learning algorithm for predictive coding (PC) models in neuroscience, known as the inference learning algorithm (IL), is a promising, bio-plausible
alternative. However, several challenges and questions hinder
IL’s application to real-world problems. For example, IL is
computationally demanding, and without memory-intensive
optimizers like Adam, IL may converge to poor local minima.
Moreover, although IL can reduce loss more quickly than BP,
the reasons for these speedups or their robustness remains unclear. In this paper, we tackle these challenges by 1) altering
the standard implementation of PC circuits to substantially
reduce computation, 2) developing a novel optimizer that improves the convergence of IL without increasing memory usage, and 3) establishing theoretical results that help elucidate the conditions under which IL is sensitive to second and
higher-order information.

Introduction
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) were originally created
to mimic biological neural circuits (McCulloch and Pitts
1943). However, backpropagation (BP) (Rumelhart et al.
1995), the now standard algorithm used to train ANNs, is
difficult to reconcile with neurobiology (Crick 1989; Lillicrap et al. 2020). Researchers in computational neuroscience
and neuromorphic computing have attempted to alter BP
to better fit what is known about the brain (Lillicrap et al.
2016; Liao, Leibo, and Poggio 2016; Guerguiev, Lillicrap,
and Richards 2017; Richards and Lillicrap 2019). However,
these altered versions of BP typically either fail to overcome
the biological implausibilities of BP, such as BP’s segregated
feed-back signals that do not alter feed-forward activities, or
perform significantly worse than standard BP. One promising alternative approach is based on the predictive coding
(PC) model in neuroscience (Rao and Ballard 1999). PC is a
type of recurrent neural network typically trained with inference learning (IL). IL is a variant of generalized expectation
maximization (Millidge et al. 2022b), which works by first
performing inference, where an objective known as free energy is reduced w.r.t. neuron activities via the recurrent PC
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10812

