The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A General Theoretical Framework for Learning Smallest Interpretable Models
Sebastian Ordyniak1 , Giacomo Paesani1 , Mateusz Rychlicki1 , Stefan Szeider2
1

University of Leeds, Leeds, UK,
2
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
{sordyniak,giacomopaesani,mkrychlicki}@gmail.com, sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

strongly extendable?

We develop a general algorithmic framework that allows us
to obtain fixed-parameter tractability for computing smallest
symbolic models that represent given data. Our framework
applies to all ML model types that admit a certain extension
property. By establishing this extension property for decision
trees, decision sets, decision lists, and binary decision diagrams, we obtain that minimizing these fundamental model
types is fixed-parameter tractable. Our framework even applies to ensembles, which combine individual models by majority decision.

DS
DL
DT
BDD

✓
✓
✓
-

# branches
single
ensemble
δ
δ+s+1
δ(s + 1)
δ3O(s)

2 + sδ
1 + s(1 + δ)
2 + 2sδ
δ3O(s)

Table 1: The number of branches required by our framework
for DSs, DLs, DTs, and BDDs, both for learning simple models and for learning ensemble models. All model types except BDDs are strongly extendable and allow for polynomial
number of branches. The run-time of our algorithm to learn
a small model (ignoring polynomial factors) only depends
on the number of branches b and is given by O∗ (b2 ).

Introduction
The modern highly successful subsymbolic Machine Learning models like neural networks can exhibit lack of robustness, display bias, and their operation is invariably
inscrutable for human decision makers (Gunning 2019).
Hence, symbolic models such as decision trees, decision
lists and sets, and binary decision diagrams have recently received new attention as they are easier to analyze and control
and more interpretable (Rudin 2019; Molnar 2022). However, also symbolic models become increasingly opaque if
their size increases. Hence one is interested in finding smallest models. This task is typically NP-hard; thus, practitioners have utilized powerful tools like SAT, MIP, and CP
solvers to compute small or even smallest models that fit the
data (Ignatiev and Marques-Silva 2021; Narodytska et al.
2018; Schidler and Szeider 2021; Shati, Cohen, and McIlraith 2021). Also, from a theoretical perspective, the parameterized complexity of finding smallest decision trees or ensembles of decision trees has become the subject of intensive research (Ordyniak and Szeider 2021; Eiben et al. 2023;
Kobourov et al. 2023; Komusiewicz et al. 2023) which revealed that the problem is fixed-parameter tractable when
parameterized by the solution size plus a bound δ on the
number of features any two examples differ1 . Such studies
are still pending for other symbolic ML model types like
decision lists, decision sets, binary decision diagrams, and
ensembles.

In this paper, we significantly extend this line of research
to all the mentioned symbolic model types. However, instead of developing specialized algorithms for all the model
types, we develop a general algorithmic framework that applies to all of them and any further model type that admits
one of two natural extension properties: strong extendability and (weak) extendability. Therefore, to show that a particular type of model admits the efficient computation of a
smallest model, one only needs to show that the model type
admits one of the two extension properties. This way, we
generalize the fixed-parameter tractability results from decision trees (DTs) to decision sets (DSs), decision lists (DLs),
binary decision diagrams (BDDs), and even ensembles of all
these model types.
Our framework uses a bounded-depth branching algorithm that, starting from the empty model, exhaustively
branches into all “important” extensions of the current
model until either a small model is found or the framework
correctly returns that no model of the required size (in the
following denoted by s) exists. The main challenge behind
the algorithm is to restrict the number of important extensions of the current model that need to be considered at every
step. In particular, it is crucial to bound the number of additional features whose addition to the model is required for an
exhaustive enumeration of all minimum models. We employ
two main approaches which lead to strong and (weak) extendability, respectively. For DSs, DLs, and DTs, we can em-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Empirical investigations show that δ is reasonably small for
real-world data sets (Ordyniak and Szeider 2021).

10662

