The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatial Transform Decoupling for Oriented Object Detection
Hongtian Yu* , Yunjie Tian* , Qixiang Ye, Yunfan Liu†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yuhongtian17, tianyunjie19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {qxye, liuyunfan}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

𝑋 α!! α!" 𝑊
𝑌 α"! α"" 𝐻

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved remarkable success in computer vision tasks. However, their potential in
rotation-sensitive scenarios has not been fully explored,
and this limitation may be inherently attributed to the
lack of spatial invariance in the data-forwarding process.
In this study, we present a novel approach, termed Spatial Transform Decoupling (STD), providing a simple-yeteffective solution for oriented object detection with ViTs.
Built upon stacked ViT blocks, STD utilizes separate network
branches to predict the position, size, and angle of bounding boxes, effectively harnessing the spatial transform potential of ViTs in a divide-and-conquer fashion. Moreover,
by aggregating cascaded activation masks (CAMs) computed upon the regressed parameters, STD gradually enhances features within regions of interest (RoIs), which complements the self-attention mechanism. Without bells and
whistles, STD achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
benchmark datasets including DOTA-v1.0 (82.24% mAP)
and HRSC2016 (98.55% mAP), which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method. Source code is available at https://github.com/yuhongtian17/Spatial-TransformDecoupling.

Coupled Prediction

𝑋
𝑌

− −
− −

−
−

− α!! α!" −
− α"! α"" −
− − − 𝑊
− − − 𝐻

Initial BBox

𝑋𝑌: Position Para.

Decoupled Prediction

Spatial Transform

Predicted BBox

Groundtruth BBox

𝑊𝐻: Size Para.

𝛼!! 𝛼!" 𝛼"! 𝛼"" : Angle Para.

Figure 1: Conventional approaches (upper) estimate the position, size, and angle using a single RoI feature. In contrast,
STD (lower) predicts and refines the parameters of bounding
boxes in a divide-and-conquer (decoupled) manner.

Introduction
In this study, we aim to tap into the potential of ViTs in
tackling the challenging spatial transform issue of vision
tasks, e.g., detecting objects in remote sensing scenarios,
where images are captured from a bird’s-eye view and target
objects may appear in arbitrary orientations. To determine
an oriented bounding box, initial research efforts (Ren et al.
2015; Lin et al. 2017b) suggested a direct regression approach for spatial transform parameters, including the spatial coordinates (x and y), object size (w and h), and the
angle (α). However, such a straightforward regression strategy often results in discontinuous boundaries due to the inconsistency in angle representation and periodicity, as well
as the suboptimal design of loss functions (Yang and Yan
2020; Yang et al. 2021b,c, 2022).
Rather than solely concentrating on developing more sophisticated angle representations or refining training objectives, it is essential to tackle the foundational issue of effectively extracting rotation-related features. In particular, we
enhance the conventional structure of the bounding box prediction head by allocating distinct feature maps to predict

Recent years have witnessed substantial progress and notable breakthroughs in computer vision, which can be primarily attributed to the advent of Vision Transformer (ViT)
models. Benefiting from the powerful self-attention mechanism, ViTs consistently achieve new state-of-the-art performance across vision tasks including classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022c; Fang
et al. 2023), object detection (Li et al. 2022b; Fang et al.
2022; Tian et al. 2023), and semantic segmentation (Xie
et al. 2021a; Yuan et al. 2021). Despite the progress made,
the capability of ViTs in spatial transform invariance has not
been fully explored and understood. In many scenarios, ViTs
are treated as a universal approximator, expected to automatically handle various vision data irrespective of their orientations and appearances.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6782

