The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LLM vs Small Model? Large Language Model Based Text Augmentation
Enhanced Personality Detection Model
Linmei Hu1 * , Hongyu He2 , Duokang Wang2 , Ziwang Zhao2 , Yingxia Shao2 , Liqiang Nie3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
hulinmei@bit.edu.cn, {hehongyu, wangduokang, zhaoziwang, shaoyx}@bupt.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Word Count (LIWC) (Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010), that
bring psychology theories and linguistic methods together.
Recent works use end-to-end deep neural network to obtain text representations automatically in a data-driven manner (Jiang, Zhang, and Choi 2020; Keh and Cheng 2019;
Lynn, Balasubramanian, and Schwartz 2020; Gjurković
et al. 2021). However, extracting effective personality information from online posts is a non-trivial task. One main
challenge is the scarcity of ground-truth personality traits,
as they are collected from self-report questionnaires, which
is time-consuming and often raises concerns related to user
privacy. To overcome the issue, pre-trained language models have been applied to learn post representations (Yang
et al. 2021b; Xue et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2021b). To further improve the post representations, TrigNet (Yang et al.
2021b) considers the contextual information of a user’s posts
as well as the external psycho-linguistic knowledge from
LIWC (Xue et al. 2018). However, the learned post representations are still unsatisfactory, resulting in inferior performance. In addition, they treat personality traits as one-hot
classification labels, overlooking the semantic information
within them.

Personality detection aims to detect one’s personality traits
underlying in social media posts. One challenge of this task is
the scarcity of ground-truth personality traits which are collected from self-report questionnaires. Most existing methods learn post features directly by fine-tuning the pre-trained
language models under the supervision of limited personality
labels. This leads to inferior quality of post features and consequently affects the performance. In addition, they treat personality traits as one-hot classification labels, overlooking the
semantic information within them. In this paper, we propose
a large language model (LLM) based text augmentation enhanced personality detection model, which distills the LLM’s
knowledge to enhance the small model for personality detection, even when the LLM fails in this task. Specifically, we
enable LLM to generate post analyses (augmentations) from
the aspects of semantic, sentiment, and linguistic, which are
critical for personality detection. By using contrastive learning to pull them together in the embedding space, the post
encoder can better capture the psycho-linguistic information
within the post representations, thus improving personality
detection. Furthermore, we utilize the LLM to enrich the information of personality labels for enhancing the detection
performance. Experimental results on the benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods on personality detection.

Recently, Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al.
2020; Sun et al. 2021; Ouyang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022)
have demonstrated significant capability in various natural
language processing tasks under a generative format in zeroshot or few-shot scenarios. However, it demonstrates unsatisfactory performance in personality detection compared to
task-specific small model (Ji et al. 2023). Inferring people’s
personality traits from online posts is a complex and difficult
task. Despite the ineffectiveness of LLMs in this task, previous studies have demonstrated that LLMs exhibit strong
language abilities, such as text comprehension, summarization, and sentiment analysis (Zhang et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023b; Hsieh et al. 2023), which can be used to distill useful
knowledge for enhancing small models. On the one hand,
we can leverage LLMs to generate post analyses (augmentations) from the aspects of semantic, sentiment, and linguistic, which are key factors for personality detection (Fang
et al. 2023). In this way, we can use the augmented post
information to learn better post embeddings for personality detection. On the other hand, we can also use LLMs to
generate explanations of the complex personality labels to
enrich the label information for improving personality de-

Introduction
Personality is a combination of a person’s internal characteristics, which can be reflected in their behavior (Stajner
and Yenikent 2020). Personality traits are defined by longestablished personality theories such as the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator (MBTI) taxonomy (Myers-Briggs 1991).
Personality detection aims to detect one’s personality traits
underlying in social media posts. This emerging task in computational psycho-linguistics can provide specific personality information about the person and has been utilized in various applications, such as dialogue systems (Wen et al. 2021;
Yang, Chen, and Narasimhan 2021) and psychological treatments (Bagby et al. 2016).
Traditional personality detection methods mostly rely on
manually designed features, such as Linguistic Inquiry and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18234

