The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dense Projection for Anomaly Detection
Dazhi Fu1,2 , Zhao Zhang3 , Jicong Fan1,4 *
2

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
fudazhiaka@gmail.com, cszzhang@gmail.com, fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

model the distribution of normal data. Thus, popular density estimation methods such as kernel density estimation
(KDE) Parzen (1962) and Gaussian mixture models (GMM)
can be applied to anomaly detection. K-nearest-neighbors
(kNN) is also a density-based method where the average
distance from test data to its nearest k neighbors is measured as the anomaly score. This method relies heavily on
the choice of k and may not be effective in handling highdimensional data. kNN+ (Sun et al. 2022), utilizing a pretrained neural network to learn feature embeddings of normal data, assumes that the test anomalies are relatively far
away from the normal data and detects anomalies by using kNN in the embedding space, which makes it effective
when faced with complex data. Breunig et al. (2000) proposed a method called local outlier factor (LOF), which relies on the concept that anomalous data often lie in a region of lower density than its surrounding data points. Zong
et al. (2018) proposed deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture
models (DAGMM) that combines deep auto-encoders with
GMM, where the output energy generated by the GMM is
used as an anomaly score. Deecke et al. (2019) provided
an anomaly detection method ADGAN based on adversarial networks (GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014)). ADGAN utilizes a generator to learn the distribution of normal data and
a discriminator to detect anomalous data.
Reconstruction-based methods use neural networks such
as auto-encoder (AE) to learn low-dimensional representation to reconstruct input data and utilize the reconstruction error as a metric to discern anomalies from normal instances. Auto-encoder and its various variants (Hinton and
Salakhutdinov 2006; Vincent et al. 2008; Pidhorskyi, Almohsen, and Doretto 2018; Wang et al. 2021) consist of an
encoder and a decoder, where the encoder compresses the
input data into a latent effective representation, while the
decoder reconstructs the original data from the compressed
representation. These methods often rely on the assumption that normal data can be reconstructed effectively, while
anomalous data exhibits significantly higher reconstruction
errors. However, in practice, some anomalous samples can
be well-reconstructed by auto-encoders, especially when the
model is complex.
One-class classification methods train classifiers using
only normal data. For instance, the one-class support vector
machine (OC-SVM), proposed by (Schölkopf et al. 2001),

This work presents a novel method called dense projection
for unsupervised anomaly detection (DPAD). The main idea
is maximizing the local density of (normal) training data and
then determining whether a test data is anomalous or not by
evaluating its density. Specifically, DPAD uses a deep neural
network to learn locally dense representations of normal data.
Since density estimation is computationally expensive, we
minimize the local distances of the representations in an iteratively reweighting manner, where the weights are updated
adaptively and the parameters are regularized to avoid model
collapse (all representations collapse to a single point). Compared with many state-of-the-art methods of anomaly detection, our DPAD does not rely on any assumption about the
distribution or spatial structure of the normal data and representations. Moreover, we provide theoretical guarantees for
the effectiveness of DPAD. The experiments show that our
method DPAD is effective not only in traditional one-class
classification problems but also in scenarios with complex
normal data composed of multiple classes.

Introduction
Anomaly detection (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009;
Pang et al. 2021; Ruff et al. 2021; Cai and Fan 2022; Xiao,
Sun, and Fan 2023) is an important problem in many areas
such as machine learning, computer vision, medical imaging, and other fields (Fan and Wang 2014; Fan, Wang, and
Zhang 2017). Basically, anomaly detection is a task that
aims to identify anomalous data from normal data within
a given dataset. To better simulate real-world scenarios,
anomalous data is often considered to be unknown in the
training stage, making this task typically an unsupervised
learning problem. In the past decades, numerous anomaly
detection methods have been proposed. In general, we can
categorize them into three main types: density-based methods, reconstruction-based methods, and one-class classification methods, though there are other types such as the perturbation learning based method proposed by (Cai and Fan
2022).
Density-based methods assume that normal data occur in
high-density regions, while anomalies are located in lowdensity or sparse regions, and utilize probabilistic models to
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8398

