The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting the Social-Like Prior in Transformer for Visual Reasoning
Yudong Han1 , Yupeng Hu1 , Xuemeng Song2 , Haoyu Tang1 , Mingzhu Xu1 , Liqiang Nie3
1
School of Software, Shandong University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{hanyudong.sdu, sxmustc, nieliqiang}@gmail.com, {huyupeng, tanghao258, xumingzhu}@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Benefiting from instrumental global dependency modeling of
self-attention (SA), transformer-based approaches have become the pivotal choices for numerous downstream visual
reasoning tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA)
and referring expression comprehension (REC). However,
some studies have recently suggested that SA tends to suffer
from rank collapse thereby inevitably leads to representation
degradation as the transformer layer goes deeper. Inspired by
social network theory, we attempt to make an analogy between social behavior and regional information interaction in
SA, and harness two crucial notions of structural hole and
degree centrality in social network to explore the possible optimization towards SA learning, which naturally deduces two
plug-and-play social-like modules. Based on structural hole,
the former module allows to make information interaction in
SA more structured, which effectively avoids redundant information aggregation and global feature homogenization for
better rank remedy, followed by latter module to comprehensively characterize and refine the representation discrimination via considering degree centrality of regions and transitivity of relations. Without bells and whistles, our model outperforms a bunch of baselines by a noticeable margin when
considering our social-like prior on five benchmarks in VQA
and REC tasks, and a series of explanatory results are showcased to sufficiently reveal the social-like behaviors in SA.

Figure 1: Illustration of Social-like Transformer Block
(STB), where vanilla self-attention is replaced with SSA.
Add&Norm denotes addition and layer normalization, respectively, CA represents the cross-modality attention, and
FFN is the feed-forward network. In SSA, “IAWG” denotes
information aggregation within groups, Gi and us represent
the i-th subgraph and structural hole, respectively.

Cordonnier, and Loukas 2021; Dong et al. 2021), the traditional SA mechanism easily leads to quicker rank collapse and representation degradation without Feed-Forward
Network (FFN) (Vaswani et al. 2017) and residual connection (He et al. 2016). Therefore, how to further optimize the
effective learning of SA and generate more expressive representations for vision-and-language tasks remains an imperative issue.
Intriguingly, we accidentally perceive that the feature aggregation amongst different image regions in SA seemingly
shares similar philosophy with the information communication in social network. Moving forward in a purposeful way,
we attempt to equip the social network theory (SNT) (Tabassum et al. 2018) into SA learning to gain some merits. For
the sake of clarity, we first shed light on the counterparts
between SA and social network. Regarding visual SA modeling in transformer, each visual unit, which can be grid feature (Jiang et al. 2020) or salient object (Anderson et al.
2018), follows to perform feature aggregation from other visual units based on the similarity score. We perceive that this
process parallels social behavior, in other words, each visual

Introduction
The success of transformer-based methods (Vaswani et al.
2017) in the natural language domain paves the way for the
prosperity of vision reasoning tasks (Goyal et al. 2017), and
numerous well-devised transformer variants have achieved
promising performance on various benchmarks (Johnson
et al. 2017). Due to the powerful global modeling ability of
self-attention (SA) mechanism in transformer, these methods not only facilitate the intra-modality context learning,
but also excel in inter-modality alignment and complementation. However, as discussed by several extant works (Dong,
Corresponding author: Yupeng Hu.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, No.:62276155, No.:62376137,
No.:62206156, and No.:62206157; in part by the NSF of Shandong
Province, No.:ZR2021MF040 and No.:ZR2022QF047;
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2058

