The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Equity-Transformer: Solving NP-Hard Min-Max Routing Problems
as Sequential Generation with Equity Context
Jiwoo Son* 1,2 , Minsu Kim* 1 , Sanghyeok Choi1 , Hyeonah Kim1 , Jinkyoo Park1,2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Omelet
{sonleave25, min-su, sanghyeok.choi, hyeonah kim, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

even for large-scale problems that have more than 2,000
cities (Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021; Qiu, Sun, and Yang 2022;
Sun and Yang 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2023).
Min-max routing problems are distinct from standard
(min-sum) routing problems in that they focus on minimizing the cost of the most expensive route among multiple
agents (i.e., minimizing the total completion time), rather
than minimizing the sum of the costs of routes. These problems are particularly relevant in time-critical applications
such as disaster management (Cheikhrouhou and Khoufi
2021), where minimizing completion time (or service time)
is crucial. However, min-max routing problems are far more
challenging than min-sum counterparts because algorithms
for min-max routing require coordinated cooperation among
multiple agents to ensure an equitable assignment of workload among them. Classical exact algorithms struggle to
solve min-max routing problems due to their NP-hardness
(França et al. 1995). Additionally, powerful heuristic approaches for min-sum problems are not well generalized
to the min-max case (Bertazzi, Golden, and Wang 2015),
particularly for large-scale problems (Kim, Park, and Park
2023), owing to the inherent differences between min-max
and min-sum problems.
Recently, deep learning methods have been utilized to address min-max routing problems (Hu, Yao, and Lee 2020;
Cao, Sun, and Sartoretti 2021; Park, Kwon, and Park 2023)
as an alternative to classical approaches. Notably, representative min-max routing techniques such as ScheduleNet
(Park, Kwon, and Park 2023) and the decentralized attention
network (DAN) (Cao, Sun, and Sartoretti 2021) aim to handle the min-max nature with event-based parallel planning.
They model a parallel decision-making process among multiple agents in a decentralized way. The parallel planning
methods can be directly applied as a real-time dispatcher,
which is advantageous in handling dynamic situations where
states contain stochastic changes.
However, parallel planning encounters challenges in modeling decentralized decision-making, which necessitates
searching for the joint space of agents’ actions. These challenges become particularly pronounced when attempting
to apply parallel planning to large-scale routing problems
(Park, Kwon, and Park 2023). On the contrary, sequential
planning presents an alternative approach involving a hierarchical decomposition of action choices among agents. This

Min-max routing problems aim to minimize the maximum
tour length among multiple agents by having agents conduct tasks in a cooperative manner. These problems include impactful real-world applications but are known as
NP-hard. Existing methods are facing challenges, particularly in large-scale problems that require the coordination
of numerous agents to cover thousands of cities. This paper
proposes Equity-Transformer to solve large-scale min-max
routing problems. First, we employ sequential planning approach to address min-max routing problems, allowing us
to harness the powerful sequence generators (e.g., Transformer). Second, we propose key inductive biases that ensure equitable workload distribution among agents. The effectiveness of Equity-Transformer is demonstrated through
its superior performance in two representative min-max routing tasks: the min-max multi-agent traveling salesman problem (min-max mTSP) and the min-max multi-agent pick-up
and delivery problem (min-max mPDP). Notably, our method
achieves significant reductions of runtime, approximately 335
times, and cost values of about 53% compared to a competitive heuristic (LKH3) in the case of 100 vehicles with
1,000 cities of mTSP. We provide reproducible source code:
https://github.com/kaist-silab/equity-transformer.

Introduction
Routing problems are combinatorial optimization problems
that are notoriously difficult to solve. The traveling salesman problem (TSP) and vehicle routing problems (VRPs)
are representative problems where the objective is to determine the optimal or shortest tour route(s) for one or multiple agents, such as robots, vehicles, or drones. These problems are classified as NP-hard, posing significant challenges
(Papadimitriou 1977). Various approaches have been proposed to solve routing problems, including mathematical
programming techniques that aim to achieve provable optimality (Gurobi Optimization, LLC 2023; David Applegate
and Cook 2023), task-specific heuristic solvers (Helsgaun
2017; Perron and Furnon 2019), and deep learning-based
methods that provide task-agnostic and fast heuristic solvers
(Khalil et al. 2017; Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019). The
deep learning-based methods have shown promising results
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20265

