The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Refined Characterizations of Approval-Based Committee Scoring Rules
Chris Dong, Patrick Lederer
School of Computation, Information, and Technology, Technical University of Munich
chris.dong@tum.de, ledererp@in.tum.de

Abstract

One of the most important classes of ABC voting rules are
ABC scoring rules (see, e.g., Lackner and Skowron 2021b).
These rules generalize the idea of single-winner scoring rules
to ABC elections: each voter assigns points to each committee according to some scoring function and the winning
committees are those with the maximal total score. There are
many well-known examples of ABC scoring rules, such as
multi-winner approval voting (AV), satisfaction approval voting (SAV), Chamberlin-Courant approval voting (CCAV), and
proportional approval voting (PAV). Moreover, ABC scoring
rules are a superset of the prominent class of Thiele rules.
In a recent breakthrough result, Lackner and Skowron
(2021b) have formalized the relation between ABC scoring
rules and single-winner scoring rules by characterizing ABC
scoring rules with almost the same axioms as Young (1975)
uses for his influential characterization of single-winner scoring rules. In more detail, Lackner and Skowron (2021b) show
that ABC scoring rules are the only ABC ranking rules that
satisfy the axioms of anonymity, neutrality, continuity, weak
efficiency, and consistency. However, this result discusses
ABC ranking rules, which return transitive rankings of committees, whereas the literature on ABC elections typically
focuses on sets of winning committees as output. Hence, this
theorem does not allow for characterizations of ABC scoring
rules in the standard ABC voting setting.
While Lackner and Skowron (2021a) also present a result
for the standard ABC election setting, the proof of this result
is incomplete.1 Moreover, even when the proof could be fixed,
this result is not a full characterization of ABC scoring rules
as it needs a technical axiom called 2-non-imposition. This
axiom is, e.g., violated by AV and SAV. Hence, characterizations of important ABC voting rules—and more generally
tools to easily infer such results—are still missing. Lackner
and Skowron (2021a, p. 16) also acknowledge this shortcoming by writing that “a full characterization of ABC scoring
rules within the class of ABC choice rules remains as important future work”.

In approval-based committee (ABC) elections, the goal is to
select a fixed-size subset of the candidates, a so-called committee, based on the voters’ approval ballots over the candidates.
One of the most popular classes of ABC voting rules are ABC
scoring rules, for which voters give points to each committee and the committees with maximal total points are chosen.
While the set of ABC scoring rules has recently been characterized in a model where the output is a ranking of all committees,
no full characterization of these rules exists in the standard
model where a set of winning committees is returned. We
address this issue by characterizing two important subclasses
of ABC scoring rules in the standard ABC election model,
thereby both extending the result for ABC ranking rules to the
standard setting and refining it to subclasses. In more detail,
by relying on a consistency axiom for variable electorates, we
characterize (i) the prominent class of Thiele rules and (ii)
a new class of ABC voting rules called ballot size weighted
approval voting. Based on these theorems, we also infer characterizations of three well-known ABC voting rules, namely
multi-winner approval voting, proportional approval voting,
and satisfaction approval voting.

1

Introduction

An important problem for multi-agent systems is collective
decision making: given the voters’ preferences over a set
of alternatives, a common decision has to be made. This
problem has traditionally been studied by economists for settings where a single candidate is elected (Arrow, Sen, and
Suzumura 2002), but there is also a multitude of applications where a fixed number of the candidates needs to be
elected. The archetypal example for this is the election of a
city council, but there are also technical applications such
as recommender systems (Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang
2016; Gawron and Faliszewski 2022). In social choice theory,
this type of elections is typically called approval-based committee (ABC) elections and has recently attracted significant
attention (e.g., Aziz et al. 2017; Faliszewski et al. 2017; Lackner and Skowron 2023). In more detail, the research on these
elections focuses on ABC voting rules, which are functions
that choose a set of winning committees (i.e., fixed-size subsets of the candidates) based on the voters’ approval ballots
(i.e., the sets of candidates that the voters approve).

1

Roughly, the proof of Lackner and Skowron (2021a) works by
constructing an ABC ranking rule g based on an ABC voting rule f
that satisfies the given axioms. Then, Lackner and Skowron (2021a)
show that g is an ABC scoring rule, which implies that f is an ABC
scoring rule in the choice setting. However, the authors never show
that g returns transitive rankings, which is required by definition of
ABC ranking rules. Closing this gap seems surprisingly difficult.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9670

