The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TCNet: Continuous Sign Language Recognition from
Trajectories and Correlated Regions
Hui Lu, Albert Ali Salah, Ronald Poppe
Utrecht University
h.lu1@uu.nl, a.a.salah@uu.nl, r.w.poppe@uu.nl

Current frame

Abstract
A key challenge in continuous sign language recognition
(CSLR) is to efficiently capture long-range spatial interactions over time from the video input. To address this
challenge, we propose TCNet, a hybrid network that effectively models spatio-temporal information from Trajectories and Correlated regions. TCNet’s trajectory module
transforms frames into aligned trajectories composed of continuous visual tokens. In addition, for a query token, selfattention is learned along the trajectory. As such, our network can also focus on fine-grained spatio-temporal patterns, such as finger movements, of a specific region in
motion. TCNet’s correlation module uses a novel dynamic
attention mechanism that filters out irrelevant frame regions. Additionally, it assigns dynamic key-value tokens from
correlated regions to each query. Both innovations significantly reduce the computation cost and memory. We perform experiments on four large-scale datasets: PHOENIX14,
PHOENIX14-T, CSL, and CSL-Daily, respectively. Our results demonstrate that TCNet consistently achieves stateof-the-art performance. For example, we improve over the
previous state-of-the-art by 1.5% and 1.0% word error rate
on PHOENIX14 and PHOENIX14-T, respectively. Code is
available at https://github.com/hotfinda/TCNet.

Sequence 1

Sequence 2

Previous frames

...

...

Figure 1: Trajectories and correlated regions. The sign is revealed by the trajectories of both hands in Seq. 1, and the
right hand and head in Seq. 2. The content of these regions,
such as the hand pose, is also important. We visualize the
trajectory of the right hand (red) and indicate correlated regions (yellow).

focus on the potentially relevant regions in the video input,
but is unsuited to exploit interactions between these regions.
More recently, transformer models allow focusing on informative spatial regions in the input by employing selfattention (Hu et al. 2023a,b). Although self-attention has
been shown to improve recognition performance, its high
computational cost limits its use to narrow spatial windows. Moreover, required pairwise token affinity computations across all spatial locations amount to a high computational complexity and incur significant memory footprints.
For the CSLR task, correlated regions to express sign language are generally dynamic. In Figure 1, the hand regions
are correlated in Seq.1, but not in Seq.2. This requires us
to assign dynamic key-value tokens from correlated regions
to each query, such that irrelevant tokens can be avoided.
Moreover, extracting temporal information from correlated
regions is also important to understand the sign language.
We build on these notions by explicitly focusing on extracting trajectories, considering patterns along these trajectories, and modeling the correlations between relevant regions, without making any assumptions about these regions.
We propose a novel network named TCNet, which collects
temporal information over an entire sequence and attends to
correlated regions to collect spatial information.
Our main innovations are the trajectory and correlation

Introduction
Continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) is the task
of transcribing sequences of continuous gestures made by
a signer into sentences. Unlike isolated sign language recognition, CSLR algorithms are typically trained in a weaklysupervised way because only sentence-level labels are provided. Temporal information is only available implicitly.
One challenge is to extract relevant patterns over time.
Traditionally, CSLR has been addressed by first extracting
spatial patterns from video, and subsequently considering
temporal relations between these features, typically using
LSTMs (e.g., Min et al. (2021); Niu and Mak (2020)). Since
sign language is mainly understood from signers’ faces and
hands, some CSLR models (Papadimitriou and Potamianos
2020; Zhou et al. 2020) leverage pre-trained pose detectors
to locate the face and hands and then crop the feature maps
to form a multi-stream architecture. This approach allows to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3891

