The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CityPulse: Fine-Grained Assessment of Urban Change with
Street View Time Series
Tianyuan Huang1 * , Zejia Wu2 * , Jiajun Wu1 , Jackelyn Hwang1 , Ram Rajagopal1
1

Stanford University
University of California San Diego
{tianyuah, jihwang, ramr}@stanford.edu, zew024@ucsd.edu, jiajunwu@cs.stanford.edu
2

Abstract
Urban transformations have profound societal impact on both
individuals and communities at large. Accurately assessing these shifts is essential for understanding their underlying causes and ensuring sustainable urban planning. Traditional measurements often encounter constraints in spatial
and temporal granularity, failing to capture real-time physical
changes. While street view imagery, capturing the heartbeat
of urban spaces from a pedestrian point of view, can add as
a high-definition, up-to-date, and on-the-ground visual proxy
of urban change. We curate the largest street view time series dataset to date, and propose an end-to-end change detection model to effectively capture physical alterations in the
built environment at scale. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method by benchmark comparisons with previous literature and implementing it at the city-wide level.
Our approach has the potential to supplement existing dataset
and serve as a fine-grained and accurate assessment of urban
change.

Introduction

Figure 1: Detection of urban change points using street view
time series. Red bounding boxes highlight transformations
in the built environment at each location. By aggregating
these detected change points within a neighborhood, we can
evaluate the temporal dynamics of urban development.

Our cities are evolving, and understanding how cities change
at a granular level has far-reaching societal impact — from
facilitating better urban planning and infrastructure assessment to enabling more sustainable social and environmental
interventions (Daniel 2015; Seto et al. 2017). Current measurements of urban change rely on datasets ranging from
survey data such as American Community Survey (ACS), to
government open data like construction permits, to remote
sensing data such as satellite and aerial imagery. However,
survey data often fall short of spatial and temporal granularity (Hwang and Sampson 2014a), and top-down perspectives
from the remote sensing data may not adequately represent
the street-level changes that directly impact the daily lives
of urban residents. And some construction permits data are
not universally accessible. Street view imagery, on the other
hand, offers a high-resolution and frequently updated visual
representation of urban environments from a ground-level
perspective (Huang et al. 2022). By curating and analyzing
the time series data of street view imagery, we can establish
a more precise and direct proxy for how cities evolve over
time.

Previous studies on street view change detection have primarily focused on comparing pairwise images from identical
locations but at different times, utilizing pixel-level annotations (Sakurada and Okatani 2015; Sakurada, Shibuya, and
Wang 2020), which is similar to change detection tasks using satellite imagery (Leenstra et al. 2021; Shi et al. 2021).
Recent works have also demonstrated the applicability of
street view pairwise change detection by collecting largescale historical street view datasets and apply them on a
range of urban applications, such as mapping out physical
improvements and declines in cities, as well as correlating
with socio-economic attributes and neighborhood gentrification status (Naik et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2022).
However, unlike satellite imagery, street view imagery
can be more susceptible to noisy signals, such as varying
camera angles and noisy background elements like shadows and lighting changes. Additionally, existing street view

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22123

