The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SGFormer: Semantic Graph Transformer for
Point Cloud-Based 3D Scene Graph Generation
Changsheng Lv1,2 , Mengshi Qi1,2 * , Xia Li2 , Zhengyuan Yang3 , Huadong Ma1,2
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
University of Rochester
{lvchangsheng, qms, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn; lixia@bupt.cn; zhengyuan.yang13@gmail.com
Abstract

Semantic Graph
Transformer

In this paper, we propose a novel model called SGFormer,
Semantic Graph TransFormer for point cloud-based 3D scene
graph generation. The task aims to parse a point cloud-based
scene into a semantic structural graph, with the core challenge of modeling the complex global structure. Existing
methods based on graph convolutional networks (GCNs) suffer from the over-smoothing dilemma and can only propagate information from limited neighboring nodes. In contrast, SGFormer uses Transformer layers as the base building block to allow global information passing, with two types
of newly-designed layers tailored for the 3D scene graph
generation task. Specifically, we introduce the graph embedding layer to best utilize the global information in graph
edges while maintaining comparable computation costs. Furthermore, we propose the semantic injection layer to leverage linguistic knowledge from large-scale language model
(i.e., ChatGPT), to enhance objects’ visual features. We
benchmark our SGFormer on the established 3DSSG dataset
and achieve a 40.94% absolute improvement in relationship prediction’s R@50 and an 88.36% boost on the subset with complex scenes over the state-of-the-art. Our analyses further show SGFormer’s superiority in the long-tail
and zero-shot scenarios. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/Andy20178/SGFormer.

vs

close by

lamp

hanging on

cabinet
(c) GCN Result

y
or
ted
b

u

n

pp

cabinet b

i
ild

close by

su

sink

to
att
ac
he
d

supported by

close by

(b) Local and Global aggregation
heater
wall
kettle
supported by

(a) Input 3D Scene
box
wall
plant

cabinet b

sink

ui

l

n
di

towel

close by

supported by
cabinet
(d) Ours Result

Figure 1: An example of 3D scene graph generation (SGG).
(a) an input 3D scene, (b) global aggregation using Transformer on the right versus local aggregation using GCN on
the left, (c) result using EdgeGCN (Zhang et al. 2021a),
and (d) result using our SGFormer. The incorrect results are
highlighted in red font, whereas the correct ones are shown
in black.

Introduction

2017) (as shown in Figure 1). The significant importance of
3D scene graph is evident as it has already been applied in a
wide range of 3D vision tasks, such as VR/AR (Tahara et al.
2020), 3D scene synthesis (Dhamo et al. 2021), and robot
navigation (Gomez et al. 2020).
One core challenge for 3D scene graph generation is to
accurately predict complex 3D scene structures from sparse
and noisy point cloud inputs. Most existing methods (Wald
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a,b; Chen et al. 2022) are built
based on Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) (Kipf and
Welling 2016), where nodes represent objects in the scene
and edges indicate relationships between objects. Despite
the recent success, GCN suffers from its inherent limitation
of the over-smoothing dilemma (Li, Han, and Wu 2018).
That is, GCN is effective in modeling neighboring nodes
with a controlled number of layers but could struggle with
learning the global structure and high-order relationships
of the entire scene. As shown in Figure 1, the GCN-based
method deteriorates in relationship accuracy when the scene

Understanding a 3D scene is the essence of human vision,
requiring accurate recognition of each object’s category and
localization, as well as the complex intrinsic structural and
semantic relationship. Conventional 3D scene understanding tasks, such as 3D semantic segmentation (Qi et al. 2017;
Engelmann et al. 2017; Rethage et al. 2018; Hou, Dai, and
Nießner 2019; Vu et al. 2022), object detection and classification (Qi et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2022),
focus primarily on the single object localization and recognition but miss higher-order object relationship information, making it challenging to deploy such 3D understanding
models in practice. To close this gap, the 3D Scene Graph
Generation task (Wald et al. 2020) is recently proposed, as a
visually-grounded graph over the detected object instances
with edges depicting their pairwise relationships (Yu et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4035

