The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bootstrapping Large Language Models for Radiology Report Generation
Chang Liu1 , Yuanhe Tian2 , Weidong Chen1 , Yan Song1∗ , Yongdong Zhang1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
University of Washington
lc980413@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yhtian@uw.edu, chenweidong@ustc.edu.cn,
clksong@gmail.com, zhyd73@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

and pulmonology, etc. Yet, writing radiology reports is a
time-consuming job, and always error-prone for inexperienced radiologists, which motivate a series of studies (Jing,
Xie, and Xing 2018; Chen et al. 2020, 2021; Qin and Song
2022; Tanida et al. 2023; Liu, Tian, and Song 2023) on automatic reports generation. They have achieved great success
on this topic that has emerged as an attractive research direction in both artificial intelligence and clinical medicine.
Aforementioned approaches for radiology report generation (RRG) employ the encoder-decoder architecture and
mainly focus on improving the capabilities of cross-modal
alignment and text generation, which are fundamentally restricted when they are learned from a rather small and fixed
set of radiograph-report pairs. Consider recent large language models (LLMs) illustrate their superiority in generating high-quality text with few examples, it is expected
to apply LLMs in RRG by fine-tuning with limited data.1
However, in doing so, one faces a challenging barrier of domain variance since ready-to-use LLMs are often pre-trained
on general data, which causes a series of problems such as
ill-representing visual and textual features from in-domain
data, generating texts without domain characteristics, etc.
Therefore, domain adaptation and refined text generation are
expected on LLMs for in-domain applications, thus requiring particular LLM optimization processes for RRG.
In this paper, we propose an approach to bootstrapping
LLM for RRG, with two components designed for domain
adaptation and task-specific generation, namely, in-domain
instance induction and coarse-to-fine decoding. Specifically,
in-domain instance induction adapts the LLM with learning on radiology reports-alike data, equipped with two parts,
related instance retrieval and contrastive semantic ranking.
Related instance retrieval provides a series of reports with
ranked semantic relations to the input radiograph, and these
reports are used in contrastive semantic ranking as related
instances, comparing with less correlated instances from
other medical sources. The LLM in this induction process
is then learned to generate reports similar to high-ranked instances than lower ones, so as to fast align with in-domain
and task-specific data. The coarse-to-fine decoding process

Radiology report generation (RRG) aims to automatically
generate a free-text description from a specific clinical radiograph, e.g., chest X-Ray images. Existing approaches tend
to perform RRG with specific models trained on the public
yet limited data from scratch, where they often lead to inferior performance owing to the problem of inefficient capabilities in both aligning visual and textual features and generating informative reports accordingly. Currently, large language models (LLMs) offered a promising solution to text
generation with their power in learning from big data, especially for cross-modal scenarios such as RRG. However,
most existing LLMs are pre-trained on general data, and suffer from the same problem of conventional approaches caused
by knowledge gap between general and medical domain if
they are applied to RRG. Therefore in this paper, we propose an approach to bootstrapping LLMs for RRG with a
in-domain instance induction and a coarse-to-fine decoding
process. Specifically, the in-domain instance induction process learns to align the LLM to radiology reports from general
texts through contrastive learning. The coarse-to-fine decoding performs a text elevating process for those reports from
the ranker, further enhanced with visual features and refinement prompts. Experimental results on two prevailing RRG
datasets, namely, IU X-Ray and MIMIC-CXR, demonstrate
the superiority of our approach to previous state-of-the-art
solutions. Further analyses illustrate that, for the LLM, the
induction process enables it to better align with the medical
domain and the coarse-to-fine generation allows it to conduct
more precise text generation.

1

Introduction

Medical imaging plays an important role in clinical diagnosis and treatment recommendation, where physicians
normally write reports according to the syndromes of patients that are reflected in images so as to form professional records. As a special type of medical images, radiographs are essential in evaluating patients’ medical condition with analyzing internal structures of their bodies, and
have been widely used in orthopedics, dentistry, cardiology,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Corresponding author.
Code and models of our approach are available at https://
github.com/synlp/R2-LLM.

1

In practice, fine-tuning LLMs for in-domain tasks still requires
a rather large amount of labeled data for better performance when
LLMs are not pre-trained on the data from particular domains.

18635

