The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Fairer Centroids in k-means Clustering
Stanley Simoes1 , Deepak P1 , Muiris MacCarthaigh2
1

School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast
2
School of History, Anthropology, Philosophy and Politics, Queen’s University Belfast
ssimoes01@qub.ac.uk, deepaksp@acm.org, M.MacCarthaigh@qub.ac.uk

Abstract

other clustering paradigms. Here, a data object’s proximity
to its cluster centroid is key in determining the clustering
quality; an object that is close to its centroid would be better
represented within the clustering than another object that is
farther away. This additional characteristic opens up a new
avenue of unfairness in terms of how well a cluster’s centroid represents the objects in that cluster. Such a consideration is critical in decision-making scenarios where centroids
are central such as facility location (e.g., polling sites (Chen
et al. 2022; Brady and McNulty 2011)) and summarisation.
Towards this, P and Abraham (2020) seek to deepen the
uniformity of every object’s distance-to-centroid, dubbed
representativity fairness, regardless of sensitive group membership; this falls within the scope of individual fairness (Dwork et al. 2012). Abbasi, Bhaskara, and Venkatasubramanian (2021) and Ghadiri, Samadi, and Vempala
(2021) extend this notion to sensitive groups – they consider the mean representativity across objects within each
group, and target equity along such aggregates. For example,
in a social profile clustering scenario, the mean distance-tocentroid of female profiles should be as close as possible to
that of males. This notion, called fair k-means, targets overall group fairness, i.e., groups be treated fairly in the clustering regardless of cluster membership. Against this backdrop,
we note two issues with fair k-means’ approach to representativity aggregations across groups: (i) representativities are
not comparable across clusters, and (ii) poor representativity in one cluster could negatively impact other clusters. We
examine these using illustrative examples1 .
First, representativity is quantified as an object’s distance
to its cluster centroid. This construction does not yield well
to cross-cluster comparisons when clusters are of different
sizes as Figure 1 illustrates. The purple object here has better representativity in the large cluster than the red one, and
vice versa. When conditioned on cluster size, the same difference in representativity is almost insignificant in the large
cluster but very consequential in the small one, causing the
red group to have a better overall representativity than the
purple group. In sharp contrast to such intuitive judgement,
the simple aggregation of representativity misleadingly puts
both groups on an equal footing.

There has been much recent interest in developing fair clustering algorithms that seek to do justice to the representation of groups defined along sensitive attributes such as race
and sex. Within the centroid clustering paradigm, these algorithms are seen to generate clusterings where different groups
are disadvantaged within different clusters with respect to
their representativity, i.e., distance to centroid. In view of this
deficiency, we propose a novel notion of cluster-level centroid
fairness that targets the representativity unfairness borne by
groups within each cluster, along with a metric to quantify the
same. Towards operationalising this notion, we draw on ideas
from political philosophy aligned with consideration for the
worst-off group to develop Fair-Centroid; a new clustering
method that focusses on enhancing the representativity of the
worst-off group within each cluster. Our method uses an iterative optimisation paradigm wherein an initial cluster assignment is refined by reassigning objects to clusters such that the
worst-off group in each cluster is benefitted. We compare our
notion with a related fairness notion and show through extensive empirical evaluations on real-world datasets that our
method significantly enhances cluster-level centroid fairness
at low impact on cluster coherence.

Introduction
Fairness in clustering has seen much scholarly activity in
recent times (Chhabra, Masalkovaitė, and Mohapatra 2021).
Most of these endeavours, starting with Chierichetti et al.
(2017), target proportional representation of sensitive groups
– such as those defined on race and sex – within each cluster;
this is often referred to as group fairness (Dwork et al. 2012).
Such representational fairness of groups may be seen as the
application of the notion of proportional representation, aka
statistical parity (Besse et al. 2022), within clustering.
Within the centroid clustering paradigm pioneered by
classical algorithms such as k-means, only ensuring proportional representation of groups within each cluster may
be insufficient depending on how subsequent decisions are
made. Where decisions are to be made solely on cluster
membership, this notion of group fairness would be appropriate. In centroid clustering however, each cluster is additionally characterised by a centroid, making it distinct from

1
The data objects in Figures 1–3 are two dimensional, shown
on the xy-plane. Each grey region depicts a cluster.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21583

