The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Effective Polynomial Technique for Compiling Conditional Effects Away
Alfonso Emilio Gerevini1 , Francesco Percassi2 * , Enrico Scala1
1

Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy
School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersfield, United Kingdom
alfonso.gerevini@unibs.it,f.percassi@hud.ac.uk,enrico.scala@unibs.it

2

Abstract

than three decades ago, several planners do not directly support them, or they do so with some limitations. The majority
of state-of-the-art planners are based on forward state-space
heuristic search (e.g., Helmert 2006; Richter and Westphal
2010), with a few notable exceptions (e.g., Gerevini, Saetti,
and Serina 2003; Wehrle and Rintanen 2007; Lipovetzky
and Geffner 2017). Although there is a significant number of
powerful heuristics available for these systems, only a few of
them provide direct support for conditional effects with the
necessary guarantees, such as the admissibility of heuristics.
One way to support conditional effects, independently
from the search algorithm and heuristic of the planner, is
using a compilation-based approach: the problem with conditional effects is transformed into an equivalent one without them, ensuring soundness and completeness. Compilation approaches have the nice property of allowing the
use of a wide set of existing planners, providing a plannerindependent approach. Two main compilation approaches
have been investigated. Gazen and Knoblock (1997) proposed an approach that generates compiled actions emulating all possible contextual effects that may take place; Nebel
(2000) devised a method simulating a machine that evaluates
and applies conditional effects through a sequence of auxiliary actions. These approaches have different strengths and
weaknesses: the former preserves the length of valid plans at
the cost of an exponential worst-case blow-up in the size of
the problem representation, while the second does not suffer
this exponential blow-up but stretches the size of the valid
plans by a polynomial factor.
In this paper, we investigate yet another polynomial compilation that addresses some of the limitations of Nebel’s approach, resulting in a significantly more powerful technique.
We begin by closely examining the interactions of conditional effects within each operator, and we observe that there
are instances where it is possible to achieve a more concise
encoding. We interpret these interactions by employing an
effect interference graph for each action and utilising wellknown algorithms for managing and reasoning about these
dependencies. Our study leads to a two-step transformation.
In the initial step, we process the planning problem to ensure
that its interference graphs become acyclic. Then we exploit
this acyclicity to generate an encoding where the additional
auxiliary atoms for the compiled problem are limited to only
those that are necessary, and all auxiliary actions do not in-

The paper introduces a novel polynomial compilation technique for the sound and complete removal of conditional effects in classical planning problems. Similar to Nebel’s polynomial compilation of conditional effects, our solution also
decomposes each action with conditional effects into several
simpler actions. However, it does so more effectively by exploiting the actual structure of the given conditional effects.
We characterise such a structure using a directed graph and
leverage it to significantly reduce the number of additional
atoms required, thereby shortening the size of valid plans.
Our experimental analysis indicates that this approach enables the effective use of polynomial compilations, offering
benefits in terms of modularity and reusability of existing
planners. It also demonstrates that a compilation-based approach can be more efficient, either independently or in synergy with state-of-the-art optimal planners that directly support conditional effects.

Introduction
In essence, automated planning is the problem of finding a
sequence of actions to achieve certain objectives from an
initial state. Many languages have been developed to model
planning problems concisely, each with its strengths and
weaknesses. This paper studies classical planning with conditional effects (Pednault 1989), which allows one to express
state-dependent effects in the action model.
Over the years, conditional effects have proved quite useful to encode planning problems beyond classical planning,
such as planning with soft and hard state trajectory constraints (e.g., Wright, Mattmüller, and Nebel 2018; Percassi
and Gerevini 2019; Bonassi et al. 2021, 2023), planning under uncertainty (e.g., Palacios and Geffner 2009; Grastien
and Scala 2017), matrix multiplication as planning (Speck
et al. 2023) and even for compiling expressive planning formalisms like PDDL + in numeric planning (Percassi, Scala,
and Vallati 2023). Moreover, they exhibit a relationship with
state-dependent action cost (Mattmüller et al. 2018; Speck
et al. 2021) and numeric planning (Gigante and Scala 2023).
However, despite conditional effects being introduced more
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20104

