The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Broadcast Protocols
Dana Fisman* 1 , Noa Izsak* 1† , Swen Jacobs* 2
1

Ben-Gurion University
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
dana@cs.bgu.ac.il, izsak@post.bgu.ac.il, jacobs@cispa.de
2

Abstract

a fixed number of processes, and therefore cannot reliably
learn models for (distributed) protocols that are expected to
run correctly for any number of processes.
Broadcast protocols (BPs) are a powerful concurrent
computational model, allowing the synchronous communication of the sender of an action with an arbitrary number of
receivers (Emerson and Namjoshi 1998). The basic model
assumes that communication and processes are reliable, i.e.,
it does not consider communication failures or faulty processes. BPs have mainly been studied in the context of parameterized verification, i.e., proving functional correctness
according to a formal specification, for all systems where an
arbitrary number of processes execute a given protocol.
The challenge in reasoning about parameterized systems
such as BPs is that a parameterized system concisely represents an infinite family of systems: for each natural number
n it includes the system where n indistinguishable processes
interact. The system is correct only if it satisfies the specification for any number n of processes interacting. In the
context of verification, a variety of approaches has been investigated to overcome this challenge.
Some of these approaches are based on the notion of cutoff, i.e., a number c of processes such that a given property holds for any instance of the system with n ≥ c processes if and only if it holds for the cutoff system, where
the cutoff system is a system with exactly c processes interacting. In the literature, many results exist that provide
cutoffs for certain classes of properties in a given computational model (Emerson and Namjoshi 2003; Emerson and
Kahlon 2000), Außerlechner et al. (2016). Moreover, cutoffs
also enable the synthesis of implementations for parameterized systems from formal specifications (Jacobs and Bloem
2014), a problem closely related to learning.
In this paper, we develop a learning approach for BPs.
Given the expressiveness of BPs and the complexity of the
general problem, we make some assumptions to keep the
problem manageable. In particular, we assume (1) that the
BP under consideration has no hidden states, i.e., every state
has at least one broadcast sending action by which it can be
recognized; and (2) that there exists a cutoff, i.e., a number c
such that the language (of finite words over actions) derived
by c processes is the same as the language derived by any
number greater than c. We call such BPs fine, and note that
many BPs studied in the literature are fine.

The problem of learning a computational model from examples has been receiving growing attention. For the particularly challenging problem of learning models of distributed
systems, existing results are restricted to models with a fixed
number of interacting processes. In this work we look for the
first time (to the best of our knowledge) at the problem of
learning a distributed system with an arbitrary number of processes, assuming only that there exists a cutoff, i.e., a number
of processes that is sufficient to produce all observable behaviors. Specifically, we consider fine broadcast protocols,
these are broadcast protocols (BPs) with a finite cutoff and
no hidden states. We provide a learning algorithm that can infer a correct BP from a sample that is consistent with a fine
BP, and a minimal equivalent BP if the sample is sufficiently
complete. On the negative side we show that (a) characteristic
sets of exponential size are unavoidable, (b) the consistency
problem for fine BPs is NP hard, and (c) that fine BPs are not
polynomially predictable.

1

Introduction

Learning computational models has a long history starting with the seminal works of Gold (1967; 1978) and Angluin (1987). Questions regarding learning computational
models have raised a lot of interest both in the artificial intelligence community and the verification community. (Peled
et al. (2002), Vaandrager (2017)). Many results regarding the
learnability of various computational models used in verification have already been obtained (Beimel et al. 2000; Bollig et al. 2013; Decker et al. 2014), Angluin et al. (2015),
Nitay et al. (2023), Roy et al. (2023).
Particularly challenging is learning of concurrent computational models. Compared to most sequential models,
they offer another level of succinctness, and they usually
have no unique minimal model. Both of these aspects can
make learning significantly more difficult. Various results
regarding learning concurrent models have already been obtained (Bollig et al. 2010), Esparza et al. (2011), Muscholl et
al. (2022). However, these results are limited to models with
* These authors contributed equally.
†
This author was supported by ISF grant 2507/21 & Frankel
Center for Computer Science, BGU.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12016

