The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Conformal Autoregressive Generation:
Beam Search with Coverage Guarantees
Nicolas Deutschmann, Marvin Alberts, María Rodríguez Martínez
IBM Research
deu@zurich.ibm.com, marvin.alberts@ibm.com, mrm@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract

A particularly interesting framework to infuse a notion
of uncertainty or error control in predictions is Conformal
Predictions (CP), which produces dynamically-sized sets
of predictions with finite-sample, distribution-free coverage
guarantees (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005). Beyond
the formal guarantees, well-calibrated conformal sets are expected to reflect uncertainty through their size.
Generative tasks, where predicting is significantly harder
than verifying a prediction seem like a perfect use case
for the guarantees of CP. However, its original formulation
relies on exhaustive searches that are untractable for sequences. Until recent methods relying on sampling (Quach
et al. 2023) or human-assisted pruning (Ren et al. 2023),
solutions only existed at the token level (Dey et al. 2022;
Ravfogel, Goldberg, and Goldberger 2023).
While sampling is particularly well-suited to NLG (Holtzman et al. 2020), other applications that search correct or optimal solutions are better served by maximization-oriented
decoding algorithms such as greedy or beam searches. Our
work proposes to fill the current absence of such conformal
decoding algorithms by introducing two new greedy methods for which we prove coverage guarantees and supported
by emprical evaluation.

We introduce two new extensions to the beam search algorithm based on conformal predictions (CP) to produce sets
of sequences with theoretical coverage guarantees. The first
method is very simple and proposes dynamically-sized subsets of beam search results but, unlike typical CP procedures,
has an upper bound on the achievable guarantee depending on
a post-hoc calibration measure. Our second algorithm introduces the conformal set prediction procedure as part of the
decoding process, producing a variable beam width which
adapts to the current uncertainty. While more complex, this
procedure can achieve coverage guarantees selected a priori. We provide marginal coverage bounds for each method,
and evaluate them empirically on a selection of tasks drawing
from natural language processing and chemistry.

Introduction
Autoregressive sequence models (ARSM) are probabilistic models describing distributions of sequence data,
among which transformer-based large language models
(LLMs) (Vaswani et al. 2023) have emerged as highly powerful tools for natural language processing (NLP) and generation (NLG). Beyond NLP, application of deep ARSMs
in the natural sciences have generated impactful advances,
such as in chemistry (Born and Manica 2023; Schwaller
et al. 2019) and molecular biology (Rives et al. 2021).
Despite their success, generating reliable predictions with
ARSMs and quantifying their uncertainty combines the general challenges of trustworthy predictions in deep learning (Guo et al. 2017) with issues arising from the combinatorially large prediction space and the iterative processes
used for sequence generation (Gleave and Irving 2022; Malinin and Gales 2021; Xiao et al. 2022). LLMs also present
the unique further dimension of linguistic calibration (Kadavath et al. 2022; Mielke et al. 2022; Yin et al. 2023). Nevertheless, the high-profile of LLMs and the potential scientific value of ARSMs on other data modalities make the
improvement of reliable uncertainty estimation methods an
important and active area of research (Fannjiang et al. 2022;
Fomicheva et al. 2020; Gleave and Irving 2022; Jiang et al.
2021; Kuhn, Gal, and Farquhar 2023; Lin, Trivedi, and Sun
2023; Schuster et al. 2022).

Related Work
Conformal Predictions and Tolerance Regions Our
work builds on top of the extensive literature developing
CP, a set of tools for uncertainty estimation and trustworthy
prediction first introduced by Vovk (2012); Vovk, Gammerman, and Saunders (1999); Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer
(2005). This foundational work builds on the much earlier distribution-free tolerance regions developed by Tukey
(1947); Wald (1943); Wilks (1941) whose iterative construction is the basis of our step-by-step calibration method. In
recent years, much activity has been spent developing CP to
tackle modern machine learning (Angelopoulos et al. 2022a;
Lei and Wasserman 2012). Although not directly used in this
paper, conformal risk control is of particular interest for potential extensions of our work (Angelopoulos et al. 2022b,
2023). Angelopoulos and Bates (2022) provide an excellent
review of foundations and recent developments.
Uncertainty Estimation for Sequence Models Given the
high visibility of large language models and their unique po-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11775

