The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relevant Intrinsic Feature Enhancement Network
for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Xiaoyi Bao,* 1,2,3 Jie Qin,* 1,2 Siyang Sun,3 Xingang Wang,2† Yun Zheng3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba group
{baoxiaoyi2021, qinjie2019}@ia.ac.cn, siyang.ssy@alibaba-inc.com,
xingang.wang@ia.ac.cn, zhengyun.zy@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

For few-shot semantic segmentation, the primary task is to
extract class-specific intrinsic information from limited labeled data. However, the semantic ambiguity and inter-class
similarity of previous methods limit the accuracy of pixellevel foreground-background classification. To alleviate these
issues, we propose the Relevant Intrinsic Feature Enhancement Network (RiFeNet). To improve the semantic consistency of foreground instances, we propose an unlabeled
branch as an efficient data utilization method, which teaches
the model how to extract intrinsic features robust to intraclass differences. Notably, during testing, the proposed unlabeled branch is excluded without extra unlabeled data and
computation. Furthermore, we extend the inter-class variability between foreground and background by proposing a
novel multi-level prototype generation and interaction module. The different-grained complementarity between global
and local prototypes allows for better distinction between
similar categories. The qualitative and quantitative performance of RiFeNet surpasses the state-of-the-art methods on
P ASCAL − 5i and COCO benchmarks.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental and crucial task in the field of computer vision, semantic segmentation is widely applied in visual tasks such as medical image understanding, industrial
defect inspection, virtual reality games, autonomous driving, etc. With the development of convolutional neural networks, fully-supervised semantic segmentation has achieved
remarkable success (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015).
Subsequent transformer-based methods also greatly improve
the segmentation performance (Zhu et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2021; Yuan et al. 2021). However, it is still arduous to acquire pixel-level annotations that require a huge amount of
manual effort and costs. To alleviate such expensive and unwieldy annotations, many works tend to resort to a few-shot
semantic segmentation paradigm. In this setting, the model
learns to segment with a few limited labeled data as the support set and then transferred to test the query inputs.

Figure 1: Comparison of RiFeNet and other works. (a)
Two foreground-related issues that limit the effectiveness
of previous research. (b) Schedule of previous prototypebased methods. The two-branch structure uses a single
global prototype as the only medium for information interaction. (c) Framework of RiFeNet. An additional unlabeled
branch is used for feature mining during training, with multigranularity prototypes extracted from different branches.

Previous approaches (Shaban et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2020)
focus on making full use of limited support data. The training data is divided into a support set and a query set,
which are processed using two different branches. Relationship prompt and information interaction between the
two branches are achieved by proposing superior matching
strategies (Kang and Cho 2022) or generating representative
prototypes (Tian et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2019a, 2020). The former class of methods is represented

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

765

