The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GigaHumanDet: Exploring Full-Body Detection on Gigapixel-Level Images
Chenglong Liu1,2, * , Haoran Wei3, * , Jinze Yang1 , Jintao Liu1 ,
Wenxi Li4 , Yuchen Guo2,† , Lu Fang2,†
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
BNRist, Tsinghua University
3
MEGVII Technology
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liuchenglong20, weihaoran18, yangjinze20, liujintao201}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
wenxi.li@sjtu.edu.cn, yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com, fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn
(a) various postures

Abstract

Bending

Riding

Standing

(c) scale
variation

(b)

336 px

Performing person detection in super-high-resolution images has been a challenging task. For such a task, modern detectors, which usually encode a box using center and
width/height, struggle with accuracy due to two factors: 1)
Human characteristic: people come in various postures and
the center with high freedom is difficult to capture robust
visual pattern; 2) Image characteristic: due to vast scale diversity of input (gigapixel-level), distance regression (for
width and height) is hard to pinpoint, especially for a person, with substantial scale, who is near the camera. To address these challenges, we propose GigaHumanDet, an innovative solution aimed at further enhancing detection accuracy for gigapixel-level images. GigaHumanDet employs
the corner modeling method to avoid the potential issues of a
high degree of freedom in center pinpointing. To better distinguish similar-looking persons and enforce instance consistency of corner pairs, an instance-guided learning approach
is designed to capture discriminative individual semantics.
Further, we devise reliable shape-aware bodyness equipped
with a multi-precision strategy as the human corner matching guidance to be appropriately adapted to the single-view
large scene. Experimental results on PANDA and STCrowd
datasets show the superiority and strong applicability of our
design. Notably, our model achieves 82.4% in term of AP,
outperforming current state-of-the-arts by more than 10%.

Sitting

125 px
1465 px

semi-finished box

602 px

long distance
regression

hard to locate center
invisible ideal center
(d)

existing center-regression-guided method
search each center
by four boundaries

center
Regress w/h

decode box
affect box quality

clear corners low degrees of freedom decouple regression from box quality
(e)

use two boundaries
search each corner

tl corner
br corner

match pairs

our corner-semantic-guided method

Figure 1: Part (b) shows a partial slice of the gigapixel-level
image. Compared to center-regression-guided detectors in
(d), our corner-semantic-guided model (e) enjoys the following strengths. 1) Our model locates persons by matching the
top-left and bottom-right corners with low degrees of freedom, rather than centers, whose visual patterns are unstable
or even invisible due to the diverse postures of flexible persons in (a). 2) Our model relies on a robust corner-matching
algorithm to construct a box, so that the box quality is not
affected by long-distance regression error in the single-view
large scene (c) where the sizes of persons change drastically.

Introduction
Person detection is a fundamental and critical task for
human-centric visual analysis. Recently, the resolution has
reached gigapixel level (e.g., 25k×14k pixels) (Wang et al.
2020), posing a challenge for object detectors to cover the
analysis at large-scale spatial range with clear local details.
Most modern detectors fall into the center-regressionguided type (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018; Tian et al. 2019;
Hasan et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022), which locates objects via centers and prefers clear four boundaries to regress
width/height (see Figure 1 (d)). But for the human-centric
task in gigapixel images, it seems that the requirements of

the above methods cannot be perfectly met. Numerous individuals exhibit various postures, leading to the instability
of human center visual pattern (e.g., Figure 1 (a): the center of the bending man lies on the ground while the center
of the standing woman is occluded), further making it harder
to determine four boundaries. Besides, because people are at
different distances from the gigacamera (Yuan et al. 2017),
there is vast variation in human size (e.g., Figure 1 (c): from

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10092

