The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Holistic, Pragmatic and Multimodal Conversational Systems
Pranava Madhyastha
City, University of London
pranava.madhyastha@city.ac.uk

Language acquisition and utilization transcend the mere
exchange of lexical units. Visual cues, prosody, gestures,
body movements, and context play an undeniably crucial
role. Humans naturally communicate multimodally, employing multiple channels and synthesizing information from diverse modalities. My research delves into the characterization and construction of multimodal models that seamlessly
integrate data from multiple independent modalities. I will
cover recent work that highlights the challenges, achievements, and opportunities towards developing capable multimodal discursive models.
The first part of my talk will focus on understanding and
exploring the potential contributions of the visual modality towards language tasks such as machine translation. I
will present the noteworthy observation that machine translation models that incorporate visual contextual information perform more effectively when the available modalities are complementary rather than redundant (Caglayan
et al. 2019). This finding aligns with the dominance effect in
psychophysics, where it has been demonstrated that visual
stimuli will consistently override auditory stimuli when the
auditory information is purely complementary. I will then
present some findings where we integrate visual information
as a refinement process for generated text, enhancing and
aligning the generated language with visual concepts (Ive,
Madhyastha, and Specia 2019).
In the second part of my talk, I will delve into the significance of abstracting visual information to foster better
alignment with linguistic inputs. Here, I will concentrate
on systems that initially distill relevant visio-linguistic concepts and demonstrate that systems encompassing abstractions like object categories can aid in crafting a more interpretable vision and language system. This mitigates potential issues like hallucinations and constrains the system
to be more anchored in the context of image captioning or
visual question answering (Whitehouse, Weyde, and Madhyastha 2023). I will also explore some of the challenges
and opportunities in translating these findings into multilingual settings and more complex phenomena such as toxic
content prediction.
In the final segment of my talk, I will discuss recent work
where we conducted a controlled study to scrutinize the im-

pact of multiple modalities of information on the cognitive processing of language comprehension (Madhyastha,
Zhang, and Vigliocco 2023). We performed experiments
with human comprehenders using verbal stimuli in audioonly and audio-visual modalities. We juxtaposed the ERP
signature (N400) associated with each word in audio-only
and audiovisual presentations of the same verbal stimuli.
We then assessed the extent to which surprisal measures
(quantifying the predictability of words in their lexical context) were generated on the basis of distinct types of language models (specifically n-gram and Transformer models) that predicted N400 responses for each word. Our findings indicate that cognitive effort exhibits a substantial divergence between multimodal and unimodal settings. In addition, our findings suggest that while Transformer-based
models, which have access to a broader lexical context, provide a superior fit in the audio-only setting, 2-gram language
models (or language models that are only conditioned on
local lexical context) are more effective in the multimodal
setting. This highlights the considerable influence of local
lexical context on cognitive processing in a multimodal environment.
These salient observations have a profound impact on the
development of conversational systems, where interaction
usually happens over multiple modalities and goes beyond
lexical channels.

References
Caglayan, O.; Madhyastha, P.; Specia, L.; and Barrault, L.
2019. Probing the Need for Visual Context in Multimodal
Machine Translation. In NAACL 2023.
Ive, J.; Madhyastha, P.; and Specia, L. 2019. Distilling
Translations with Visual Awareness. In ACL 2019, 6525–
6538. Florence, Italy.
Madhyastha, P.; Zhang, Y.; and Vigliocco, G. 2023. Are
words equally surprising in audio and audio-visual comprehension? In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Whitehouse, C.; Weyde, T.; and Madhyastha, P. 2023. Towards a Unified Model for Generating Answers and Explanations in Visual Question Answering. In EACL 2023.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22677

