The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Conformal Prediction Regions for Time Series
Using Linear Complementarity Programming
Matthew Cleaveland1 , Insup Lee2 , George J. Pappas1 Lars Lindemann3
1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
mcleav@seas.upenn.edu, lee@seas.upenn.edu, pappasg@seas.upenn.edu, llindema@usc.edu

2

Abstract
Conformal prediction is a statistical tool for producing prediction regions of machine learning models that are valid
with high probability. However, applying conformal prediction to time series data leads to conservative prediction regions. In fact, to obtain prediction regions over T time steps
with confidence 1–delta, previous works require that each individual prediction region is valid with confidence 1–delta/T.
We propose an optimization-based method for reducing this
conservatism to enable long horizon planning and verification when using learning-enabled time series predictors. Instead of considering prediction errors individually at each
time step, we consider a parameterized prediction error over
multiple time steps. By optimizing the parameters over an additional dataset, we find prediction regions that are not conservative. We show that this problem can be cast as a mixed
integer linear complementarity program (MILCP), which we
then relax into a linear complementarity program (LCP). Additionally, we prove that the relaxed LP has the same optimal
cost as the original MILCP. Finally, we demonstrate the efficacy of our method on case studies using pedestrian trajectory
predictors and F16 fighter jet altitude predictors.

1

Figure 1: Sample trajectory of a pedestrian (teal stars), the
pedestrian predictions using a social LSTM from (Alahi
et al. 2016) (blue stars), the conformal prediction regions
for our approach (green circles), and the conformal prediction regions for the approach from (Lindemann et al. 2023a)
(red circles). Notably, our approach is less conservative.
analyze the underlying architecture or change the training
procedure (Angelopoulos and Bates 2023).
One challenge of CP is that its standard variant can not
directly construct valid prediction regions for time series.
This is because datapoints at different time steps are not exchangeable. Variants of CP have been developed for time series, such as adaptive conformal inference (Gibbs and Candes 2021; Zaffran et al. 2022). However, their coverage guarantees are weaker and only asymptotic. While these types of
guarantees are useful in many contexts, they are insufficient
in safety-critical applications such as self-driving cars.
In previous works (Stankeviciute, M Alaa, and van der
Schaar 2021; Lindemann et al. 2023a,b), this issue was mitigated by instead considering a calibration dataset that consists of full rollouts of the time series, which do not violate
the exchangeability assumption. At design time, one runs a
separate instance of CP for each of the T time steps of the
time series predictor (also referred to as a trajectory predictor). Then at runtime, these CP instances are combined with
the predictor’s T predictions to compute prediction regions.
However, to obtain prediction regions that are valid over all
T time steps with confidence 1 − δ, each individual prediction region has to be valid with confidence 1 − δ/T .1 This
results in conservative prediction regions.
Contributions: To address this conservatism, this paper

Introduction

Autonomous systems perform safety-critical tasks in dynamic environments where system errors can be dangerous
and costly, e.g., a mistake of a self-driving car navigating in
urban traffic. In such scenarios, accurate uncertainty quantification is vital for ensuring safety of learning-enabled systems. In this work, we focus on quantifying uncertainty of
time series data. For instance, for a given time series predictor that predicts the future trajectory of a pedestrian, how can
we quantify the uncertainty and accuracy of this predictor?
Conformal prediction (CP) has emerged as a popular
method for statistical uncertainty quantification (Shafer and
Vovk 2008; Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005). It aims to
construct prediction regions that contain the true quantity of
interest with a user-defined probability. CP does not require
any assumptions about the underlying distribution or the predictor itself. Instead, one only needs calibration data that
is exchangeable or independent and identically distributed.
That means that CP can seamlessly be applied to learningenabled predictors like neural networks, without the need to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

20984

A union bound argument can be used to show this result.

