The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepAccident: A Motion and Accident Prediction Benchmark for V2X
Autonomous Driving
Tianqi Wang1 , Sukmin Kim1 , Ji Wenxuan1 , Enze Xie2 * ,
Chongjian Ge1 , Junsong Chen3 , Zhenguo Li2 , Ping Luo1 *
1

The University of Hong Kong
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Dalian University of Technology
{wangtq, u3544547, jiweixia, rhettgee}@connect.hku.hk, johnny ez@163.com,
jschen@mail.dlut.edu.cn, li.zhenguo@huawei.com, pluo@cs.hku.hk
Abstract

the existing V2X datasets (Xu et al. 2022c; Li et al. 2022;
Yu et al. 2022) support perception tasks but ignore the critical motion prediction task. The only V2X dataset that supports motion prediction is V2X-seq (Yu et al. 2023), that is
recently released, but it requires ground truth vehicle positions, map topology, and traffic light status as inputs, which
is impractical for real-world autonomous driving. Moreover,
mainstream datasets lack an essential attribute for evaluating the safety of autonomous driving: the inclusion of
safety-critical scenarios, such as collision accidents. Existing accident datasets (Sadegh Aliakbarian et al. 2018; Hoon
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2022d) suffer from limitations such
as low-resolution images captured from a single forwardfacing camera and coarse accident annotation labels.
We propose the DeepAccident dataset, the first V2X autonomous driving dataset supporting end-to-end motion and
accident prediction, and various perception tasks. Using
the CARLA simulator (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017), we reconstructed diverse real-world driving accidents according to
NHTSA pre-crash reports (Najm et al. 2007). For each scenario, four vehicles and one infrastructure are designed to
collect full sets of sensor data, including multi-view cameras
and LiDAR, with labels for perception and prediction tasks.
This setup fills the gap of a lack of safety-critical scenarios
in existing V2X datasets. Additionally, we introduce a new
end-to-end accident prediction task to predict collision accidents’ occurrence, timing, location, and involved vehicles
or pedestrians. An illustration of this task is shown in Figure 1. Lastly, we propose a V2X model named V2XFormer,
which demonstrates superior performance compared to the
single-vehicle model on the DeepAccident dataset.
Our main contributions can be summarized in three-fold:
(i) DeepAccident, the first V2X dataset and benchmark that
contains diverse collision accidents, (ii) a new task named
end-to-end accident prediction that predicts the occurrence
of collision accidents and their specific timing, location,
and vehicles or pedestrians involved, and (iii) a V2X model
named V2XFormer for both perception and prediction tasks
to serve as a baseline for further research.

Safety is the primary priority of autonomous driving. Nevertheless, no published dataset currently supports the direct
and explainable safety evaluation for autonomous driving. In
this work, we propose DeepAccident, a large-scale dataset
generated via a realistic simulator containing diverse accident scenarios that frequently occur in real-world driving.
The proposed DeepAccident dataset includes 57K annotated
frames and 285K annotated samples, approximately 7 times
more than the large-scale nuScenes dataset with 40k annotated samples. In addition, we propose a new task, end-toend motion and accident prediction, which can be used to
directly evaluate the accident prediction ability for different
autonomous driving algorithms. Furthermore, for each scenario, we set four vehicles along with one infrastructure to
record data, thus providing diverse viewpoints for accident
scenarios and enabling V2X (vehicle-to-everything) research
on perception and prediction tasks. Finally, we present a baseline V2X model named V2XFormer that demonstrates superior performance for motion and accident prediction and 3D
object detection compared to the single-vehicle model.

Introduction
In recent years, single-vehicle autonomous driving has
achieved significant progress owing to the well-established
datasets for autonomous driving, such as KITTI (Geiger
et al. 2013), nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020), Waymo (Sun
et al. 2020), etc. Using those datasets, researchers have proposed various representative algorithms for different downstream tasks, including perception (Lang et al. 2019; Shi
et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023) and prediction (Hu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022).
Nevertheless, single-vehicle autonomous driving suffers
from performance degradation in distant or occluded areas
due to poor or partial visibility of raw sensors. One possible
solution is to seek the help of vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
communication technology which can provide a complementary perception range or enhanced visibility for the ego
vehicle. Based on the additional information source, V2X
communication can be further categorized as vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I). Most of

Related Work

* Corresponding authors.

V2X datasets for autonomous driving. The existing
V2X datasets primarily focus on perception tasks, includ-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5599

