The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Communicative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Active Defense
Lebin Yu, Yunbo Qiu, Quanming Yao, Yuan Shen, Xudong Zhang and Jian Wang *
Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{yulb19, qyb18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, quanmingyao@gmail.com, {shenyuan ee, zhangxd, jianwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2023). Hence, it becomes imperative to address these
issues and devise robust communicative MARL mechanisms.
Adversarial attacks and defenses in communicative
MARL receive much less attention when compared to their
counterparts in reinforcement learning (Mu et al. 2022). Current frameworks in this area (Ishii, Wang, and Feng 2022;
Yuan et al. 2023) commonly follow the principle of passive
defense, where agents treat all received messages equally
and try to make relative safe decisions. Since perturbed messages are mixed with useful messages, this indiscriminate reception may lead to the result of “garbage in, garbage out”.
We notice that robust communicative MARL has an important feature compared with robust RL: The attackers are
only allowed to modify a part of the messages, while the
modification is unlimited and perturbed messages can be
quite different from the original ones. Inspired by noisy
learning (Han et al. 2018), we propose an active defense
strategy to utilize this feature: agents actively judge the reliability of messages based on their own unperturbed observations and hidden states (which contain history information)
and reduce unreliable messages’ impact on the final decision.1 For example, if in a search task an agent receives a
message saying that “target is at coordinates (1,1), get to
it!”, while the agent have searched (1,1) and found nothing,
it can realize that this message is fake. We also visualize
the difference between active defense and passive defense in
Fig. 1 for better demonstration.
Nevertheless, there remain two key challenges to implement active defense. (I) What kind of messages should be
defined as unreliable? (II) How to adjust the unreliable messages’ impact on the final decision properly? Since the ultimate goal for multi-agent communication is to make agents
better finish cooperation tasks, a message beneficial for
this goal should be considered reliable. However, common
communicative MARL frameworks aggregate received messages with highly nonlinear neural networks, making it hard

Communication in multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) has been proven to effectively promote cooperation
among agents recently. Since communication in real-world
scenarios is vulnerable to noises and adversarial attacks, it is
crucial to develop robust communicative MARL technique.
However, existing research in this domain has predominantly
focused on passive defense strategies, where agents receive
all messages equally, making it hard to balance performance
and robustness. We propose an active defense strategy, where
agents automatically reduce the impact of potentially harmful
messages on the final decision. There are two challenges to
implement this strategy, that are defining unreliable messages
and adjusting the unreliable messages’ impact on the final
decision properly. To address them, we design an Active Defense Multi-Agent Communication framework (ADMAC),
which estimates the reliability of received messages and
adjusts their impact on the final decision accordingly with the
help of a decomposable decision structure. The superiority of
ADMAC over existing methods is validated by experiments
in three communication-critical tasks under four types of
attacks.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has made remarkable strides in enhancing cooperative robot
tasks and distributed control domains, exemplified by traffic
lights control (Chu, Chinchali, and Katti 2020) and robots
navigation (Han, Chen, and Hao 2020). Given the inherent
partial observability in multi-agent tasks, several researchers
have explored the integration of communication mechanisms to facilitate information exchange among agents (Ma,
Luo, and Pan 2021).
Nevertheless, the utilization of multi-agent communication in real-world applications introduces certain challenges.
In such scenarios, agents rely on wireless communication
channels to exchange messages, which are susceptible to
various sources of noises and interference. These perturbations on messages, especially malicious ones, can severely
reduce the performance of multi-agent systems, even though
agents get accurate observations of the environment (Sun

1

An intuitive approach is identifying the perturbed messages
and simply remove them from decision-making. However, for an
agent, the received messages themselves contain some unknown information, making it infeasible to accurately judge whether a message should be completely trusted or ignored. Besides, it is hard to
determine a proper decision threshold for judging whether a message is reliable or unreliable.

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17575

