The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Harnessing Network Effect for Fake News Mitigation: Selecting Debunkers via
Self-Imitation Learning
Xiaofei Xu, Ke Deng, Michael Dann, Xiuzhen Zhang
School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria 3000 Australia
xiaofei.xu2@student.rmit.edu.au, {ke.deng, michael.dann, xiuzhen.zhang}@rmit.edu.au

Abstract

A crucial issue in reinforcement learning-based multistage fake news mitigation strategies but one that is largely
overlooked in the literature (Farajtabar et al. 2017; Goindani
and Neville 2020a,b; Xu, Deng, and Zhang 2022) is the lack
of direct, “net” rewards for agent actions. Since news propagation on social networks is a long-lasting process with
intensity decay over time, the effects of debunkers on fake
news mitigation are interleaved across the network at different stages. The “net” effect of individual debunkers cannot
be directly measured at intermediate stages; only the cumulative effect of all debunkers can be observed when the mitigation campaign finishes. In other words, the reward function for the task is episodic.
In this paper, we propose a reinforcement learning approach to multi-stage fake news mitigation that explicitly
addresses the issue of episodic reward. In a multi-stage fake
news mitigation campaign, one user is selected at each stage
to post true news such that the number of users believing in
fake news is minimized at the conclusion of the campaign.
To address the issue of episodic rewards, we propose to
learn the debunker selection policy via self-imitation learning (Oh et al. 2018; Gangwani, Liu, and Peng 2018). Instead
of learning directly from immediate rewards, self-imitation
learning aims to mimic the agent’s own past behaviour from
highly rewarding episodes. Existing self-imitation learning
algorithms (Ho and Ermon 2016; Gangwani, Liu, and Peng
2018; Oh et al. 2018) have shown promise in learning from
episodic rewards (Gangwani, Liu, and Peng 2018), but have
two weaknesses that potentially limit their effectiveness for
fake news mitigation on social networks:
First, fake news mitigation campaigns are cost-intensive
(Farajtabar et al. 2017). Real-world campaigns often have
budget constraints and it is essential to learn mitigation policies from a small number of episodes. It is therefore desirable to exploit all available information about episodes
for more efficient sampling and hence more efficient learning. Existing self-imitation learning methods imitate past
good experiences only, and state-action pairs that appear
frequently in past good experiences are typically treated
as favourable, but this may not be true if they also appear
frequently in past bad experiences. Second, existing methods assume that the full environment state can be observed.
However, in fake news mitigation, due to interleaved information propagation and the complexity of social networks,

This study aims to minimize the influence of fake news on social networks by deploying debunkers to propagate true news.
This is framed as a reinforcement learning problem, where,
at each stage, one user is selected to propagate true news. A
challenging issue is episodic reward where the “net” effect of
selecting individual debunkers cannot be discerned from the
interleaving information propagation on social networks, and
only the collective effect from mitigation efforts can be observed. Existing Self-Imitation Learning (SIL) methods have
shown promise in learning from episodic rewards, but are illsuited to the real-world application of fake news mitigation
because of their poor sample efficiency. To learn a more effective debunker selection policy for fake news mitigation,
this study proposes NAGASIL – Negative sampling and state
Augmented Generative Adversarial Self-Imitation Learning,
which consists of two improvements geared towards fake
news mitigation: learning from negative samples, and an augmented state representation to capture the “real” environment
state by integrating the current observed state with the previous state-action pairs from the same campaign. Experiments
on two social networks show that NAGASIL yields superior performance to standard GASIL and state-of-the-art fake
news mitigation models.

1

Introduction

There have been significant efforts to combat the spread of
fake news on social networks. Beyond fake news detection,
another important strategy is mitigation, whereby debunkers
– users who propagate true news – are deployed to counter
the spread of fake news. Unfortunately, despite the efforts
of “official” debunkers, such as fact-checking services and
authoritative organisations (e.g., WHO), fake news still proliferates widely on social media. It is therefore important to
unleash the power of crowd debunking from online users
for fake news mitigation (Vo and Lee 2018, 2020). Previous work on this problem has explored using reinforcement
learning to optimize fake news mitigation campaigns. Some
studies focus on optimizing the intensity with which given
debunkers spread true news (Farajtabar et al. 2017; Goindani
and Neville 2020a,b). Other studies optimize the selection of
crowd debunkers from online users over multiple stages with
a budget constraint (Xu, Deng, and Zhang 2022).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22447

