The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Imitation of Life: A Search Engine for Biologically Inspired Design
Hen Emuna1 , Nadav Borenstein2 , Xin Qian3 , Hyeonsu Kang4 ,
Joel Chan3 , Aniket Kittur4 , Dafna Shahaf1
1

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
2
University of Copenhagen
3
University of Maryland
4
Carnegie Mellon University
hen.emuna@mail.huji.ac.il, nadav.borenstein@di.ku.dk, xinq@umd.edu, hyeonsuk@cs.cmu.edu, joelchan@umd.edu,
nkittur@cs.cmu.edu, dshahaf@cs.huji.ac.il
Abstract

from biology often rely on serendipity (Vattam and Goel
2013) – in the bullet train case, one of the engineers was
an amateur birdwatcher (Kobayashi 2005). Moreover, while
biological knowledge is abundant, bio-inspirational information is scarce. An audit of potential inspirations, involving heuristically filtered scientific articles from PubMed, revealed that only 3.36% (from a sample of 3416) provided
insights for design problems (Kaiser et al. 2012).
Several hand-curated databases of BID exist. AskNature (asknature.org 2018) is an online dataset of biological
phenomena, categorized by functional keywords. Design by
Analogy to Nature Engine (DANE) provides a library of biological descriptions represented in the Structure-BehaviorFunction (SBF) framework (Vattam et al. 2011; Goel, Rugaber, and Vattam 2009). However, the hand-curation of
these databases is an extremely time-consuming and costly
process; it takes 40–100 hours to describe a single biological organism in their framework. Thus, there is a need for
automatic, scalable methods to expand the coverage of these
datasets (Vandevenne et al. 2016).
More recently, Zhao et al. demonstrated how crowdsourcing annotations of scientific articles containing biomimicryrelated content can facilitate a supervised learning approach
to classifying scientific articles (Zhao et al. 2018; Vattam
and Goel 2011b). However, generating labels for a large
dataset can again be expensive and difficult.
Another work relies on hard-coded rules to seek bioinspiration (Cheong and Shu 2014). However, the set of rules
is small and limited. Furthermore, they match only the identified causal-function verbs, which are often too broad. For
instance, a query like “reduce glare” only matches on “reduce”, possibly leading to irrelevant matches that do not refer to “glare”.
In this work, we introduce BAR CODE (Biological Analogy Retriever), a scalable and automatic end-to-end system for mining bio-inspiration from unstructured data written in natural language. A recent work in analogy mining
has shown how mining functional aspects such as the purposes and mechanisms of products can support the search
and discovery of products that match on an abstract level
(Hope et al. 2022). We incorporate recent advances in natural language understanding and data programming to extract functional aspects relevant to our settings. We show our
system retrieves valuable bio-inspirations for human de-

Biologically Inspired Design (BID), or Biomimicry, is a
problem-solving methodology that applies analogies from nature to solve engineering challenges. For example, Speedo engineers designed swimsuits based on shark skin. Finding relevant biological solutions for real-world problems poses significant challenges, both due to the limited biological knowledge engineers and designers typically possess and to the limited BID resources. Existing BID datasets are hand-curated
and small, and scaling them up requires costly human annotations.
In this paper, we introduce BAR CODE (Biological Analogy
Retriever), a search engine for automatically mining bioinspirations from the web at scale. Using advances in natural language understanding and data programming, BARCODE identifies potential inspirations for engineering challenges. Our experiments demonstrate that BAR CODE can retrieve inspirations that are valuable to engineers and designers tackling real-world problems, as well as recover famous
historical BID examples. We release data and code; we view
BAR CODE as a step towards addressing the challenges that
have historically hindered the practical application of BID to
engineering innovation.

1

Introduction

Nature is a rich source of inspiration for creative problemsolving. For example, engineers addressing the bullet train’s
sonic boom problem drew inspiration from kingfishers, who
dive without splashing water (Linic et al. 2021). By redesigning the train’s front after a kingfisher’s beak, they reduced booms and improved speed while conserving energy.
Biologically Inspired Design (BID), or biomimicry, is a
design approach that derives solutions by drawing analogies
to nature’s strategies and systems (Fu et al. 2014; Lurie-Luke
2014; Dumanli and Savin 2016; Pawlyn 2019; San Ha and
Lu 2020).
In the past two decades, there has been a growing interest
in BID (Verbrugghe, Rubinacci, and Khan 2023). However,
despite its potential, it is still not widely applied. One reason
might be that finding relevant biological solutions is timeconsuming due to limited biological knowledge among designers and engineers (Vattam and Goel 2011a). Analogies
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

503

