The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Leveraging Diffusion Perturbations for Measuring Fairness in Computer Vision
Nicholas Lui1 * , Bryan Chia1 * , William Berrios2 , Candace Ross3 , Douwe Kiela1,2
1

Stanford University
2
Contextual AI
3
Meta AI
{niclui,bryancws}@stanford.edu

Abstract

can be used to evaluate the fairness of computer vision models. Our work is inspired by demographic perturbations in
language (Maudslay et al. 2019; Smith and Williams 2021;
Emmery et al. 2022; Qian et al. 2022), and extends it to images using recent advancements in diffusion models.
We propose measuring fairness via diffusion perturbations, a novel diffusion-based approach that can be used to
generate a dataset balanced along demographic traits, such
as the perceived race of people. In our fully automated approach, we use diffusion models to generate a large set of
base images. Then, each image is edited using inpainting to
generate multiple variants, where each variant refers to a different demographic group. Image sets that do not meet the
bar for realism and prompt fidelity are filtered using a combination of a VQA and face attribution model.
Images, in a given set of perturbations, share the same
backgrounds and contexts, with the only difference being
the perturbed demographic trait. To exploit the consistency
within an image set, we propose a fairness metric that measures a model’s robustness to demographic perturbations.
Given a classification task, the fairness metric measures the
extent to which the probability of the true label varies across
different demographic groups. We draw inspiration from
perturbation metrics in language (Ma et al. 2021; Qian et al.
2022; Thrush et al. 2022) and extend them to images.
Using diffusion perturbations, we construct a novel
dataset depicting different occupations balanced by perceived race. Each occupation comprises 1,200 images per
perceived identity group with 4 identity groups represented (Black, Caucasian, East Asian, and Indian). We validate our dataset using crowdworkers, and show that our images demonstrate a high level of visual realism and a high
probability of belonging to the intended target group.
Finally, we undertake a fairness analysis using our occupations dataset, where we evaluate several vision-language
models (e.g. CLIP, FLAVA) using an occupation classification task. Using our fairness metric, we identify significant
disparities between the models’ robustness to demographic
perturbations. We also find that images generated with nonCaucasian labels have a lower classification accuracy than
Caucasian-labeled images, and that many of these misclassifications are suggestive of model biases.
The paper’s main contributions are shown in Figure 1. To
enable greater exploration of our work, we release our gen-

Computer vision models have been known to encode harmful
biases, leading to the potentially unfair treatment of historically marginalized groups, such as people of color. However,
there remains a lack of datasets balanced along demographic
traits that can be used to evaluate the downstream fairness
of these models. In this work, we demonstrate that diffusion
models can be leveraged to create such a dataset. We first use
a diffusion model to generate a large set of images depicting
various occupations. Subsequently, each image is edited using inpainting to generate multiple variants, where each variant refers to a different perceived race. Using this dataset,
we benchmark several vision-language models on a multiclass occupation classification task. We find that images generated with non-Caucasian labels have a significantly higher
occupation misclassification rate than images generated with
Caucasian labels, and that several misclassifications are suggestive of racial biases. We measure a model’s downstream
fairness by computing the standard deviation in the probability of predicting the true occupation label across the different perceived identity groups. Using this fairness metric, we
find significant disparities between the evaluated vision-andlanguage models. We hope that our work demonstrates the
potential value of diffusion methods for fairness evaluations.

Introduction
Computer vision systems have been shown to replicate harmful statistical associations found in the training
data (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018; Stock and Cisse 2018;
Wang et al. 2019). Encoding such biases increases the risk of
computer vision models unfairly treating under-represented
groups (Barocas et al. 2017), such as people of color (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018). To combat this, there have been
several efforts to mitigate bias, ranging from sampling (Cao
et al. 2020) to adversarial training (Alvi, Zisserman, and
Nellåker 2018). However, there remains a lack of datasets,
balanced along demographic traits, that are generally useful
for evaluating the effectiveness of these techniques and the
downstream fairness of computer vision models.
In this work, we explore the efficacy of diffusion methods (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Rombach et al. 2022) for
generating datasets balanced along demographic traits that
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14220

