The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Automatically Testing Functional Properties of Code Translation Models
Hasan Ferit Eniser1 , Valentin Wüstholz2 , Maria Christakis3
1

MPI-SWS ,Germany
ConsenSys, Austria
3
TU Wien, Austria
hfeniser@mpi-sws.org, valentin.wustholz@consensys.net, maria.christakis@tuwien.ac.at
2

Abstract

Our approach. In this paper, we automatically test
functional properties of code translation models themselves. To this end, we extend N OMOS (Christakis et al.
2023), an open-source framework for expressing functionalcorrectness properties of machine learning models and automatically testing models against these properties. In particular, N OMOS uses a declarative, domain-agnostic specification language for writing hyperproperties (Clarkson and
Schneider 2008) (or k-safety properties), which capture
functional correctness by reasoning about k model executions. As an example, consider a recidivism-risk model predicting whether a criminal is likely to re-offend. The property that “if a criminal’s number of priors increases, then
their recidivism risk should not decrease” is a 2-safety property—we need two model executions to detect a violation of
this property, both of which take as input the same criminal but one with an increased number of priors. N OMOS has
been used to effectively test models from various application
domains, namely action policies as well as models that take
as input tabular data, images, speech, and natural language.
Here, we build on N OMOS to enable it to express and validate a wide range of k-safety properties about code translation models, ranging from purely syntactic to purely semantic properties of the transpiled code. An example of a purely
syntactic property is that “the number of loops in the translated code should match the number of loops in the original code”; a purely semantic property is that “the translated
code should produce the same return values as the original
code for a given set of inputs”. We can also express compilation preservation, that is, “if the original code compiles, the
translated code should also compile”. Note that compilers
typically perform both syntactic (e.g., parsing) and semantic
(e.g., type checking) analyses, and thus, compiler preservation could be viewed as a hybrid property, between purely
syntactic and purely semantic ones. These are examples of
standard (1-)safety properties—they can be validated by a
single model execution that generates the translated code.
A k greater than 1 enables specifying the expected model
behavior more comprehensively. For instance, violations of
the above compilation property may be unavoidable for
some programs—e.g., the source program uses a library
function for which there is no comparable version in the target language. Writing k-safety properties allows not labeling such unavoidable model behavior as “buggy” and iden-

Large language models are becoming increasingly practical
for translating code across programming languages, a process known as transpiling. Even though automated transpilation significantly boosts developer productivity, a key concern is whether the generated code is correct. Existing work
initially used manually crafted test suites to test the translations of a small corpus of programs; these test suites were
later automated. In contrast, we devise the first approach for
automated, functional, property-based testing of code translation models. Our general, user-provided specifications about
the transpiled code capture a range of properties, from purely
syntactic to purely semantic ones. As shown by our experiments, this approach is very effective in detecting property violations in popular code translation models, and therefore, in
evaluating model quality with respect to given properties. We
also go a step further and explore the usage scenario where
a user simply aims to obtain a correct translation of some
code with respect to certain properties without necessarily being concerned about the overall quality of the model. To this
purpose, we develop the first property-guided search procedure for code translation models, where a model is repeatedly
queried with slightly different parameters to produce alternative and potentially more correct translations. Our results
show that this search procedure helps to obtain significantly
better code translations.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are becoming highly relevant for translating code across programming languages, a
process also known as transpiling. Transpilation is typically
used to translate an existing software system written in an
obsolete programming language into a modern language or
to integrate code bases written in different languages into
one. On one hand, automated transpilation tremendously increases developer productivity. On the other hand, a key concern is whether the transpiled code is correct.
Existing work used manually crafted test suites (Rozière
et al. 2020) to assess the quality of translations for individual
functions. These test suites were later generated automatically using search-based testing (Rozière et al. 2022). However, given the small corpus of functions, it remains unclear
how well the models generalize to other code.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21055

