The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GroundVLP: Harnessing Zero-Shot Visual Grounding from Vision-Language
Pre-training and Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Haozhan Shen1 , Tiancheng Zhao2 * , Mingwei Zhu1 , Jianwei Yin1
1

Zhejiang University
Binjiang Institute of Zhejiang University
{hz shen, zhumw, zjuyjw}@zju.edu.cn, tianchez@zju-bj.com,
2

Abstract
Visual grounding, a crucial vision-language task involving
the understanding of the visual context based on the query
expression, necessitates the model to capture the interactions
between objects, as well as various spatial and attribute information. However, the annotation data of visual grounding
task is limited due to its time-consuming and labor-intensive
annotation process, resulting in the trained models being constrained from generalizing its capability to a broader domain.
To address this challenge, we propose GroundVLP, a simple
yet effective zero-shot method that harnesses visual grounding ability from the existing models trained from imagetext pairs and pure object detection data, both of which are
more conveniently obtainable and offer a broader domain
compared to visual grounding annotation data. GroundVLP
proposes a fusion mechanism that combines the heatmap
from GradCAM and the object proposals of open-vocabulary
detectors. We demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms other zero-shot methods on RefCOCO/+/g datasets, surpassing prior zero-shot state-of-the-art
by approximately 28% on the test split of RefCOCO and RefCOCO+. Furthermore, GroundVLP performs comparably to
or even better than some non-VLP-based supervised models on the Flickr30k entities dataset. Our code is available at
https://github.com/om-ai-lab/GroundVLP.

Figure 1: With the combination of existing models trained
with image-text matching and object detection, we could
conduct zero-shot visual grounding without fine-tuning on
any additional supervised dataset.

Introduction

information within the image. As a result, these datasets are
limited in quantity, especially when compared to two other
dataset types, as detailed in Table 1. Undoubtedly, this finite
amount of data restricts a model’s adaptability to broader domain. Compared to the difficulty of obtaining visual grounding data, two alternative data types—image-text pairs and
object detection (OD) data—are comparatively easier to obtain, as shown in Table 1.
Recently, Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) models,
when trained on image-text pairs, have demonstrated impressive results in image-text matching (ITM) (Zhang et al.
2021; Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Li et al. 2021). Similarly,
Open-Vocabulary object Detectors (OVD) trained with OD
data have excelled in detecting specific categories (Zareian
et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022), as referenced in the top of Figure 1. Therefore, a natural question
arises: Can we harness the semantic comprehension of VLP
and the category-specific detection prowess of OVD to perform visual grounding without any additional training, just

Visual grounding seeks to pinpoint the image region described by a linguistic expression containing complex semantic information. It includes two typical tasks, Referring
Expression Comprehension (REC) and Phrase Grounding.
REC aims to localize an object in an image given a textual referring expression, while phrase grounding seeks to
ground every entity in the sentence to objects in the image.
Generally, models are trained via task-specific datasets in
the supervised setting (Yu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019c; Sun
et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2019; Liao et al. 2020; Deng et al.
2021) to perform visual grounding.
However, creating these task-specific datasets poses challenges due to their intricate annotation process. Annotating
a query demands a detailed examination of object interactions and an understanding of various spatial and attribute
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4766

