The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Protect Your Score: Contact-Tracing
with Differential Privacy Guarantees
Rob Romijnders1 , Christos Louizos2 , Yuki M. Asano1 , Max Welling1
1

University of Amsterdam
2
Qualcomm AI research
r.romijnders@uva.nl

Abstract

journal stating that most individuals would consider the privacy risks “to be unacceptably high” (The Lancet; Bengio
et al. 2020). Yet, to the best of our knowledge, no research
has been published on differential privacy when releasing a
risk score to a user for the purpose of contact tracing.
Despite security measures, a contact tracing algorithm
needs to assign a risk score and release the score either directly to the user or indirectly by the signal to get tested. It is
precisely the communication and release of this score that an
adversary can leverage to gauge the private health status of
an individual. For the rest of the paper, we refer, by the name
COVIDSCORE, to a risk score that a contact tracing algorithm
assigns to a user and communicates to other users. Most papers about privacy and security aspects during the COVID19
pandemic center on security measures (Ahmed et al. 2020)
for establishing contacts, where approaches such as hashing
were studied for establishing contacts (Ali and Dyo 2021;
Reichert, Brack, and Scheuermann 2021). In this work, we
assume that these security precautions are adhered to and, in
the presence of the security measures, identify another privacy attack on the COVIDSCORE:

The pandemic in 2020 and 2021 had enormous economic and
societal consequences, and studies show that contact tracing algorithms can be key in the early containment of the
virus. While large strides have been made towards more effective contact tracing algorithms, we argue that privacy concerns currently hold deployment back. The essence of a contact tracing algorithm constitutes the communication of a risk
score. Yet, it is precisely the communication and release of
this score to a user that an adversary can leverage to gauge
the private health status of an individual. We pinpoint a realistic attack scenario and propose a contact tracing algorithm
with differential privacy guarantees against this attack. The
algorithm is tested on the two most widely used agent-based
COVID19 simulators and demonstrates superior performance
in a wide range of settings. Especially for realistic test scenarios and while releasing each risk score with ε = 1 differential privacy, we achieve a two to ten-fold reduction in the
infection rate of the virus. To the best of our knowledge, this
presents the first contact tracing algorithm with differential
privacy guarantees when revealing risk scores for COVID19.

1

Introduction

An adversary wants to determine the COVIDSCORE
of a victim. The adversary installs the app and only
makes contact with the victim. The next day, the adversary observes a change in their COVIDSCORE. This
change is due to the victim, and the adversary reconstructs the COVIDSCORE of the victim.

The COVID19 pandemic had enormous economic and societal consequences (Boden et al. 2021; Vindegaard and Benros 2020; Kim et al. 2022; Berger, Herkenhoff, and Mongey
2020). Some sources estimate the global economic impact
at more than a trillion US dollars (Kaye et al. 2021). Previous studies show that contact tracing apps can aid understanding and mitigate the early rise of the pandemic (Alsdurf
et al. 2020; Baker et al. 2021; Herbrich, Rastogi, and Vollgraf 2020; Perra 2021). Most studies, however, focused on
the effectiveness of the pandemic mitigation, while we argue that privacy concerns hold the deployment back (Raskar
et al. 2020; Alsdurf et al. 2020). Population surveys during
and after the pandemic show that mistrust and ‘worries about
privacy’ are among the top three reasons not to use a contact
tracing app (Jones, Thompson et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022;
Walrave, Waeterloos, and Ponnet 2022).
Several studies argue for the studying of privacy in
contact tracing algorithms (Park, Choi, and Ko 2020; Grantz
et al. 2020; Dyda et al. 2021). We also quote an influential

The naı̈ve approach of simply adding noise to any revealed COVIDSCORE does lead to increased uncertainty at
the adversary about the score of a victim. However, adding
noise naturally decreases the utility of a contact tracing algorithm. To address this conundrum, we propose a novel algorithm that, while adding noise, maintains good results in
mitigating a peak of the pandemic. Moreover, we prove differential privacy (Dwork and Roth 2014) for the release of
the COVIDSCORE and demonstrate strong performance even
when ε ≤ 1 per message.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:
1. We concretize a privacy attack in contact tracing with
important implications, and we propose a novel decentralized algorithm with a differential privacy guarantee against this attack. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to study the differential privacy of a

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14829

