The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bridging the Gap between 2D and 3D Visual Question Answering: A Fusion
Approach for 3D VQA
Wentao Mo1 , Yang Liu1,2 *
1

2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
mowt@pku.edu.cn, yangliu@pku.edu.cn

ScanQA Train/Val Performance Curve
Top-1 Accuracy
(EM@1)

Abstract
In 3D Visual Question Answering (3D VQA), the scarcity
of fully annotated data and limited visual content diversity
hampers the generalization to novel scenes and 3D concepts
(e.g., only around 800 scenes are utilized in ScanQA and
SQA dataset). Current approaches resort supplement 3D reasoning with 2D information. However, these methods face
challenges: either they use top-down 2D views that introduce overly complex and sometimes question-irrelevant visual clues, or they rely on globally aggregated scene/imagelevel representations from 2D VLMs, losing the fine-grained
vision-language correlations. To overcome these limitations,
our approach utilizes question-conditional 2D view selection procedure, pinpointing semantically relevant 2D inputs
for crucial visual clues. We then integrate this 2D knowledge into the 3D-VQA system via a two-branch Transformer
structure. This structure, featuring a Twin-Transformer design, compactly combines 2D and 3D modalities and captures fine-grained correlations between modalities, allowing
them mutually augmenting each other. Integrating proposed
mechanisms above, we present BridgeQA, that offers a fresh
perspective on multi-modal transformer-based architectures
for 3D-VQA. Experiments validate that BridgeQA achieves
state-of-the-art on 3D-VQA datasets and significantly outperforms existing solutions. Code is available at https://github.
com/matthewdm0816/BridgeQA.

Generalization
Gap ~ 40%
Train Step

television
cabinet?

Q: What type of
cabinet is next to …?
A: television cabinet
3D Scene

a. Hard to Generalize Due to 3D Data Scarcity
Top-Down View

3D Scene

Q: Where is the
silver bread
toaster placed?

silver bread
toaster?

silver bread
toaster is there!

Our Semantic Related 2D View

b. Complex and Incomplete Top-Down View

Figure 1: Caveats of current 3D-VQA methods. (a). Current
3D-VQA methods exhibits large generalization gap due to
3D data scarcity. And there are questions with visual concepts that never appeared (e.g., “television cabinet”) in either question, answer or object type annotation during training, which are hard for 3D-VQA models to generalize to.
(b). Current 3D-VQA methods that explictly incorporate 2D
VLMs use top-down views of 3D scenes, which might be
too complex with many irrelative visual clues and might be
incomplete on relative visual clues for some questions. In
BridgeQA, we use question-related views instead, to capture visual context potentially relative to the question.

Introduction
The pursuit of better vision-language (VL) understanding in
AI has been relentless, with extensive research aimed at enabling models to see, read, and reason in response to multimodal inputs. This is particularly evident in the field of visual question answering (VQA), where models are trained
to interpret and respond to visual contents and questions (Li
et al. 2020; Tan and Bansal 2019; Yu et al. 2019; Anderson et al. 2018). However, the majority of VQA researches
have focused on 2D visual inputs such as images or videos,
leaving a gap in the understanding of real-world 3D scenes.
Recognizing the above limitation on understanding 3D inputs, 3D visual question answering (3D-VQA) has emerged
as a novel and essential type of 3D scene understanding task.
Recent proposals in ScanQA (Azuma et al. 2022) and SQA

(Ma et al. 2022) have gained increasing research interest, requiring the VQA model to comprehend the 3D scene rather
than planar pixels. Most 3D-VQA methods rely on a combination of a 3D object detector and a Transformer-based
vision-language fusion backbone to predict an answer.
Despite these advancements in incorporating 3D modality
in VQA, the current performance of 3D-VQA tasks remains
constrained, particularly in generalizing to novel 3D visual

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4261

