The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Protect Copyright Data in Optimization of Large Language Models?
Timothy Chu1 , Zhao Song2 , Chiwun Yang3
1

Google, Mountain View, CA
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA
3
Sun Yat-sen University, China
hungryTOAN@gmail.com, zsong@adobe.com, christiannyang37@gmail.com
2

Abstract

2023). Generative models trained on large corpora of data
can inadvertently generate outputs that are direct copies, or
close variants, of copyrighted text or images that the model
is trained on. Removing copyrighted material from training
may also be undesirable: while one can achieve good performance without using copyrighted data, the inclusion of such
data can significantly enhance the performance of generative
AI models. For example, incorporating literary works, which
are often copyrighted, into the training dataset of a language
model can enhance performance. Copyright infringement issues regarding outputs of generative AI have led to controversy in using it, and past researchers have considered models and theoretical frameworks for evaluating whether generative models are copying data, and how to evaluate and
avoid copyright issues that arise (Vyas, Kakade, and Barak
2023).
Our paper has two main contributions:

Large language models (LLMs) and generative AI have
played a transformative role in computer research and applications. Controversy has arisen as to whether these models output copyrighted data, which can occur if the data the
models are trained on is copyrighted. LLMs are built on the
transformer neural network architecture, which in turn relies
on a mathematical computation called Attention that uses the
softmax function.
In this paper, we observe that large language model training and optimization can be seen as a softmax regression
problem. We then establish a method of efficiently performing softmax regression, in a way that prevents the regression
function from generating copyright data. This establishes a
theoretical method of training large language models in a way
that avoids generating copyright data.

1

Introduction

1. We provide an approach for solving general regression
problems in a way that avoids generating copyright data.
We term this approach copyright regression.
2. We show how to protect copyright data in the optimization and training of transformer-based architectures (including most large language models), by finding an algorithm to solve copyright regression for the softmax function.

Large language models have changed the world, with the
rise of generative AI models such as ChatGPT, GPT-4,
Llama, BERT, BARD, PaLM, and OPT (ChatGPT 2022;
Bubeck et al. 2023; Devlin et al. 2018; Touvron et al.
2023b,a; BARD 2023; Chowdhery et al. 2022; Anil et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2022). These models are able to process natural language effectively, handling a wide range
of tasks including story generation, code creation, machine
translation, and elementary mathematical problem solving
(Brown et al. 2020; Svyatkovskiy et al. 2020; Wu et al.
2016; Wei et al. 2022). One core component in the large
language model is the transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al. 2017), which is built on a computational step known
as attention. Transformers have been used in a wide variety
of tasks outside of large language models, including generative image systems such as DALL-E (Research 2021) and
DALL-E2 (Research 2022). Recent research has integrated
the transformer architecture with scalable diffusion-based
image generation models (Bao et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2023a; Han et al. 2022; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020).
Once challenge in generative AI is guaranteeing that outputs are protected from copyright infringement and intellectual property issues (Hattenbach and Glucoft 2015; Hristov
2016; Sag 2018; Gillotte 2019; Vyas, Kakade, and Barak

Solving the copyright regression problem for the softmax
function is the key technical contribution of our paper. To
establish the copyright regression framework, we provide a
new optimization objective for a general regression problem
where some outputs are copyrighted. Such a case can arise
when regression outputs are images or sentences, which occurs in transformer-based architectures for language generation and image generation. We also review literature linking
the softmax regression problem to the training of transformers.
To find an algorithm for solving copyright regression for
the softmax function, we used an approach based on convex optimization and gradient descent. We show that the objective function of the softmax copyright regression is convex, and that its Hessian is bounded. Showing this convexity
is non-trivial, and requires intricate bounding of key matrix
and vector quantities that arise in the softmax copyright regression problem. Establishing convexity and the bounded

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17871

