The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FairWASP: Fast and Optimal Fair Wasserstein Pre-processing
Zikai Xiong1 , Niccolò Dalmasso2, * , Alan Mishler2 ,
Vamsi K. Potluru2 , Tucker Balch2 , Manuela Veloso2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
J.P. Morgan AI Research, New York
zikai@mit.edu, {niccolo.dalmasso, first.last}@jpmchase.com

Abstract

on the training data, (ii) in-processing methods apply constraints or regularizers during the model training process itself, and (iii) post-processing methods alter the outputs of
previously trained models. See Hort et al. (2022) for a recent review of methods across all three categories.
Among these three, no one category of methods clearly
dominates the others in terms of performance. Preprocessing methods are useful when the person who generates or maintains a dataset is not the same as the person who will be using it to train a model (Feldman et al.
2015), or when a dataset may be used to train multiple models. These methods typically require no knowledge of downstream models, so they are in principle compatible with any
subsequent machine learning procedure.
Many pre-processing methods operate by changing the
feature values or labels of the training data (Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy 2009; Žliobaite, Kamiran, and Calders
2011), subsampling or oversampling the data (Kamiran and
Calders 2010; Yan, Kao, and Ferrara 2020; Chakraborty,
Majumder, and Menzies 2021; Salazar et al. 2021), and/or
generating synthetic data (Xu et al. 2018; Salimi et al. 2019).
In high-stakes settings such as finance and healthcare, however, it may be unethical or even illegal to alter customer
or patient attributes or labels, e.g. with current data regulations in the European Union (GDPR) or health information (HIPAA) in the United States. Maintaining separate,
modified versions of datasets is possible but may be costly
for large datasets. An alternative is to learn a set of sample
weights that can be passed to a learning method at training
time (Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy 2009; Chai and
Wang 2022; Jiang and Nachum 2020; Li and Liu 2022).
While there are many methods that do this, they focus on
satisfying fairness constraints without providing guarantees
about how much they alter the distribution of the data.

Recent years have seen a surge of machine learning approaches aimed at reducing disparities in model outputs
across different subgroups. In many settings, training data
may be used in multiple downstream applications by different
users, which means it may be most effective to intervene on
the training data itself. In this work, we present FairWASP,
a novel pre-processing approach designed to reduce disparities in classification datasets without modifying the original data. FairWASP returns sample-level weights such that
the reweighted dataset minimizes the Wasserstein distance
to the original dataset while satisfying (an empirical version
of) demographic parity, a popular fairness criterion. We show
theoretically that integer weights are optimal, which means
our method can be equivalently understood as duplicating
or eliminating samples. FairWASP can therefore be used to
construct datasets which can be fed into any classification
method, not just methods which accept sample weights. Our
work is based on reformulating the pre-processing task as a
large-scale mixed-integer program (MIP), for which we propose a highly efficient algorithm based on the cutting plane
method. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed optimization algorithm significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
commercial solvers in solving both the MIP and its linear program relaxation. Further experiments highlight the competitive performance of FairWASP in reducing disparities while
preserving accuracy in downstream classification settings.

Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly involved in decision making that impacts people’s lives (Sloane, Moss, and Chowdhury 2022; Zhang et al. 2022). There is concern that models may inherit from the data bias against subgroups defined
by race, gender, or other protected characteristics. Accordingly, there is a vast literature on methods to make machine
learning models “fair.” While there is no consensus about
what it means for a model to be fair or unfair in a given
setting, these methods commonly aim to minimize disparities in model outputs or model performance across different
subgroups.
Fair machine learning methods are traditionally divided
into three categories: (i) pre-processing methods intervene

Contributions We present FairWASP, a novel preprocessing method that learns a set of sample weights for
classification datasets without modifying the training data.
FairWASP minimizes the Wasserstein distance between the
original and reweighted datasets while ensuring that the
reweighted dataset satisfies (an empirical version of) demographic parity, a popular fairness criterion, which we detail
in Section . Our contributions are as follows:

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Since directly solving the target optimization problem is

16120

