The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ColNeRF: Collaboration for Generalizable Sparse Input Neural Radiance Field
Zhangkai Ni1 , Peiqi Yang1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Hanli Wang1 * , Lin Ma3 , Sam Kwong4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Meituan, China
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{zkni, 2233007, hanliwang}@tongji.edu.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, forest.linma@gmail.com, cssamk@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have demonstrated impressive potential in synthesizing novel views from dense input,
however, their effectiveness is challenged when dealing with
sparse input. Existing approaches that incorporate additional
depth or semantic supervision can alleviate this issue to an
extent. However, the process of supervision collection is not
only costly but also potentially inaccurate. In our work, we
introduce a novel model: the Collaborative Neural Radiance
Fields (ColNeRF) designed to work with sparse input. The
collaboration in ColNeRF includes the cooperation among
sparse input source images and the cooperation among the
output of the NeRF. Through this, we construct a novel collaborative module that aligns information from various views
and meanwhile imposes self-supervised constraints to ensure multi-view consistency in both geometry and appearance. A Collaborative Cross-View Volume Integration module (CCVI) is proposed to capture complex occlusions and
implicitly infer the spatial location of objects. Moreover, we
introduce self-supervision of target rays projected in multiple
directions to ensure geometric and color consistency in adjacent regions. Benefiting from the collaboration at the input
and output ends, ColNeRF is capable of capturing richer and
more generalized scene representation, thereby facilitating
higher-quality results of the novel view synthesis. Our extensive experimental results demonstrate that ColNeRF outperforms state-of-the-art sparse input generalizable NeRF methods. Furthermore, our approach exhibits superiority in finetuning towards adapting to new scenes, achieving competitive
performance compared to per-scene optimized NeRF-based
methods while significantly reducing computational costs.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/eezkni/ColNeRF.

Figure 1: Comparing previous approaches (a), (b) with
our method (c): Previous approaches heavily depend on a
learned neural radiance field (Fθ ) for synthesis. However,
these approaches result in undesirable outcomes with limited
utilization of source view features and their interrelationships. ColNeRF leverages collaboration at both input and
output ends, providing richer supervision for training Fθ .
value of a target pixel is then rendered by accumulating radiance from N sampled points along the target ray.
The excellent performance of NeRF comes with a price,
i.e. with a large amount of high-quality input source images
used for training. However, acquiring a substantial number of RGB images along with their corresponding accurate
camera parameters necessitates a complex process of calibrating. In real-world scenarios, not only is this difficult to
execute, but the accuracy of the results obtained is questionable. In scenarios where input images are limited, the novel
view results generated by NeRF are degraded due to the lack
of dense supervision. Moreover, the optimization of NeRF
is typically conducted independently for each scene, resulting in notable time inefficiency. Significant research efforts
have been put into addressing these issues. An intuitive strategy to improve geometric accuracy of sparse input NeRF is
by supervising the generated density values σ for sampled
points. However, obtaining ground truth for all these points
is unfeasible. An alternative strategy involves incorporating

Introduction
Novel view synthesis aims to generate new view images of
a scene based on a set of source images (Zhu, Xie, and Fang
2018). A prominent technique in this field is the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021), which learns
an implicit neural representation of the scene. NeRF takes a
5D vector as input, comprising a 3D location x = (x, y, z)
and a 2D viewing direction d = (θ, ϕ) for each point, and
estimates the corresponding radiance value (c, σ). The RGB
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4325

