The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BCLNet: Bilateral Consensus Learning for Two-View Correspondence Pruning
Xiangyang Miao1, 2 , Guobao Xiao1∗ , Shiping Wang2 , Jun Yu3
1

School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University,
2
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University,
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University
mxyttkx@163.com, x-gb@163.com, shipingwangphd@163.com, yujun@hdu.edu.cn

Neighbors in feature space

Plausible global models

Abstract
Correspondence pruning aims to establish reliable correspondences between two related images and recover relative camera motion. Existing approaches often employ a progressive
strategy to handle the local and global contexts, with a prominent emphasis on transitioning from local to global, resulting
in the neglect of interactions between different contexts. To
tackle this issue, we propose a parallel context learning strategy that involves acquiring bilateral consensus for the twoview correspondence pruning task. In our approach, we design a distinctive self-attention block to capture global context and parallel process it with the established local context
learning module, which enables us to simultaneously capture
both local and global consensuses. By combining these local and global consensuses, we derive the required bilateral
consensus. We also design a recalibration block, reducing the
influence of erroneous consensus information and enhancing
the robustness of the model. The culmination of our efforts is
the Bilateral Consensus Learning Network (BCLNet), which
efficiently estimates camera pose and identifies inliers (true
correspondences). Extensive experiments results demonstrate
that our network not only surpasses state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets but also showcases robust generalization abilities across various feature extraction techniques.
Noteworthily, BCLNet obtains significant improvement gains over the second best method on unknown outdoor dataset,
and obviously accelerates model training speed.

…
(a)

(c)

(b)
Bilateral Consensus

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Bilateral consensus acquisition process. Both local and global contexts are inevitably affected by outliers, neglecting the interaction between them tends to exacerbate the propagation of erroneous information. There may
be multiple models in the network that satisfy global constraints (a) and (b). Neighbors based on k-nearest neighbor
search also contain many outliers (c). Given a set of putative
correspondences (d), we adopt existing blocks and the designed BCMA block (e) to extract local and global consensuses, respectively. Subsequently, we facilitate their interaction to achieve bilateral consensus, which ultimately generates the network’s prediction (f). The red lines represent
outliers, green lines represent inliers, and blue represents selected correspondences.

Introduction
Accurate two-view correspondences play a pivotal role
in various computer vision applications, including stereo
matching (Yao et al. 2021), simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) (Kazerouni et al. 2022), and structure
from motion (Xiao et al. 2021), etc. Standard sparse matching pipeline relies on off-the-shelf methods (SIFT (Lowe
2004) or Superpoint (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich
2018)) to establish initial correspondences. However, these
initial correspondences often harbor a considerable number
of outliers (false correspondences) due to the intricate image
variations (Jin et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2021), such as illumination changes, repeated textures, image blurs and occlusions. Therefore, to alleviate the repercussions on downstream

tasks, the incorporation of a correspondence pruning algorithm emerges as an indispensable stride.
Existing correspondence pruning algorithms can currently be categorized into two classes: traditional and
learning-based algorithms. Among traditional algorithms,
RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981) and its diverse adaptations (Chum and Matas 2005; Barath, Matas, and Noskova
2019; Torr and Zisserman 2000; Torr and Bishop 2002) are
the most popular ones, which primarily rely on a generateand-verify strategy. Although they demonstrate promising
results on specific tasks, their theoretical execution time
tends to experience exponential growth as the proportion of
outliers increases (Zheng et al. 2022).
Fortunately, the advancement of deep learning offers a
novel solution for the correspondence pruning task. Following the pioneering work LFGC (Yi et al. 2018), learning-

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4225

