The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Balanced Alignment: Modal-Enhanced Semantic Modeling
for Video Moment Retrieval
Zhihang Liu1 , Jun Li2 , Hongtao Xie1 * , Pandeng Li1 ,
Jiannan Ge1 , Sun-Ao Liu1 , Guoqing Jin2
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
People’s Daily Online
{liuzhihang, lpd, gejn, lsa1997}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, htxie@ustc.edu.cn, {lijun, jinguoqing}@people.cn
Abstract

3

4

5

6

Frames:

Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) aims to retrieve temporal
segments in untrimmed videos corresponding to a given language query by constructing cross-modal alignment strategies. However, these existing strategies are often sub-optimal
since they ignore the modality imbalance problem, i.e., the
semantic richness inherent in videos far exceeds that of a
given limited-length sentence. Therefore, in pursuit of better alignment, a natural idea is enhancing the video modality to filter out query-irrelevant semantics, and enhancing the
text modality to capture more segment-relevant knowledge.
In this paper, we introduce Modal-Enhanced Semantic Modeling (MESM), a novel framework for more balanced alignment through enhancing features at two levels. First, we enhance the video modality at the frame-word level through
word reconstruction. This strategy emphasizes the portions
associated with query words in frame-level features while
suppressing irrelevant parts. Therefore, the enhanced video
contains less redundant semantics and is more balanced with
the textual modality. Second, we enhance the textual modality at the segment-sentence level by learning complementary knowledge from context sentences and ground-truth segments. With the knowledge added to the query, the textual
modality thus maintains more meaningful semantics and is
more balanced with the video modality. By implementing two
levels of MESM, the semantic information from both modalities is more balanced to align, thereby bridging the modality
gap. Experiments on three widely used benchmarks, including the out-of-distribution settings, show that the proposed
framework achieves a new start-of-the-art performance with
notable generalization ability (e.g., 4.42% and 7.69% average
gains of R1@0.7 on Charades-STA and Charades-CG). The
code will be available at https://github.com/lntzm/MESM.

Direct alignment
Balanced alignment

Words:

Person then stands up.

(a) Frame-word level

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Segments:

Sentences:

A person awakens
in the sofa.

Direct alignment
Balanced alignment

Person then
stands up.

Person takes
some medicine.

Missing examples:

from the sofa, and turn around, …

(b) Segment-sentence level

Figure 1: We creatively analyze the modality imbalance
problem in VMR and the comparison between existing direct alignment and our balanced alignment, which manifests in two levels: (a) Frame-word level, the description of
a word should typically align with specific parts within a
frame (balanced) rather than the entire frame (direct). (b)
Segment-sentence level, there is some semantic information
in the segment but absent in the given sentence. The segment
should typically align with the expanded sentence semantics
(balanced) rather than the sentence only (direct).

Modality alignment in existing VMR methods is primarily implemented at two distinct levels. Some previous studies (Li, Guo, and Wang 2021; Liu et al. 2022a) align framelevel and word-level features, devising efficient alignment
strategies to accurately regress the moments. Another line
of methods (Chen and Jiang 2019; Wang et al. 2022) generates proposals to extract segment-level features, aligning them with sentence-level features to identify the most
matching segment as the answer. There are also some methods considering both the frame-word and segment-sentence
level (Wang et al. 2021; Moon et al. 2023). Normally, they
first align frame-level and word-level features, then pool the
segments for further alignment and moment retrieval.
Despite the achievements of existing alignment strategies,

Introduction
Video moment retrieval (VMR) poses a meaningful and
challenging task in video understanding. Given a natural
language query that describes a moment segment in an
untrimmed video, VMR aims to determine the start and end
timestamps of the segment in the video (Anne Hendricks
et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017). Therefore, it necessitates an
accurate understanding of both the video content and the
language query, as well as their alignment (Li et al. 2023b).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3855

