The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving GNN Calibration with Discriminative Ability: Insights and Strategies
Yujie Fang1 , Xin Li* 1 , Qianyu Chen1 , Mingzhong Wang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
University of the Sunshine Coast
{fangyujie,xinli,qychen}@bit.edu.cn, mwang@usc.edu.au
2

Abstract
The widespread adoption of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
has led to an increasing focus on their reliability. To address the issue of underconfidence in GNNs, various calibration methods have been developed to gain notable reductions
in calibration error. However, we observe that existing approaches generally fail to enhance consistently, and in some
cases even deteriorate, GNNs’ ability to discriminate between
correct and incorrect predictions. In this study, we advocate
the significance of discriminative ability and the inclusion
of relevant evaluation metrics. Our rationale is twofold: 1)
Overlooking discriminative ability can inadvertently compromise the overall quality of the model; 2) Leveraging discriminative ability can significantly inform and improve calibration outcomes. Therefore, we thoroughly explore the reasons why existing calibration methods have ineffectiveness
and even degradation regarding the discriminative ability of
GNNs. Building upon these insights, we conduct GNN calibration experiments across multiple datasets using a straightforward example model, denoted as DC(GNN). Its excellent
performance confirms the potential of integrating discriminative ability as a key consideration in the calibration of GNNs,
thereby establishing a pathway toward more effective and reliable network calibration.

Figure 1: (a) presents the original model. The diagonal line
indicates perfect calibration. Green for correct, red for incorrect; numbers indicate sample counts. (b), (c) and (d) showcase three different perfect calibration results with the same
accuracy. Although they all achieve 0 calibration error, they
exhibit different discriminative abilities between correct and
incorrect predictions.

While traditional calibration evaluation metrics, such as
ECE (Expected Calibration Error), may suggest good calibration results by these methods, they assume that wellcalibrated confidence should accurately reflect the likelihood of correctness (DeGroot and Fienberg 1983). However,
this assumption might not always be sufficient for evaluating
a calibration model. As shown in Fig. 1, all three calibration
methods can reduce the ECE to 0 while keeping the same
classification accuracy, even though they have different discriminative abilities between correct and incorrect predictions: steady in (b), decreased in (c), and improved in (d).
Therefore, we argue that an effective calibration should
also prioritize enhancing the discriminative ability in predictions, thus ensuring better alignment between confidence
and accuracy. In essence, we propose that a good calibration
model should strive to achieve two goals: reduce calibration
error while simultaneously improving discriminative ability.
Given that AUROC (Area Under the Receiver Operating
Characteristic) is a common measure of discriminative ability, we conducted an empirical study to evaluate existing
GNN calibration methods for their calibration and discrimi-

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a popular
choice across various domains due to the ubiquitous presence of graph data and their exceptional performance. As
GNNs gain increasing applications in safety-critical fields,
such as autonomous driving (Weng et al. 2020), healthcare (Wang et al. 2023), and finance (Wang et al. 2022), their
reliability has become a major concern. Contrary to the overconfidence issue in predictions made by conventional deep
learning models, (Wang et al. 2021; Hsu et al. 2022) reveal
that GNNs tend to exhibit a noteworthy trend of underconfidence. To address the issue of underconfidence in GNNs,
primarily two strategies have been proposed to calibrate
GNNs. One strategy integrates calibration-related loss functions into the training phase of GNNs, while another strategy
adopts post-hoc (or post-processing) calibration techniques,
applying them after GNNs have been trained.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11953

