The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MGQFormer: Mask-Guided Query-Based Transformer
for Image Manipulation Localization
Kunlun Zeng* , Ri Cheng* , Weimin Tan† , Bo Yan†
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
klceng22@m.fudan.edu.cn, rcheng22@m.fudan.edu.cn, wmtan@fudan.edu.cn, byan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning-based models have made great progress in image tampering localization, which aims to distinguish between manipulated and authentic regions. However, these
models suffer from inefficient training. This is because they
use ground-truth mask labels mainly through the crossentropy loss, which prioritizes per-pixel precision but disregards the spatial location and shape details of manipulated
regions. To address this problem, we propose a Mask-Guided
Query-based Transformer Framework (MGQFormer), which
uses ground-truth masks to guide the learnable query token
(LQT) in identifying the forged regions. Specifically, we extract feature embeddings of ground-truth masks as the guiding query token (GQT) and feed GQT and LQT into MGQFormer to estimate fake regions, respectively. Then we make
MGQFormer learn the position and shape information in
ground-truth mask labels by proposing a mask-guided loss to
reduce the feature distance between GQT and LQT. We also
observe that such mask-guided training strategy has a significant impact on the convergence speed of MGQFormer training. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks show
that our method significantly improves over state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1: The difference between previous methods and
ours. Our method uses a query-based transformer which is
efficient and explainable. Token similarity means the softmax result of the scalar product between the image feature
and query tokens. In addition, we use ground-truth masks to
guide the learnable query token (LQT) in identifying the authentic and forged regions.

Introduction
Digital image manipulation risk has become more serious in
recent years due to advances in deep generative models and
editing techniques. An increasing number of image processing applications are emerging and easily accessible to produce tampered images in a visually imperceptible way. Traditional local image editing method including copy-move,
splicing, and removal, as a currently common forgery category, requires meticulous and skillful processing. Recent
deep generative models, such as GAN (Goodfellow et al.
2020) and diffusion (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) models,
can generate realistic false contents in designated areas or
use language prompts to modify image semantics and style.
As a result, these manipulated images cause various social
security issues and can mislead the public. Consequently, it
is a realistic requirement to develop a reliable model to accurately locate the manipulated region.

Despite significant advancements that have been made,
existing image manipulation localization networks suffer
from two shortcomings that lead to poor performance. First,
these methods employ the convolutional neural network
(CNN) in the final decoder process to classify the per-pixel
feature (Lin et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021), as shown in Figure 1 (a). However, the local receptive field property of convolution filters restricts access to global information in the
image. To address this problem, we propose using a querybased transformer for the image manipulation localization
task. Figure 1 (b) shows that the query-based single-stage
method utilizes learnable query tokens (LQT) to select pixel
embeddings that are highly similar to itself, which makes
network processes more explainable and effectively exploits

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Bo Yan, Weimin Tan.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6944

