The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QDETRv: Query-Guided DETR for One-Shot Object Localization in Videos
Yogesh Kumar1 , Saswat Mallick1 , Anand Mishra1 , Sowmya Rasipuram2 ,
Anutosh Maitra2 , Roshni Ramnani2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India
2
Accenture Labs
kumar.204@iitj.ac.in, saswatsubhajyotimallick@gmail.com, mishra@iitj.ac.in,
{sowmya.rasipuram, anutosh.maitra, roshni.r.ramnani}@accenture.com
Abstract

Query Image

In this work, we study one-shot video object localization
problem that aims to localize instances of unseen objects in
the target video using a single query image of the object. Toward addressing this challenging problem, we extend a popular and successful object detection method, namely DETR
(Detection Transformer), and introduce a novel approach –
query-guided detection transformer for videos (QDETRv). A
distinctive feature of QDETRv is its capacity to exploit information from the query image and spatio-temporal context of the target video, which significantly aids in precisely
pinpointing the desired object in the video. We incorporate
cross-attention mechanisms that capture temporal relationships across adjacent frames to handle the dynamic context
in videos effectively. Further, to ensure strong initialization
for QDETRv, we also introduce a novel unsupervised pretraining technique tailored to videos. This involves training
our model on synthetic object trajectories with an analogous
objective as the query-guided localization task. During this
pretraining phase, we incorporate recurrent object queries
and loss functions that encourage accurate patch feature reconstruction. These additions enable better temporal understanding and robust representation learning. Our experiments
show that the proposed model significantly outperforms the
competitive baselines on two public benchmarks, VidOR and
ImageNet-VidVRD, extended for one-shot open-set localization tasks.

Target Video

Input

Output

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed task. Given an unseen
query image and a target video, the model is expected to
localize all instances of objects present in the query image
on the target video. [Best viewed in color].

pinpoint unfamiliar objects in the video that were not encountered during the training phase and unexpectedly appeared during testing. This is particularly relevant in various
application areas, including surveillance systems and industrial automation. We illustrate our open-set one-shot object
localization goal in Figure 1.
To address the challenge posed by open-set one-shot object localization, our goal is to develop a model that, once
trained, can localize any object query that might arise unexpectedly during testing. As noted in some of the recent
works (Hsieh et al. 2019a; Osokin, Sumin, and Lomakin
2020), such a model should maintain its class-agnostic nature even during the training process. Our requisites, distinct
from approaches, necessitate prior access to the list of category names during both training and testing (Fan, Tang, and
Tai 2022; Du et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2023). To this end,
we extend a popular and successful object detection method,
namely DETR (Detection Transformer) (Carion et al. 2020),
and introduce a novel query-guided detection transformer
for videos – QDETRv. The QDETRv leverages the visual
representation of the query image to better localize the target
object in the video frames. To handle the temporal context
in videos, we incorporate cross-attention that captures information from neighboring frames of the video. The key and
value matrices of the cross-attention are obtained from the
contextual and target frames, and the query matrix is derived
from the query image. The cross-attention operation pro-

Introduction
The field of computer vision has long been engaged in the
pursuit of localizing objects of interest within videos. In the
past, the primary emphasis has been localizing the specified object within a single frame on the entire video (Sivic
and Zisserman 2003). Additionally, efforts have been made
towards recognizing individuals based on their facial features (Sivic, Everingham, and Zisserman 2005) or clothing characteristics (Brunelli and Falavigna 1995). In a more
novel direction, some research has explored using natural
language or sketch-based queries to precisely locate objects within images (Minderer et al. 2022; Sadhu, Chen, and
Nevatia 2019; Kumar and Mishra 2023; Tripathi et al. 2020,
2023). As visual comprehension continues to advance, there
is a need for localization methodologies that can effectively
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2831

