The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

XKD: Cross-Modal Knowledge Distillation with Domain Alignment for Video
Representation Learning
Pritam Sarkar1, 2 , Ali Etemad1
1

Queen’s University, Canada
2
Vector Institute
{pritam.sarkar, ali.etemad}@queensu.ca

Abstract
We present XKD, a novel self-supervised framework to learn
meaningful representations from unlabelled videos. XKD is
trained with two pseudo objectives. First, masked data reconstruction is performed to learn modality-specific representations from audio and visual streams. Next, self-supervised
cross-modal knowledge distillation is performed between the
two modalities through a teacher-student setup to learn complementary information. We introduce a novel domain alignment
strategy to tackle domain discrepancy between audio and visual modalities enabling effective cross-modal knowledge distillation. Additionally, to develop a general-purpose network
capable of handling both audio and visual streams, modalityagnostic variants of XKD are introduced, which use the same
pretrained backbone for different audio and visual tasks. Our
proposed cross-modal knowledge distillation improves video
action classification by 8% to 14% on UCF101, HMDB51,
and Kinetics400. Additionally, XKD improves multimodal
action classification by 5.5% on Kinetics-Sound. XKD shows
state-of-the-art performance in sound classification on ESC50,
achieving top-1 accuracy of 96.5%.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning aims to learn meaningful representations from unlabelled data with no human supervision (Chen
et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021; Misra and Maaten 2020;
Grill et al. 2020; He et al. 2021). Using self-supervision, recent multimodal methods (Morgado, Vasconcelos, and Misra
2021; Alwassel et al. 2020; Morgado, Misra, and Vasconcelos 2021; Min et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2020; Sarkar and Etemad
2023) have shown great promise in learning effective representations from videos. In general, multimodal frameworks
leverage the existing information in multiple data streams
to learn better representations for downstream tasks toward
either modality (or all). Recent audio-visual frameworks aim
to perform information sharing between networks to further enrich the learned representations (Afouras, Chung, and
Zisserman 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Ren et al. 2021; Aytar,
Vondrick, and Torralba 2016; Albanie et al. 2018). However,
effective knowledge sharing between audio and video is particularly challenging due to the inherent diversity, complexity,
and domain-specific nature of each modality, as well as the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14875

existence of substantial domain gaps between them (Ren et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021).
In this work, we aim to perform effective information
sharing between audio and video streams to obtain more generalized representations for downstream tasks. To this end,
we propose a novel self-supervised framework called XKD,
which stands for Cross-modal Knowledge Distillation. Our
approach consists of two sets of pseudo-tasks, (i) masked data
modelling and (ii) cross-modal knowledge distillation. The
former is performed to learn modality-specific (MS) information, while the latter distills and transfers knowledge across
modalities to further enrich the learned representations. To
allow for stable and effective information exchange between
modalities, we introduce a domain alignment strategy. The
proposed strategy involves 2 steps (i) feature refinement that
identifies ‘what to transfer’ based on cross-modal feature
relevance and (ii) minimizing domain discrepancy to align
the two representations. Additionally, we introduce modalityagnostic (MA) variants of our method to tackle the challenging task of learning from both modalities using a unified
network (shared backbone). Modality-agnostic methods are
particularly useful given their ability to accept different data
streams and solve a variety of tasks using the same backbone.
Moreover, they ease the challenge of designing individual
models for each modality, thus attracting attention in recent
studies (Girdhar et al. 2022, 2023; Akbari et al. 2021).
Inspired by the recent success of Transformers in different domains (Devlin et al. 2018; Gong, Chung, and Glass
2021a; He et al. 2021; Feichtenhofer et al. 2022), we use ViT
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) as the backbone of our framework
for both audio and visual modalities. We use the 3 different sizes of datasets to pretrain the framework, including
AudioSet, Kinetics400, and Kinetics-Sound. The pretrained
backbones are then evaluated on multiple datasets on a variety
of downstream tasks. More specifically, UCF101, HMDB51,
and Kinetics400 are used for video-related tasks; ESC50 and
FSD50K are used for audio-related tasks; and Kinetics-Sound
is used for multimodal evaluation.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We introduce XKD, a self-supervised framework for video
representation learning, which uses a novel domain alignment strategy to enable self-supervised cross-modal knowledge distillation between audio and video as two heterogeneous modalities. The proposed domain alignment strategy

