The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sketch and Refine: Towards Fast and Accurate Lane Detection
Chao Chen, Jie Liu* , Chang Zhou, Jie Tang, Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{chenchao, zhouchang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {liujie,tangjie,gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

located first and then heuristically integrated into continuous lane instances via local descriptors. Local descriptors
are compact representations of local image characteristics,
including semantic ones like deep feature embedding (Ko
et al. 2021), and geometric ones like spatial offsets to adjacent keypoints (Qu et al. 2021) (See Fig. 1(a)). Despite their
flexibility to describe a variety of lane shapes, the integration
procedure complicates the pipeline and causes additive errors. Besides, these methods face difficulty predicting more
lane-level attributes, such as lane type.
Alternatively, proposal-based methods rely on proposals
to aggregate relevant features and model global geometry directly. Proposals here refer to a group of class-agnostic candidates likely to be lanes. Taking proposals as input, there
is usually a classifier to distinguish between positive and
negative samples and a locator to predict shapes. Benefiting from the end-to-end pipeline, these methods are simpler to design and implement. However, the demand for
high-quality proposals leaves them in a dilemma between
efficiency and adaptability. Typically, sparse proposals are
computationally efficient but have limited fitting ability,
while dense proposals offer better fitting ability but can be
more computationally expensive (Qin, Zhang, and Li 2022).
Some anchor-based methods (Li et al. 2019; Tabelini et al.
2021a) introduce anchors as references to build proposals
(See Fig. 1(b)). To guarantee the detection qualities, they
preset hundreds of thousands of anchors to cover underlying lanes, which results in high redundancy and complexity and hinders their applications on resource-constrained
hardware. For a trade-off between performance and inference speed, some methods (Qin, Wang, and Li 2020) arrange
varying amounts of anchors to different datasets, which involves more laborious processes, while the inherent problem
remains untouched.
In this paper, we seek to develop an efficient and effective lane detector by incorporating the characteristics of both
paradigms. As demonstrated in (Qu et al. 2021), local lane
markers are easier to predict than global lanes because of
their limited geometric variations and spatial coverage. This
raises a question: can we leverage cheap local descriptors
to build complex global lane proposals? We empirically observe that lanes in the front view exhibit certain geometric
consistency, e.g., limited variation in lane slope within a
local region. It implies that keypoints of a lane are likely

Lane detection is to determine the precise location and shape
of lanes on the road. Despite efforts made by current methods, it remains a challenging task due to the complexity of
real-world scenarios. Existing approaches, whether proposalbased or keypoint-based, suffer from depicting lanes effectively and efficiently. Proposal-based methods detect lanes
by distinguishing and regressing a collection of proposals
in a streamlined top-down way, yet lack sufficient flexibility in lane representation. Keypoint-based methods, on the
other hand, construct lanes flexibly from local descriptors,
which typically entail complicated post-processing. In this
paper, we present a “Sketch-and-Refine” paradigm that utilizes the merits of both keypoint-based and proposal-based
methods. The motivation is that local directions of lanes are
semantically simple and clear. At the “Sketch” stage, local directions of keypoints can be easily estimated by fast
convolutional layers. Then we can build a set of lane proposals accordingly with moderate accuracy. At the “Refine”
stage, we further optimize these proposals via a novel Lane
Segment Association Module (LSAM), which allows adaptive lane segment adjustment. Last but not least, we propose
multi-level feature integration to enrich lane feature representations more efficiently. Based on the proposed “Sketchand-Refine” paradigm, we propose a fast yet effective lane
detector dubbed “SRLane”. Experiments show that our SRLane can run at a fast speed (i.e., 278 FPS) while yielding an F1 score of 78.9%. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/passerer/SRLane.

Introduction
Lane detection is a core part of an autonomous driving system that aims to depict the exact shape of each lane on the
road. It has advanced thanks to the prosperity of convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Pan et al. 2018; Li et al.
2019). Prevailing solutions for lane detection can be broadly
divided into two streams: keypoint-based methods (Qu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022) and proposal-based methods (Feng
et al. 2022; Tabelini et al. 2021a). Keypoint-based methods reduce lane detection into two steps: discrete keypoints
detection and association. That is, keypoints on lanes are
* Corresponding author. liujie@nju.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1001

