The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LGMRec: Local and Global Graph Learning for Multimodal Recommendation
Zhiqiang Guo1 , Jianjun Li1 * , Guohui Li2 * , Chaoyang Wang3 , Si Shi4 , Bin Ruan1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
3
Wuhan Digital Engineering Institute, Wuhan, China
4
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
{zhiqiangguo, jianjunli, guohuili}@hust.edu.cn, sunwardtree@outlook.com, shisi@gml.ac.cn, binruan0227@gmail.com
Abstract

I-ID
ID

U-ID

Collaborative
Model

ID

I-T
Text

Multimodal
Model

Optimization

The multimodal recommendation has gradually become the
infrastructure of online media platforms, enabling them to
provide personalized service to users through a joint modeling of user historical behaviors (e.g., purchases, clicks) and
item various modalities (e.g., visual and textual). The majority of existing studies typically focus on utilizing modal
features or modal-related graph structure to learn user local
interests. Nevertheless, these approaches encounter two limitations: (1) Shared updates of user ID embeddings result in
the consequential coupling between collaboration and multimodal signals; (2) Lack of exploration into robust global user
interests to alleviate the sparse interaction problems faced by
local interest modeling. To address these issues, we propose a
novel Local and Global Graph Learning-guided Multimodal
Recommender (LGMRec), which jointly models local and
global user interests. Specifically, we present a local graph
embedding module to independently learn collaborativerelated and modality-related embeddings of users and items
with local topological relations. Moreover, a global hypergraph embedding module is designed to capture global user
and item embeddings by modeling insightful global dependency relations. The global embeddings acquired within the
hypergraph embedding space can then be combined with two
decoupled local embeddings to improve the accuracy and robustness of recommendations. Extensive experiments conducted on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our LGMRec over various state-of-the-art recommendation baselines, showcasing its effectiveness in modeling both local and global user interests.

I-V
Image

(a) Sharing of user ID embeddings

(b) Gradient comparison
color
style
shape

(c) Local user-item interaction graph

....

....

common
attributes

item
visual space

(d) Global dependencies

Figure 1: Illustrations of (a) sharing of user ID embeddings,
(b) the gradient comparison of user ID embeddings updated
from different models during training, (c) local user-item interaction graph, and (d) global dependencies between users
and attributions. Darker lines indicate greater user interest.
and McAuley 2016; Liu, Wu, and Wang 2017; Wei et al.
2021) or the attention mechanism on item modalities (Chen
et al. 2017, 2019; Liu et al. 2019) to model representations
of users and items. However, The efficacy of these models is somewhat constrained as they only model low-order
user-item interactions. The surge of research on graph-based
recommendations (Wang et al. 2019; He et al. 2020; Mao
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021) has sparked a wave of explorations in using graph neural networks (GNN) to enhance
multimodal recommendations. These works typically capture higher-order user interests from the user-item graph that
integrates multimodal contents (Wei et al. 2019, 2020; Wang
et al. 2021; Yi et al. 2022; Tao et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2023),
or construct modality-aware auxiliary graph structures to
transfer multimodal knowledge into item and user embeddings (Zhang et al. 2021, 2022a; Zhou et al. 2023).
Though achieving remarkable progress, existing studies
on MRSs still suffer from the following two limitations in
modeling user interests. (1) Coupling. Firstly, collabora-

Introduction
With the explosive growth of massive multimedia information (e.g., images, texts, and videos) on online media platforms, such as YouTube and Tiktok, a lot of efforts have
been devoted to multimodal recommender systems (MRSs)
to assist these platforms in providing personalized services
to users. Nowadays, the primary task of MRSs is to design
an effective way to integrate item multimodal information
into traditional user-item interaction modeling frameworks
to capture comprehensive user interests.
Some early studies on MRSs adopt either the linear fusion
between item modal features and their ID embeddings (He
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8454

