The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Would You Like Your Data to Be Trained?
A User Controllable Recommendation Framework
Lei Wang1 , Xu Chen1,2 * , Zhenhua Dong3 , Quanyu Dai3
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
wanglei154@ruc.edu.cn, xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn, dongzhenhua@huawei.com, daiquanyu@huawei.com
2

Abstract

and a female user may purchase items for others that are
not indicative of her own preferences. In such cases, users
may prefer that these irrelevant items not be used for training the model. This motivates the need for a recommender
system that allows users to actively indicate their willingness
regarding which items should be leveraged for training.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel, usercontrollable recommendation paradigm. In this paradigm,
each user specifies a willingness vector, which indicates
their preference for excluding certain items from model
training. We formulate the problem as a multiplayer game,
where each player represents a user and their action is a selection vector representing a subset of their interacted items.
The recommender model is then optimized based on the selected items from different users, striking a balance between
recommendation performance and user preferences. However, solving this game requires repeated optimization of the
recommender model to compute rewards for different actions, which may not be feasible in practice.
Faced with the aforementioned challenge, we utilize the
concept of influence functions to approximate recommendation performance without re-optimizing the model. Specifically, we start by setting an anchor selection vector to
train the recommender model. Then, for different actions,
we directly compute the recommendation performance using the influence function (Koh and Liang 2017) and the
previously obtained model trained with anchor selection
vector. Our method is referred to as influence function
based recommendation quality exploration (called IFRQE
for short). To achieve more accurate performance approximation, we extend this approach by employing multiple anchor selection vectors. In addition to these models, we provide a theoretical analysis of the convergence rate of our
learning algorithm and demonstrate the advantages of increasing the number of anchor selection vectors. Extensive
experiments are conducted using both synthetic and realworld datasets to validate the effectiveness of our models.
It is worth noting that there have been previous works on
federated recommendation (Yang et al. 2020), recommendation unlearning (Chen et al. 2022a), and controllable recommendation. However, these studies differ fundamentally
from our approach as they neither allow users to actively
indicate data nor incorporate user willingness into the optimization target. Furthermore, while (Chen et al. 2022b) pro-

Recommender systems have a significant impact on various
real-world applications, shaping people’s daily lives and enhancing productivity. Traditional recommender models aim
to collect extensive user information to accurately estimate
user preferences. However, in practical scenarios, users may
not want all their behaviors to be included in the model training process. This paper introduces a novel recommendation
paradigm that allows users to indicate their “willingness” regarding which data should contribute to model training. The
models are then optimized to maximize utility, which considers the trade-off between recommendation performance and
respecting user preferences. The recommendation problem is
formulated as a multiplayer game, with each user acting as a
player and using a selection vector to indicate their willingness to include specific interacted items in training. To efficiently solve this game, an influence function-based model is
proposed to approximate recommendation performances for
different actions without re-optimizing the model. Furthermore, an enhanced model leveraging multiple anchor actions
for the influence function is introduced to improve performance approximation accuracy. The convergence rate of the
algorithm is theoretically analyzed, and the advantages of incorporating multiple anchor actions are demonstrated. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world datasets
validate the effectiveness of the proposed models in balancing recommendation quality and user willingness. To promote this research direction, we have released our project at
https://paitesanshi.github.io/IFRQE/.

Introduction
Recommender systems are critical components in real-world
applications, providing significant business value and user
convenience. Collaborative filtering (CF) has been a fundamental assumption in recommender systems, assuming that
users who behaved similarly in the past will continue to behave similarly in the future. To accurately estimate user similarities, recommender systems traditionally collect extensive user behavior data. However, in real-world scenarios,
users may not want all their data to be used for model training. As exampled in Figure 1, a male user may occasionally click on items that do not reflect his true preferences,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21673

