The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Arbitrary-Scale Video Super-resolution Guided by Dynamic Context
Cong Huang1 * , Jiahao Li2 , Lei Chu2 , Dong Liu1 , Yan Lu2
1

University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Microsoft Research Asia
hcy96@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn, {li.jiaha, lei.chu, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a Dynamic Context-Guided Upsampling
(DCGU) module for video super-resolution (VSR) that leverages temporal context guidance to achieve efficient and effective arbitrary-scale VSR. While most VSR research focuses on backbone design, the importance of the upsampling part is often overlooked. Existing methods rely on
pixelshuffle-based upsampling, which has limited capabilities in handling arbitrary upsampling scales. Recent attempts
to replace pixelshuffle-based modules with implicit neural
function-based and filter-based approaches suffer from slow
inference speeds and limited representation capacity, respectively. To overcome these limitations, our DCGU module predicts non-local sampling locations and content-dependent filter weights, enabling efficient and effective arbitrary-scale
VSR. Our proposed multi-granularity location search module efficiently identifies non-local sampling locations across
the entire low-resolution grid, and the temporal bilateral filter
modulation module integrates content information with the
filter weight to enhance textual details. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of our method in terms of performance and speed on arbitrary-scale VSR.

Figure 1: PSNR-Runtime comparison with different
arbitrary-scale upsampling modules, including filter-based
MetaSR (Hu et al. 2019), and implicit neural functionbased LTE (Lee and Jin 2022) and LIIF (Chen, Liu, and
Wang 2021). MetaSR, LTE, LIIF and our DCGU use BasicVSR++ (Chan et al. 2021) as the backbone.

not handle arbitrary ones. However, in real-world scenarios, scaling up LR videos with user-desired scales has more
practical value. Recent work on arbitrary-scale single-image
super-resolution (Hu et al. 2019; Chen, Liu, and Wang 2021;
Lee and Jin 2022; Cao et al. 2022) has explored the possibility of replacing the pixelshuffle-based upsampling module and supporting arbitrary-scale super-resolution. These
methods can be divided into two categories: the implicit neural function-based (Chen, Liu, and Wang 2021; Lee and Jin
2022; Cao et al. 2022) and the filter-based (Hu et al. 2019)
approaches.
The implicit neural function-based methods utilize implicit neural representations to predict RGB values for specific coordinates in HR space, resulting in good visual quality. However, applying such methods directly to the VSR
pipeline can severely impact inference speed due to a heavy
MLP computation for each coordinate in the HR grid, making it inefficient for VSR, as shown in Fig. 1. On the other
hand, the filter-based method (Hu et al. 2019) employs an
MLP model to predict dynamic scale-location-dependent
filter weights and then upsamples LR features at arbitrary
scales. While this method has a fast inference speed as the

Introduction
The task of video super-resolution (VSR) involves reconstructing high-resolution (HR) videos from low-resolution
(LR) observations. While there have been numerous existing works (Wang et al. 2019; Isobe et al. 2020b, 2022; Chan
et al. 2020, 2021) proposing different approaches to address
the VSR problem, most of them focus on designing powerful
backbones that incorporate motion alignment and feature extraction components. Interestingly, the upsampling module a crucial yet often overlooked final step in generating HR
videos (Wang, Chen, and Hoi 2020; Liu et al. 2022; Willets
et al. 2017; Anwar, Khan, and Barnes 2020) - has received
limited attention in these works.
Existing VSR methods typically employ the pixelshufflebased upsampling module (Shi et al. 2016a). While this
module is easy to implement, it can only support superresolving features with fixed scale factors (e.g., x4) and can* This work was done when Cong Huang was an intern in Microsoft Research Asia..
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2294

