The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Regroup Median Loss for Combating Label Noise
Fengpeng Li1 , Kemou Li1 , Jinyu Tian2 , Jiantao Zhou1 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Faculty of Innovation Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
{yc17420, mc15415, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, jytian@must.edu.mo

Abstract

strong capacity of the deep learning model, it can easily fit
the training samples with incorrect labels, which impairs the
performance and generalization of the deep model (Zhang
et al. 2017). Owing to the difficulty of selecting noisy samples in a large-scale dataset, how to make the deep model
robust to label noise becomes an essential and fundamental
research topic (Bai et al. 2021; Karim et al. 2022).
To protect the deep model from label noise (Han et al.
2018; Bai et al. 2021; Karim et al. 2022), some methods
have been proposed recently. According to the operations of
these methods, they can be divided into two categories: loss
correction and sample selection (Karim et al. 2022). Loss
correction commonly attempts to estimate the noise transition matrix. The matrix contains the conditional probabilities of samples belonging to different classes based on their
observed labels (Frénay and Verleysen 2013). However, estimating the transition matrix is difficult especially when the
number of classes is large and the ratio of noisy samples is
too high (Xu et al. 2019; Karim et al. 2022). Compared to
loss correction, sample selection methods pay more attention to filtering out samples with incorrect labels based on
the small-loss criterion (Han et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2019), supposing clean samples have smaller losses than noisy ones.
Inevitably, some noisy samples will also have small loss values, and will therefore be misclassified as clean. Traditional
small-loss criterion based methods usually select only clean
samples for training and discard noisy ones (Han et al. 2018;
Xia et al. 2019), resulting in information loss. The semisupervised methods (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Karim et al.
2022) use the small-loss criterion to select clean samples and
relabel noisy ones. However, these methods require complex strategies to separate clean and noisy samples, which
increases time consumption.
According to (Xia et al. 2020), noisy samples can also
provide useful information for model training if their losses
can be appropriately corrected. Motivated by these previous
works, we propose Regroup Median Loss (RML) to reduce
the probability of selecting noisy samples and correct the
distorted losses based on losses of clean samples through a
robust estimation method. In RML, we select samples with
the same observed label as each training sample and use
their losses to estimate the loss of the training sample. To
reduce the probability of selecting noisy samples, we propose a new strategy to process losses and use them to select

The deep model training procedure requires large-scale
datasets of annotated data. Due to the difficulty of annotating a large number of samples, label noise caused by incorrect annotations is inevitable, resulting in low model performance and poor model generalization. To combat label
noise, current methods usually select clean samples based
on the small-loss criterion and use these samples for training. Due to some noisy samples similar to clean ones, these
small-loss criterion-based methods are still affected by label
noise. To address this issue, in this work, we propose Regroup Median Loss (RML) to reduce the probability of selecting noisy samples and correct losses of noisy samples.
RML randomly selects samples with the same label as the
training samples based on a new loss processing method.
Then, we combine the stable mean loss and the robust median loss through a proposed regrouping strategy to obtain
robust loss estimation for noisy samples. To further improve
the model performance against label noise, we propose a
new sample selection strategy and build a semi-supervised
method based on RML. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, for both the traditionally trained and semi-supervised
models, RML achieves a significant improvement on synthetic and complex real-world datasets. The source code is
available at https://github.com/Feng-peng-Li/Regroup-LossMedian-to-Combat-Label-Noise.

Introduction
Deep learning model has been proven powerful in various practical tasks, e.g., image classification (Szegedy et al.
2015; Zhang et al. 2015; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2017), object detection (Girshick 2015; Redmon et al. 2016)
and image semantic segmentation (He et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2018). As is known, the performance of deep learning models heavily relies on dataset scale and annotation
quality. Currently, collecting large-scale datasets with highquality annotation is an extremely expensive task. An efficient and cheap method called crowd-sourcing policy is often used to collect large-scale datasets (Zubiaga et al. 2015).
However, in the crowd-sourcing data labeling procedure, it
is inevitable that some samples will be annotated with incorrect labels, resulting in the so-called label noise. Due to the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13474

