The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Imagine, Initialize, and Explore: An Effective Exploration Method in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Zeyang Liu, Lipeng Wan, Xinrui Yang, Zhuoran Chen, Xingyu Chen, Xuguang Lan*
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Application
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, 710049
{zeyang.liu, wanlipeng, xinrui.yang, zhuoran.chen}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, xingyuchen1990@gmail.com, xglan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

paradigm, value decomposition methods (Rashid et al. 2018;
Son et al. 2019; Rashid et al. 2020) factorize the joint Qvalue as a function of individual utility functions, ensuring
consistency between the centralized policy and the individual policies. Consequently, they have achieved state-of-theart performance in challenging tasks, such as StarCraft unit
micromanagement (Samvelyan et al. 2019).
Despite their success, the simple -greedy exploration
strategy used in these methods has been found ineffective
in solving coordination tasks with complex state and reward
transitions (Mahajan et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020c; Zheng
et al. 2021). To address this limitation, MAVEN (Mahajan
et al. 2019) adopts a latent space for hierarchical control,
allowing agents to condition their behavior on shared latent variables and enabling committed exploration. EITI and
EDTI (Wang et al. 2020c) quantify and characterize the influence of one agent’s behavior on others using mutual information and the difference of expected returns, respectively.
By optimizing EITI or EDTI objectives as intrinsic rewards,
agents are encouraged to coordinate their exploration and
learn policies that optimize team performance. EMC (Zheng
et al. 2021), on the other hand, uses prediction errors of individual Q-values to capture the novelty of states and the influence from other agents for coordinated exploration. Unfortunately, these methods suffer from the exponential growth
of the action-observation space with the number of agents
and become inefficient in long-horizon tasks.
It is possible to decompose the complex task rather than
directly conducting collective searches across the entire
action-observation space. To this end, RODE (Wang et al.
2020b) decomposes joint action spaces into restricted role
action spaces by clustering actions based on their effects
on the environment and other agents. Low-level role-based
policies explore and learn within these restricted actionobservation spaces, reducing execution and training complexity. However, RODE still struggles with long-term tasks
as it is still unlikely to obtain a long sequence of specific actions to achieve successful states. The Go-Explore family of
algorithms (Ecoffet et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2020; Ecoffet et al.
2021) decomposes the exploration into two phases: returning to the previous state and then starting to explore. These
methods store the high-scoring trajectories in an archive and
return to sampled states from this archive by running a goalconditioned policy. However, in the multi-agent field, agents

Effective exploration is crucial to discovering optimal strategies for multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in complex coordination tasks. Existing methods mainly utilize intrinsic rewards to enable committed exploration or use rolebased learning for decomposing joint action spaces instead
of directly conducting a collective search in the entire actionobservation space. However, they often face challenges obtaining specific joint action sequences to reach successful states in long-horizon tasks. To address this limitation,
we propose Imagine, Initialize, and Explore (IIE), a novel
method that offers a promising solution for efficient multiagent exploration in complex scenarios. IIE employs a transformer model to imagine how the agents reach a critical state
that can influence each other’s transition functions. Then,
we initialize the environment at this state using a simulator
before the exploration phase. We formulate the imagination
as a sequence modeling problem, where the states, observations, prompts, actions, and rewards are predicted autoregressively. The prompt consists of timestep-to-go, return-togo, influence value, and one-shot demonstration, specifying
the desired state and trajectory as well as guiding the action generation. By initializing agents at the critical states,
IIE significantly increases the likelihood of discovering potentially important under-explored regions. Despite its simplicity, empirical results demonstrate that our method outperforms multi-agent exploration baselines on the StarCraft
Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) and SMACv2 environments.
Particularly, IIE shows improved performance in the sparsereward SMAC tasks and produces more effective curricula
over the initialized states than other generative methods, such
as CVAE-GAN and diffusion models.

Introduction
Recent progress in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) has shown attractive prospects for realworld applications, such as autonomous driving (Zhou et al.
2021) and active voltage control on power distribution networks (Wang et al. 2021). To utilize global information
during training and maintain scalability in execution, centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) has
become a widely adopted paradigm in MARL. Under this
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17487

