The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Manifold Constraints for Imperceptible Adversarial Attacks on Point Clouds
Keke Tang1 * , Xu He1 * , Weilong Peng2† , Jianpeng Wu1 ,
Yawen Shi1 , Daizong Liu3 , Pan Zhou4 , Wenping Wang5 , Zhihong Tian1
1
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University
School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
tangbohutbh@gmail.com, heexu976@gmail.com, wlpeng@tju.edu.cn, lesswu666@gmail.com,
shiyawen666@gmail.com, dzliu@hust.edu.cn, zhoupannewton@gmail.com, wenping@cs.hku.hk, tianzhihong@gzhu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Adversarial attacks on 3D point clouds often exhibit unsatisfactory imperceptibility, which primarily stems from the disregard for manifold-aware distortion, i.e., distortion of the underlying 2-manifold surfaces. In this paper, we develop novel
manifold constraints to reduce such distortion, aiming to enhance the imperceptibility of adversarial attacks on 3D point
clouds. Specifically, we construct a bijective manifold mapping between point clouds and a simple parameter shape using an invertible auto-encoder. Consequently, manifold-aware
distortion during attacks can be captured within the parameter
space. By enforcing manifold constraints that preserve local
properties of the parameter shape, manifold-aware distortion
is effectively mitigated, ultimately leading to enhanced imperceptibility. Extensive experiments demonstrate that integrating manifold constraints into conventional adversarial attack solutions yields superior imperceptibility, outperforming
the state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Illustration of adversarial attacks: (a) original point cloud; (b, c) adversarial point clouds generated under Euclidean and manifold constraints respectively,
and their corresponding parameter shapes obtained using
our parameterization-like operation; (d) optional parameter
shapes. Note that the SOFA point clouds in (b, c) are misclassified by PointNet as BATHTUB after the IFGM attack.

Introduction
With the advancement of deep learning techniques (Tang
et al. 2022b) and the accessibility of affordable depthsensing devices, 3D point cloud perception utilizing deep
neural networks (DNNs) has emerged as the go-to solution (Guo et al. 2020). However, numerous recent studies
have revealed that DNN classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019; Liu, Yu, and Su
2019), i.e., imperceptible perturbations on the input point
clouds can lead to erroneous predictions, hindering their
deployment in real-world scenarios. Consequently, investigating adversarial attacks on DNN classifiers for 3D point
clouds is a crucial step, as it lays the groundwork for the assessment and enhancement of their adversarial robustness.
Typical methodologies to ensure the imperceptibility of
adversarial attacks on 3D point clouds employ metrics such
as the l2 -norm, Chamfer distance, and Hausdorff distance to
constrain the perturbation. More recent studies have sought

to further reduce the distortion by limiting the change of curvature (Wen et al. 2022), guiding the perturbation along the
normal direction (Liu and Hu 2023; Tang et al. 2022c) and
along the tangential direction (Huang et al. 2022), etc. Despite these advances, the generated adversarial point clouds
do not yet achieve the desired level of imperceptibility, often
exhibiting noticeable outliers or deformations in shape.
While the aforementioned solutions successfully limit
the distortion of 3D point clouds from a Euclidean perspective, they overlook the common assumption that these
point clouds are generally sampled from 2-manifold surfaces (Spanier 1989). As a result, they have yet to apply any
constraints in this aspect, leading to manifold-aware distortion. We argue that the persistent manifold-aware distortion
is the primary cause of unsatisfactory imperceptibility.
In this paper, we propose novel manifold constraints
aimed at minimizing the manifold-aware distortion during
attacks. Specifically, we employ an invertible auto-encoder

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5127

