The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Graph Masked Autoencoders through
Alignment and Uniformity
Liang Wang1,2 * , Xiang Tao1,2 * , Qiang Liu1,2 , Shu Wu1,2† , Liang Wang1,2
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liang.wang, xiang.tao}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {qiang.liu, shu.wu, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

alignment and uniformity, which are considered to lead to
high-quality representations (Wang and Isola 2020). On the
other hand, the basic idea behind generative methods is to reconstruct the masked portions of data with generative models, such as autoencoders and autoregressive models. The
reconstruction process reveals inherent data patterns and encode them into learned representations.
In the past few years, contrastive methods have dominated graph self-supervised learning due to their superior
performance, and have gained sufficient theoretical analysis and understanding. Recently, graph masked autoencoder
(GraphMAE) (Hou et al. 2022) is proposed and demonstrates that generative methods can also achieve competitive, and even better, performance when appropriately designed. GraphMAE analyzes the deficiencies of early generative methods in terms of reconstruction target, decoder
structure, and optimization objective. This model addresses
these deficiencies in a sophisticated manner and achieves
performance beyond that of the contrastive methods. Many
subsequent studies take GraphMAE as a foundation to further improve the model structure and apply it to different
domains (Zhang et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2022; Tan et al. 2023;
Xia et al. 2023; Ye, Xia, and Huang 2023). These studies
spark renewed interest and reflection on generative methods.
However, despite the recent empirical success of GraphMAE, there is still a lack of sufficient understanding regarding its efficacy. Additionally, it remains unknown whether
there exists a connection between GraphMAE and GCL.
Specifically, the following questions arise: Why is GraphMAE effective? Are GraphMAE and GCL completely different methods, or do they share any commonality?
To answer these questions, we conducted a theoretical
analysis of GraphMAE. To facilitate the understanding of
the relationship between GraphMAE and GCL, we do not
analyze GraphMAE independently, but build a bridge between GraphMAE and GCL. Specifically, we first view
the learning process of GraphMAE as using the contexts
(ego-graphs) of the masked nodes to restore the original
features of these nodes. Then, we theoretically prove that
the node-level reconstruction loss in GraphMAE is lower
bounded by the context-level alignment loss. This indicates
that GraphMAE has the ability to align positive pairs defined
in contrastive learning, and GraphMAE implicitly performs

Self-supervised learning on graphs can be bifurcated into
contrastive and generative methods. Contrastive methods,
also known as graph contrastive learning (GCL), have dominated graph self-supervised learning in the past few years,
but the recent advent of graph masked autoencoder (GraphMAE) rekindles the momentum behind generative methods. Despite the empirical success of GraphMAE, there is
still a dearth of theoretical understanding regarding its efficacy. Moreover, while both generative and contrastive methods have been shown to be effective, their connections and
differences have yet to be thoroughly investigated. Therefore, we theoretically build a bridge between GraphMAE and
GCL, and prove that the node-level reconstruction objective
in GraphMAE implicitly performs context-level GCL. Based
on our theoretical analysis, we further identify the limitations of the GraphMAE from the perspectives of alignment
and uniformity, which have been considered as two key properties of high-quality representations in GCL. We point out
that GraphMAE’s alignment performance is restricted by the
masking strategy, and the uniformity is not strictly guaranteed. To remedy the aforementioned limitations, we propose
an Alignment-Uniformity enhanced Graph Masked AutoEncoder, named AUG-MAE. Specifically, we propose an easyto-hard adversarial masking strategy to provide hard-to-align
samples, which improves the alignment performance. Meanwhile, we introduce an explicit uniformity regularizer to ensure the uniformity of the learned representations. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our model over existing state-of-the-art methods. The
code is available at: https://github.com/AzureLeon1/AUGMAE.

1. Introduction
Graph self-supervised learning can be categorized into two
distinct types, contrastive and generative methods (Wu et al.
2021; Xie et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022). Motivated by the InfoMax principle, contrastive methods, also known as graph
contrastive learning (GCL), maximize the mutual information between positive pairs. The contrastive loss is proved
to asymptotically optimize two properties, representation
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15528

