The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DCLP: Neural Architecture Predictor with Curriculum Contrastive Learning
Shenghe Zheng, Hongzhi Wang * , Tianyu Mu
Massive Data Computing Lab, Harbin Institute of Technology
shenghez.zheng@gmail.com, {wangzh, mutianyu}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Zhao 2021). However, the estimation is often expensive as it
usually requires training DNNs from scratch to assess their
performance. For instance, NASNet (Zoph et al. 2018) needs
around 40K GPU hours for estimation on CIFAR-10, making it unaffordable for many applications. Hence, predictorbased NAS (Ning et al. 2020) has gained popularity due to
its close-to-zero estimation costs and satisfactory results.
For predictor-based NAS, a key challenge is the requirement for trained neural networks to train the predictor. Training a neural network to converge may take several days, and
then obtaining a substantial amount of training data is costly.
Two solutions have been proposed to overcome this challenge. The first is to optimize the predictor to better utilize
limited labeled data (Chen et al. 2021b), while the second
is to optimize the training method by incorporating unsupervised learning to utilize unlabeled data obtained at a low
cost (Tang et al. 2020). However, optimizing the predictor
disregards the upper limit to the predictive ability learned
from limited labeled data. Then, they still require a great
number of training data (Ning et al. 2020). On the other
hand, although the introduction of unsupervised learning reduces the need for labeled data, it does not enable predictors
to achieve desired performance (Jing and Xu 2022).
Unsupervised neural predictors fail because the pretext
tasks designed for regular graph data are too complex for
neural networks (Jing and Xu 2022). For example, contrastive learning, a popular unsupervised approach, requires
the model to differentiate data similarity and provide similar embeddings for similar data (He et al. 2020). However,
determining the similarity between neural networks is challenging even for experienced experts. Moreover, randomly
selecting samples in vanilla contrastive learning creates excessive data distribution differences during training, which
further complicates the learning process. Therefore, employing unsupervised learning meant for other data to neural predictors results in poor performance (Tang et al. 2020).
To simplify the contrastive task for better adaptation to
neural predictors, the issue of high variability in the distributions of randomly selected positive data for contrastive
training, which may hinder the learning process for weak
learners, must be addressed. This variability in data distribution arises from differences in the difficulty of positive samples during contrastive training. Specifically, when positive
data are more similar to each other, the learner can classify

Neural predictors have shown great potential in the evaluation process of neural architecture search (NAS). However, current predictor-based approaches overlook the fact
that training a predictor necessitates a considerable number
of trained neural networks as the labeled training set, which
is costly to obtain. Therefore, the critical issue in utilizing
predictors for NAS is to train a high-performance predictor
using as few trained neural networks as possible. Although
some methods attempt to address this problem through unsupervised learning, they often result in inaccurate predictions. We argue that the unsupervised tasks intended for the
common graph data are too challenging for neural networks,
causing unsupervised training to be susceptible to performance crashes in NAS. To address this issue, we propose
a CurricuLum-guided Contrastive Learning framework for
neural Predictor (DCLP). Our method simplifies the contrastive task by designing a novel curriculum to enhance the
stability of unlabeled training data distribution during contrastive training. Specifically, we propose a scheduler that
ranks the training data according to the contrastive difficulty
of each data and then inputs them to the contrastive learner
in order. This approach concentrates the training data distribution and makes contrastive training more efficient. By using our method, the contrastive learner incrementally learns
feature representations via unsupervised data on a smooth
learning curve, avoiding performance crashes that may occur with excessively variable training data distributions. We
experimentally demonstrate that DCLP has high accuracy
and efficiency compared with existing predictors, and shows
promising potential to discover superior architectures in various search spaces when combined with search strategies. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/Zhengsh123/DCLP.

1

Introduction

To reduce the design cost of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs),
NAS has emerged as a promising technique to automatically
design neural networks for specific tasks (Zoph and Le 2017;
Qin et al. 2022). NAS has been widely adopted for various
tasks such as image classification (Li et al. 2023) and semantic segmentation (Zhang et al. 2021). In typical NAS,
searched architectures are evaluated to guide search (He and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17051

