The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EMGAN: Early-Mix-GAN on Extracting Server-Side Model in Split Federated
Learning
Jingtao Li1 * , Xing Chen2 , Li Yang3 , Adnan Siraj Rakin4 , Deliang Fan5 , Chaitali Chakrabarti2

NEURIPS 2
Sony AI
Arizona State University
3
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
4
Binghamton University (SUNY)
5
Johns Hopkins University
jingtao.li@sony.com, xchen382@asu.edu, lyang50@uncc.edu, arakin@binghamton.edu, dfan10@jhu.edu, chaitali@asu.edu
1

2

Abstract

Untrusted

Split Federated Learning (SFL) is an emerging edge-friendly
version of Federated Learning (FL), where clients process a
small portion of the entire model. While SFL was considered to be resistant to Model Extraction Attack (MEA) by
design, a recent work (Li et al. 2023b) shows it is not necessarily the case. In general, gradient-based MEAs are not
effective on a target model that is changing, as is the case in
training-from-scratch applications. In this work, we propose
a strong MEA during the SFL training phase. The proposed
Early-Mix-GAN (EMGAN) attack effectively exploits gradient queries regardless of data assumptions. EMGAN adopts
three key components to address the problem of inconsistent
gradients. Specifically, it employs (i) Early-learner approach
for better adaptability, (ii) Multi-GAN approach to introduce
randomness in generator training to mitigate mode collapse,
and (iii) ProperMix to effectively augment the limited amount
of synthetic data for a better approximation of the target domain data distribution. EMGAN achieves excellent results in
extracting server-side models. With only 50 training samples,
EMGAN successfully extracts a 5-layer server-side model of
VGG-11 on CIFAR-10, with 7% less accuracy than the target
model. With zero training data, the extracted model achieves
81.3% accuracy, which is significantly better than the 45.5%
accuracy of the model extracted by the SoTA method. The
code is available at https://github.com/zlijingtao/SFL-MEA.

Server
Local
Local W
W

ℒ

FedAvg
Avg
Avg W
W

Clients’
Clients’ local
local model
model

(a) IP threat in standard Federated Learning (FL)

Untrusted

Activation
Activation

Gradient
Gradient

Client-side
Client-side model
model Prediction
Prediction

Server

ℒ
Server-side
Server-side model
model

(b) IP threat in Split Federated Learning (SFL)

Figure 1: IP threats in Federated Learning. (a) FL suffers
from direct model leakage. (b) SFL prevents direct model
leakage and is immune to prediction-based MEAs by blocking prediction queries.

Introduction

free (Fig. 1 (a)). Also, the stolen model can be used to perform much more effective adversarial attacks (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), making model IP security in FL
absolutely essential.
Split Federated Learning (SFL) scheme (Thapa et al.
2020) is a variant of FL for training with resourceconstrained clients, where the neural network is split into a
client-side model and a server-side model. Each client only
computes the forward/backward propagation of the smaller
client-side model while the server, which has more compute resources, computes the forward/backward propagation of the larger server-side model. SFL follows the same
model averaging mechanism as standard FL to synchronize
clients’ models. Unlike standard FL which passes on the entire model over to the clients, SFL preserves the server-side
model and prevents the model from direct leakage. More-

Federated Learning (FL) has become increasingly popular thanks to its ability to protect users’ data and comply
with the General Data Protection Regulation policy. In FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017), which is the standard FL
scheme, clients locally update their model copies and send
them to the server, which then aggregates the model parameters and sends the aggregated model back to the clients.
Such a setting only allows model parameters to be shared
with the server, and direct data sharing is avoided. Standard FL is clearly vulnerable to Intellectual Property (IP)
threat as a malicious client can acquire the entire model for
* Work was done when Jingtao Li was a PhD student at Arizona
State University.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13545

