The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Nowcasting Temporal Trends Using Indirect Surveys
Ajitesh Srivastava1 , Juan Marcos Ramı́rez2 , Sergio Dı́az-Aranda2,3 , Jose Aguilar2 , Antonio
Fernández Anta2 , Antonio Ortega1 , Rosa Elvira Lillo3
1

University of Southern California, USA
2
IMDEA Networks Institute, Spain
3
Universidad Carlos III, Spain
ajiteshs@usc.edu, juan.ramirez@imdea.org, sergio.diaz@imdea.org, jose.aguilar@imdea.org, antonio.fernandez@imdea.org,
aortega@usc.edu, lillo@est-econ.uc3m.es
Abstract

thus improving participation and data collection about sensitive populations (Rossier 2010); (2) one individual response
gives the researchers access to information about many different individuals, thus leading to cost reductions in the data
collection (Breza et al. 2020), (Alix-Garcia, Sims, and Costica 2021). Indirect surveys have been employed in a variety
of domains, such as estimating the number of casualties in an
earthquake (Bernard et al. 1989), conditions among female
sex workers (Jing et al. 2018), or the prevalence of drug use
(Salganik et al. 2010), HIV (Teo et al. 2019) or COVID-19
(Garcia-Agundez et al. 2021).
While indirect surveys have a long history (Laga, Bao,
and Niu 2021), the ubiquity of internet access among the
general public has made it possible to develop online indirect surveys, which can be deployed rapidly and allow the
continuous collection of ARD, instead of consisting of oneshot surveys. The importance of recurrent online surveys,
including indirect surveys, has become apparent during the
COVID-19 pandemic, where one of the most important challenges has been estimating (nowcasting) the number of cases
(especially when testing was not widely available), the number of deaths, the number of people vaccinated, etc. While
the best-known online surveys are the COVID-19 Trends
and Impact Surveys (CTIS) (Astley et al. 2021; Salomon
et al. 2021), which collected more than 100,000 responses
daily, other surveys were also deployed (Geldsetzer 2020;
Oliver et al. 2020; Garcia-Agundez et al. 2021).
Our main goals are (i) to quantify the advantages of indirect surveys over direct ones for nowcasting, by determining under what conditions, more accurate estimates can be
obtained via indirect questions; and (ii) to develop a new
method to identify a hidden temporal trend from the continuously collected ARD from indirect surveys. To achieve
these goals, we combine a detailed theoretical analysis with
extensive experimental evaluations with both synthetic and
real datasets. Given the availability, throughout the paper,
we use the COVID-19 surveys dataset as a test case.

Indirect surveys, in which respondents provide information
about other people they know, have been proposed for estimating (nowcasting) the size of a hidden population where
privacy is important or the hidden population is hard to
reach. Examples include estimating casualties in an earthquake, conditions among female sex workers, and the prevalence of drug use and infectious diseases. The Network Scaleup Method (NSUM) is the classical approach to developing
estimates from indirect surveys, but it was designed for oneshot surveys. Further, it requires certain assumptions and asking for or estimating the number of individuals in each respondent’s network. In recent years, surveys have been increasingly deployed online and can collect data continuously
(e.g., COVID-19 surveys on Facebook during much of the
pandemic). Conventional NSUM can be applied to these scenarios by analyzing the data independently at each point in
time, but this misses the opportunity of leveraging the temporal dimension. We propose to use the responses from indirect
surveys collected over time and develop analytical tools (i)
to prove that indirect surveys can provide better estimates for
the trends of the hidden population over time, as compared to
direct surveys and (ii) to identify appropriate temporal aggregations to improve the estimates. We demonstrate through extensive simulations that our approach outperforms traditional
NSUM and direct surveying methods. We also empirically
demonstrate the superiority of our approach on a real indirect
survey dataset of COVID-19 cases.

1

Introduction

Direct reporting through surveys is the most widely used
method for collecting data on a given characteristic among
individuals in a population. It is well known that direct
surveys sometimes face reliability and efficiency problems,
as respondents may refuse to participate or may choose to
misreport sensitive private information. An alternative approach to overcome some of these issues is using surveys
with indirect reporting, where respondents answer questions
about people they know instead of providing information
about themselves. These surveys collect what is known in
the literature as aggregated relational data (ARD). Their
main advantages are primarily two: (1) privacy is preserved
as the respondents do not have to report their own status,

1.1

Related Work

ARD from indirect surveys are used to nowcast the size of a
subpopulation or hidden population, i.e., the fraction of the
population that has some characteristic. For example, in a
COVID-19-related survey, a respondent may report on how
many people they know who have tested positive recently,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22359

