The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

What Makes Good Collaborative Views? Contrastive Mutual Information
Maximization for Multi-Agent Perception
Wanfang Su* ,1,2 , Lixing Chen* ,1,2 , Yang Bai†,1 , Xi Lin1,2 , Gaolei Li1,2 , Zhe Qu3 , Pan Zhou4
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University
of Science of Technology, Wuhan, China
{77susu, lxchen, ybai, linxi234, gaolei li}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhe qu@csu.edu.cn, zhoupannewton@gmail.com
2

Abstract

MAP in autonomous driving (Cui et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2017) effectively addresses challenges caused by occlusions
and sparse observations in long-distance areas.
Collaboration strategy is one of the fundamental components of MAP, which involves protocols for communication,
data sharing, and coordination among multiple agents. Stateof-the-art collaboration strategies can be categorized into
three types: early collaboration, late collaboration, and intermediate collaboration. Early Collaboration (Chen et al.
2019; Arnold et al. 2020) aggregates the raw measurement
from agents to generate a comprehensive view. However,
it requires substantial communication bandwidth and incurs
privacy leakage risk. Late Collaboration (Miller et al. 2020)
aggregates perception results of individual agents, which is
bandwidth-efficient. However, individual perception results
are noisy and coarse-grained, and therefore may cause inferior performance for collaborative perception. To strike a
balance between performance and bandwidth usage, Intermediate Collaboration has been proposed (Liu et al. 2020b;
Hu et al. 2022) to aggregate intermediate features of agents.
The intermediate features distill compact knowledge representations from raw measurement, offering the potential for
both communication efficiency and enhanced perception capability. Nevertheless, intermediate collaboration strategies
require judicious design, otherwise, may result in substantial information loss and adversely impact the effectiveness
of MAP.
Recent endeavors have been dedicated to the advancement of intermediate collaboration strategies. For example, V2VNet (Wang et al. 2020) proposes to exchange intermediate features and integrate them via a spatial-aware
graph neural network for improving motion prediction performance; When2com (Liu et al. 2020a) constructs a communication group based on general attention mechanisms to
determine the optimal timing for intermediate collaboration;
DiscoNet (Li et al. 2021) trains a distilled collaboration network to push the results of intermediate collaboration close
to that of early collaboration. The majority of current works
treat the intermediate collaboration as an opaque process and
approximate it with deep neural networks that are trained
to optimize the performance of downstream tasks or other
specified design goals. However, such a process can eas-

Multi-agent perception (MAP) allows autonomous systems
to understand complex environments by interpreting data
from multiple sources. This paper investigates intermediate collaboration for MAP with a specific focus on exploring “good” properties of collaborative view (i.e., postcollaboration feature) and its underlying relationship to individual views (i.e., pre-collaboration features), which were
treated as an opaque procedure by most existing works.
We propose a novel framework named CMiMC (Contrastive
Mutual Information Maximization for Collaborative Perception) for intermediate collaboration. The core philosophy of
CMiMC is to preserve discriminative information of individual views in the collaborative view by maximizing mutual information between pre- and post-collaboration features while
enhancing the efficacy of collaborative views by minimizing the loss function of downstream tasks. In particular, we
define multi-view mutual information (MVMI) for intermediate collaboration that evaluates correlations between collaborative views and individual views on both global and
local scales. We establish CMiMNet based on multi-view
contrastive learning to realize estimation and maximization
of MVMI, which assists the training of a collaboration encoder for voxel-level feature fusion. We evaluate CMiMC on
V2X-Sim 1.0, and it improves the SOTA average precision
by 3.08% and 4.44% at 0.5 and 0.7 IoU (Intersection-overUnion) thresholds, respectively. In addition, CMiMC can reduce communication volume to 1/32 while achieving performance comparable to SOTA. Code and Appendix are released
at https://github.com/77SWF/CMiMC.

Introduction
Multi-Agent perception (MAP) (Wang et al. 2023; Xu et al.
2023a) refers to the process by which multiple entities work
together to gather a interpret sensory information and establish a collective comprehension of the environment. MAP
enhances perception capabilities over the single-agent perception by mitigating inherent limitations arising from individual perspectives (Li et al. 2021). For example, using
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17550

