The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Blind-Touch: Homomorphic Encryption-Based Distributed Neural Network
Inference for Privacy-Preserving Fingerprint Authentication
Hyunmin Choi1,3 , Simon S. Woo2,3 , Hyoungshick Kim3
1

NAVER Cloud, South Korea
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
hyunmin.choi@{navercorp.com, g.skku.edu}, swoo@g.skku.edu, hyuong@skku.edu
2

Abstract

stolen, highlighting the dangers of storing biometric data remotely (Gootman 2016).
In web and cloud environments, homomorphic encryption
(HE) (Gentry 2009; Acar et al. 2018) is a promising solution
for privacy-sensitive applications such as fingerprint authentication. HE allows computations on encrypted data without decryption on a server. Although many research works
have adopted this for fingerprint authentication (Kim, Oh,
and Kim 2020; Yang et al. 2020), they face challenges due
to the significant computational overhead under HE. These
challenges primarily arise from complex minutiae representations in fingerprints, which are computationally demanding and prone to variations that can affect the matching process. To overcome these limitations, Engelsma et al. (Engelsma, Cao, and Jain 2019) introduced a deep learningbased authentication technique using HE. However, even
with its enhanced speed, an average authentication time of
3.4 seconds to search among 5,000 fingerprints (considering
only the feature vector’s encryption time) is not practical for
real-world services. Implementing a conventional convolutional neural network (CNN) with HE is challenging due to
the costly operations required in the convolution and pooling
layers. Specifically, convolution layers necessitate rotations
and multiplications for filter application, and pooling layers
require a substantial number of multiplications. Additionally, encrypted feature vectors are significantly larger than
plaintext feature vectors; therefore, we must do our best to
reduce the size of the feature vector, which can consequently
lead to a decrease in model accuracy.
To overcome this challenge, we introduce a novel privacypreserving fingerprint authentication system, Blind-Touch.
Blind-Touch employs a distributed deep learning architecture involving clients and a server (see Figure 1). Clients
handle feature extraction through CNN operations on plaintext data while the server performs searching tasks to identify the most suitable fingerprint match with the encrypted
feature vector. We optimize the feature vector size to 16, significantly less than the 192 features used in DeepPrint (Engelsma, Cao, and Jain 2019), by processing the first fully
connected layer (FC-16) in plaintext on the client and the
second fully connected layer (FC-1) post-encryption on the
server. Next, to further enhance performance, we propose
a novel compression method compatible with HE to process 8,192 authentication results concurrently. Finally, we

Fingerprint authentication is a popular security mechanism
for smartphones and laptops. However, its adoption in web
and cloud environments has been limited due to privacy
concerns over storing and processing biometric data on
servers. This paper introduces Blind-Touch, a novel machine
learning-based fingerprint authentication system leveraging
homomorphic encryption to address these privacy concerns.
Homomorphic encryption allows computations on encrypted
data without decrypting. Thus, Blind-Touch can keep fingerprint data encrypted on the server while performing machine
learning operations. Blind-Touch combines three strategies to
efficiently utilize homomorphic encryption in machine learning: (1) It optimizes the feature vector for a distributed architecture, processing the first fully connected layer (FC-16) in
plaintext on the client side and the subsequent layer (FC-1)
post-encryption on the server, thereby minimizing encrypted
computations; (2) It employs a homomorphic encryptioncompatible data compression technique capable of handling
8,192 authentication results concurrently; and (3) It utilizes
a clustered server architecture to simultaneously process authentication results, thereby enhancing scalability with increasing user numbers. Blind-Touch achieves high accuracy
on two benchmark fingerprint datasets, with a 93.6% F1score for the PolyU dataset and a 98.2% F1-score for the
SOKOTO dataset. Moreover, Blind-Touch can match a fingerprint among 5,000 in about 0.65 seconds. With its privacyfocused design, high accuracy, and efficiency, Blind-Touch is
a promising alternative to conventional fingerprint authentication for web and cloud applications.

Introduction
Fingerprint authentication is a biometric method that uses
the unique characteristics of an individual’s fingerprint. It
is favored for smartphones and laptops because of its security and convenience (De Luca et al. 2015; Mare, Baker,
and Gummeson 2016; Lovisotto et al. 2020; Cho et al.
2020). However, the adoption of fingerprint authentication
in web and cloud environments faces challenges due to the
risk of unauthorized access to sensitive biometric data on
servers (Rui and Yan 2018). For example, in June 2015,
the US Office of Personnel Management suffered a security
breach in which over 5.6 million fingerprint records were
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21976

