The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning MDL Logic Programs from Noisy Data
Céline Hocquette1 , Andreas Niskanen2 , Matti Järvisalo2 , Andrew Cropper1
1

University of Oxford
University of Helsinki
celine.hocquette@cs.ox.ac.uk, andreas.niskanen@helsinki.fi, matti.jarvisalo@helsinki.fi, andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Many inductive logic programming approaches struggle to
learn programs from noisy data. To overcome this limitation,
we introduce an approach that learns minimal description
length programs from noisy data, including recursive programs. Our experiments on several domains, including drug
design, game playing, and program synthesis, show that our
approach can outperform existing approaches in terms of predictive accuracies and scale to moderate amounts of noise.

1

Introduction

The goal of inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton
1991) is to induce a logic program (a set of logical rules) that
generalises training examples and background knowledge.
A common criticism of ILP is that it cannot handle noisy
data (Evans and Grefenstette 2018; Cucala, Grau, and Motik
2022). This criticism is unfounded: most ILP approaches can
learn from noisy data (Cropper and Dumancic 2022). For
instance, set-covering approaches (Muggleton 1995; Srinivasan 2001; Ahlgren and Yuen 2013; Zeng, Patel, and Page
2014; De Raedt et al. 2015) search for rules that generalise a
subset of the examples.
Although most ILP approaches can learn from noisy data,
they struggle to learn recursive programs and perform predicate invention, two important features when learning complex
algorithms (Lin et al. 2014; Cropper and Muggleton 2019).
Moreover, they are not guaranteed to learn optimal programs,
such as textually minimal programs, and tend to overfit.
Recent approaches overcome these limitations and can
learn recursive and textually minimal programs (Corapi,
Russo, and Lupu 2011; Kaminski, Eiter, and Inoue 2019)
and perform predicate invention (Muggleton, Lin, and
Tamaddoni-Nezhad 2015; Purgal, Cerna, and Kaliszyk 2022).
However, these approaches struggle to learn from noisy data
because they search for a program that strictly generalises all
the positive and none of the negative examples.
In this paper, our goal is to learn recursive programs and
support predicate invention in a noisy setting. Following
Cropper and Hocquette (2023), we first search for small
programs that generalise a subset of the examples. We then
search for a combination of these smaller programs to form
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10553

a larger program. Cropper and Hocquette (2023) search for
a combination that strictly generalises all the positive and
none of the negative examples, i.e. they cannot learn from
noisy data. By contrast, we relax this condition to learn from
noisy data. To avoid overfitting, we search for a combination
that trades off model complexity (program size) and data fit
(training accuracy). To do so, we use the minimal description
length (MDL) principle (Rissanen 1978). In other words, we
introduce an approach that learns MDL programs from noisy
data.
To explore our idea, we build on learning from failures
(LFF) (Cropper and Morel 2021). LFF frames the ILP problem as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP), where each
solution to the CSP represents a program (a hypothesis). The
goal of a LFF learner is to accumulate constraints to restrict
the hypothesis space (the set of all hypotheses) and thus constrain the search. We use LFF to explore our idea because it
can learn recursive programs and perform predicate invention.
We build on LFF by learning MDL programs from noisy examples. We introduce constraints which are optimally sound
in that they do not prune MDL programs. To find an MDL
combination, we use a maximum satisfiability (MaxSAT)
solver (Bacchus, Järvisalo, and Martins 2021).
Novelty and contributions The main novelty of this paper
is the idea of learning small programs from noisy examples
and using a MaxSAT solver to find an MDL combination.
The benefits, which we show on diverse domains, are (i) the
ability to learn complex programs from noisy examples, and
(ii) improved performance compared to existing approaches.
Overall, our contributions are:
1. We introduce M AX S YNTH, which learns MDL programs
from noisy examples, including recursive programs.
2. We introduce constraints for this noisy setting and prove
that they are optimally sound (Propositions 1 and 2).
3. We prove the correctness of M AX S YNTH, i.e. that it always learns an MDL program (Theorem 1).
4. We experimentally show on multiple domains, including drug design, game playing, and program synthesis,
that M AX S YNTH can (i) substantially improve predictive
accuracies compared to other systems, and (ii) scale to
moderate amounts of noise (30%). We also show that our
noisy constraints can reduce learning times by 99%.

