The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exponent Relaxation of Polynomial Zonotopes and Its Applications in Formal
Neural Network Verification
Tobias Ladner, Matthias Althoff
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{tobias.ladner,althoff}@tum.de

consider an abstraction refinement strategy, which outerapproximates nonlinear layers using higher-order polynomials (Ladner and Althoff 2023a). The main advantage of
this refinement strategy over branch-and-bound approaches
is that we maintain a single set. A single set is especially
attractive for closed-loop verification (Lopez et al. 2022),
where splitting is particularly expensive due to repeated neural network evaluations. While we can enclose the nonlinear
layers tightly using higher-order polynomials, subsequent
operations on the output set might be more expensive due
to the complexity of the resulting polynomial zonotope, including intersection checking with an unsafe set. An alternative is to outer-approximate activation functions using linear
functions to keep the set representation simple at the cost of
losing accuracy. Better accuracy can then only be obtained
by splitting sets at the input or the neuron level, causing the
aforementioned problems.
While challenges arising from polynomial zonotopes have
been addressed (Huang et al. 2023), common strategies
to simplify them remain splitting and the enclosure by a
zonotope (see Sec. 2). However, the zonotope enclosure
can be very outer-approximative as dependencies between
the monomials of a polynomial zonotope are lost. Unfortunately, these dependencies naturally occur when using
higher-order polynomials to outer-approximate nonlinear
functions. We address this dependency issue in this work.
To summarize our contributions, we present a novel approach to restructure polynomial zonotopes such that we
have fewer dependencies between the monomials without
inducing large outer-approximations by preserving the underlying structure. The restructuring is done by a) finding
monomials with similar exponents, b) relaxing the exponents from one monomial to match the other, and c) finding
an appropriate approximation error. Further, we present an
approach to efficiently apply our novel exponent relaxation
on the entire polynomial zonotope using graph theory. To the
best of our knowledge, our approach is the first to consider
the dependencies of monomials during restructuring.

Abstract
Formal verification of neural networks is a challenging problem due to the complexity and nonlinearity of neural networks. It has been shown that polynomial zonotopes can
tightly enclose the output set of a neural network. Unfortunately, the tight enclosure comes with additional complexity in the set representation, thus, rendering subsequent operations expensive to compute, such as computing interval
bounds and intersection checking. To address this issue, we
present a novel approach to restructure a polynomial zonotope to tightly enclose the original polynomial zonotope
while drastically reducing its complexity. The restructuring
is achieved by relaxing the exponents of the dependent factors of polynomial zonotopes and finding an appropriate approximation error. We demonstrate the applicability of our
approach on output sets of neural networks, where we obtain
tighter results in various subsequent operations, such as order
reduction, zonotope enclosure, and range bounding.

1

Introduction

While neural networks demonstrate impressive results in
various fields (Kiran et al. 2021), their applicability to
safety-critical environments still needs to be improved due
to their vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). Adversarial attacks show that
slight perturbations to the input of a neural network can result in unexpected outputs. Therefore, in recent years there
has been a growing interest in the formal verification of
neural networks (Bak, Liu, and Johnson 2021; Lopez et al.
2022). While it is shown that this problem is NP-hard for
ReLU networks (Katz et al. 2017), many sound approaches
verify neural networks by formulating the problem as an optimization problem (Xu et al. 2020; Ferrari et al. 2022; Katz
et al. 2019; Botoeva et al. 2020) or use reachability analysis (Henriksen and Lomuscio 2020; Kochdumper et al. 2023;
Bogomolov et al. 2019; Schilling, Forets, and Guadalupe
2022). Abstraction refinement strategies like branch-andbound can improve the verification results (Wang et al.
2021).
In this work, we focus on reachability analysis using
polynomial zonotopes (Kochdumper and Althoff 2020) and

2

Preliminaries

Notation
We denote scalars and vectors by lower-case letters, matrices by upper-case letters, and sets by calligraphic letters.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21304

