The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

T2MAC: Targeted and Trusted Multi-Agent Communication through Selective
Engagement and Evidence-Driven Integration
Chuxiong Sun1 2 * , Zehua Zang1 3 * , Jiabao Li4 * , Jiangmeng Li1 2† , Xiao Xu2 , Rui Wang1 2 3 ,
Changwen Zheng1 3
1 Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game
3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4 School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing

{chuxiong2016,zehua2020}@iscas.ac.cn, M202110548@xs.ustb.edu.cn, jiangmeng2019@iscas.ac.cn,
xuxiao0825@gmail.com, {wangrui,changwen}@iscas.ac.cn,
Abstract

servations, missing out on the broader perspective of the entire environment. Complicating matters further, Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) grapples with the nonstationarity of the environment. From an individual agent’s
perspective, the environmental dynamics shift incessantly,
adding another layer of complexity to the learning process.
Multi-agent communication offers a compelling solution
to the issues outlined by granting agents the capability to
derive a deeper understanding of their surroundings through
collective insights. This approach ensures stable learning
and encourages harmonized actions among agents. However, historical methods have focused on the content and
timing of communication (Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus
2016; Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2018; Kim et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2020b; Zhang, Zhang, and Lin 2020; Yuan et al.
2022). Once an agent elects to share its message, it is broadcast to the entire agent group. This indiscriminate broadcasting is not only resource-intensive but also potentially
inefficient. A pivotal realization is that only some agents
carry valuable insights, and flooding the network with redundant information can be counterproductive to learning.
Interestingly, humans know when to communicate intrinsically, with whom, and how to customize their messages
to the recipient. Mirroring these human instincts could significantly refine the information exchange process, allowing
agents to curate their messages and recipients selectively.
Moreover, the essence of messages relayed by agents
is a distillation of their individual observational experiences. Assimilating these messages aptly can enrich
agents’ perception of an uncertain environment, leading
to more refined policies. Regrettably, the existing techniques—whether they’re steeped in basic aggregation (Jiang
and Lu 2018) or are more avant-garde with representation
learning (Das et al. 2019; Guan et al. 2022)—tend to treat the
fusion of information as a black box, presupposing that the
policy networks can innately sift out vital data and diminish
decision-making uncertainty. In this context, the information
integration process might prove to be both uncertain and inefficient, especially in intricate scenarios. As such, there’s
a pressing need for a novel and theory-grounded approach
that can adeptly merge messages while tackling the inherent

Communication stands as a potent mechanism to harmonize
the behaviors of multiple agents. However, existing works
primarily concentrate on broadcast communication, which
not only lacks practicality, but also leads to information redundancy. This surplus, one-fits-all information could adversely impact the communication efficiency. Furthermore,
existing works often resort to basic mechanisms to integrate
observed and received information, impairing the learning
process. To tackle these difficulties, we propose Targeted and
Trusted Multi-Agent Communication (T2MAC), a straightforward yet effective method that enables agents to learn
selective engagement and evidence-driven integration. With
T2MAC, agents have the capability to craft individualized
messages, pinpoint ideal communication windows, and engage with reliable partners, thereby refining communication
efficiency. Following the reception of messages, the agents
integrate information observed and received from different
sources at an evidence level. This process enables agents to
collectively use evidence garnered from multiple perspectives, fostering trusted and cooperative behaviors. We evaluate our method on a diverse set of cooperative multi-agent
tasks, with varying difficulties, involving different scales and
ranging from Hallway, MPE to SMAC. The experiments indicate that the proposed model not only surpasses the stateof-the-art methods in terms of cooperative performance and
communication efficiency, but also exhibits impressive generalization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable
milestones in a myriad of intricate real-world domains, ranging from Game AI (Osband et al. 2016; Silver et al. 2017,
2018; Vinyals et al. 2019) and Robotics (Andrychowicz
et al. 2020) to Autonomous Driving (Leurent 2018). However, when delving into cooperative multi-agent settings,
distinct challenges surface. The issue of partial observability stands out, where agents are confined to their local ob* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15154

