The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CI-STHPAN: Pre-trained Attention Network for Stock Selection with
Channel-Independent Spatio-Temporal Hypergraph
Hongjie Xia, Huijie Ao, Long Li, Yu Liu, Sen Liu, Guangnan Ye* , Hongfeng Chai
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Institute of FinTech, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
hjxia22@m.fudan.edu.cn, yegn@fudan.edu.cn

Feature

Abstract

HMSY

1

Quantitative stock selection is one of the most challenging
FinTech tasks due to the non-stationary dynamics and complex market dependencies. Existing studies rely on channel
mixing methods, exacerbating the issue of distribution shift in
financial time series. Additionally, complex model structures
they build make it difficult to handle very long sequences.
Furthermore, most of them are based on predefined stock relationships thus making it difficult to capture the dynamic and
highly volatile stock markets. To address the above issues, in
this paper, we propose Channel-Independent based SpatioTemporal Hypergraph Pre-trained Attention Networks (CISTHPAN), a two-stage framework for stock selection, involving Transformer and HGAT based stock time series selfsupervised pre-training and stock-ranking based downstream
task fine-tuning. We calculate the similarity of stock time series of different channel in dynamic intervals based on Dynamic Time Warping (DTW), and further construct channelindependent stock dynamic hypergraph based on the similarity. Experiments with NASDAQ and NYSE markets data over
five years show that our framework outperforms SOTA approaches in terms of investment return ratio (IRR) and Sharpe
ratio (SR). Additionally, we find that even without introducing graph information, self-supervised learning based on the
vanilla Transformer Encoder also surpasses SOTA results.
Notable improvements are gained on the NYSE market. It is
mainly attributed to the improvement of fine-tuning approach
on Information Coefficient (IC) and Information Ratio based
IC (ICIR), indicating that the fine-tuning method enhances
the accuracy and stability of the model prediction.

Business Services
AGNC

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

HUAN

Computer Software

Real Estate Investment Trusts
SPTN
Food Distributors
CGNX
Industrial Machinery
HAIN
/Components
Packaged Foods

0

2013-03

2013-08

2013-12

AMBA
Semiconductors
TREE
Finance: Consumer
Services

2014-05

2015-10

ABMD
Medical/Dental
Instruments

2015-03

Figure 1: Correlation of stock movements among different sector-industries. Dynamic hyperedges are constructed
based on similarity between the normalized time series.
implications, which requires a high level of expertise. Moreover, traditional machine learning techniques have difficulty
capturing the interactions among stocks.
In recent years, deep learning techniques have achieved
great success in areas such as natural language processing(NLP), computer vision (CV) and automatic speech
recognition (ASR), especially with the release of ChatGPT1
at the end of 2022, which ushered in the era of large models. Accordingly, researchers in the quantitative investment
field also actively tried to use deep learning for stock price
prediction to enhance investment returns. Many studies have
showed that deep learning-based stock price prediction models outperform traditional machine learning (Sezer, Gudelek,
and Ozbayoglu 2020). Examples included LSTM (Feng
et al. 2018), GRU (Xu and Cohen 2018) and Transformer
(Muhammad et al. 2023), which were based on recurrent
neural networks to improve the accuracy. In addition, many
studies focused on correlations among stocks, such as holding relationships (Chen, Wei, and Huang 2018), sector relationships (Feng et al. 2019) and momentum spillover effects
(Cheng and Li 2021).They applied various graph neural networks (Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2020) such as GCN (Chen, Wei,
and Huang 2018), GAT (Hsu, Tsai, and Li 2021) and HGCN
(Sawhney et al. 2020) to fuse stock temporal features and
spatial features to improve stock prediction accuracy.
However, all of those methods were end-to-end models.

Introduction
Stock markets play a crucial role in shaping the development of the global economy (Zou et al. 2022), with global
market capitalization returning to $100 trillion by June 2023
and investors re-embracing risky assets after the COVID-19.
Stock markets are characterized by uncertainty and volatility, and traditional machine learning techniques have been
applied to stock price prediction to overcome these difficulties while improving prediction accuracy. However, traditional machine learning requires the manual construction
of a large number of features with financial and economic
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9187

OpenAI (2023): https://openai.com/research/gpt-4

