The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discretionary Trees: Understanding Street-Level Bureaucracy via Machine
Learning
Gaurab Pokharel1 , Sanmay Das1 , Patrick J. Fowler2
1

George Mason University
Washington University at St. Louis
gpokhare@gmu.edu, sanmay@gmu.edu, pjfowler@wustl.edu
2

Abstract

standing of its causes, dynamics, and the strategic allocation of limited resources to provide timely interventions. In
the United States, decisions on homeless service allocation
are determined through a complex mix of federal guidelines,
community and local agency policies, and the interpretation
and implementation of these policies by on-the-ground caseworkers.
Homelessness caseworkers are an example of what Lipsky, in a seminal work, calls street-level bureaucrats (Lipsky
2010). These are public-facing employees of government
agencies who are granted discretion and may (or may not)
follow the agencies’ policies in each decision they make.
Among the reasons Lipsky details for why street-level bureaucrats implement different policies include resource limitations (e.g., the time and information constraints faced by
tremendously overworked caseworkers and street-level bureaucrats), as well as the misalignment of individual and
agency objectives that may be ambiguous.
This paper aims to use machine learning tools to better understand street-level bureaucrats’ behavior. In particular, we are interested in three main questions grounded
in the street-level bureaucracy theory: (1) Can bureaucratic
decision-making be boiled down to applying a relatively
simple set of heuristics/rules? The theory says street-level
bureaucrats often adopt such methods to reduce cognitive
load and decision-making time. (2) When decisions are not
driven by these rules (examples of the application of caseworker discretion), are caseworkers nonetheless consistent
in their decision-making? Inconsistent application of discretionary powers is a major problem because it leads to individuals suffering allocative harms without a procedural basis and could cause considerable bias and inequity. (3) When
caseworker discretion is applied, what can we say about the
cost/benefit trade-off to the subjects of such discretion?
We leverage a rich dataset of allocations of households
to homelessness services during a period in which the allocation process was less formulaic than imposed by the subsequent adoption of decision-making tools (Eubanks 2018;
HUD 2017). In addition to the interventions assigned, the
dataset contains demographic and other features of the
households. We use machine learning methods to ask the
question how predictable are the interventions assigned
to households and to understand the nature of caseworker
decisions. We present evidence to support several impor-

Street-level bureaucrats interact directly with people on behalf of government agencies to perform a wide range of functions, including, for example, administering social services
and policing. A key feature of street-level bureaucracy is that
the civil servants, while tasked with implementing agency
policy, are also granted significant discretion in how they
choose to apply that policy in individual cases. Using that
discretion could be beneficial, as it allows for exceptions to
policies based on human interactions and evaluations, but it
could also allow biases and inequities to seep into important domains of societal resource allocation. In this paper, we
use machine learning techniques to understand street-level
bureaucrats’ behavior. We leverage a rich dataset that combines demographic and other information on households with
information on which homelessness interventions they were
assigned during a period when assignments were not formulaic. We find that caseworker decisions in this time are highly
predictable overall, and some, but not all of this predictivity
can be captured by simple decision rules. We theorize that
the decisions not captured by the simple decision rules can
be considered applications of caseworker discretion. These
discretionary decisions are far from random in both the characteristics of such households and in terms of the outcomes of
the decisions. Caseworkers typically only apply discretion to
households that would be considered less vulnerable. When
they do apply discretion to assign households to more intensive interventions, the marginal benefits to those households
are significantly higher than would be expected if the households were chosen at random; there is no similar reduction in
marginal benefit to households that are discretionarily allocated less intensive interventions, suggesting that caseworkers are using their knowledge and experience to improve outcomes for households experiencing homelessness.

Introduction
Homelessness is an acute and pervasive issue affecting societies worldwide. The lack of stable housing and access
to resources poses immense challenges for individuals and
families, jeopardizing their well-being and livelihoods. As
federal guidelines increasingly emphasize ending homelessness entirely (United States Interagency Council on Homelessness 2022), a need exists for a comprehensive underCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22303

