The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Expressive Forecasting of 3D Whole-Body Human Motions
Pengxiang Ding1,2 , Qiongjie Cui3,5 * ,
Haofan Wang , Min Zhang1,2 , Mengyuan Liu4 , Donglin Wang1
5

1

MiLAB, Westlake University
2
Zhejiang University
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
5
Xiaohongshu Inc.
dingpengxiang@westlake.edu.cn, cuiqiongjie@njust.edu.cn
Abstract
Human motion forecasting, with the goal of estimating future human behavior over a period of time, is a fundamental task in many real-world applications. However, existing
works typically concentrate on predicting the major joints of
the human body without considering the delicate movements
of the human hands. In practical applications, hand gesture
plays an important role in human communication with the
real world, and expresses the primary intention of human
beings. In this work, we are the first to formulate a wholebody human pose forecasting task, which jointly predicts the
future body and hand activities. Correspondingly, we propose a novel Encoding-Alignment-Interaction (EAI) framework that aims to predict both coarse (body joints) and finegrained (gestures) activities collaboratively, enabling expressive and cross-facilitated forecasting of 3D whole-body human motions. Specifically, our model involves two key constituents: cross-context alignment (XCA) and cross-context
interaction (XCI). Considering the heterogeneous information within the whole-body, XCA aims to align the latent features of various human components, while XCI focuses on effectively capturing the context interaction among the human
components. We conduct extensive experiments on a newlyintroduced large-scale benchmark and achieve state-of-theart performance. The code is public for research purposes at
https://github.com/Dingpx/EAI.

Figure 1: Top: Previous works focus on predicting the human major joints, without considering delicate hand movements that are critical to the HRI application. Bottom: To fill
this gap, our work proposes a novel task: whole-body human pose forecasting, to jointly predict future both body and
gesture activities. We also highlight that within the proposed
EAI, both coarse- (major joints) and fine-grained (gestures)
properties are cross-facilitated to achieve a higher-fidelity
prediction. Here, red/blue pose is the predicted result, while
the underlying green is the ground truth.

Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2021; Ruiz, Gall, and MorenoNoguer 2018; Vaswani et al. 2017). Moreover, we note that
existing works fall into the coarse-grained scope, i.e., forecasting major joint movements of the human body (Adeli
et al. 2021; Cui and Sun 2021; Butepage et al. 2017; Ruiz,
Gall, and Moreno-Noguer 2018; Zhong et al. 2022; Ma et al.
2022). However, in terms of realistic applications, it remains
a significant limitation: the subtle activity (i.e., gestures) is
not considered. The human hand is a vital bridge for interacting with the world, and meanwhile, for the HRI application, it typically includes a detailed command to the robot,
embodying human behaviors with the major body (Zhang,
Black, and Tang 2021; Diller, Funkhouser, and Dai 2022;
Jin et al. 2020; Hidalgo et al. 2019; Taheri et al. 2020). From
real applications of human pose forecasting, we, therefore,
suggest that considering only major joints, while ignoring
the subtle hand gestures, is not sufficient.
To fully investigate this issue, we propose a novel
paradigm: whole-body human motion forecasting, that is,

Introduction
Predicting the evolution of human behavior/activity in the
physical world over time is an essential aspect of machine
intelligence (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Ruiz, Gall, and
Moreno-Noguer 2018; Yuan and Kitani 2020). For instance,
to make the seamless human-robot interaction (HRI), a robot
is supposed to have some notion of how people will move or
act in the near future, conditioned on a series of historically
observed poses (Gui et al. 2018; Cui and Sun 2021; Zhang,
Black, and Tang 2021; Mao et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2020; Dang
et al. 2021; Ding and Yin 2021).
Over the past few years, this attractive topic has received considerable attention, emerging a large number of
approaches, with deep learning techniques proving to be
sought-after (Cai et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1537

