The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stereo Vision Conversion from Planar Videos Based on Temporal Multiplane
Images
Shanding Diao1 , Yuan Chen3 , Yang Zhao1,2 * , Wei jia1 , Zhao Zhang1 , Ronggang Wang2,4 *
1

School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China
2
Peng Cheng National Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China
3
School of Internet, Anhui University, Hefei 230039, China
4
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China
yzhao@hfut.edu.cn, rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn
Abstract

than that of multi-view capturing. Therefore, there is significant value in transforming classic planar videos into stereo
vision using stereoscopic vision conversion techniques.
To generate stereo videos from monocular input, traditional methods usually estimate depth maps from singleview frame and then use depth-image-based rendering
(DIBR) (Fehn 2004) algorithms to synthesize novel views.
But DIBR process usually leaves holes in the occlusion exposure regions. Then, some deep neural network (DNN)based 2D-to-3D video conversion methods have been proposed, e.g., Deep3D (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016) and
depth estimation-based models (Lee et al. 2017). However,
although recent monocular depth estimation methods (Ranftl, Bochkovskiy, and Koltun 2021; Godard et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2023) have achieved promising performance,
good depth maps can not guarantee satisfactory view synthesis. It is still difficult to acquire accurate dense 3D geometry or fill in the occluded contents of the scene. Implicit
neural representation is another highly regarded approach to
synthesize novel views (Wang et al. 2023; Peng et al. 2021).
However, these methods require training specific representations for each scene, which greatly limits their application in
the field of stereo video conversion, as each video contains
a large number of constantly changing scenes.
Recently, the multiplane images (MPI) has gained a lot of
attention (Zhou et al. 2018; Mildenhall et al. 2019; Srinivasan et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021; Han, Wang, and Yang
2022), which consists of N fronto-parallel RGB-α planes
in the frustum of the source viewpoint, arranged at depths
(z1 , · · · , zN ) from nearest to farthest. Each plane in MPI
contains both RGB values and α value, which denotes volume density or transparency. By means of MPI, planes at
different depths can better represent the details and spatial structure of the scene. Recent MPI-based methods (Li
et al. 2021; Tucker and Snavely 2020; Han, Wang, and Yang
2022) can render multiple views from planar video frames,
achieving planar video stereoscopy. However, these methods
predict MPI without considering the temporal information
and still cannot regenerate obscured details.
To utilize the temporal information of videos, this paper
extends MPI to temporal domain and proposes a temporal MPI (TMPI) representation, as illustrated in Fig.1 (a).
TMPI combines the MPIs of neighbor frames and presents

With the rapid development of 3D movie and light-field displays, there is a growing demand for stereo videos. However,
generating high-quality stereo videos from planar videos remains a challenging task. Traditional depth-image-based rendering techniques struggle to effectively handle the problem
of occlusion exposure, which occurs when the occluded contents become visible in other views. Recently, the single-view
multiplane images (MPI) representation has shown promising performance for planar video stereoscopy. However, the
MPI still lacks real details that are occluded in the current
frame, resulting in blurry artifacts in occlusion exposure regions. In fact, planar videos can leverage complementary
information from adjacent frames to predict a more complete scene representation for the current frame. Therefore,
this paper extends the MPI from still frames to the temporal domain, introducing the temporal MPI (TMPI). By extracting complementary information from adjacent frames
based on optical flow guidance, obscured regions in the current frame can be effectively repaired. Additionally, a new
module called masked optical flow warping (MOFW) is introduced to improve the propagation of pixels along optical
flow trajectories. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method can generate high-quality stereoscopic or
light-field videos from a single view and reproduce better
occluded details than other state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods.
https://github.com/Dio3ding/TMPI

Introduction
With the growing popularity of virtual reality, 3D movies
and light-field display technology (Su et al. 2020), there
is an increasing demand for stereoscopic videos. The most
straightforward way to obtain stereo videos is multi-view
capturing, which simultaneously records the same scene
with multiple cameras. For 3D movies, two cameras can
simulate human eyes and capture videos synchronously. In
the case of light-field videos, more cameras are required
to capture data from different viewpoints. However, after
decades of accumulation, there are a huge number of precious planar video resources. At the same time, the cost and
difficulty of single camera capturing are still much lower
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1519

