The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Supervised Representation Learning with Meta Comprehensive
Regularization
Huijie Guo1, * , Ying Ba4,5, * , Jie Hu6 , Lingyu Si2,3 , Wenwen Qiang2,3,† , Lei Shi1,‡
1

Beihang University
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
6
Meituan
{guo hj, leishi}@buaa.edu.cn, yingba@ruc.edu.cn, hujie@ios.ac.cn, {lingyu, qiangwenwen}@iscas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) methods harness the concept
of semantic invariance by utilizing data augmentation strategies to produce similar representations for different deformations of the same input. Essentially, the model captures
the shared information among multiple augmented views of
samples, while disregarding the non-shared information that
may be beneficial for downstream tasks. To address this issue,
we introduce a module called CompMod with Meta Comprehensive Regularization (MCR), embedded into existing selfsupervised frameworks, to make the learned representations
more comprehensive. Specifically, we update our proposed
model through a bi-level optimization mechanism, enabling
it to capture comprehensive features. Additionally, guided by
the constrained extraction of features using maximum entropy coding, the self-supervised learning model learns more
comprehensive features on top of learning consistent features. In addition, we provide theoretical support for our proposed method from information theory and causal counterfactual perspective. Experimental results show that our method
achieves significant improvement in classification, object detection and instance segmentation tasks on multiple benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Loss of task-related information caused by data
augmentation in SSL methods. (a), the positive sample pair
(xa , xb ) can be obtained from the input x by Random Cropping and Cutout. (b) formally presents the semantics related
to label in different augmented views, where h(·) represents
the amount of attributes related to the label in sample.

2021; Caron et al. 2020) and natural language processing
(Baevski et al. 2020; Akbari et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2020).
The general framework of self-supervised representation
learning consists of two key components: data augmentation
and loss function, which try to learn invariance to the transformation generated by data augmentation on the same sample while maintain discrimination to different samples. In
practice, data augmentation generates two augmented views
of the same image by applying random strategies, such as
Cutout (DeVries and Taylor 2017), Coloring (Zhang, Isola,
and Efros 2016), Random Cropping (Takahashi, Matsubara,
and Uehara 2019), etc. Several studies (Zheng et al. 2021;
Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019; Zhang and Ma 2022; Tian
et al. 2020) also have suggested that not all data augmentations are beneficial for downstream tasks. For instance, rotation invariance may help some flower categories but harm
animal recognition (Xiao et al. 2020). Similarly, color invariance may have opposite effects on animal and flower
classification tasks. Therefore, recent works have proposed
adaptive augmentation strategies to adapt to different data
and task environments (Li et al. 2022a; Yang et al. 2022).
Data augmentation strategies are widely used in SSL to
create positive pairs of images that share the same label.
However, these strategies may not preserve all the semantic information that is relevant to the label in the augmented
views. For example, suppose an image’s label is “bird” and

Introduction
Deep learning models have exhibited remarkable capabilities, leading to the widespread adoption of machine learning
across diverse fields. Despite the impressive performance
of supervised learning methods, their heavy reliance on labeled data for model training poses limitations on their generalization ability and scalability. To address this challenge,
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged as a promising
paradigm that bridges the gap between supervised and unsupervised learning by generating supervised signals directly
from the samples without the need for manual annotation.
Currently, SSL has achieved remarkable results in computer
vision (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020; Chen, Xie, and He
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Co-corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

1959

