The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Generalized Medical Image Segmentation
from Decoupled Feature Queries
Qi Bi1,2 * , Jingjun Yi1,2 * , Hao Zheng1† , Wei Ji3 , Yawen Huang1 , Yuexiang Li4† , Yefeng Zheng1
1

Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, ShenZhen, China
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
4
Medical AI ReSearch (MARS) Group, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China
{q bi, rsjingjuny}@whu.edu.cn, yuexiangli@sr.gxmu.edu.cn, {howzheng, yefengzheng}@tencent.com
2

Source

Abstract

Shallow Features

Deep Features

S1

Domain generalized medical image segmentation requires
models to learn from multiple source domains and generalize well to arbitrary unseen target domain. Such a task is
both technically challenging and clinically practical, due to
the domain shift problem (i.e., images are collected from
different hospitals and scanners). Existing methods focused
on either learning shape-invariant representation or reaching consensus among the source domains. An ideal generalized representation is supposed to show similar pattern responses within the same channel for cross-domain images.
However, to deal with the significant distribution discrepancy, the network tends to capture similar patterns by multiple channels, while different cross-domain patterns are also
allowed to rest in the same channel. To address this issue, we
propose to leverage channel-wise decoupled deep features as
queries. With the aid of cross-attention mechanism, the longrange dependency between deep and shallow features can be
fully mined via self-attention and then guides the learning of
generalized representation. Besides, a relaxed deep whitening transformation is proposed to learn channel-wise decoupled features in a feasible way. The proposed decoupled feature query (DFQ) scheme can be seamlessly integrate into
the Transformer segmentation model in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments show its state-of-the-art performance, notably outperforming the runner-up by 1.31% and
1.98% with DSC metric on generalized fundus and prostate
benchmarks, respectively. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/BiQiWHU/DFQ.

S2

S3

Target

Channel 35

Channel 56

Channel 100

Channel 59

Channel 134

T

Figure 1: Key challenges to learn domain generalized medical segmentation (visualized with GradCAM). (1) Similar
cross-domain features rest in multiple channels with redundancy (in blue boxes); (2) Cross-domain feature misalignment among the same channel (in red boxes).

and annotated by different annotators with different levels
of expertise (Ji et al. 2021; Reiß et al. 2021). Consequently,
the domain shift inevitably exists among these data sources,
and thus leads to the high requirement on the generalization
ability for medical image segmentation models.
In the past few years, the area of domain adaptation for
medical image segmentation has been extensively studied.
Its pre-requisite is that samples from the target domain are
involved in training (Bian et al. 2021; You et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2019), and can only generalize to the target domain
seen in training (Zhou, Qi, and Shi 2022). In contrast, the
domain generalization paradigm allows the learnt representation to be generalized to any unseen target domains, which
significantly alleviates the aforementioned dilemma of annotated data (Liu et al. 2021a; Wang et al. 2020; Zhou, Qi,
and Shi 2022; Hu et al. 2023). In general, learning domain
generalized medical image segmentation is both technically
and clinically significant, as it predicts reliable segmentation
results from a variety of scanners, annotators and hospitals.
Existing domain generalized medical image segmentation

Introduction
Despite the rapid development of deep learning techniques,
most existing medical image segmentation approaches assume that the training and testing samples follow the same
statistical distribution. Unfortunately, this assumption may
not be fulfilled in many practical medical scenarios. In practice, it is notoriously taxing and expertise-demanding to annotate large amount of segmentation ground truth (Wang
et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2020; Zhou, Qi, and Shi 2022;
Cui et al. 2021; Yao, Hu, and Li 2022). In this regard, medical images are usually collected from a variety of hospitals
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author

810

