The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SlowTrack: Increasing the Latency of Camera-Based Perception in Autonomous
Driving Using Adversarial Examples
Chen Ma1 * , Ningfei Wang2 * , Qi Alfred Chen2 , Chao Shen1
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
University of California, Irvine
ershang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, ningfei.wang@uci.edu, alfchen@uci.edu, chaoshen@xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Nevertheless, the availability aspect (real-time performance) of the system, which is crucial for safety (e.g., causing vehicle collision (Wan et al. 2022)) has been relatively
underexplored, especially for the complete camera-based
AD perception pipeline. While some existing AD security
analysis has studied availability in object detection (Shapira
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023), they do not encompass the entire AD perception since usually, object detection is a part of
the AD perception (Jia et al. 2020). In addition, in the CyberPhysical System area, it is widely recognized that small
component level errors do not necessarily lead to systemlevel effects (Shen et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023). Thus, these
studies leave a critical research gap: their proposed attack
strategies may not be effective enough to conduct systemlevel effects in end-to-end AD systems. As we demonstrate
later, existing attacks targeting only object detection do not
consistently produce highly potent system-level effects due
to lack of entire AD perception consideration.

In Autonomous Driving (AD), real-time perception is a critical component responsible for detecting surrounding objects
to ensure safe driving. While researchers have extensively explored the integrity of AD perception due to its safety and security implications, the aspect of availability (real-time performance) or latency has received limited attention. Existing works on latency-based attack have focused mainly on
object detection, i.e., a component in camera-based AD perception, overlooking the entire camera-based AD perception,
which hinders them to achieve effective system-level effects,
such as vehicle crashes. In this paper, we propose SlowTrack,
a novel framework for generating adversarial attacks to increase the execution time of camera-based AD perception.
We propose a novel two-stage attack strategy along with the
three new loss function designs. Our evaluation is conducted
on four popular camera-based AD perception pipelines, and
the results demonstrate that SlowTrack significantly outperforms existing latency-based attacks while maintaining comparable imperceptibility levels. Furthermore, we perform the
evaluation on Baidu Apollo, an industry-grade full-stack AD
system, and LGSVL, a production-grade AD simulator, with
two scenarios to compare the system-level effects of SlowTrack and existing attacks. Our evaluation results show that
the system-level effects can be significantly improved, i.e.,
the vehicle crash rate of SlowTrack is around 95% on average while existing works only have around 30%.

To fill in this critical research gap, in this paper, we are the
first to study availability-based adversarial attacks across the
entire camera-based AD perception including both object
detection and tracking. Our proposed novel attack framework, SlowTrack, is designed to increase the latency of
camera-based AD perception. Instead of solely targeting object detection, which might not yield potent system-level
effects due to the limited increase of the latency, we realize the untapped potential of object tracking response time
to generate a much more effective latency attack. To illustrate, an attacker focusing only on object detection might
attempt to dramatically increase the number of proposed
bounding boxes (Chen et al. 2023). Object tracking might
filter out a majority of these boxes and in common object
detection post-processing (Jocher 2020; Zhang et al. 2021),
the maximum number of detection is provided to ensure performance. Thus, the effectiveness of these attack is limited.
Due to the importance of object tracking, we first perform
availability attack surface analysis by theoretically analyzing the time complexity of the state-of-the-art representative
tracking algorithms. Then, we propose a two-stage attack
strategy and formulate the attack as an optimization problem, shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, our novel loss function
designs, encompassing score loss, bounding box area loss,
and feature match loss, fully leverage the entire tracking-bydetection pipeline to generate effective latency-based attack.

Introduction
Autonomous Driving (AD) vehicles, manufactured by various companies, have become ubiquitous in our daily lives.
For instance, numerous Tesla vehicles are equipped with the
Autopilot feature (Kane 2021; Tesla 2022) running in the
real world. For these vehicles, camera-based perception is
pivotal, enabling them to detect real-time environmental objects such as pedestrians to ensure safety. Given its significance for safety and security, various prior works (Cao et al.
2021; Shen et al. 2022; Sato et al. 2021a; Wang et al. 2023)
have studied its security, especially on integrity such as making the object vanished or changing the label of the objects
to cause traffic rule violations or safety hazards. We refer to
these as system-level effects throughout this paper.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4062

