The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

High-Fidelity Gradient Inversion in Distributed Learning
Zipeng Ye1, 2 , Wenjian Luo1, 2, 3 * , Qi Zhou1, 2 , Yubo Tang1, 2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
22B351009@stu.hit.edu.cn, luowenjian@hit.edu.cn, {22S051036, 22S151061}@stu.hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Recovered Data

-*"$*"

Distributed learning frameworks aim to train global models by sharing gradients among clients while preserving the
data privacy of each individual client. However, extensive research has demonstrated that these learning frameworks do
not absolutely ensure the privacy, as training data can be reconstructed from shared gradients. Nevertheless, the existing privacy-breaking attack methods have certain limitations.
Some are applicable only to small models, while others can
only recover images in small batch size and low resolutions,
or with low fidelity. Furthermore, when there are some data
with the same label in a training batch, existing attack methods usually perform poorly. In this work, we successfully address the limitations of existing attacks by two steps. Firstly,
we model the coefficient of variation (CV) of features and
design an evolutionary algorithm based on the minimum CV
to accurately reconstruct the labels of all training data. After
that, we propose a stepwise gradient inversion attack, which
dynamically adapts the objective function, thereby effectively
and rationally promoting the convergence of attack results towards an optimal solution. With these two steps, our method
is able to recover high resolution images (224 ⇥ 224 pixel,
from ImageNet and Web) with high fidelity in distributed
learning scenarios involving complex models and larger batch
size. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach, reveal the potential vulnerabilities of the distributed
learning paradigm, and emphasize the necessity of developing more secure mechanisms. Source code is available at
https:// github.com/ MiLab-HITSZ/ 2023YeHFGradInv.

W

!"#$%&'()*%+%,*
Private Training Data

(a) Overview of threat model in distributed learning
Original

Recovery

Geiping et al.

Yin et al.

Ours

(b) Qualitative comparison between prior art and ours.

Figure 1: Privacy leakage in distributed learning. Client
sends the gradients rW averaged from the batch training
images to the server. The honest-but-curious server recovers
images from rW via gradient inversion.
its own data and uploads the gradients to the server (McMahan et al. 2017; Karimireddy et al. 2020; Long et al. 2020).
The server aggregates these uploaded gradients from participants and distributes the updated model back to them.
Although such an architecture has no need to share training data across clients and server, Zhu et al. (Zhu, Liu, and
Han 2019) have demonstrated that it is still possible for
honest-but-curious server to reconstruct client-side training
data from shared gradients. Specifically, they have recovered
training data from randomly initialized noise by gradient
matching, which aims to minimize the Euclidean distance
between ground-truth gradients and generative gradients of
the recovered data. The feasibility of their method (a.k.a.,
DLG) is verified in a distributed learning scenario, where
pixel-level image reconstruction is achieved.
However, there are still some limitations of DLG. First,
DLG only works well on reconstructing low-resolution
training data in shallow models. Moreover, in practical distributed learning scenario, clients usually input a whole
batch of data at one iteration for training, then upload the
batch-averaged gradients, rather than the gradients of single

Introduction
It is a consensus view that using more training data can help
improve the performance of AI models (Pati et al. 2022).
However, data is usually distributed among different users,
organizations and institutions, and the behaviors of sharing
data for training model collaboratively will obviously result
in privacy leakage (Zhang et al. 2022b). Distributed learning is an emerging paradigm for training AI models collaboratively without the explicit sharing of data (Li et al.
2020; Banabilah et al. 2022; Abreha, Hayajneh, and Serhani
2022). One basic setting of distributed learning is the “clientserver” architecture, in which each client trains locally using
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19983

