The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MFTN: Multi-Level Feature Transfer Network Based on MRI-Transformer for
MR Image Super-Resolution
Shuying Huang1* , Ge Chen2* , Yong Yang3† , Xiaozheng Wang4 , Chenbin Liang2
1

School of Software, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
4
School of Control Science and Engineering, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
huangshuying@tiangong.edu.cn, 2131070961@tiangong.edu.cn, greatyangy@126.com, xiaozhengwang95@gmail.com,
15802268381@163.com
2

Abstract

cost of acquiring MR images. To obtain high-quality MR images, two solutions are usually adopted. One is to introduce
more advanced equipment. However, state-of-the-art equipment is expensive and not widely accessible. The second approach is to utilize computer vision technology to achieve
SR reconstruction of MR images, ensuring richer details are
reconstructed and restored while improving the spatial resolution of the image.

Due to the unique environment and inherent properties of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) instruments, MR images
typically have lower resolution. Therefore, improving the resolution of MR images is beneficial for assisting doctors in
diagnosing the condition. Currently, the existing MR image
super-resolution (SR) methods still have the problem of insufficient detail reconstruction. To overcome this issue, this paper proposes a multi-level feature transfer network (MFTN)
based on MRI-Transformer to realize SR of low-resolution
MRI data. MFTN consists of a multi-scale feature reconstruction network (MFRN) and a multi-level feature extraction branch (MFEB). MFRN is constructed as a pyramid
structure to gradually reconstruct image features at different
scales by integrating the features obtained from MFEB, and
MFEB is constructed to provide detail information at different scales for low resolution MR image SR reconstruction by
constructing multiple MRI-Transformer modules. Each MRITransformer module is designed to learn the transfer features
from the reference image by establishing feature correlations
between the reference image and low-resolution MR image.
In addition, a contrast learning constraint item is added to the
loss function to enhance the texture details of the SR image.
A large number of experiments show that our network can
effectively reconstruct high-quality MR Images and achieves
better performance compared to some state-of-the-art methods. The source code of this work will be released on GitHub.

Currently SR techniques for MR images can mainly be
divided into two categories: single-contrast SR methods
and multi-contrast SR methods. Single-contrast SR methods
only utilizes the information of the single modality degraded
image itself to improve its resolution, but the obtained feature information is limited and singular. The multi-contrast
SR methods restore more information by utilizing highresolution (HR) images from another modality as reference
images, thereby reconstructing HR images with more texture details. Currently, most of the SR works for MR images
use the multi-contrast reconstruction way, which achieve the
reconstruction of one modality image by utilizing two different modalities of MR images. Figure 1 shows two sets
of different modality MR images with the same anatomical structure, such as fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) and T2-weighted images, proton density-weighted
(PDWI) and fat-suppressed proton density-weighted (FSPDWI) images, which are generated by adjusting the parameter settings of the MRI machine. From the figure, it can be
seen that the two images have the same structure, but emphasize different details. Therefore, one of the images can
be used as a reference image for SR reconstruction of the
other image.

Introduction
Compared to CT and PET imaging, MRI is more effective
in detecting early lesions that are not easily noticeable and
has become the most efficient imaging diagnostic method
for diseases such as the brain and spinal cord. Furthermore,
MRI is nonionizing and harmless to the human body. However, MRI scans require longer acquisition times to obtain
high-resolution MR images, and due to limitations in device
hardware and post-processing, an increase in image resolution will also reduce the signal-to-noise ratio of the image.
This will also increase the consumption of hardware facilities and shorten their lifespan, leading to an increase in the

In the recent study, MSPN (Lyu et al. 2020) introduced
neural networks of different levels to perform multi-contrast
image fusion. Although this method generates more information, there is also a problem of insufficient detail reconstruction due to a lack of attention to long-distance information. MINet (Feng et al. 2021a) adopted multi-stage integrated network to carry out multi-contrast MR Image SR,
but it reconstructed features in HR space without reconstructing intermediate scale features, resulting in the problem of missing details. WavTrans (Li et al. 2022b) introduced wavelet transform into the network and designed

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2366

