The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Doubly Perturbed Task Free Continual Learning
Byung Hyun Lee1 , Min-hwan Oh2 , Se Young Chun1,3,†
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University
3
INMC & IPAI, Seoul National University
ldlqudgus756@snu.ac.kr, minoh@snu.ac.kr, sychun@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

et al. 2017; Jung et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021), rehearsalbased methods (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Shin et al.
2017; Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017; Chaudhry et al.
2018b, 2021), and architecture-based methods (Mallya and
Lazebnik 2018; Serra et al. 2018).
In Task Free CL (TF-CL) (Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and
Tuytelaars 2019), the model incrementally learns classes
in an online manner agnostic to the task shift, which is
considered more realistic and practical, but more challenging setup than offline CL (Koh et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022). The dominant approach to relieve forgetting in TFCL is memory-based approaches (Aljundi, Kelchtermans,
and Tuytelaars 2019; Pourcel, Vu, and French 2022). They
employ a small memory buffer to preserve a few past samples and replay them when training on a new task, but the
restrictions on the available memory capacity highly degenerate performance on past tasks.
Recently, several works suggested evolving the data distribution in memory by perturbing memory samples (Wang
et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2021). Meanwhile, flattening the weight
loss landscape has also shown benefits in CL setups (Cha
et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2021). However, most of the prior CL
works primarily concentrated on past samples, often overlooking future samples. Note that many CL studies use “i.i.d.
offline” as the oracle method of the best possible performance, not only for past and present data but also for future data. Therefore, incorporating unknown future samples
in the CL model could be helpful in reducing forgetting and
enhancing learning when training with real future samples.
In this work, we first demonstrate an upper bound for
the TF-CL problem with unknown future samples, considering both adversarial input and weight perturbation, which
has not been fully explained yet. Based on the observation,
we propose a method, doubly perturbed continual learning (DPCL), addressing adversarial input perturbation with
perturbed function interpolation and weight perturbation,
specifically for classifier weights, through branched stochastic classifiers. Furthermore, we design a simple memory
management strategy and adaptive learning rate scheduling
induced by the perturbation. In experiments, our method significantly outperforms the existing rehearsal-based methods
on various CL setups and benchmarks. Here is the summary
of our contributions.

Task Free online Continual Learning (TF-CL) is a challenging problem where the model incrementally learns tasks without explicit task information. Although training with entire
data from the past, present as well as future is considered
as the gold standard, naive approaches in TF-CL with the
current samples may be conflicted with learning with samples in the future, leading to catastrophic forgetting and poor
plasticity. Thus, a proactive consideration of an unseen future sample in TF-CL becomes imperative. Motivated by this
intuition, we propose a novel TF-CL framework considering future samples and show that injecting adversarial perturbations on both input data and decision-making is effective. Then, we propose a novel method named Doubly Perturbed Continual Learning (DPCL) to efficiently implement
these input and decision-making perturbations. Specifically,
for input perturbation, we propose an approximate perturbation method that injects noise into the input data as well as the
feature vector and then interpolates the two perturbed samples. For decision-making process perturbation, we devise
multiple stochastic classifiers. We also investigate a memory management scheme and learning rate scheduling reflecting our proposed double perturbations. We demonstrate that
our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art baseline methods by large margins on various TF-CL benchmarks.

Introduction
Continual learning (CL) addresses the challenge of effectively learning tasks when training data arrives sequentially.
A notorious drawback of deep neural networks in a continual learning is catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). As these networks learn new tasks, they often
forget previously learned tasks, causing a decline in performance on those earlier tasks. If, on the other hand, we
restrict the update in the network parameters to counteract
the catastrophic forgetting, the learning capacity for newer
tasks can be hindered. This dichotomy gives rise to what
is known as the stability-plasticity dilemma (Carpenter and
Grossberg 1987; Mermillod, Bugaiska, and Bonin 2013).
The solutions to overcome this challenge fall into three
main strategies: regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
† Corresponding author.

• We propose an optimization framework for TF-CL and

13346

