The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reviewing the Forgotten Classes for Domain Adaptation of Black-Box Predictors
Shaojie Zhang1,2 , Chun Shen1,2,3 , Shuai Lü1,2,3 * , Zeyu Zhang1,3
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering (Jilin University), Ministry of Education, China
2
College of Software, Jilin University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
{lus, shenchun}@jlu.edu.cn, {sjzhang22, zeyuz22}@mails.jlu.edu.cn

100

Accuracy (%)

Abstract
For addressing the data privacy and portability issues of domain adaptation, Domain Adaptation of Black-Box Predictors (DABP) aims to adapt a black-box source model to an
unlabeled target domain without accessing both the sourcedomain data and details of the source model. Although existing DABP approaches based on knowledge distillation (KD)
have achieved promising results, we experimentally find that
these methods all have the minority class forgetting issue,
which refers that the trained model completely forgets some
minority classes. To address this issue, we propose a method
called Reviewing the Forgotten Classes (RFC), which including two main modules. Firstly, we propose a simple but effective component called selection training (ST). ST selects
classes that the model tends to forget according to the learning status of the model and obtains clean samples of the selected classes with the small-loss criterion for enhanced training. ST is orthogonal to previous methods and can effectively
alleviate their minority class forgetting issue. Secondly, we
find that neighborhood clustering (NC) can help the model
learn more balanced than KD so that further alleviate the minority class forgetting issue. However, NC is based on the
fact that target features from the source model already form
some semantic structure, while DABP is unable to obtain the
source model. Thus, we use KD and ST to warm up the target model to form a certain semantic structure. Overall, our
method inherits the merits of both ST and NC, and achieves
state of the art on three DABP benchmarks.

DINE
BETA

80
60
40
20
0

12

Office-31
Office-Home

10

Number

1

8
6
4
2

0

5

10

15

Class

20

(a) Accuracy

25

30

0

Total

DINE

BETA

Method

SO

RFC

(b) Forgetting frequency

Figure 1: (a) The per-class accuracies of existing methods on
Office-31(W→A); (b) The forgetting frequency on Office31 and Office-Home; “Total” is the total number of tasks on
each dataset and “SO” means the source-only model.

still suffers from the data privacy issue due to generation
techniques like generative adversarial learning, and also requires the target domain to employ the same network as the
source domain, which is unfriendly to low-resource target
users. Therefore, Domain Adaptation of Black-Box Predictors (DABP) (Liang et al. 2022) is proposed to learn a model
with only the unlabeled target-domain data and a black-box
source predictor.
Existing DABP methods have achieved promising performance, but we experimentally find that these methods all
suffer from the minority class forgetting issue, which refers
that the model trained with existing methods completely forget some classes (the accuracies of these classes are 0%) during the learning process, like the classes 8 and 28 on Office31 (W→A) shown in Fig. 1(a). The main reason is that these
methods utilize the imbalanced predictions of target domain
samples from the source model due to the domain shift and
teach the model by knowledge distillation throughout the entire training stage, which results that samples actually belonging to minority classes are prone to be pushed in majority classes. Fig. 1(b) shows that current state-of-the-art methods, DINE (Liang et al. 2022) and BETA (Yang et al. 2023),
suffer from the minority class forgetting issue severely, especially over 9 (totally 12) transfer tasks on Office-Home for
both methods. However, to the best of our knowledge, there
is currently no research on this issue. In addition, previous
methods use a two-stage knowledge distillation framework,
including the distillation stage and the fine-tuning stage,

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved significant performance on visual tasks in multiple fields, such as image classification
(Qian, Hang, and Liu 2022) and semantic segmentation
(Huang et al. 2022). However, it is limited by the need for
large-scale labeling. Therefore, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is proposed, which aims to transfer the knowledge from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain with access to both source data and models.
In view of the importance of data privacy, source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is proposed, which can adapt a
pre-trained source model to the unlabeled target domain
without accessing the private source data. Even so, SFDA
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16830

