The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decentralized Sum-of-Nonconvex Optimization
Zhuanghua Liu1, 2 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
CNRS@CREATE LTD, 1 Create Way, #08-01 CREATE Tower, Singapore 138602
liuzhuanghua9@gmail.com, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

objective function:
m

We consider the optimization problem of minimizing the
sum-of-nonconvex function, i.e., a convex function that is the
average of nonconvex components. The existing stochastic
algorithms for such a problem only focus on a single machine and the centralized scenario. In this paper, we study
the sum-of-nonconvex optimization in the decentralized setting. We present a new theoretical analysis of the PMGTSVRG algorithm for this problem and prove the linear convergence of their approach. However, the convergence rate of
the PMGT-SVRG algorithm has a linear dependency on the
condition number, which is undesirable for the ill-conditioned
problem. To remedy this issue, we propose an accelerated
stochastic decentralized first-order algorithm by incorporating the techniques of acceleration, gradient tracking, and
multi-consensus mixing into the SVRG algorithm. The convergence rate of the proposed method has a square-root dependency on the condition number. The numerical experiments validate the theoretical guarantee of our proposed algorithms on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

min F (x) := f (x) + ψ(x),

x∈Rd

f (x) :=

1 X
fi (x) (1)
m i=1

where f (x) is convex and smooth, and ψ(·) is convex but
possibly non-smooth (e.g., ℓ1 -regularization term). We suppose there are m agents and the i-th agent stores the local
objective function fi (x) which can be written as a finite-sum
form:
n
1X
fi,j (x)
fi (x) :=
n j=1
where n is the number of components and each fi,j (x)
is smooth but possibly non-convex. The sum-of-nonconvex
optimization is common in real-world applications, including 1-PCA (Saad 2011), k-PCA (Allen-Zhu and Li 2016),
online eigenvector problem (Allen-Zhu and Li 2017), and
general nonconvex optimization (Agarwal et al. 2016; Carmon et al. 2018).
Existing decentralized first-order optimization algorithms
suffer several limitations in solving Problem (1): (i) The decentralized deterministic algorithms, such as EXTRA (Shi
et al. 2015a), Exact-Diffusion (Yuan et al. 2018), P2D2
(Alghunaim, Yuan, and Sayed 2019), and SONATA (Sun,
Daneshmand, and Scutari 2019), need access to the full gradient at each round. The computational cost of each iteration
is prohibitively expensive on massive datasets. (ii) While existing decentralized stochastic methods achieve a cheaper
per-iteration cost by sampling a minibatch of samples, the
theoretical analysis of these approaches is not specialized in
the sum-of-nonconvex optimization problem. One class of
methods (Shi et al. 2015a; Xin, Khan, and Kar 2020; Ye,
Xiong, and Zhang 2020) assumes that all component functions fi,j (·) are convex such that the global objective function f (·) is convex1 . Convergence analysis of these works
does not apply to Problem (1) due to the mismatch of problem assumptions. The other class of methods (Li, Li, and
Chi 2022; Luo and Ye 2022; Xin, Khan, and Kar 2022) assumes that component functions fi,j (·) are nonconvex and

Introduction

The exponential growth of data in the past decades has
sparked substantial interest in developing algorithms distributed over multiple agents. A common scenario is that
each agent within some network topology owns a disjoint
subset of data, and they collaborate to tackle a global optimization objective. The network topology in which each
agent resides can be classified into two categories: clientserver vs. decentralized settings. For the former setting, a
central parameter server communicates with all the workers
and aggregates the information collected from them (Li et al.
2014). When there is a large volume of data on each agent,
the central server becomes the bottleneck in the whole network. For the latter setting, each agent only communicates
with its direct neighbors to exchange their information and
finish the global task (Lian et al. 2017).
This paper focuses on stochastic optimization for minimizing the sum-of-nonconvex objective function in the decentralized setting. We formulate our problem as a convex
optimization problem collaboratively solved by m agents in
the network. Consider the following composite optimization

1
Ye, Xiong, and Zhang (2020) have claimed that each component function can be possibly nonconvex. However, Assumption 1 in their work requires each component function to be both
L-smooth and convex, otherwise Eq. (3) cannot be satisfied.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14088

