The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

E2HQV: High-Quality Video Generation from Event Camera via Theory-Inspired
Model-Aided Deep Learning
Qiang Qu1 , Yiran Shen2 * , Xiaoming Chen3 * , Yuk Ying Chung1 , Tongliang Liu1
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney.
2
School of Software, Shandong University.
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University.
{vincent.qu, vera.chung, tongliang.liu}@sydney.edu.au; yiran.shen@sdu.edu; xiaoming.chen@btbu.edu.cn

Abstract

including high temporal resolution, high dynamic range of
up to 140dB (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008), and
low resource consumption due to the sparse nature of eventstreams. For example, the DVS128 sensor platform consumes 150 times less energy than a conventional CMOS
camera (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008).
Despite the appealing advantages of event cameras, the
non-structural event-streams are not inherently compatible
with traditional computer vision methodologies (Scheerlinck et al. 2020) and the visualization is not intuitive
for human users to understand. To address the above issue, the research on events-to-video (E2V), which aims to
generate video frames from pure event-streams, has been
raised to provide convenient and intuitive access to the rich
information encapsulated in the sparse and non-structure
event-streams. There have been a number of successful approaches for E2V task, such as E2VID (Rebecq et al. 2019),
FireNet (Scheerlinck et al. 2020), SPADE-E2VID (Cadena
et al. 2021), and ET-Net (Weng, Zhang, and Xiong 2021).

The bio-inspired event cameras or dynamic vision sensors
are capable of asynchronously capturing per-pixel brightness
changes (called event-streams) in high temporal resolution
and high dynamic range. However, the non-structural spatialtemporal event-streams make it challenging for providing intuitive visualization with rich semantic information for human vision. It calls for events-to-video (E2V) solutions which
take event-streams as input and generate high quality video
frames for intuitive visualization. However, current solutions
are predominantly data-driven without considering the prior
knowledge of the underlying statistics relating event-streams
and video frames. It highly relies on the non-linearity and
generalization capability of the deep neural networks, thus,
is struggling on reconstructing detailed textures when the
scenes are complex. In this work, we propose E2HQV, a
novel E2V paradigm designed to produce high-quality video
frames from events. This approach leverages a model-aided
deep learning framework, underpinned by a theory-inspired
E2V model, which is meticulously derived from the fundamental imaging principles of event cameras. To deal with the
issue of state-reset in the recurrent components of E2HQV,
we also design a temporal shift embedding module to further
improve the quality of the video frames. Comprehensive evaluations on the real world event camera datasets validate our
approach, with E2HQV, notably outperforming state-of-theart approaches, e.g., surpassing the second best by over 40%
for some evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Inspired by the human visual system, Silicon Retina (Mahowald 1991) has pioneered an approach to perceptual
sensing with event cameras or Dynamic Vision Sensors
(DVS) (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Posch, Matolin, and Wohlgenannt 2010; Berner et al. 2013) and gained
significant interests from both academia and industry. Unlike traditional cameras, event cameras detect microsecondlevel intensity changes, generating an asynchronous stream
of ‘events’, termed as event-stream. Event cameras offer
several advantages over conventional CCD/CMOS cameras,

Figure 1: Conceptual Overview of the Proposed ModelAided Learning Framework.
However, the quality of the video frames generated by
the existing E2V approaches is still not satisfactory and fail
to recover detailed texture for the complex scenes (Ercan
et al. 2023). This issue is predominantly attributed to the
fact that many of these approaches, such as E2VID and ETNet, primarily adopt a purely data-driven approach to learn
the mapping from event-streams to video frames directly.
However, the purely data-driven approaches are lack of in-

* Corresponding author. The implementation of our work is publicly available at https://github.com/VincentQQu/E2HQV.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4632

