The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parallel Ranking of Ads and Creatives in Real-Time Advertising Systems
Zhiguang Yang, Liufang Sang* , Haoran Wang, Wenlong Chen, Lu Wang, Jie He, Changping Peng,
Zhangang Lin, Chun Gan, Jingping Shao
JD.com
zgyang1996@gmail.com, sangliufang@jd.com, wanghaoran35@jd.com, chenwenlong17@jd.com, wanglu319@jd.com,
hejie67@jd.com, pengchangping@jd.com, linzhangang@jd.com, ganchun1@jd.com, shaojingping@jd.com

Abstract
CTR: 2.8%

Creativity is the heart and soul of advertising services. Effective creatives can create a win-win scenario: advertisers
reach target users and achieve marketing objectives more effectively, users find products of interest more quickly, and
platforms generate more advertising revenue. With the advent
of AI-Generated Content, advertisers now can produce vast
amounts of creative content at a minimal cost. The current
challenge lies in how advertising systems can select the most
pertinent creative in real-time for each user personally. Existing methods typically perform serial ranking of ads or creatives, limiting the creative module in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency. In this paper, we propose for the first time
a novel architecture for online parallel estimation of ads and
creatives ranking, as well as the corresponding offline joint
optimization model. The online architecture enables sophisticated personalized creative modeling while reducing overall latency. The offline joint model for CTR estimation allows
mutual awareness and collaborative optimization between ads
and creatives. Additionally, we optimize the offline evaluation metrics for the implicit feedback sorting task involved
in ad creative ranking. We conduct extensive experiments to
compare ours with two state-of-the-art approaches. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in both
offline evaluations and real-world advertising platforms online in terms of response time, CTR, and CPM.

CTR: 3.3%
CTR: 2.2%

CTR: 2.9%

CTR: 2.5%
CTR: 2.6%

CTR: 2.3%

CTR: 3.1%

CTR: 3.0%

ECOVACS Deebot Omni
Robot Vacuum and Mop

La Mer Gift Box – Essence +
Face Cream + Eye Cream

Figure 1: The CTR comparison across different creatives
for the same product, demonstrates that creatives can have
a significant impact on CTR. Creatives can highlight product attributes in various ways, such as intuitively displaying
the product itself, presenting scenarios of using the product,
or emphasizing special pricing or other selling points of the
product. The first column shows the overall CTR for three
creatives of the same product, underscoring that even welldesigned creatives may underperform. The second column
presents the CTR by gender for different creatives of the
same product, further emphasizing the importance of personalized creative selection.

Introduction
Online advertising has revolutionized the revenue generation landscape for e-commerce platforms such as Amazon,
Taobao, and JD.com, emerging as a pivotal source of income
in the digital era. These modern advertising platforms have
harnessed the power of personalized advertising, leveraging
user interests and preferences to deliver targeted product displays. Creatives, as shown in Fig.1, are the heart and soul of
advertising services(Halinen 1996), acting as a bridge between users and products. Through various display formats,
such as images, titles, and videos, creatives spotlight the
unique qualities and benefits of products to engage potential buyers. With the rapid evolution of AI-Generated Content(AIGC) technologies(Brown et al. 2020; Rombach et al.

2022), advertisers now have the ability to generate an extensive range of creatives, tailored to different product attributes
and styles, to captivate and engage users. Consequently, the
creative ranking module, which can dynamically select the
most compelling advertising creatives based on real-time
user preferences has become increasingly crucial.
Current recommendation systems mainly adopt a twostage cascading architecture: candidate retrieval and ranking. In retrieval, billions of ad candidates are narrowed down
to thousands. With M(M >1000) ad candidates and N(N

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9278

