The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GridFormer: Point-Grid Transformer for Surface Reconstruction
Shengtao Li1,2 , Ge Gao1,2 * , Yudong Liu1,2 , Yu-Shen Liu2 , Ming Gu1,2
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
list21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaoge@tsinghua.edu.cn,
liuyd23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, guming@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Implicit neural networks have emerged as a crucial technology in 3D surface reconstruction. To reconstruct continuous surfaces from discrete point clouds, encoding the input points into regular grid features (plane or volume) has
been commonly employed in existing approaches. However,
these methods typically use the grid as an index for uniformly scattering point features. Compared with the irregular point features, the regular grid features may sacrifice
some reconstruction details but improve efficiency. To take
full advantage of these two types of features, we introduce
a novel and high-efficiency attention mechanism between
the grid and point features named Point-Grid Transformer
(GridFormer). This mechanism treats the grid as a transfer point connecting the space and point cloud. Our method
maximizes the spatial expressiveness of grid features and
maintains computational efficiency. Furthermore, optimizing
predictions over the entire space could potentially result in
blurred boundaries. To address this issue, we further propose a boundary optimization strategy incorporating margin
binary cross-entropy loss and boundary sampling. This approach enables us to achieve a more precise representation
of the object structure. Our experiments validate that our
method is effective and outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches under widely used benchmarks by producing more
precise geometry reconstructions. The code is available at
https://github.com/list17/GridFormer.

(a) Ground Truth

(c) ALTO

(b) POCO

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Visualization of the complex scene reconstruction
results on the Synthetic Rooms dataset (Peng et al. 2020).
Our method can produce high-fidelity reconstructions compared with the point-based method POCO (Boulch and Marlet 2022) and the grid-based method ALTO (Wang et al.
2023).

Typically, these methods encode the point cloud using either a single global feature or regular local grid features. The
regular grid features are learned by uniformly distributing
the point-wise features across each grid. While regular grid
features capture information averagely from every point of
the space, they may overlook the shape details in the point
cloud. Some other methods will attach the features to the
input points (Boulch and Marlet 2022; Zhang, Nießner, and
Wonka 2022) or move the regular grid features close to the
surface (Li et al. 2022). These irregular features can represent the 3D shape more accurately. However, connecting the
irregular features with the space can be difficult. Also, the
target occupancy function is not differentiable or even not
continuous at the zero level. This intrinsic property increases
the error bound and makes training more difficult.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel and
highly efficient attention mechanism that bridges the space
and point cloud by treating the grid as a transfer point. Figure 2 shows the difference between our approach and the
previous techniques based on point or grid structures. The
point-based method can effectively obtain the shape information from the point cloud, but the irregular structure of

Introduction
Perceiving and modeling the surrounding world are essential tasks in 3D computer vision. Point clouds obtained from
various sensors allow us to capture discrete spatial information about 3D surfaces directly. Surface reconstruction plays
a vital role in converting this discrete representation into a
continuous one. Recently, learning-based approaches have
gained significant popularity in reconstructing point clouds.
These implicit methods employ a conversion process that
transforms the input point cloud into a global feature to represent the spatial continuous field of a 3D shape. However,
bridging the gap between the continuous space and the discrete point cloud poses challenges, resulting in varying reconstruction outcomes across different representations.
* Corresponding author: Ge Gao
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3163

