The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Asymmetric Mutual Alignment for Unsupervised Zero-Shot Sketch-Based Image
Retrieval
Zhihui Yin1 , Jiexi Yan2 * , Chenghao Xu1 , Cheng Deng1∗
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
yzh.xdu@gmail.com, yanjiexi@xidian.edu.cn, chx@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chdeng.xd@gmail.com
2

Abstract
In recent years, many methods have been proposed to address
the zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval (ZS-SBIR) task,
which is a practical problem in many applications. However,
in real-world scenarios, on the one hand, we can not obtain
training data with the same distribution as the test data, and
on the other hand, the labels of training data are not available as usual. To tackle this issue, we focus on a new problem, namely unsupervised zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval (UZS-SBIR), where the available training data does
not have labels while the training and testing categories are
not overlapping. In this paper, we introduce a new asymmetric
mutual alignment method (AMA) including a self-distillation
module and a cross-modality mutual alignment module. First,
we conduct self-distillation to extract the feature embeddings from unlabeled data. Due to the lack of available information in an unsupervised manner, we employ the crossmodality mutual alignment module to further excavate underlying intra-modality and inter-modality relationships from
unlabeled data, and take full advantage of these correlations
to align the feature embeddings in image and sketch domains.
Meanwhile, the feature representations are enhanced by the
intra-modality clustering relations, leading to better generalization ability to unseen classes. Moreover, we conduct an
asymmetric strategy to update the teacher and student networks, respectively. Extensive experimental results on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
method.

Figure 1: The setting of ZS-SBIR and UZS-SBIR. (a) ZSSBIR typically trains on seen classes and supplemented with
labels auxiliary such as word embeddings. (b) UZS-SBIR
also trains on seen classes. However, due to the absence of
labels, it is impossible to establish a one-to-one correspondence between training samples of sketches and images. (c)
Both of them test on unseen classes for retrieval.
The application scenarios where SBIR is feasible are
closer to the zero-shot setting, requiring the training and testing categories to be non-overlapping. ZS-SBIR (Yelamarthi
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Tian et al. 2022; Sain et al. 2023;
Lin et al. 2023), which combines zero-shot learning (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2013; Xian et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2022) and SBIR as a single task, has
become a research problem that has garnered increased attention recently. These works leverage labeled data and external auxiliary knowledge to achieve cross-category adaptation between sketches and images. However, the origin
of the ZS-SBIR problem stems from the scarcity of annotated sketches. Therefore, we approach the essence of the
problem and investigate Unsupervised Zero-shot Sketch Retrieval (UZS-SBIR) which eliminates the necessity of any
annotations.
A core challenge in UZS-SBIR is how to effectively
leverage unlabeled cross-modality data. To tackle this is-

Introduction
Sketch-based Image Retrieval (SBIR) (Eitz et al. 2010; Qi
et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017) is a practical problem that
addresses retrieving relevant images from a gallery using
sketches as queries. Under the framework of deep neural networks, SBIR focuses on learning better representations for
abstract sketches (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012) and the domain gap between sketches and images (Yu et al. 2016; Song
et al. 2017). Since sketches can effectively convey the shape,
pose, and fine-grained details of relevant objects, SBIR provides a superior alternative to text-based methods for retrieving images in situations where language cannot express visual characteristics accurately.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16504

