The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Zero-Shot Task Adaptation with Relevant Feature Information
Atsutoshi Kumagai1 , Tomoharu Iwata2 , Yasuhiro Fujiwara2
1

NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
2
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
atsutoshi.kumagai@ntt.com, tomoharu.iwata@ntt.com, yasuhiro.fujiwara@ntt.com

Features

Abstract

z soccer

We propose a method to learn prediction models such as classifiers for unseen target tasks where labeled and unlabeled
data are absent but a few relevant input features for solving
the tasks are given. Although machine learning requires data
for training, data are often difficult to collect in practice. On
the other hand, for many applications, a few relevant features
would be more easily obtained. Although zero-shot learning
or zero-shot domain adaptation use external knowledge to
adapt to unseen classes or tasks without data, relevant features
have not been used in existing studies. The proposed method
improves the generalization performance on the target tasks,
where there are no data but a few relevant features are given,
by meta-learning from labeled data in related tasks. In the
meta-learning phase, it is essential to simulate test phases
on target tasks where prediction model learning is required
without data. To this end, our neural network-based prediction model is meta-learned such that it correctly responds to
perturbations of the relevant features on randomly generated
synthetic data. By this modeling, the prediction model can
explicitly learn the discriminability of the relevant features
without real target data. When unlabeled training data are
available in the target tasks, the proposed method can incorporate such data to boost the performance in a unified framework. Our experiments show that the proposed method outperforms existing methods with four real-world datasets.

‘python’ ‘kick’ ‘rebound’ ‘iphone’

‘ball’

‘bayes’

= ( 0

1

0

0

0

0

z basketball = ( 0

0

1

0

0

0

…

…

‘offside’
1

)

0

)

Figure 1: An example of relevant feature information. For
clarity, we consider a text classification task (soccer vs. basketball), whose feature space is a lexical space. Note that the
proposed method can be applied to not only text domains.
zsoccer (zbasketball ) is a vector representing some relevant
features for the soccer (basketball) class. Here, the value 1
indicates that the corresponding feature (word) is relevant
for the class and 0 means unknown. The features “kick” and
“offside” are relevant features for the soccer class, while
“rebound” is relevant for the basketball class. These relevant features are useful to discriminate two classes. The dimensionality of zsoccer , zbasketball , and feature vectors to be
classified is the same.

where such information is available and useful. For example,
in text classification, we can associate some relevant features
(words) from the names of the classes only. In medical care,
even when data of patients are difficult to share due to privacy concerns, a few relevant features might be possible to
share because individuals cannot be identified from them. In
cyber security, although data of new attacks or malware are
difficult to obtain due to scarcity, information on some of
the features that characterize them is often obtainable from
security reports and other sources.
On the other hand, even if labeled data are difficult to collect on a task of interest, called a target task, they might be
available in different but related tasks, called source tasks.
In the above examples, for text classification, labeled texts
of other classes might be available. For medical care, data of
patients in own hospital can be used. In cyber security, data
of existing/old attacks or malware can be accumulated.
Zero-shot learning or zero-shot domain adaptation aims
to adapt to unseen classes or tasks that never appeared during the training phase by using labeled data in other classes
or tasks (Wang et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Yang and
Hospedales 2015b; Ishii, Takenouchi, and Sugiyama 2019).
To adapt to unseen classes or tasks without data, they require auxiliary information about the classes or tasks. For

Introduction
Supervised learning requires labeled data for training. However, in real-world applications, such data are often timeconsuming and impractical to collect since the label for each
instance needs to be manually assigned by domain experts.
Even unlabeled data might be difficult to use for training
in some applications due to privacy concerns (Chen, Pastro,
and Raykova 2019) and security issues (Kumagai and Iwata
2016). In contrast, prior knowledge about the task may be
available in practice even if the data themselves are difficult
to collect. In this paper, for such knowledge, we consider
relevant features on the input feature space for solving the
task. Figure 1 illustrates an example of the relevant feature
information. Since full set of relevant features is generally
difficult to known in advance, we assume that a few relevant
features are available. There are many possible applications
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13283

