The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cumulative Regret Analysis of the Piyavskii–Shubert Algorithm and Its Variants
for Global Optimization
Kaan Gokcesu1,4 , Hakan Gokcesu2,3
2

1
Regrify AI
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
3
Network Technologies Next Generation R&D, Turkcell Technology, Istanbul, Turkey
4
MIT EECS
gokcesu@regrify.com, hgokcesu@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract

derivative-free optimization (Rios and Sahinidis 2013). In
the problem of global optimization, we have a function f (·)
that we want to optimize. Let this function f (·) be univariate such that f (·) : Θ → Ω, where Θ, Ω ⊂ ℜ and they are
compact intervals. The goal of the global optimization is to
find the optimizer of this function f (·) with as little evaluations of the function as possible. Every time a new point x
is queried, only its value f (x), i.e., the result of the query, is
revealed. Thus, for any query x ∈ Θ, we observe f (x) ∈ Ω.
Without loss of generality, let Θ = [0, 1], since optimization
on any compact interval Θ can be reduced to optimization
on [0, 1] after translating and scaling of the input x.

We study the problem of global optimization, where we analyze the performance of the Piyavskii–Shubert algorithm and
its variants. For any given time duration T , instead of the extensively studied simple regret (which is the difference of the
losses between the best estimate up to T and the global minimum), we study the cumulative regret up to time T . For LLipschitz continuous functions, we show that the cumulative
regret is O(L log T ). For H-Lipschitz smooth functions, we
show that the cumulative regret is O(H). We analytically extend our results for functions with Hölder continuous derivatives, which cover both the Lipschitz continuous and the Lipschitz smooth functions, individually. We further show that a
simpler variant of the Piyavskii–Shubert algorithm performs
just as well as the traditional variants for the Lipschitz continuous or the Lipschitz smooth functions. We further extend
our results to broader classes of functions, and show that,
our algorithm efficiently determines its queries; and achieves
nearly minimax optimal (up to log factors) cumulative regret,
for general convex or even concave regularity conditions on
the extrema of the objective (which encompasses many preceding regularities). We consider further extensions by investigating the performance of the Piyavskii-iShubert variants in
the scenarios with unknown regularity, noisy evaluation and
multivariate domain.

Related Works
Global optimization has received considerable attention over
the past decades. Many algorithms have been proposed
in a myriad of fields such as convex optimization (Nesterov 2003; Boyd, Boyd, and Vandenberghe 2004; Bubeck
2015), non-convex optimization (Hansen, Jaumard, and Lu
1992, 1991; Jones, Perttunen, and Stuckman 1993; Jain
and Kar 2017; Basso 1982; Shang, Kaufmann, and Valko
2019), stochastic optimization (or approximation) (Spall
2005; Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2012), Bayesian optimization
(Brochu, Cora, and De Freitas 2010), bandit optimization
over metric spaces (Munos 2014). Additionally, due to numerous applications, it has been heavily utilized in decision theory (Moody and Saffell 2001), control theory
(Berenji and Khedkar 1992), game theory (Song, Lewis,
and Wei 2016), distribution estimation (Gokcesu and Kozat
2018a; Willems 1996; Gokcesu and Kozat 2017; Shamir
and Merhav 1999), anomaly detection (Gokcesu et al. 2019;
Delibalta et al. 2016), signal processing (Ozkan et al. 2015),
prediction (Singer and Feder 1999; Vanli et al. 2016), multiarmed bandits (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012; Gokcesu
and Kozat 2018b; Neyshabouri et al. 2018).
There exists various heuristics in literature that deal with
this problem such as model-based methods, genetic algorithms and Bayesian optimization. However, the most popular approach is the regularity-based methods since, in many
applications, the system has some inherent regularity in
its objective, i.e., f (·) satisfies some regularity condition.
While there are works with different regularity conditions
(e.g., (Bartlett, Gabillon, and Valko 2019), (Grill, Valko, and
Munos 2015) use a notion of smoothness related to hierar-

Introduction
In many applications such as hyper-parameter tuning for
learning algorithms and complex system design, the goal is
to optimize an unknown function with as few evaluations as
possible and use that optimal point in the design (Poor 1994;
Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006). In these types of problems,
evaluating the performance of a set of parameters often requires numerical simulations (or cross-validations) with significant computational cost; and the constraints of the application often require a sequential exploration of the solution
space with small number of evaluations. Moreover, the function to be optimized may not necessarily have nice properties such as linearity or convexity. This generic problem
of sequentially optimizing the output of an unknown and
potentially non-convex function is often referred to as the
following terminologies: global optimization (Pintér 1991),
black-box optimization (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch 1998),
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20700

