The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bidirectional Contrastive Split Learning for Visual Question Answering
Yuwei Sun1,2 , Hideya Ochiai1
1

The University of Tokyo
2
RIKEN AIP
ywsun@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, ochiai@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

We aim to overcome the aforementioned challenges
by proposing the Bidirectional Contrastive Split Learning
(BiCSL) method. Different from FL which trains the entire model on a local device, BiCSL decouples a large-scale
model into client components and cloud components. This
avoids the potential misuse of the exposed model architecture by attackers, such as mounting a backdoor attack using
the revealed architecture. BiCSL learns refined cross-modal
representations from different clients via inter-module gradient sharing and inter-client weight sharing, without revealing either the user data or the model architecture (Figure 1).
This is enabled by a self-supervised learning method to correlate various decentralized modules.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1) We propose a novel self-supervised split learning
method for VQA, called Bidirectional Contrastive Split
Learning (BiCSL). BiCSL trains a global model over the entire client data distribution without disclosing either training
data or model architecture. This is the first study of selfsupervised decentralized VQA.
2) This study demonstrates BiCSL’s ability to tackle
self-supervised learning of decentralized multi-modal data.
BiCSL devises a contrastive learning method to align module activations encouraging similarity between relevant outputs while discouraging similarity between irrelevant ones.
3) An in-depth evaluation with a wide range of metrics
including robustness to adversarial attack is conducted. The
results show that our method could achieve competitive performance compared to a centralized method, while ensuring
privacy protection and maintaining great performance even
under adversarial attacks.

Visual Question Answering (VQA) based on multi-modal
data facilitates real-life applications such as home robots and
medical diagnoses. One significant challenge is to devise a
robust decentralized learning framework for various client
models where centralized data collection is refrained due to
confidentiality concerns. This work aims to tackle privacypreserving VQA by decoupling a multi-modal model into
representation modules and a contrastive module, leveraging
inter-module gradients sharing and inter-client weight sharing. To this end, we propose Bidirectional Contrastive Split
Learning (BiCSL) to train a global multi-modal model on
the entire data distribution of decentralized clients. We employ the contrastive loss that enables a more efficient selfsupervised learning of decentralized modules. Comprehensive experiments are conducted on the VQA-v2 dataset based
on five SOTA VQA models, demonstrating the effectiveness
of the proposed method. Furthermore, we inspect BiCSL’s robustness against a dual-key backdoor attack on VQA. Consequently, BiCSL shows significantly enhanced resilience when
exposed to the multi-modal adversarial attack compared to
the centralized learning method, which provides a promising
approach to decentralized multi-modal learning.

Introduction
The deployment of multi-modal models in safety-critical applications, such as personal robots and healthcare, requires
addressing robust architecture design. The collected vast
amount of user data causes critical privacy concern. Unfortunately, few studies have focused on enhancing privacy
for multi-modal models. For instance, Visual Question Answering (VQA) requires a large amount of data in both texts
and images that indicate a wide range of personal interests.
Decentralized machine learning, such as federated learning
(FL), is one of the approaches to privacy-preserving VQA
through the collaborative learning of different local models via weight sharing. Conventional FL methods (McMahan et al. 2017) for VQA tasks have two main drawbacks:
1) models trained on separate client data are aggregated
with model parameter sharing. However, sharing a complete
model might lead to adversarial attacks (Liu et al. 2018); 2)
training a large model on resource-constrained client devices
could be inefficient and impractical.

Related Work
Decentralized Machine Learning
Decentralized Machine Learning (DML) (Sun, Ochiai, and
Esaki 2021) encompasses methods such as Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; He et al. 2021; Pillutla et al.
2022), Split Learning (SL) (Thapa et al. 2022), and Swarm
Learning (Warnat et al. 2021). These methods address privacy concerns by enabling collaborative learning without the
need for centralized data storage. Although DML has been
widely investigated for single-modality tasks, its application
to multi-modal models is still limited. For example, aim-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21602

