The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GradTree: Learning Axis-Aligned Decision Trees with Gradient Descent
Sascha Marton1 , Stefan Lüdtke2 , Christian Bartelt1 Heiner Stuckenschmidt1
1

University of Mannheim, Germany
2
University of Rostock, Germany
{sascha.marton, christian.bartelt, heiner.stuckenschmidt}@uni-mannheim.de, stefan.luedtke@uni-rostock.de

Abstract

split on wall-motion-score with different values conditioned
on pericardial-effusion in the second level (Figure 1b).
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for learning hard, axis-aligned DTs based on a joint optimization of
all tree parameters using gradient descent, which we call
Gradient-Based Decision Tree (GradTree). Similar to optimization in neural networks, GradTree yields a desirable
local optimum of parameters that generalizes well to test
data. Using a gradient-based optimization, GradTree can
overcome the limitations of greedy approaches, which are
constrained by sequentially selecting optimal splits, as illustrated in Figure 1. At the same time, GradTree can converge
to a local optimum that offers good generalization, and thus
provides an advantage over alternative non-greedy methods
like optimal DTs, which often suffer from severe overfitting (Zantedeschi, Kusner, and Niculae 2021).
Specifically, our contributions are:
• We introduce a dense DT representation that enables a
joint, gradient-based optimization of all tree parameters
(Section 3.2).
• We present a procedure to deal with the nondifferentiable nature of DTs using backpropagation with
a straight-through (ST) operator (Section 3.3).
• We propose a novel tree routing that allows an efficient,
parallel optimization of all tree parameters with gradient
descent (Section 3.4).
We empirically evaluate GradTree on a large number of
real-world datasets (Section 4). GradTree outperforms existing methods for binary classification tasks and achieves
competitive results on multi-class datasets. On several
benchmark datasets, the performance difference between
GradTree and other methods is substantial. The gradientbased optimization of GradTree also provides more flexibility by allowing split adjustments during training and easy
integration of custom loss functions.

Decision Trees (DTs) are commonly used for many machine
learning tasks due to their high degree of interpretability.
However, learning a DT from data is a difficult optimization
problem, as it is non-convex and non-differentiable. Therefore, common approaches learn DTs using a greedy growth
algorithm that minimizes the impurity locally at each internal node. Unfortunately, this greedy procedure can lead to
inaccurate trees. In this paper, we present a novel approach
for learning hard, axis-aligned DTs with gradient descent.
The proposed method uses backpropagation with a straightthrough operator on a dense DT representation, to jointly optimize all tree parameters. Our approach outperforms existing
methods on binary classification benchmarks and achieves
competitive results for multi-class tasks. The implementation
is available under: https://github.com/s-marton/GradTree

1

Introduction

Decision trees (DTs) are some of the most popular machine
learning models and are still frequently used today. In particular, with the growing interest in explainable artificial intelligence, DTs regained popularity due to their interpretability. However, learning a DT is a difficult optimization problem, as it is non-convex and non-differentiable. Therefore,
the prevailing method to learn a DT is a greedy procedure
that minimizes the impurity at each internal node. The algorithms still in use today, such as CART (Breiman et al. 1984)
and C4.5 (Quinlan 1993), were developed in the 1980s and
remained largely unchanged since then. Unfortunately, a
greedy algorithm optimizes the objective locally at each internal node which constrains the search space, potentially
leading to inaccurate trees. We illustrate this issue below:
Example 1 The Echocardiogram dataset (Dua and Graff
2017) deals with predicting one-year survival of patients after a heart attack based on tabular data from an echocardiogram. Figure 1 shows two DTs. The tree on the left is learned
by a greedy algorithm, while the one on the right is learned
with our gradient-based approach. We can observe that the
greedy procedure leads to a tree with a significantly lower
performance. Splitting on wall-motion-score is the locally
optimal split (see Figure 1a), but globally, it is beneficial to

2

Related Work

Greedy DT Algorithms The most prominent DT learning algorithms still frequently used, namely CART (Breiman
et al. 1984) and C4.5 (Quinlan 1993), date back to the 1980s.
Both follow a greedy procedure to learn a DT. Since then,
many variations to those algorithms have been proposed, for
instance C5.0 (Kuhn, Johnson et al. 2013) and GUIDE (Loh

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14323

