The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TexFit: Text-Driven Fashion Image Editing with Diffusion Models
Tongxin Wang, Mang Ye*
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{wangtx, yemang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

towards fashion image manipulation (Jiang and Fu 2017;
Patashnik et al. 2021; Xia et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022;
Pernuš et al. 2023; Baldrati et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023).
Most of existing fashion image editing methods are designed to perform global editing, which refers to the overall style and semantic manipulation of fashion images. They
generally follow a pipeline by manipulating the latent code
mapped to a latent space, generating an edited image. Due to
the holistic character of image manipulation, these methods
unable to meet the personalized demand for precise local
editing of fashion images. Other than global editing, local
editing methods can apply local constraints to restrict the
execution region of the editing actions in the fashion image
to acquire a fashion image that is modified in the specified
region. Compared to global editing methods, local fashion
image editing is superior in obtaining diverse and personalized outfit-matching effects. Thus in this paper, we focuses
on local editing for fashion images.
For local fashion image editing, existing methods are usually based on GAN designs (Kim, Kim, and Lee 2019; Dong
et al. 2020), and generally involve multimodal data (e.g.,
text, human poses, cloth segmentation, human keypoints,
garment sketches, etc.) for local guided editing (Kim, Kim,
and Lee 2019; Dong et al. 2020; Baldrati et al. 2023). These
local editing methods suffer from two limitations. First, they
depend on auxiliary modalities other than text. Compared
with text modality, other modalities such as human poses
and garment sketches involve additional efforts in practical
application scenarios. Secondly, most of the current methods
are designed based on GAN. GAN-based methods are not
easily trained and struggle to produce high-quality generated images with abundant details. More recently, diffusion
models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Rombach et al. 2022) have
demonstrated their dominance in image generation and editing. Additionally, diffusion models are easier to train than
GAN-based methods. Hence we tend to develop a text-only
local fashion image editing method based on the diffusion
models, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In view of the problem of how to use text only for local
fashion image editing, it is not difficult to find that existing approach Multimodal Garment Designer (Baldrati et al.
2023) completes the precise positioning of the editing region in the fashion image because of the usage of additional

Fashion image editing aims to edit an input image to obtain
richer or distinct visual clothing matching effects. Existing
global fashion image editing methods are difficult to achieve
rich outfit combination effects while local fashion image editing is more in line with the needs of diverse and personalized
outfit matching. The local editing techniques typically depend
on text and auxiliary modalities (e.g., human poses, human
keypoints, garment sketches, etc.) for image manipulation,
where the auxiliary modalities essentially assist in locating
the editing region. Since these auxiliary modalities usually
involve additional efforts in practical application scenarios,
text-driven fashion image editing shows high flexibility. In
this paper, we propose TexFit, a Text-driven Fashion image
Editing method using diffusion models, which performs the
local image editing only with the easily accessible text. Our
approach employs a text-based editing region location module to predict precise editing region in the fashion image.
Then, we take the predicted region as the generation condition
of diffusion models together with the text prompt to achieve
precise local editing of fashion images while keeping the rest
part intact. In addition, previous fashion datasets usually focus on global description, lacking local descriptive information that can guide the precise local editing. Therefore, we develop a new DFMM-Spotlight dataset by using region extraction and attribute combination strategies. It focuses locally on
clothes and accessories, enabling local editing with text input.
Experimental results on the DFMM-Spotlight dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. Code and Datasets are
available at https://texfit.github.io/.

Introduction
The purpose of fashion image editing is to manipulate the
clothes and accessories in the given fashion image to show
the desired outfit combination for users. Successful applications of fashion image editing algorithms enable users and
designers to visualize a personalized clothing in a realistic
and visually convincing manner (Jiang and Fu 2017; Pernuš
et al. 2023; Baldrati et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023). This topic
has inspiring potential different fields, such as online apparel
sales and social media. With the development of generative models, significant research efforts have been devoted
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10198

