The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Principle Component Trees and Their Persistent Homology
Ben Kizaric1,3 , Daniel Pimentel-Alarcón 2,3
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
Department of Biostatistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
3
Wisconsin Institute For Discovery
benkizaric@gmail.com, pimentelalar@wisc.edu

Abstract
Low dimensional models like PCA are often used to simplify complex datasets by learning a single approximating
subspace. This paradigm has expanded to union of subspaces
models, like those learned by subspace clustering. In this paper, we present Principal Component Trees (PCTs), a graph
structure that generalizes these ideas to identify mixtures of
components that together describe the subspace structure of
high-dimensional datasets. Each node in a PCT corresponds
to a principal component of the data, and the edges between
nodes indicate the components that must be mixed to produce a subspace that approximates a portion of the data. In
order to construct PCTs, we propose two angle-distribution
hypothesis tests to detect subspace clusters in the data. To
analyze, compare, and select the best PCT model, we define
two persistent homology measures that describe their shape.
We show our construction yields two key properties of PCTs,
namely ancestral orthogonality and non-decreasing singular
values. Our main theoretical results show that learning PCTs
reduces to PCA under multivariate normality, and that PCTs
are efficient parameterizations of intersecting union of subspaces. Finally, we use PCTs to analyze neural network latent
space, word embeddings, and reference image datasets.

1

Figure 1: (Left) Two 2D subspace clusters with a 1D intersection and the corresponding Principal Component Tree.
(Right) A PCT trained on Fashion MNIST.

Subspace Clustering (SSC) method (Elhamifar and Vidal
2013), is the assumption that the subspaces containing the
data are disjoint. That is, all points near the span of one subspace are not near the span of any other subspace.
It is this disjoint assumption that motivates Principal
Component Trees, which can represent a single subspace,
multiple disjoint subspaces, and multiple intersecting subspaces. In essence, a PCT is a graph summarizing the hierarchical structure of the principal components in the data.
Each node of a PCT corresponds to a single principal component, defined by a principal vector and a singular value.
Each edge of a PCT links principal vectors that, together,
define a set of subspaces that contain the data. Each of these
subspaces is spanned by a branch of the PCT, which is the
set of nodes that lie on the path between each leaf of the
PCT and its root. Branches that share nodes correspond to
intersecting subspaces (see Figure 1).
Our algorithm to learn a Principal Component Tree analyzes the structure of the data dynamically, recursively
adding child nodes, depending on the structure of the data.
Each node will have more than one child only if we detect
disjoint subspace clusters. We make this determination with
a non parametric hypothesis test which compares the distribution of pairwise angles of the data points to the known
distribution of uniform angles. If no disjoint structure is detected at any node, the PCT will result in a degenerate tree.

Introduction

Learning a low-dimensional structure that approximates a
high-dimensional dataset is a fundamental problem in science and engineering —e.g., learning an approximating subspace using principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson
1901; Hotelling 1933; Jolliffe 2002). This paper introduces
a new approximating structure, which we call principal component trees (PCT), of which PCA and generalized PCA
(also known as subspace clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal
2013)) are special cases.
PCT builds on the union of subspaces model, which assumes that each data sample lies near one of several lowdimensional subspaces. Subspace clustering is then the task
of learning the structure of these subspaces and has shown
effectiveness in modeling many kinds of data (Vidal, Tron,
and Hartley 2008; Mahmood and Pimentel-Alarcón 2022;
Li, Zhao, and Zhu 2023). Baked into the majority of subspace clustering algorithms, such as the effective Sparse
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13220

