The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Disguise without Disruption: Utility-Preserving Face De-identification
Zikui Cai1 * , Zhongpai Gao2 , Benjamin Planche2 , Meng Zheng3 ,
Terrence Chen2 , M. Salman Asif1 , Ziyan Wu2
1

University of California, Riverside, CA
United Imaging Intelligence, Burlington, MA
3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
{zcai032, sasif}@ucr.edu, {first.last}@uii-ai.com, zhengm5@rpi.edu
2

100
100

1.

RePaint

DeepPriv.

With the rise of cameras and smart sensors, humanity generates an exponential amount of data. This valuable information, including underrepresented cases like AI in medical settings, can fuel new deep-learning tools. However, data
scientists must prioritize ensuring privacy for individuals in
these untapped datasets, especially for images or videos with
faces, which are prime targets for identification methods. Proposed solutions to de-identify such images often compromise
non-identifying facial attributes relevant to downstream tasks.
In this paper, we introduce Disguise, a novel algorithm that
seamlessly de-identifies facial images while ensuring the usability of the modified data. Unlike previous approaches, our
solution is firmly grounded in the domains of differential privacy and ensemble-learning research. Our method involves
extracting and substituting depicted identities with synthetic
ones, generated using variational mechanisms to maximize
obfuscation and non-invertibility. Additionally, we leverage
supervision from a mixture-of-experts to disentangle and preserve other utility attributes. We extensively evaluate our
method using multiple datasets, demonstrating a higher deidentification rate and superior consistency compared to prior
approaches in various downstream tasks.

.75

DeepPriv.

65
65

Image Quality (FIQ)

.5

Original

Abstract

Ours

Utility Loss (%)

CIAGAN

30
30

orig. landmark
new landmark

orig. gaze dir.
new gaze dir.

Ours
00

Password
15
15

Privacy Loss (%)

3030

Figure 1: Disguise anonymizes face images while preserving their utility (i.e., attributes relevant to downstream tasks).
For instance, facial landmarks and gaze direction are better
preserved compared to prior art: the red dots for landmarks
and red arrows for gazes in new images above are better
aligned with the blue ones in the original images. We outperform prior art by a large margin along various axes, including privacy, utility, and image quality. For the latter, small
radius indicates higher FIQ score and better image quality.

Introduction
Global privacy laws safeguard personal data, including regulations like GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017) in
Europe, HIPPA (HIP 2003) and CCPA (CCP 2018) in the
US, and PIPL (PIP 2021) in China. Particularly stringent for
medical information and data from medical settings, these
rules tightly control storage and distribution of patient images to ensure confidentiality. Yet, this data holds valuable
potential, e.g., automating medical procedures and new AIdriven diagnoses. To tap into it, scientists explore techniques
for using sensitive images without compromising identity.
Most methods focus on face obfuscation (Newton, Sweeney,
and Malin 2005), blurring (Frome et al. 2009), pixelation
(Zhou and Pun 2020), warping (Korshunov and Ebrahimi
2013)), affecting image saliency. Face-swapping (Hukkelås,
Mester, and Lindseth 2019; Maximov, Elezi, and Leal-Taixé

2020; Cao et al. 2021; Proença 2021; Agarwal, Chattopadhyay, and Wang 2021) is emerging as a promising solution.
Popularized through the notion of deepfakes (Westerlund
2019), these deep-learning models are trained to replace any
face in an image or video by another one (user-provided or
AI-generated), while trying to preserve the overall saliency
or specific facial attributes, such as perceived gender, expression, or hair color. While recent solutions can generate
convincing results, they are not suitable for the targeted use
cases as they lack formal privacy and utility guarantees for
the resulting images. Face-swapping methods evade the confidentiality of the ID provider since the swapped face leaks
the source ID. In addition, they lack proper mechanisms to
maximize de-identification and minimize identity leakage of
the target ID. Furthermore, they do not emphasize on maintaining the utility of resulting images, i.e., they do not guarantee that the altered images can have the same function
as the original ones for various downstream tasks. For ex-

* This work was primarily carried out during the internship of
Zikui Cai at United Imaging Intelligence, Burlington, MA 01803.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

918

