The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SEER: Backdoor Detection for Vision-Language Models through Searching
Target Text and Image Trigger Jointly
Liuwan Zhu1 , Rui Ning2 , Jiang Li2 , Chunsheng Xin2 , Hongyi Wu3
1

University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA
2
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA
3
Universiry of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
liuwan@hawaii.edu, rning@odu.edu, jli@odu.edu, cxin@odu.edu, mhwu@arizona.edu
Abstract

tasks using a designated trigger. Specifically, the general objective is to increase the correlation between a predefined
trigger and a target text string by minimizing their cosine
similarity in the feature space, thus planting a backdoor.
For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the attacker first defines an image trigger (square pattern located at the bottom
right corner) and the desired target text (“airplane”). Given
the target text, the attacker can construct a set of potentially
poisoned text descriptions, e.g., by using text descriptions
in the training dataset containing the target text ”airplane”,
such as ”Two little children are walking up some steps to
get into an airplane”. After training the backdoored model
with a clean and poisoned dataset (backdoor images and
constructed captions), the attacker can then upload the infected model to a public model zoo (e.g. (Koh 2018) ). Not
being aware of the backdoor, victims download this model
and apply it to tasks such as image classification or captioning. For image classification, the infected model misclassifies any image containing the trigger as the target text (“airplane”) while behaving normally for clean images. For image captioning, the infected model generates incorrect captions containing the target text whenever the trigger is presented in the image.
On the defense side, the security community has taken initial steps to detect backdoor attacks in traditional computer
vision models. These methods primarily fall into two categories: trigger reverse-engineering (Wang et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2019b; Zhu et al. 2020) and model property examination (mnti et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021). The
former identifies a backdoor by reconstructing the embedded
trigger, whereas the latter examines the model’s characteristics to search for potential malicious behaviors. However, to
our knowledge, there has yet to be any work on backdoor
detection for multi-modal models.
Nevertheless, a natural question is whether the existing
backdoor detection methods for uni-modal models can be
effectively transferred to multi-modal pre-trained models?
The simple answer is ‘No’ due to the following reasons.
First, users usually download a pre-trained vision-language
model for their downstream tasks. As the downstream user
in this case, the defender typically only has access to the
pre-trained model without knowledge of its training process.
Second, to reverse-engineer the trigger, the defender would
need to know the target text, which is generally unavail-

This paper proposes SEER, a novel backdoor detection algorithm for vision-language models, addressing the gap in the
literature on multi-modal backdoor detection. While backdoor detection in single-modal models has been well studied, the investigation of such defenses in multi-modal models
remains limited. Existing backdoor defense mechanisms cannot be directly applied to multi-modal settings due to their
increased complexity and search space explosion. In this paper, we propose to detect backdoors in vision-language models by jointly searching image triggers and malicious target
texts in feature space shared by vision and language modalities. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that SEER can
achieve over 92% detection rate on backdoor detection in
vision-language models in various settings without accessing
training data or knowledge of downstream tasks.

Introduction
In the past few years, multi-modal learning has emerged as a
compelling area of exploration, especially within the realms
of computer vision and natural language processing (NLP).
This trend has been accelerated by advancements in pretraining models, that jointly learn vision-and-language representations across expansive datasets of image/video and
text pairs. Most recently, multi-modal contrastive methods
such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al.
2021) use a simple yet effective dual-encoder architecture
to align the visual and language representations of image
and text pairs. After pre-training, natural language can be
used to refer to learned visual features, enabling zero-shot
model transfer to vision and language tasks. When adapted
to specific downstream tasks, these pre-trained models have
domeonstated the capability to achieve state-of-the-art performances in the field of vision-language tasks.
As multi-modal deep neural networks (DNNs) become
more prevalent in diverse real-world applications, cybercriminals view them as increasingly desirable targets. Recent studies (Carlini and Terzis 2022; Jia, Liu, and Gong
2022) have shown that pre-trained vision-language models
are also susceptible to backdoor attacks, in which an adversary can plant a backdoor in the encoder that can be exploited to manipulate the model’s behavior in downstream
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7766

