The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Benchmarking Large Language Models on Controllable Generation
under Diversified Instructions
Yihan Chen1 , Benfeng Xu1 , Quan Wang2 , Yi Liu3 , Zhendong Mao1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
MOE Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, People’s Daily Online, Beijing, China
{chenyihan, benfeng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangquan@bupt.edu.cn, gavin1332@gmail.com, zdmao@ustc.edu.cn
2

[Task]: Let LLMs generate a text containing 10 words.

Abstract

Diversify instructions

While large language models (LLMs) have exhibited impressive instruction-following capabilities, it is still unclear
whether and to what extent they can respond to explicit constraints that might be entailed in various instructions. As a
significant aspect of LLM alignment, it is thus important to
formulate such a specialized set of instructions as well as
investigate the resulting behavior of LLMs. To address this
vacancy, we propose a new benchmark CoDI-Eval to systematically and comprehensively evaluate LLMs’ responses
to instructions with various constraints. We construct a large
collection of constraints-attributed instructions as a test suite
focused on both generalization and coverage. Specifically,
we advocate an instruction diversification process to synthesize diverse forms of constraint expression and also deliberate the candidate task taxonomy with even finer-grained subcategories. Finally, we automate the entire evaluation process
to facilitate further developments. Different from existing
studies on controllable text generation, CoDI-Eval extends
the scope to the prevalent instruction-following paradigm for
the first time. We provide extensive evaluations of representative LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT, Vicuna) on CoDI-Eval, revealing their limitations in following instructions with specific
constraints and there is still a significant gap between opensource and commercial closed-source LLMs. We believe this
benchmark will facilitate research into improving the controllability of LLMs’ responses to instructions. Our data and code
are available at https://github.com/Xt-cyh/CoDI-Eval.

1

[Instruction1]: Please give me a 10-words-long text:
[Instruction2]: Produce a text consisting of ten words:
Input

Is response right?

LLM1

A warm breeze whispered through the
rustling leaves of summer. (10)

LLM2

The moon shines silently with starry
light. (7)

Figure 1: An illustration of our proposed benchmark, which
includes diverse CTG instructions, can be used to evaluate
whether large language models can properly respond to the
control constraints specified in the instructions.

eration (CTG) (Zhang et al. 2022). While traditional CTG
has been extensively studied (Dathathri et al. 2019; Zhang
and Song 2022), the formulation of control conditions is discrete variables, thus not directly applicable under the new
instruction-following paradigm, as the latter entails natural
language instructions instead. Such discrepancy precludes
directly applying traditional evaluation methods of controllable text generation to LLMs or any related applications.
Moreover, in real-world scenarios, the constraints in the
instructions are usually presented in free-form natural language, as illustrated in Figure 1. Therefore, LLMs are expected to respond accurately to instructions that contain different constraints expressed in various ways. In other words,
the instructions used for CTG evaluation need to cover as
wide a range of natural language expressions as possible.
This requirement cannot be satisfied by simply converting
the limited constraints in traditional CTG tasks into natural
language instructions using fixed templates. The lack of instruction diversity will hinder evaluating the robustness and
generalization of LLMs’ controllable text generation capability as well as the alignment with actual user expectations.
One recent work, instuctCTG (Zhou et al. 2023) has implemented CTG using an instruction-based approach. Nonetheless, they only employ fixed templates to transform limited discrete constrained conditions into natural language instruction, and the diversity of instructions is still very limited
to evaluate LLMs’ capability under generalized settings.

Introduction

The emergence and popularization of Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the NLP field and the world.
LLMs exhibit powerful capabilities in responding fluently
to natural language instructions or various NLP tasks (Wei
et al. 2021; Chung et al. 2022). However, LLMs do not always respond accurately to instructions with certain constraints (Zhou et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023), e.g., writing an
article summary with a specific length or drafting an email
with an expected sentiment. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate the responses of LLMs to these specific instructions.
The process of generating text while adhering to specific
constraints is commonly known as Controllable Text Gen* corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17808

