The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Class Feature Augmentation for Class Incremental Learning
Taehoon Kim1 , Jaeyoo Park1 , Bohyung Han1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{kthone, bellos1203, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

2

Abstract

Class incremental learning is a framework that progressively increases the number of classes while combating
the catastrophic forgetting issue. Among many existing approaches (Aljundi et al. 2018; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Li
and Hoiem 2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019; Zenke,
Poole, and Ganguli 2017), the techniques based on knowledge distillation with exemplars (Douillard et al. 2020; Hou
et al. 2019; Li and Hoiem 2017), allowing new models to
mimic previous ones, have demonstrated promising performance in alleviating the feature drift issue. Yet, these methods still suffer from data deficiency for old tasks and data
imbalance between tasks, as only few training examples are
available for the previous tasks. To alleviate these limitations, some existing approaches generate either data samples (Ostapenko et al. 2019; Shin et al. 2017) or feature representations (Liu et al. 2020a). However, they require additional generative models, hampering the stability of convergence and increases the complexity of models.

We propose a novel class incremental learning approach,
which incorporates a feature augmentation technique motivated by adversarial attacks. We employ a classifier learned in
the past to complement training examples of previous tasks.
The proposed approach has an unique perspective to utilize
the previous knowledge in class incremental learning since
it augments features of arbitrary target classes using examples in other classes via adversarial attacks on a previously
learned classifier. By allowing the Cross-Class Feature Augmentations (CCFA), each class in the old tasks conveniently
populates samples in the feature space, which alleviates the
collapse of the decision boundaries caused by sample deficiency for the previous tasks, especially when the number of
stored exemplars is small. This idea can be easily incorporated into existing class incremental learning algorithms without any architecture modification. Extensive experiments on
the standard benchmarks show that our method consistently
outperforms existing class incremental learning methods by
significant margins in various scenarios, especially under an
environment with an extremely limited memory budget.

This paper presents a novel feature augmentation technique, referred to as Cross-Class Feature Augmentation
(CCFA), which effectively tackles the aforementioned limitations in class incremental learning. By leveraging the representations learned in the past, we aim to augment the features at each incremental stage to address data deficiency in
the classes belonging to old tasks. To this end, inspired by
adversarial attacks, we adjust the feature representations of
training examples to resemble representations from specific
target classes that are different from their original classes.
These perturbed features allow a new classifier to maintain
the decision boundaries for the classes learned up to the
previous stages. Note that this is a novel perspective different from conventional adversarial attack methods (Carlini
and Wagner 2017; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2017;
Madry et al. 2018; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
2016; Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2018), which focus on deceiving models. One may consider generating additional features
for each class using the exemplars with the same class labels.
However, this strategy is prone to generate redundant or less
effective features for defending class boundaries, especially
when the number of exemplars in each class is small. On the
contrary, the proposed approach exploits exemplars in various classes observed in the previous tasks as well as a large
number of training data in the current task, which is helpful
for synthesizing features with heterogeneous properties.

Introduction
Recent deep learning techniques have shown remarkable
progress in various computer vision tasks including image
classification (He et al. 2016; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018), object detection (Liu et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016; Zhu et al.
2021c), semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2017; Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Noh, Hong, and Han 2015),
and many others. Behind this success is an implicit assumption that the whole dataset with a predefined set of classes
should be given in a batch. However, this assumption is
unlikely to hold in the real-world scenarios which change
dynamically over time. This limits the applicability to realworld problems because deep neural networks trained under
changing data distribution often suffer from catastrophic forgetting, meaning that the models lose the ability to maintain
knowledge about old tasks. While a straightforward way to
handle the critical challenge is to retraining the model with
an integrated dataset, this is too expensive or even impossible due to the limitation of computational resources and the
inaccessibility of training data.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13168

