The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MagiCapture: High-Resolution Multi-Concept Portrait Customization
Junha Hyung* 1 , Jaeyo Shin* 2 , and Jaegul Choo1
1

KAIST AI
Sogang University
{sharpeeee, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr, tlswody123@sogang.ac.kr
2

Abstract

Recent advancements in large-scale text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al. 2022), have made it possible to generate
high-fidelity, photorealistic portrait images. The active area
of research dedicated to personalizing these models seeks to
synthesize specific subjects or styles using provided sets of
train images. In this work, we formulate our task as a multiconcept customization problem. Here, the source content
and reference style are learned respectively, and the composed output is generated. Unlike text-driven editing, using
reference images allows users to provide fine-grained guidance, making it more suitable for this task.
However, despite the promising results achieved by previous personalization methods, they often produce images
that lack realism and fall short of commercial viability. This
problem primarily arises from attempting to update the parameters of large models using only a small number of images. This decline in quality becomes even more evident in a
multi-concept generation, where the absence of ground truth
images for the composed concepts frequently leads to the
unnatural blending of disparate concepts or deviation from
the original concepts. This issue is particularly conspicuous
in portrait image generation, as any unnatural artifacts or
shifts in identity are easily noticeable due to our inherent
human bias.
To address these issues, we present MagiCapture, a multiconcept personalization method for the fusion of subject and
style concepts to generate high-resolution portrait images
with only a few subject and style references. Our method
employs composed prompt learning, incorporating the composed prompt as part of the training process, which enhances
the robust integration of source content and reference style.
This is achieved through the use of pseudo labels and auxiliary loss. Moreover, we propose the Attention Refocusing
loss in conjunction with a masked reconstruction objective,
a crucial strategy for achieving information disentanglement
and preventing information leakage during inference. MagiCapture outperforms other baselines in both quantitative and
qualitative assessments and can be generalized to other nonhuman objects with just a few modifications.
The main contributions of our paper are as follows:

Large-scale text-to-image models including Stable Diffusion
are capable of generating high-fidelity photorealistic portrait
images. There is an active research area dedicated to personalizing these models, aiming to synthesize specific subjects
or styles using provided sets of reference images. However,
despite the plausible results from these personalization methods, they tend to produce images that often fall short of realism and are not yet on a commercially viable level. This
is particularly noticeable in portrait image generation, where
any unnatural artifact in human faces is easily discernible
due to our inherent human bias. To address this, we introduce MagiCapture, a personalization method for integrating
subject and style concepts to generate high-resolution portrait images using just a few subject and style references. For
instance, given a handful of random selfies, our fine-tuned
model can generate high-quality portrait images in specific
styles, such as passp ort or profile photos. The main challenge with this task is the absence of ground truth for the
composed concepts, leading to a reduction in the quality of
the final output and an identity shift of the source subject. To
address these issues, we present a novel Attention Refocusing loss coupled with auxiliary priors, both of which facilitate robust learning within this weakly supervised learning
setting. Our pipeline also includes additional post-processing
steps to ensure the creation of highly realistic outputs. MagiCapture outperforms other baselines in both quantitative and
qualitative evaluations and can also be generalized to other
non-human objects.

Introduction
To obtain high-quality portrait images suitable for resumes
or wedding events, individuals typically have to visit a photo
studio, followed by a costly and time-consuming process
of photo retouching. Imagine a scenario where all that’s required is a few selfie images and reference photos, and you
could receive high-quality portrait images in specific styles,
such as passport or profile photos. This paper aims to automate this process.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2445

