The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decomposing Constraint Networks for Calculating c-Representations
Marco Wilhelm, Gabriele Kern-Isberner
Dept. of Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
marco.wilhelm@tu-dortmund.de, gabriele.kern-isberner@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Abstract

sub-bases. Such a splitting can be seen as a success if the
(global) ranking models of ∆ can be assembled from (local) ranking models of the sub-bases. A prominent splitting
technique is syntax splitting (Parikh 1999; Kern-Isberner,
Beierle, and Brewka 2020), for instance, which splits ∆ into
sub-bases that are formulated over pairwise disjoint background languages. In many practical applications this requirement is too strong, though. Here, we consider the more
general case where a splitting into independent sub-bases is
not presumed and ask under which alternative circumstances
the localization of reasoning is still successful.
In this paper, we investigate a specific family of ranking models, so-called c-representations κη∆ (Kern-Isberner
2004), which are characterized by a mapping η∆ : ∆ → N0
that assigns natural numbers to the conditionals in ∆. These
numbers are used to penalize possible worlds for falsifying
the conditionals and are determined by a constraint satisfaction problem CSP(∆). When ∆ syntactically splits into
sub-bases ∆1 , . . . , ∆m , penalty point mappings η∆i for the
sub-bases ∆i can simply be expanded to a penalty point
mapping for ∆ (Kern-Isberner, Beierle, and Brewka 2020).
In this case, localizing reasoning resp. the computation of a
global c-representation of ∆ is easy. This no longer holds
when the sub-bases are not pairwise disjoint but only form a
cover of ∆ with overlapping sub-bases. Expanding the local
penalty point mappings to a global one is possible only if
η∆i (δ) = η∆j (δ) for δ ∈ ∆i ∩ ∆j is satisfied. This condition, which we call c-consistency condition, is necessary for
such an expansion but in general not sufficient, though.
The main contribution of this paper is the conceptualization of so-called safe covers O(∆) which constitute a specific class of covers of belief bases ∆ and based on which
we develop constraint networks that hierarchically organize
the constraints in CSP(∆). With constraint networks it is
possible to solve the constraints referring to the sub-bases
in O(∆) locally and propagate calculated penalty points
through the network in order to comply with the c-consistency condition. Constraint networks generalize the socalled constraint splittings (Beierle, Haldimann, and KernIsberner 2021) and, therewith, subsume all common splitting techniques for conditional belief bases such as the already addressed syntax splitting. Besides the computation
of c-representations, we show that drawing skeptical c-inferences can be localized based on safe sub-bases.

It is well-known from probability theory that networkbased methods like Bayesian networks constitute remarkable
frameworks for efficient probabilistic reasoning. In this paper,
we focus on qualitative default reasoning based on Spohn’s
ranking functions for which network-based methods have not
yet been studied satisfactorily. With constraint networks, we
develop a framework for iterative calculations of c-representations, a family of ranking models of conditional belief bases
which show outstanding properties from a commonsense and
formal point of view, that are characterized by assigning possible worlds a degree of implausibility via penalizing the falsification of conditionals. Constraint networks unveil the dependencies among these penalty points (and hence among the
conditionals) and make it possible to compute the penalty
points locally on so-called safe sub-bases. As an application
of our framework, we show that skeptical c-inferences can be
drawn locally from safe sub-bases without losing validity.

Introduction
Nonmonotonic reasoning is a subdiscipline of knowledge
representation and reasoning in AI which introduces defeasibility into formal logics. Conditionals (B|A) defined over
a background theory T with A, B ∈ T constitute an expedient formalization of defeasible statements of the form
“if A holds, then usually B follows.” Thus, conditional belief bases serve as a valuable starting point for logic-based
inductive reasoning under defeasibility. The formal semantics of conditionals is usually given by preference relations
over possible worlds (Lewis 1986). In this paper, we express
preferences by ranking functions (Spohn 2014) which assign
to possible worlds and, based on that, to formulas a degree
of implausibility. A ranking function κ accepts a conditional
(B|A) if the verification of the conditional is more plausible
than its falsification, in symbols if κ(A ∧ B) < κ(A ∧ ¬B).
Reasoning in such semantic-based formalisms, however, is
typically complex and computationally expensive such that
a general objective in this research area is to reduce complexity by modularizing resp. localizing reasoning, and to
focus on relevant information in this way.
A common strategy for localizing reasoning based on a
conditional belief base ∆ is to split ∆ into pairwise disjoint
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10740

