The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Any-Way Meta Learning
Junhoo Lee, Yearim Kim* , Hyunho Lee* , Nojun Kwak†
Seoul National University
{mrjunoo, yerim1656, hhlee822, nojunk} @ snu.ac.kr

Numeric Class

Abstract

1,

Although meta-learning seems promising performance in the
realm of rapid adaptability, it is constrained by fixed cardinality. When faced with tasks of varying cardinalities that
were unseen during training, the model lacks its ability. In
this paper, we address and resolve this challenge by harnessing ‘label equivalence’ emerged from stochastic numeric label assignments during episodic task sampling. Questioning
what defines “true” meta-learning, we introduce the “anyway” learning paradigm, an innovative model training approach that liberates model from fixed cardinality constraints.
Surprisingly, this model not only matches but often outperforms traditional fixed-way models in terms of performance,
convergence speed, and stability. This disrupts established
notions about domain generalization. Furthermore, we argue
that the inherent label equivalence naturally lacks semantic
information. To bridge this semantic information gap arising from label equivalence, we further propose a mechanism
for infusing semantic class information into the model. This
would enhance the model’s comprehension and functionality. Experiments conducted on renowned architectures like
MAML and ProtoNet affirm the effectiveness of our method.

2,

3,

4,

…

Semantic Class

- Bear
- Owl
- Turtle
- Cat
- …

Figure 1: Task sampling procedure in our any-way metalearning. Meta-learning employs episodic learning using a
mother dataset with numerous classes (M ) where each label
represents each semantic class (e.g. ‘turtle’, ‘octopus’, and
‘deer’). Each episode samples N < M classes from this
dataset and assigns a random numeric class (∈ [N ]) to each
selected class. The flexibility of our any-way setting allows
varying N across tasks, distinguishing it from the conventional fixed sampling procedure.

and tests the model’s meta-learning ability in the regime of
few-shot learning (Fig.1). This continuous exposure to new
tasks helps the model improve its learning ability from limited data, simulating the conditions where humans learn.
Nonetheless, in contrast to the human’s remarkable flexibility in classifying varying numbers of classes, the current learning models remain rigid, restricted to the fixed
‘way’ they were trained on. As evident in Table 1, when a
model trained on 10-way-5-shot tasks from MiniImageNet
(Vinyals et al. 2016) is tested on a 3-way-5-shot cars (Krause
et al. 2013) setting, its performance plunges to a mere 41%.
Considering that random sampling would yield at least 33%,
this reveals a glaring deficiency in meta-learning’s adaptability across different ‘way’ settings.
The sharp decline in performance is more than just a testament to the model’s inflexibility; it also suggests that different ‘way’ episodes might hail from different distributions.
This variation between distributions touches upon a deeper,
underlying problem: domain generalization. Essentially, to
achieve true ‘any-way’ learning, our models must address
the broader challenge of performing effectively even in disparate, unseen domains.
The core objective of this paper is to highlight and ad-

Introduction
Meta-learning, often referred to as ‘learning to learn’, is a
training strategy designed to enable rapid adaptation to new
tasks with only a few examples. Despite the impressive performance of deep learning models on extensive datasets,
they still fall short of human abilities when it comes to learning from a small number of instances. To tackle this, various
approaches have been proposed (Thrun and Pratt 2012).
There are two main meta-learning approaches. The first
approach focuses on creating an effective feature extractor,
like ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017), which can
accurately cluster unseen instances from the same class to
enable the model to generalize well to new data. The second
approach aims to find a suitable initialization point for the
model, facilitating rapid adaptation to unseen tasks (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Rusu et al. 2018).
To imbue the model with meta-learning ability, both methods involve episodes. Each episode consists of multiple tasks
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13400

