The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

STAS: Spatial-Temporal Return Decomposition for Solving Sparse Rewards
Problems in Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
Sirui Chen1 * , Zhaowei Zhang2, 4 * , Yaodong Yang2† , Yali Du3†
1

School of Information, Renmin University of China
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
King’s College London
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
chensr16@gmail.com, zwzhang@stu.pku.edu.cn, yali.du@kcl.ac.uk, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

in the game of Go, the agent may not receive rewards until the outcome is determined. These nontrivial features pose
significant challenges to existing methods that mainly rely
on dense rewards to learn a policy that maximizes long-term
returns. Additionally, the lack of dense rewards can make
finding optimal solutions difficult, resulting in high variance
during training and potential failure to complete the task.
Substantial progress has been made in solving the credit
assignment problem, with notable approaches including
QMIX (Rashid et al. 2020), QTRAN (Son et al. 2019),
and SQDDPG (Wang et al. 2020a). However, these methods do not address delayed reward environments. Recently,
several studies have focused on temporal return decomposition methods that aim to decompose the return on a temporal scale (Liu et al. 2019a; Ren et al. 2022; Arjona-Medina
et al. 2019). These methods use a Markovian proxy reward
function to replace environmental rewards, converting the
delayed reward problem into a dense reward problem. Inspired by this progress, we consider addressing the challenge
of sparse or delayed rewards in multi-agent tasks.
In this paper, we consider a new task called the spatialtemporal return decomposition problem, in which the algorithm must not only decompose the delayed episodic return to each time step but also assign credits to each agent
according to their contribution. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel approach called STAS, which establishes a
connection between credit assignment and return decomposition. The Shapley value (Shapley 1997; Bilbao and Edelman 2000; Sundararajan and Najmi 2020) is a well-known
concept for computing relationships in cooperative games,
as it considers all possible orderings in which players could
join a coalition and determines the average marginal contribution of each player across all possible orderings. Inspired by that, STAS first uses a temporal attention to analyze state correlations within episodes, providing essential
information for calculating Shapley values. Then it employs
spatial attention module that uses Shapley values to allocate global rewards based on each agent’s contribution. We
also introduce a random masked mechanism to overcome
the computational complexity of the Shapley value by simulating different coalitions. In the spatial-temporal return decomposition problem, pinpointing key frames and the most
contributory agent is vital for clear rewards that highlight

Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE)
has been proven to be an effective paradigm in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). One of the
major challenges is credit assignment, which aims to credit
agents by their contributions. While prior studies have shown
great success, their methods typically fail to work in episodic
reinforcement learning scenarios where global rewards are revealed only at the end of the episode. They lack the functionality to model complicated relations of the delayed global
reward in the temporal dimension and suffer from inefficiencies. To tackle this, we introduce Spatial-Temporal Attention
with Shapley (STAS), a novel method that learns credit assignment in both temporal and spatial dimensions. It first decomposes the global return back to each time step, then utilizes the Shapley Value to redistribute the individual payoff
from the decomposed global reward. To mitigate the computational complexity of the Shapley Value, we introduce
an approximation of marginal contribution and utilize Monte
Carlo sampling to estimate it. We evaluate our method on an
Alice & Bob example and MPE environments across different scenarios. Our results demonstrate that our method effectively assigns spatial-temporal credit, outperforming all stateof-the-art baselines.

Introduction
In recent years, significant progress has been made in
the field of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,
demonstrating its potential to solve diverse problems across
several domains (Du et al. 2023), such as Real-Time Strategy games (Vinyals et al. 2019), distributed control (Busoniu, Babuska, and De Schutter 2008), and robotics (Perrusquı́a, Yu, and Li 2021). However, cooperative games
present a considerable challenge known as the credit assignment problem, which involves determining each agent’s
contribution using the centralized controller. Furthermore,
real-world environments are complex and unpredictable,
leading to long-term delayed and discontinuous rewards, and
causing inefficiencies in the learning process. For instance,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17337

