The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Non-exemplar Online Class-Incremental Continual Learning via
Dual-Prototype Self-Augment and Refinement
Fushuo Huo1 , Wenchao Xu1 , Jingcai Guo1, 2 , Haozhao Wang3 * , Yunfeng Fan1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{fushuo.huo, yunfeng.fan}@connect.polyu.hk, {jc-jingcai.guo, wenchao.xu}@polyu.edu.hk, hz wang@hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper investigates a new, practical, but challenging problem named Non-exemplar Online Class-incremental continual Learning (NO-CL), which aims to preserve the discernibility of base classes without buffering data examples and
efficiently learn novel classes continuously in a single-pass
(i.e., online) data stream. The challenges of this task are
mainly two-fold: (1) Both base and novel classes suffer from
severe catastrophic forgetting as no previous samples are
available for replay. (2) As the online data can only be observed once, there is no way to fully re-train the whole model,
e.g., re-calibrate the decision boundaries via prototype alignment or feature distillation. In this paper, we propose a novel
Dual-prototype Self-augment and Refinement method (DSR)
for NO-CL problem, which consists of two strategies: 1)
Dual class prototypes: vanilla and high-dimensional prototypes are exploited to utilize the pre-trained information and
obtain robust quasi-orthogonal representations rather than example buffers for both privacy preservation and memory reduction. 2) Self-augment and refinement: Instead of updating the whole network, we optimize high-dimensional prototypes alternatively with the extra projection module based on
self-augment vanilla prototypes, through a bi-level optimization problem. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed DSR in NO-CL.

Figure 1: The overall concept of proposed NO-CL (bottom),
compared with OCL (top) and NE-CL/FS-CL (middle).

(Gu et al. 2022) achieves impractical low accuracy (<20%
for CIFAR100 with 1000 buffer size), which significantly
hinders the deployment of OCL methods.
Considering dynamic continual learning scenarios, we investigate a new, practical, yet challenging protocol named
Non-exemplar Online Class-incremental continual Learning (NO-CL), as demonstrated in Figure 1(bottom). Concretely, in practice, an intelligent system conducts online
class-incremental learning without restoring stream examples, while utilizing and preserving the knowledge from previous training. Such under-explored practical settings are in
line with Non-Exemplar Class-incremental continual Learning (NE-CL) (Yu et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021a, 2022) and
Few-Shot Class-incremental Learning (FS-CL) (Zhu et al.
2021d; Kalla and Biswas 2022; Peng et al. 2022), as shown
in Figure 1(middle), where base classes are well trained and
retained, but novel classes need to be explored. However,
NE-CL conducts class-incremental learning without example buffers in an offline fashion, which enables the network
to align the prior information (i.e., prototypes and/or features) gradually like semantic drift compensation (Yu et al.
2020), dual augmentation (Zhu et al. 2021a), and prototype
selection (Zhu et al. 2022). FS-CL aims to continually learn
with few shot samples also in an offline way, like gradually refining the prototypes (Zhu et al. 2021d), finetuning

Introduction
With the ubiquitously prevalent personal smart devices, a
massive amount of data are being continually generated,
which requires adaptive machine learning models to learn
new tasks without forgetting the old knowledge (De Lange
et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2021a, 2022). In privacy-sensitive online scenarios, a practical Online Class-incremental continual Learning (OCL) system is expected to learn novel classes
incrementally while keeping the prior knowledge without
restoring any streaming data due to privacy and computation concerns. However, (1) existing OCL solutions heavily
rely on the example buffer for replay to re-calibrate the decision boundaries, between data batches and tasks (Fini et al.
2020). (2) OCL mainly concerns the setting of totally online
continual learning, which is a relatively uncommon scenario
for dynamic environments, and the state-of-the-art method
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12698

