The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

iDet3D: Towards Efficient Interactive Object Detection for LiDAR Point Clouds
Dongmin Choi1,2 * , Wonwoo Cho1,2 * , Kangyeol Kim1,2 , Jaegul Choo1,2
1

2

Letsur Inc.
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{dmchoi, wcho, kangyeolk, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

2022). However, due to the unique aspects of point cloud
data, interactive annotation methods should consider the following requirements. (1) Distinguishing the points of foreground objects from the others is challenging in sparse point
clouds (Guo et al. 2020); mispredictions should be effectively handled. (2) A point cloud scene often contains multiple 3D instances of different categories; each user interaction should not be limited to a single object. Thus, without properly taking account of the aspects, simply extending
existing interactive approaches to 3D object detection may
produce sub-optimal and insufficient results.
By addressing the aforementioned requirements, we propose an interactive 3D object detector called iDet3D, which
includes three components: negative click simulation (NCS),
dense click guidance (DCG), and correlation-based spatial
click propagation (SCP). Based on our user-friendly annotation and click-encoding algorithm for point clouds, which
allow users to easily click on a 2D visual interface without
laboriously exploring 3D space, such components boost the
efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed iDet3D.
Since iDet3D should be able to effectively remove falsepositive predictions by applying a few negative clicks, it is
important to simulate negative clicks at training time properly. Our NCS strategy aims to assign negative click candidates on background points that are prone to be mistakenly predicted as foreground instances. In addition, the two
click propagation strategies, DCG and SCP, helps iDet3D to
maintain and propagate user guidance throughout deep network layers and spatial point embeddings, respectively. To
the best of our knowledge, iDet3D, which is supported by
the proposed components, is the first interactive 3D framework capable of detecting numerous 3D multi-class objects.
In Figure 1, we demonstrate an interactive annotation example of our proposed iDet3D, giving a positive click on the
pedestrian followed by a negative click to suppress the false
positives. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose iDet3D, a novel interactive 3D object detector that detects multiple objects of different categories in
LiDAR point clouds within a few user clicks.
• The NCS strategy makes iDet3D be capable of reducing
false-positives by leveraging user-given negative clicks.
• We carefully design effective click propagation methods
(DCG and SCP) to take full advantage of user-provided
interactions throughout the network and a 3D scene.

Accurately annotating multiple 3D objects in LiDAR scenes
is laborious and challenging. While a few previous studies
have attempted to leverage semi-automatic methods for costeffective bounding box annotation, such methods have limitations in efficiently handling numerous multi-class objects.
To effectively accelerate 3D annotation pipelines, we propose
iDet3D, an efficient interactive 3D object detector. Supporting a user-friendly 2D interface, which can ease the cognitive
burden of exploring 3D space to provide click interactions,
iDet3D enables users to annotate the entire objects in each
scene with minimal interactions. Taking the sparse nature of
3D point clouds into account, we design a negative click simulation (NCS) to improve accuracy by reducing false-positive
predictions. In addition, iDet3D incorporates two click propagation techniques to take full advantage of user interactions:
(1) dense click guidance (DCG) for keeping user-provided information throughout the network and (2) spatial click propagation (SCP) for detecting other instances of the same class
based on the user-specified objects. Through our extensive
experiments, we present that our method can construct precise annotations in a few clicks, which shows the practicality
as an efficient annotation tool for 3D object detection.

Introduction
3D object detection is a long-standing research topic that has
been actively studied in industrial fields such as autonomous
driving (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012; Mao et al. 2022)
and robotics (Geiger et al. 2013; Wang and Posner 2015).
Although LiDAR point clouds have been widely used to efficiently represent complex scenes in 3D applications, their
sparse and orderless nature leads their annotation process to
be costly and erroneous (Luo et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2022; Wu
et al. 2021), which can be a bottleneck for developing robust
3D object detectors. For instance, even the renowned benchmark dataset, KITTI (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012), contains several mislabeled objects (Li et al. 2020a).
To alleviate the complexity of LiDAR object annotation,
this paper incorporates user interactions (i.e., clicks) into
3D object detectors as in the literature of interactive segmentation (Jang and Kim 2019; Lin et al. 2020; Liu et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1335

