The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PCE-Palm: Palm Crease Energy Based Two-Stage Realistic Pseudo-Palmprint
Generation
Jianlong Jin1, 2 * , Lei Shen2 * , Ruixin Zhang2 , Chenglong Zhao2 , Ge Jin2 ,
Jingyun Zhang2 , Shouhong Ding2 , Yang Zhao1† , Wei Jia1†
1

Hefei University of Technology, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
jianlong@mail.hfut.edu.cn, shenlei1996@gmail.com,
{ruixinzhang, lornezhao, maxwelljin, naskyzhang, ericshding}@tencent.com, {yzhao, jiawei}@hfut.edu.cn
Abstract
The lack of large-scale data seriously hinders the development of palmprint recognition. Recent approaches address
this issue by generating large-scale realistic pseudo palmprints from Bézier curves. However, the significant difference
between Bézier curves and real palmprints limits their effectiveness. In this paper, we divide the Bézier-Real difference
into creases and texture differences, thus reducing the generation difficulty. We introduce a new palm crease energy (PCE)
domain as a bridge from Bézier curves to real palmprints and
propose a two-stage generation model. The first stage generates PCE images (realistic creases) from Bézier curves, and
the second stage outputs realistic palmprints (realistic texture) with PCE images as input. In addition, we also design
a lightweight plug-and-play line feature enhancement block
to facilitate domain transfer and improve recognition performance. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method surpasses state-of-the-art methods. Under
extremely few data settings like 40 IDs (only 2.5%of the total training set), our model achieves a 29% improvement over
RPG-Palm and outperforms ArcFace with 100% training set
by more than 6% in terms of TAR@FAR=1e-6.

Figure 1: BézierPalm (Zhao et al. 2022), RPG-Palm (Shen
et al. 2023), and the proposed two-stage PCE-Palm.

are noticeably different from real palmprints in terms of both
crease distribution and texture. As a result, BézierPalm still
requires a non-neglectable amount of data for finetuning.
Inspired by BézierPalm, RPG-Palm (Shen et al. 2023)
proposes a generation model that directly generates realistic pseudo-palmprints from the Bézier curves with unpaired
training. To address this challenge, the generation model incorporates a palmprint recognition model to ensure identity
consistency and a conditional modulation generator to improve the intraclass diversity. As a result, RPG-Palm can
generate massive realistic palmprints and significantly improve recognition performance. Unfortunately, RPG-Palm
still suffers from the severe domain gap and difficulty in
unpaired training. Both identity consistency and generation
models cannot work well with limited training data.
In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage method to
well address the severe domain gap between Bézier curves
and realistic palmprints.
Our method introduces a palm crease energy (PCE) domain as an intermediate bridge connecting Bézier curves
and realistic palmprints. Therefore, the generation process
can be divided into two stages: Bézier curves to PCE images
and PCE images to palmprints, as illustrated in Fig.2.
In the first stage, our generation model produces PCE images by transferring the style from Bézier curves to realistic
palm creases. Both the PCE images and Bézier curves are binary line-based images, simplifying the task to focus solely
on transferring the style from the curves to realistic creases.
As depicted in Fig.2, although the task remains unpaired,

Introduction
As a promising biometric technology, palmprint recognition
has demonstrated broad application prospects (Fei et al.
2018). Big companies like Amazon and Tencent have released palmprint based products. In recent years, deep learning has become the mainstream palmprint recognition technology (Zhong and Zhu 2019). However, a significant bottleneck in the research and application of deep learningbased palmprint recognition lies in the scarcity of large-scale
palmprint datasets. Collecting large-scale palmprint datasets
may pose a risk of violating user privacy.
To address this challenge, BézierPalm (Zhao et al.
2022) uses parameterized Bézier curves to simulate pseudopalmprints and pretrain recognition model. By adjusting
the control points of Bézier curves according to geometric
rules, BézierPalm can generate massive new identities without training data. However, as shown in Fig.1, Bézier curves
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2616

