The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Generalized Neural Diffusion Framework on Graphs
Yibo Li1 , Xiao Wang2 , Hongrui Liu3 , Chuan Shi1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beihang University
3
Ant Group
{yiboL, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, xiao_wang@buaa.edu.cn, liuhongrui.lhr@antgroup.com

Abstract

subgraph isomorphism counting (Yu et al. 2023), and graph
classifification (Gao and Ji 2019; Zhang et al. 2018).
Some recent studies show that GNNs are in fact intimately
connected to diffusion equations (Chamberlain et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021; Thorpe et al. 2022), which can be considered as information diffusion on graphs. Diffusion equation
interprets GNNs from a continuous perspective (Chamberlain
et al. 2021) and provides new insights to understand existing GNN architectures, which motives some diffusion-based
GNNs. For instance, (Wang et al. 2021) proposes continuous
graph diffusion. (Thorpe et al. 2022) utilizes the diffusion
process to handle oversmoothing issue. (Song et al. 2022)
considers a graph as a discretization of a Riemannian manifold and studies the robustness of the information propagation process on graphs. Diffusion equation can also build a
bridge between traditional GNNs and control theory (Zang
and Wang 2020). Although the diffusion process and graph
convolution are closely related, little effort has been made to
answer: Is there a unified diffusion equation framework to formally unify the current GNN architectures? A well-informed
answer can deepen our understanding of the learning mechanism of GNNs, and may inspire to design a broad new class
of GNNs based on diffusion equation.
Actually, (Chamberlain et al. 2021) has explained GCN
(Kipf and Welling 2016a) and GAT (Veličković et al. 2017)
from diffusion equation. However, with more proposed GNN
architectures, it is highly desired to formally revisit the relation between diffusion equation and GNNs. In this paper,
we discover that many GNN architectures substantially can
be unified with a general diffusion equation with the fidelity
term, such as GCN/SGC [22], APPNP[14], GAT [19], AMP
[16], DAGNN [15]. Basically, the diffusion equation describes that the change of a node representation depends
on the movement of information on graphs from one node
to its neighbors, and the fidelity term constraints that the
change of a node representation depends on the difference
with its initial feature. Furthermore, we show that the unified diffusion framework can also be derived from an energy
function, which explains the whole framework as an energy
minimization process in a global view. Compared with other
unified frameworks (Zhu et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2021), our
framework is from the diffusion perspective, which has many
advantages. For example, diffusion-based methods are able to
address the common plights of graph learning models such as

Recent studies reveal the connection between GNNs and
the diffusion process, which motivates many diffusion-based
GNNs to be proposed. However, since these two mechanisms
are closely related, one fundamental question naturally arises:
Is there a general diffusion framework that can formally unify
these GNNs? The answer to this question can not only deepen
our understanding of the learning process of GNNs, but also
may open a new door to design a broad new class of GNNs. In
this paper, we propose a general diffusion equation framework
with the fidelity term, which formally establishes the relationship between the diffusion process with more GNNs. Meanwhile, with this framework, we identify one characteristic of
graph diffusion networks, i.e., the current neural diffusion
process only corresponds to the first-order diffusion equation. However, by an experimental investigation, we show that
the labels of high-order neighbors actually exhibit monophily
property, which induces the similarity based on labels among
high-order neighbors without requiring the similarity among
first-order neighbors. This discovery motives to design a new
high-order neighbor-aware diffusion equation, and derive a
new type of graph diffusion network (HiD-Net) based on the
framework. With the high-order diffusion equation, HiD-Net
is more robust against attacks and works on both homophily
and heterophily graphs. We not only theoretically analyze the
relation between HiD-Net with high-order random walk, but
also provide a theoretical convergence guarantee. Extensive
experimental results well demonstrate the effectiveness of
HiD-Net over state-of-the-art graph diffusion networks.

Introduction
Graphs, such as traffic networks, social networks, citation
networks, and molecular networks, are ubiquitous in the real
world. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which are
able to effectively learn the node representations based on
the message-passing manner, have shown great popularity in
tackling graph analytics problems. So far, GNNs have significantly promoted the development of graph analysis towards
real-world applications. e.g, node classifification (Abu-ElHaija et al. 2019; Wu, He, and Xu 2019), link prediction
(Kipf and Welling 2016b; You, Ying, and Leskovec 2019),
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8707

