The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Grey-Box Bayesian Optimization for Sensor Placement in Assisted Living
Environments
Shadan Golestan, Omid Ardakanian, Pierre Boulanger
Computing Science Department, University of Alberta
{golestan, ardakanian, pierreb}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

the most notable methods used to place and configure sensors in an indoor environment (Thomas, Crandall, and Cook
2016; Wu et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020). But these methods
do not perform well in general, because they rely only on
local information provided by the samples of f , the function being optimized (Mori, Takeda, and Matsumoto 2005),
with x being a sensor placement and f (x) representing some
performance measure of the machine learning model. On
the contrary, estimation of distribution algorithms, such as
Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2015), use local information to acquire global information about f (x),
i.e., building a probabilistic surrogate model of this function.
When this model represents f (x) accurately, the optimizer
can perform more effective exploration/exploitation. A wide
range of problems have been recently solved using BO, from
optimization over permutation spaces (Deshwal et al. 2022)
and combinatorial spaces (Deshwal et al. 2020, 2023) to setting up sensor networks for air quality monitoring (Hellan,
Lucas, and Goddard 2022). However, the application of BO
to optimize the sensor placement for indoor activity recognition has not been explored in previous work.
The main shortcoming of BO is that it treats f (x) as a
black-box function, meaning that it analyzes only its inputoutput behavior, disregarding any inherent, domain-specific
knowledge that might exist about this function. Grey-box
optimization (Astudillo and Frazier 2021), however, incorporates this knowledge in the optimization process. Although it requires more careful design, it can be faster and
drastically improve the quality of the solution. Our hypothesis is that in the problem of optimizing sensor placement
with respect to the performance of an activity recognition
model, inherent knowledge about the distribution of activities in different parts of the space could help BO quickly
identify important regions in the search space.
This paper presents Distribution-Guided Bayesian Optimization (DGBO), a novel grey-box BO algorithm that
learns the spatial distribution of activities and takes advantage of this knowledge to speed up the search for the best
sensor placement. This algorithm, depicted in Fig. 1, combined with high-fidelity building simulation for generating
realistic movement and activity traces and corresponding
sensor triggers, establishes the foundation of a framework
for sample-efficient identification of a motion sensor placement that supports accurate activity recognition in an aged-

Optimizing the configuration and placement of sensors is crucial for reliable fall detection, indoor localization, and activity recognition in assisted living spaces. We propose a
novel, sample-efficient approach to find a high-quality sensor placement in an arbitrary indoor space based on grey-box
Bayesian optimization and simulation-based evaluation. Our
key technical contribution lies in capturing domain-specific
knowledge about the spatial distribution of activities and incorporating it into the iterative selection of query points in
Bayesian optimization. Considering two simulated indoor environments and a real-world dataset containing human activities and sensor triggers, we show that our proposed method
performs better compared to state-of-the-art black-box optimization techniques in identifying high-quality sensor placements, leading to accurate activity recognition in terms of
F1-score, while also requiring a significantly lower number
(51.3% on average) of expensive function queries.

Introduction
Smart indoor spaces are commonly equipped with various networked sensors, such as motion sensors and cameras (Cook et al. 2012), to monitor activities and physical and mental health of the occupants, enabling caregivers
to detect and respond quickly to critical events, such as
falls. This is crucial as 1 in 4 older adults report falling per
year (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020).
The placement of sensors in the environment is one of the
main factors determining the performance of machine learning models that utilize the data they generate (Yang 2021).
In particular, an optimized sensor placement strategy makes
possible accurate activity recognition and localization using
the smallest number of sensors. However, due to the exponential size of the search space and the high cost of evaluating the model performance for each sensor placement under
normal occupancy conditions, finding the best sensor placement through exhaustive search is prohibitive in practice.
To date, many efforts have been made to design sampleefficient techniques to optimize the location of sensors,
given a lower bound on the performance of downstream applications that consume the sensor data. Greedy and evolutionary algorithms, such as the genetic algorithm (GA), are
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22049

