The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Commonsense for Zero-Shot Natural Language Video Localization
Meghana Holla1 , Ismini Lourentzou2 ,
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign
mmeghana@vt.edu, lourent2@illinois.edu

Abstract

0.3s

0.3s

The man walks to the
kitchen with his son
and helps him cook.

Full Supervision

1.0s

DVP

Pseudo Supervision
+ Commonsense
OD
{person, child, pan}

Weak Supervision

0.3s

1.0s

DVP

Child

House

Person

To

ed

lat

LocatedIn

Re

Zero-shot Natural Language-Video Localization (NLVL)
methods have exhibited promising results in training NLVL
models exclusively with raw video data by dynamically generating video segments and pseudo-query annotations. However, existing pseudo-queries often lack grounding in the
source video, resulting in unstructured and disjointed content. In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of commonsense reasoning in zero-shot NLVL. Specifically, we
present CORONET, a zero-shot NLVL framework that leverages commonsense to bridge the gap between videos and
generated pseudo-queries via a commonsense enhancement
module. CORONET employs Graph Convolution Networks
(GCN) to encode commonsense information extracted from
a knowledge graph, conditioned on the video, and crossattention mechanisms to enhance the encoded video and
pseudo-query representations prior to localization. Through
empirical evaluations on two benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that CORONET surpasses both zero-shot and weakly
supervised baselines, achieving improvements up to 32.13%
across various recall thresholds and up to 6.33% in mIoU.
These results underscore the significance of leveraging commonsense reasoning for zero-shot NLVL.

1.0s

uses
Full
Pan
Lo
Knowledge
ca
Pseudo Supervision
t
e
SubsetOf
dIn
Graph
Kitchen
{person, child,
DQG
pan, walk, play}
DVP: Dynamic Video Proposal
DQG: Dynamic Query Generation OD: Object Detection

Figure 1: NLVL tasks under various supervision settings.
Color-coded boxes show the expected annotations at each
supervision level. Full supervision: Temporal Video Annotations + Text Queries; Weak Supervision: Text Queries;
Pseudo-Supervision: Only Raw Videos. Makes use of DVP
+ DQG; CORONET (Ours, right) Only Raw Videos. DVP +
OD + video-grounded commonsense knowledge subgraph.

Introduction

vised methods demand fine-grained moment span annotations, while weakly supervised methods typically rely on
query descriptions alone. Nevertheless, both still heavily
rely on paired video-language data, which limits practicality in open-domain settings.
Recent works formulate zero-shot NLVL, which aims to
dynamically generate video moments and their corresponding queries, eliminating the need for paired video-query data
(Nam et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2023). Nonetheless, existing
approaches have certain limitations. On one hand, recent
methods generate pseudo-queries using off-the-shelf object
detectors for objects (nouns) and text-based language models for actions (verbs), resulting in noisy pseudo-queries
that lack grounding in the video content (Nam et al. 2021).
On the other hand, language-free methods remove pseudoqueries entirely by utilizing vision-language models pretrained on large-scale image and text datasets (Kim et al.
2023). However, eliminating textual information entirely
may lead to missing out on important semantic nuances.
Visual (video) and textual (query) modalities provide very

Natural Language Video Localization (NLVL) is a fundamental multimodal understanding task that aims to align
textual queries with relevant video segments. NLVL is a
core component for various applications such as video moment retrieval (Cao et al. 2022), video question answering
(Qian et al. 2023; Lei et al. 2020a), and video editing (Gao
et al. 2022). Prior works have primarily explored supervised
(Zeng et al. 2020; Wang, Ma, and Jiang 2020; Soldan et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2021)
or weakly supervised (Mun, Cho, and Han 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020, 2021) NLVL methodologies, relying on annotated video-query data to various extents.
Obtaining annotated data for NLVL is a labor-intensive
process that requires video samples paired with meticulous
annotations of video moments and corresponding textual descriptions. Figure 1 illustrates the annotation requirements
for different levels of supervision in NLVL. Fully superCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2166

