The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Training Based Few-Shot Node Classification by Knowledge Distillation
Zongqian Wu1 * , Yujie Mo1 * , Peng Zhou3 , Shangbo Yuan4 , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
4
School of Engineering and Design, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
wkzongqianwu@gmail.com
Abstract

GPN (Ding et al. 2020) computes prototypes with ProNet to
obtain expressive node representations. However, the meta
FSNC needs to construct multiple tasks to obtain generalization ability but it is usually time-consuming. Moreover,
previous methods ignore the information in unlabeled nodes.
To alleviate these issues, the self-training FSNC is proposed
to use prior knowledge in the base set with inexpensive time
cost and to assign a part of unlabeled nodes in the novel
set with pseudo-labels. For instance, IA-FSNC (Wu et al.
2022) first reduces the time cost by constructing only one
GCN in the base set, and then assigns pseudo-labels to unlabeled nodes with low information entropy in the novel set
for achieving information augmentation.
However, there are still some limitations to be solved for
the self-training FSNC. First, the self-training FSNC cannot
generally make the full use of the information in the base
set. For example, IA-FSNC only passes the parameters in the
first layer of the graph convolution to initialize the parameters in the novel set, but it ignores the information in other
graph convolutional layers. This possibly results in the information lack for the novel set. Second, the self-training FSNC
conducts self-training to generate pseudo-labels for providing new supervisory information, but its effectiveness will
degrade if the pseudo-labels are incorrect or over-confident.
For example, the classification accuracy of IA-FSNC will
greatly reduce if it selects either incorrect pseudo-labels or
over-confident pseudo-labels too much.
Addressing the above issues of the self-training FSNC is
challenging. First, the information in the base set does not
have strong generalization ability (as the meta FSNC does)
since it only builds one task (Wu et al. 2022). Therefore,
it is essential for the novel set to fully use the information
in the base set. Second, the effectiveness of the self-training
FSNC depends on the quality of pseudo-labels (Miyato et al.
2018; Wei et al. 2020). Incorrect pseudo-labels will mislead
the training model while over-confident pseudo-labels will
lead to the over-fitting issue. Therefore, it is challenging for
the self-training FSNC to properly handle either incorrect
pseudo-labels or over-confident pseudo-labels.
In this paper, we propose a new self-training FSNC with
knowledge distillation (KD-FSNC for short) to address the
above issues. To do this, we first pre-train a GCN (Hinton
et al. 2015; Romero et al. 2014; Joshi et al. 2021) as the
teacher model on the base set, and then randomly initialize

Self-training based few-shot node classification (FSNC)
methods have shown excellent performance in real applications, but they cannot make the full use of the information in the base set and are easily affected by the quality of
pseudo-labels. To address these issues, this paper proposes a
new self-training FSNC method by involving the representation distillation and the pseudo-label distillation. Specifically, the representation distillation includes two knowledge
distillation methods (i.e., the local representation distillation and the global representation distillation) to transfer the
information in the base set to the novel set. The pseudolabel distillation is designed to conduct knowledge distillation on the pseudo-labels to improve their quality. Experimental results showed that our method achieves supreme
performance, compared with state-of-the-art methods. Our
code and a comprehensive theoretical version are available
at https://github.com/zongqianwu/KD-FSNC.

Introduction
Node classification usually needs enough label information
to predict unlabeled nodes on the graph data (Tu et al. 2022;
Liang et al. 2023). However, obtaining label information is
generally expensive and time-consuming. To address this issue, few-shot node classification (FSNC) has widely been
proposed to train machine learning models (e.g., graph convolutional network (GCN)) on the datasets with limited label
nodes. As a result, FSNC has recently attracted increasing
attention in real applications.
Previous FSNC methods can be divided into two categories, i.e., meta-learning based method (meta FSNC for
short) and self-training based method (self-training FSNC
for short) (Zhang et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2022). The meta FSNC aims to learn the initialization model
with prior knowledge from the base set, by either modelagnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017) or prototypical network (ProNet) (Snell, Swersky,
and Zemel 2017). For instance, G-META (Huang and Zitnik 2020) applies MAML to preserve both the structure
information and the feature information of the graph, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author (seanzhuxf@gmail.com).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15988

