The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BirdCollect: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Analyzing Dense Bird Flock
Attributes
Kshitiz .1 , Sonu Shreshtha1 , Bikash Dutta1 , Muskan Dosi1 , Mayank Vatsa1 ,
Richa Singh1 , Saket Anand2 , Sudeep Sarkar3 , Sevaram Mali Parihar4
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, India, 2 Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, India,
3
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA 4 Crane Conservationist, Khichan, India
{kshitiz.1, shreshtha.1, d22cs051, dosi.1, mvatsa, richa}@iitj.ac.in, anands@iiitd.ac.in, sarkar@usf.edu,
smaliparihar@gmail.com
Abstract

Bird
Counting

BirdCollect Dataset

Automatic recognition of bird behavior from long-term, uncontrolled outdoor imagery can contribute to conservation efforts by enabling large-scale monitoring of bird populations.
Current techniques in AI-based wildlife monitoring have focused on short-term tracking and monitoring birds individually rather than in species-rich flocks. We present BirdCollect,
a comprehensive benchmark dataset for monitoring dense
bird flock attributes. It includes a unique collection of more
than 6,000 high-resolution images of Demoiselle Cranes
(Anthropoides virgo) feeding and nesting in the vicinity of
Khichan region of Rajasthan. Particularly, each image contains an average of 190 individual birds, illustrating the complex dynamics of densely populated bird flocks on a scale that
has not previously been studied. In addition, a total of 433 distinct pictures captured at Keoladeo National Park, Bharatpur
provide a comprehensive representation of 34 distinct bird
species belonging to various taxonomic groups. These images
offer details into the diversity and the behaviour of birds in vital natural ecosystem along the migratory flyways. Additionally, we provide a set of 2,500 point-annotated samples which
serve as ground truth for benchmarking various computer vision tasks like crowd counting, density estimation, segmentation, and species classification. The benchmark performance
for these tasks highlight the need for tailored approaches
for specific wildlife applications, which include varied conditions including views, illumination, and resolutions. With
around 46.2 GBs in size encompassing data collected from
two distinct nesting ground sets, it is the largest birds dataset
containing detailed annotations, showcasing a substantial
leap in bird research possibilities. The database is available at:
https://iab-rubric.org/resources/wildlife-dataset/birdcollect

Site 1 Data

Site 2 Data
Multiple Bird
Species
Keoladeo
National Park

Demoiselle
Cranes
Khichan

Task-1: Bird Counting

Bird Tracking

Task-2: Density Estimation

Behaviour
Analysis

Count
26

Task-4: Species Identification

Task-3: Semantic Segmentation

Wildlife
Monitoring

Ap
Uneven
Distribution

Low-Resolution

Occlusion

Motion Effect

pli
c

Ch

ati

all

en

on
s

ge
s

Figure 1: Visual description outlining the potential applications and challenges associated with our proposed dataset
BirdCollect.

et al. 2019), with grassland-dwelling and aerial insectivores
amongst the most affected. Globally, 1 in 8 bird species is
now threatened with extinction2 . Urgent conservation action
is imperative to reverse these declines and prevent irreparable damage to ecosystems. Long-distance migratory birds
that traverse continents are especially vulnerable, as they depend on networked habitats along their flyways for nesting
and wintering. For instance, collision with man-made structures like power lines and wind turbines results in millions
of migratory bird mortalities annually.
Quantitative long-term monitoring is essential to track
climate change indicators like shifts in arrival time, nesting locations, and migration routes. Targeted conservation
planning hinges on high-quality data on avian distribution,
abundances, and behavior. AI and vision techniques through
tasks like crowd-counting, density estimation, segmentation
and species classification can automate bird monitoring from
imagery. However, lack of labeled data for migratory birds
limit the research progress in this field.
Our research endeavors to leverage advanced vision techniques for an enriched analysis of bird behavior. We present

Introduction
Birds are vital components of our ecosystems worldwide,
playing critical roles in pollination, pest control, seed dispersal, and other ecological processes. However, both migratory and non-migratory bird populations face escalating
threats from anthropogenic pressures like habitat loss1 , climate change (Li, Liu, and Zhu 2022), and overexploitation. Habitat degradation and destruction are major threats
to avian biodiversity globally. Consequently, North America has lost nearly 3 billion birds since 1970 (Rosenberg
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.3billionbirds.org/

2

21879

https://www.stateofthebirds.org/2022/

