The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Bilingual Lexicon Induction via Bi-directional Translation Pair
Retrieving
Qiuyu Ding, Hailong Cao* , Tiejun Zhao
Harbin Institute of Technology
qiuyuding@stu.hit.edu.cn, caohailong@hit.edu.cn, tjzhao@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Source langauge words
Target langauge words

Most Bilingual Lexicon Induction (BLI) methods retrieve
word translation pairs by finding the closest target word for
a given source word based on cross-lingual word embeddings (WEs). However, we find that solely retrieving translation from the source-to-target perspective leads to some false
positive translation pairs, which significantly harm the precision of BLI. To address this problem, we propose a novel
and effective method to improve translation pair retrieval in
cross-lingual WEs. Specifically, we consider both source-side
and target-side perspectives throughout the retrieval process
to alleviate false positive word pairings that emanate from a
single perspective. On a benchmark dataset of BLI, our proposed method achieves competitive performance compared to
existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. It demonstrates effectiveness and robustness across six experimental languages,
including similar language pairs and distant language pairs,
under both supervised and unsupervised settings.

apple
cherry
from source-side to target-side
from target-side to source-side

Figure 1: The illustration of asymmetry in retrieving translations, traversing from the source-side language to the targetside language and vice versa in cross-lingual WEs. The blue
points are words in the source language, and the pink points
are words in the target language.

Introduction
Bilingual Lexicon Induction (BLI) or word translation aims
to find word translation pairs across large monolingual corpora of two languages, and has wide applications in crosslingual NLP tasks, such as cross-lingual text classification
(Klementiev, Titov, and Bhattarai 2012; Mogadala and Rettinger 2016), unsupervised machine translation (Artetxe,
Labaka, and Agirre 2018b; Yang et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019;
Duan et al. 2020), and cross-lingual named entity recognition (Mayhew, Tsai, and Roth 2017; Xie et al. 2018).
Most BLI models map monolingual word embeddings
(WEs) into a shared WE space (Lample et al. 2018; Artetxe,
Labaka, and Agirre 2018a; Ruder, Vulić, and Søgaard 2019;
Li et al. 2022). When searching for the translation of a
source word, the closest target word is retrieved in the crosslingual WE space and regarded as a translation result.
However, we find an interesting phenomenon where a
source word has its nearest neighbor in the target language,
but the nearest neighbor of that target word may not be
the original source word. As illustrated in Figure 1, the
cross-lingual nearest neighbor of the source word “apple” is
“cherry”, but the cross-lingual nearest neighbor of the target

word “cherry” is the source word “cherry”. This indicates
that the translation pairs obtained from the two perspectives exhibit inequality. Clearly, the translation pair {apple,
cherry} obtained from the source-side perspective, which is
commonly used, is not a reliable translation pair. One of the
reasons for this false translation issue is that the BLI system’s retrieval predominantly focuses on a single perspective: source-to-target, which we refer to as the “source-side
perspective”, raising the problem of “source-side bias” (The
formal definition can be found in Sec. Methodology).
Although the previous study (Lample et al. 2018) notes
the importance of retrieval of translation pairs, they did not
resolve the problem of false positive word pairs arising from
source-side bias. In this paper, we investigate the impact of
false positive translation pairs caused by source-side bias
on BLI’s accuracy. Then we propose a novel method of
word translation retrieval that incorporates a bi-directional
perspective to alleviate this problem. Specifically, when retrieving word translation pairs for a given source word, we
first retrieve its cross-lingual nearest neighbor set from the
source-side perspective. Then, for each word in this set, a
reverse nearest neighbor set retrieval is conducted from the
target-side perspective. The final translation result is collaboratively determined by the set of translations obtained from

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17898

