The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Can LLM Replace Stack Overflow? A Study on Robustness and Reliability of
Large Language Model Code Generation
Li Zhong, Zilong Wang
University of California, San Diego
lizhong@ucsd.edu, zlwang@ucsd.edu

Abstract

merous works have been made to avoid syntax errors and
improve semantic understanding in the generated code (Xu
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2023a; Luo et al.
2023). Unlike the online programming forums, the generated code snippets are not reviewed by the community peers
and thus suffer from API misuse, such as missing boundary
checking in file reading and variable indexing, missing file
stream closing, failure in transaction completion, etc. Even
if the code samples are executable or functionally correct,
misuse can trigger serious potential risks in production, such
as memory leaks, program crashes, garbage collection failures, etc, as shown in Figure 1. To make things worse, the
programmers asking these questions could be vulnerable to
the risk if they are novices to the APIs and cannot tell the
violations in the generated code snippets. Therefore, it is essential to contemplate the code reliability while evaluating
the code generation by large language models.

Recently, large language models (LLMs) have shown an extraordinary ability to understand natural language and generate programming code. It has been a common practice for
software engineers to consult LLMs when encountering coding questions. Although efforts have been made to avoid syntax errors and align the code with the intended semantics, the
reliability, and robustness of the code generation from LLMs
have not yet been thoroughly studied. The executable code
is not equivalent to reliable and robust code, especially in
the context of real-world software development. For example,
the misuse of APIs in the generated code could lead to severe problems, such as resource leaks, program crashes, etc.
Existing code evaluation benchmarks and datasets focus on
crafting small tasks such as programming questions in coding
interviews. However, this deviates from the problems developers typically consult LLMs about. To fill the missing piece,
we propose a dataset ROBUSTAPI for evaluating the reliability and robustness of code generated by LLMs. We collect
1208 coding questions from Stack Overflow on 18 representative Java APIs. We summarize the common misuse patterns of
these APIs and evaluate them on current popular LLMs. The
evaluation results show that even GPT-4 has 62% of the generated code that contains API misuses. It would cause unexpected consequences if the code is introduced into real-world
software.

To evaluate the code generation of large language models, most of the existing benchmarks focus on the functional
correctness of the execution result from the generated code,
which means the code is acceptable as long as it is functional for the user’s purpose (Chen et al. 2021; Yin et al.
2018; Lu et al. 2021). We argue that the correct execution
result is important but it is not only the case in the software
development scenario. What the engineers really need is a
reliable code sample without potential risks in the long run.
Moreover, the domain of most current programming datasets
is far from software engineering. The data source is mostly
online coding challenge websites, such as Codeforces, Kattis, Leetcode, etc (Hendrycks et al. 2021; Austin et al. 2021).
Although remarkable progress has been made, we argue that
they fail to substantially help the software development in
practical scenarios.

Introduction
The new era of language modeling arrives when large language models (LLMs) are capable of generating customized
code according to the user’s needs (Ye et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023a; Anil et al. 2023). It is not surprising that more
and more software engineers choose to query large language
models for the answer to the coding questions, such as generating a code snippet using certain APIs or detecting bugs
in a few lines of code. Large language models are able to
respond more suitable and customized answers for the question compared with searching in the online programming forums, such as Stack Overflow.
Such a fast pace conceals potential risks in the code generation of large language models. From the perspective of
software engineering, the robustness and reliability of generated code have not yet been thoroughly studied even if nu-

To this end, we propose ROBUSTAPI, a comprehensive
benchmark to evaluate the reliability and robustness of code
generated by large language models, including a dataset of
coding questions and an evaluator using the abstract syntax
tree (AST) (Fischer, Lusiardi, and Von Gudenberg 2007).
In the dataset, we target creating an evaluation setting that
is close to real software development. Thus we collect representative questions about Java from Stack Overflow. Java
is one of the most popular programming languages and is
widely used in software development because of its write

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21841

