The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Efficient Diffusion-Based Image Editing with Instant Attention Masks
Siyu Zou1 * † , Jiji Tang2† , Yiyi Zhou1 , Jing He1 , Chaoyi Zhao2 ,
Rongsheng Zhang2 , Zhipeng Hu2 , Xiaoshuai Sun1‡
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., Hangzhou, China
zousiyu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, tangjiji01@corp.netease.com, zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn, blinghe@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{zhaochaoyi, zhangrongsheng, zphu}@corp.netease.com, xssun@xmu.edu.cn
Input Image

Abstract
Diffusion-based Image Editing (DIE) is an emerging research
hot-spot, which often applies a semantic mask to control the
target area for diffusion-based editing. However, most existing solutions obtain these masks via manual operations or
off-line processing, greatly reducing their efficiency. In this
paper, we propose a novel and efficient image editing method
for Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models, termed Instant Diffusion Editing (InstDiffEdit). In particular, InstDiffEdit aims
to employ the cross-modal attention ability of existing diffusion models to achieve instant mask guidance during the diffusion steps. To reduce the noise of attention maps and realize the full automatics, we equip InstDiffEdit with a trainingfree refinement scheme to adaptively aggregate the attention
distributions for the automatic yet accurate mask generation.
Meanwhile, to supplement the existing evaluations of DIE,
we propose a new benchmark called Editing-Mask to examine the mask accuracy and local editing ability of existing
methods. To validate InstDiffEdit, we also conduct extensive
experiments on ImageNet and Imagen, and compare it with a
bunch of the SOTA methods. The experimental results show
that InstDiffEdit not only outperforms the SOTA methods in
both image quality and editing results, but also has a much
faster inference speed, i.e., +5 to +6 times. Our code available at https://github.com/xiaotianqing/InstDiffEdit

Generation Image

Manual Mask

British Shorthair cat

Persian cat

Generated Mask

Figure 1: Illustration of existing diffusion-based image editing methods, where a manually or off-line generated mask
is often used to control the editing area.

text description, while the rest image information needs to
be preserved as much as possible. Although existing diffusion models (Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022) excel in generation quality and diversity
on text-to-image generation, it still lacks precise controls.
Therefore, recent diffusion-based editing methods introduce
additional information to better control the image manipulation, such as reference image (Meng et al. 2021) or semantic
mask (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022).
Among these solutions, padding a semantic mask is the
most effective way for accurate image editing, which can
precisely restrict the target image area and achieve editing via text-to-image diffusions (Avrahami, Lischinski, and
Fried 2022), as shown in Fig. 1. However, the mask generation often requires manual intervention (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022; Couairon et al. 2022b), greatly limiting
the efficiency of these methods for the practical use.
Recent advance has aspired to automate the editing process via reducing the manual efforts or including the mask
generation in diffusion models. For instance, PtP (Hertz
et al. 2022) proposes a semi-automated method, which can
directly obtain mask by manually setting some parameters.
More recently, DiffEdit (Couairon et al. 2022b) proposes a
fully automatic method, which can embed the mask generation into the diffusion framework, but its mask generation
and image editing are still time consuming. Overall, exist-

Introduction
For a year or two, diffusion models have gradually become
the mainstream paradigm in conditional image generation
(Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Rombach et al.
2022; Balaji et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2021). Compared with
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Karras, Laine,
and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2021), diffusion models yield a completely different generation pipeline,
which can obtain more diverse and interpretable generations. The great success of diffusion models also sparks researchers to apply them to the task of semantic image editing (Meng et al. 2021; Kawar et al. 2022).
Semantic image editing (Zhan et al. 2021) aims to modify
the target instance of the given image according to the input
* This work was done during her internship at Fuxi AI Lab.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

7864

