The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Memory-Efficient Reversible Spiking Neural Networks
Hong Zhang1 , Yu Zhang1,2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China
2
Key Laboratory of Collaborative Sensing and Autonomous Unmanned Systems of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China
{hongzhang99, zhangyu80}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

MS ResNet
RevSResNet (ours)
Spikingformer
RevSFormer (ours)

500
GPU Memory (MB/img)

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are potential competitors to
artificial neural networks (ANNs) due to their high energyefficiency on neuromorphic hardware. However, SNNs are
unfolded over simulation time steps during the training process. Thus, SNNs require much more memory than ANNs,
which impedes the training of deeper SNN models. In this
paper, we propose the reversible spiking neural network to
reduce the memory cost of intermediate activations and membrane potentials during training. Firstly, we extend the reversible architecture along temporal dimension and propose
the reversible spiking block, which can reconstruct the computational graph and recompute all intermediate variables
in forward pass with a reverse process. On this basis, we
adopt the state-of-the-art SNN models to the reversible variants, namely reversible spiking ResNet (RevSResNet) and
reversible spiking transformer (RevSFormer). Through experiments on static and neuromorphic datasets, we demonstrate that the memory cost per image of our reversible SNNs
does not increase with the network depth. On CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 datasets, our RevSResNet37 and RevSFormer-4384 achieve comparable accuracies and consume 3.79× and
3.00× lower GPU memory per image than their counterparts
with roughly identical model complexity and parameters. We
believe that this work can unleash the memory constraints in
SNN training and pave the way for training extremely large
and deep SNNs.

100

9.1x

2-384

16-384

21
2

104

34

2-384
18

20

16-384

8.1x

37
4

109
6
8
10
12
Model Complexity (GFLOPs)

14

16

Figure 1: Reversible spiking neural networks are more
memory-efficient. Our proposed RevSResNet and RevSFormer need less GPU memory than their non-reversible
counterparts during training. Besides, the memory cost of
reversible SNNs does not increase with the network depth.

Although the inference process of SNNs on neuromorphic
chips is relatively mature (Davies et al. 2018; Roy, Jaiswal,
and Panda 2019), these chips cannot support the training
process. Therefore, SNNs are still trained on graphics processing units (GPUs). During the training process based on
the BPTT framework, SNNs are unfolded over simulation
time steps T . Thus, SNNs usually require higher computing
resources and memory bandwidth compared to ANNs. The
computational requirements can be compensated by some
AI accelerators (Okuta et al. 2017) or spending more time
in training. However, there is currently no solution to the
memory constraints. Under such constraints, some SNNs
are trained with a small batch size (Zhang, Fan, and Zhang
2023), indirectly affecting the final accuracy (Wu and Johnson 2021). Also, deeper SNNs are prevented from training.
The high memory consumption of SNNs comes from several aspects. On the one hand, like ANNs, the memory required by SNNs increases linearly with the depth of the network. The deeper the network, the more parameters and intermediate activations need storage. On the other hand, unlike ANNs, the memory cost of SNNs increases with simulation time step T . SNNs need to store T times more intermediate activations, and the membrane potentials of spiking

Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs), brain-inspired models
based on binary spiking signals, are regarded as the third
generation of neural networks (Maass 1997). Due to the
sparsity and event-driven characteristics, SNNs can be deployed on neuromorphic hardware with low energy consumption. With the help of backpropagation through time
framework (BPTT) and surrogate gradient, direct training
SNNs are developing towards deeper and larger models. Advanced spiking architectures such as ResNet-like SNNs (Hu
et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2023) and spiking vision transformers (Zhou et al. 2022, 2023) have been
proposed in succession, indicating that SNNs are potential
competitors to artificial neural networks (ANNs).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16759

