The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatial-Related Sensors Matters: 3D Human Motion Reconstruction Assisted with
Textual Semantics
Xueyuan Yang 1,2 , Chao Yao1,2 * , Xiaojuan Ban1,2,3,4*
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering, Beijing 100083, China.
2
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China.
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Bionic Unmanned Systems, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100083, China.
4
Institute of Materials Intelligent Technology, Liaoning Academy of Materials, Shenyang 110004, China.
m202210673@xs.ustb.edu.cn,{yaochao, banxj}@ustb.edu.cn
Share the Same IMU Readings

Abstract
6

Leveraging wearable devices for motion reconstruction has
emerged as an economical and viable technique. Certain
methodologies employ sparse Inertial Measurement Units
(IMUs) on the human body and harness data-driven strategies to model human poses. However, the reconstruction of
motion based solely on sparse IMU data is inherently fraught
with ambiguity, a consequence of numerous identical IMU
readings corresponding to different poses. In this paper, we
explore the spatial importance of sparse sensors, supervised
by text that describes specific actions. Specifically, uncertainty is introduced to derive weighted features for each IMU.
We also design a Hierarchical Temporal Transformer (HTT)
and apply contrastive learning to achieve precise temporal
and feature alignment of sensor data with textual semantics. Experimental results demonstrate our proposed approach
achieves significant improvements in multiple metrics compared to existing methods. Notably, with textual supervision,
our method not only differentiates between ambiguous actions such as sitting and standing but also produces more precise and natural motion.

6
1

2

3

11

2

4

5

3

1:root 2:lwrist
3:rwrist 4:lknee
5:rknee 6:head

Text label:A man is standing

4

5

Text label:A man is sitting

Figure 1: Considering specific postures such as standing and
sitting, the rotational data and acceleration output by the sensors are largely invariant. Incorporating additional information such as text can help to address this challenge.

To address this issue, some methods (Huang et al. 2018;
Yi, Zhou, and Xu 2021; Jiang et al. 2022b; Von Marcard
et al. 2017; Yi et al. 2022) have deployed sparse IMUs on the
body and analyzed temporal signals to model human body
poses. These approaches not only reduce the number and
cost of IMUs but also enhance the wearability and minimize
invasiveness. Nevertheless, it should be noted that there are
still some limitations that restrict the utilization of sparse
sensors. Specifically, motion reconstruction using sparse inertial sensors constitutes an under-constrained problem: distinct postures can yield identical sensor outputs. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the sensors generate similar rotation matrices and acceleration outputs when the subject is sitting and
standing, making accurate differentiation between these postures challenging. Besides, the inherent distinction of spatial
relations between IMUs, has rarely been used in previous
methods, thereby revealing opportunities for potential enhancements.
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework for sensorbased 3D human motion reconstruction, leveraging spatial
relationships and textual supervision to accurately generate naturalistic human body poses. Sparse sensors are designed to capture the motion characteristics of different body

Introduction
Human motion reconstruction is a pivotal technique for accurately capturing 3D human body kinematics, with critical
applications in gaming, sports, healthcare, and film production. One of the prevalent methods in motion reconstruction
is the optical-based approach, which involves analyzing images of individuals to ascertain their respective poses (Chen
et al. 2020; Sengupta, Budvytis, and Cipolla 2023; Cao et al.
2017). With the rapid progression of wearable techniques,
various sensor devices have also been used to reconstruct
human motion. For example, Xsens (Schepers et al. 2018)
system employs 17 densely positioned IMUs to facilitate
the reconstruction of human body poses. Compared to optical methods, IMUs offer robustness against variable lighting conditions and occlusions, allow for unrestrained movement in both indoor and outdoor environments, and enable
the generation of naturalistic human motion. However, the
dense placement of wearable IMUs on the body can be intrusive and costly.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10225

