The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

United We Stand: Using Epoch-Wise Agreement of Ensembles to Combat Overfit*
Uri Stern, Daniel Shwartz, Daphna Weinshall
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
ustern@gmail.com, Daniel.Shwartz1@mail.huji.ac.il, daphna@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Deep neural networks have become the method of choice
for solving many classification tasks, largely because they
can fit very complex functions defined over raw data. The
downside of such powerful learners is the danger of overfit. In this paper, we introduce a novel ensemble classifier
for deep networks that effectively overcomes overfitting by
combining models generated at specific intermediate epochs
during training. Our method allows for the incorporation of
useful knowledge obtained by the models during the overfitting phase without deterioration of the general performance,
which is usually missed when early stopping is used.
To motivate this approach, we begin with the theoretical analysis of a regression model, whose prediction – that the variance among classifiers increases when overfit occurs – is
demonstrated empirically in deep networks in common use.
Guided by these results, we construct a new ensemble-based
prediction method, where the prediction is determined by the
class that attains the most consensual prediction throughout
the training epochs. Using multiple image and text classification datasets, we show that when regular ensembles suffer
from overfit, our method eliminates the harmful reduction in
generalization due to overfit, and often even surpasses the performance obtained by early stopping. Our method is easy to
implement and can be integrated with any training scheme
and architecture, without additional prior knowledge beyond
the training set. It is thus a practical and useful tool to overcome overfit.

1

(a) Example with 3 models

(b) Final predictions

Figure 1: An illustrative example, showing the hypothetical
behavior of an ensemble of size 3. (a) Visualization of each
model’s prediction over time (5 epochs) (b) The final prediction of the 3 models (top row), regular ensemble (bottom
left), and our method (bottom right).
ceeds. Not surprisingly, given the gravity of this issue, a variety of measures have been developed through the years to
combat overfit, as reviewed in Section 2.
One important cause of overfit in deep learning is the
existence of false labels in the dataset (also termed ”noisy
labels”), which the network nevertheless is able to memorize. Empirically, such noisy labels are known to be memorized late by deep networks (Arpit et al. 2017), resulting in
overfit - errors that occur later in training. As deep learning
requires large annotated datasets, the problem of false labels often arises in real applications, medical data being an
important example (Karimi et al. 2020), where the reliable
labeling of data is expensive. Moreover, cheap alternatives
such as crowd-sourcing or automatic labeling typically introduce noisy labels to the dataset (Nicholson, Sheng, and
Zhang 2016). It is thus important to develop additional tools
for combating overfit, especially heavy overfit caused by
noisy labels, which is our goal in this paper.
Many methods have been developed to reduce overfit (See
Section 2), often by adding some form of regularization to
the network’s training. One important example is early stopping, where the training is concluded ahead of time to avoid
overfit. The problem with early stopping is that models can
learn useful features from the data even as they are overfitting, which raises the need for additional methods that reduce overfit without limiting the training or the model.
Our proposed method belongs to the family of deep ensemble classifiers. Differently from most methods, our new
ensemble classifier does not only consider the final predictions of the networks in the ensemble, but also tracks the
networks’ responses as learning proceeds. In this context,
we recall recent empirical findings (Hacohen, Choshen, and

Introduction

Deep supervised learning has achieved exceptional results
in various image recognition tasks in recent years. This impressive success is largely attributed to two factors – ready
access to very large annotated datasets, and powerful architectures involving a huge number of parameters, thus capable of learning very complex functions from large datasets.
However, when training very large models, we face the risk
of overfit – when models are fine-tuned to irrelevant details
in the training set. It is defined here as the co-occurrence
of increase in training accuracy and decrease in test accuracy, which implies poorer generalization as training pro* This work was supported by grants from the Israeli Council of
Higher Education and the Gatsby Charitable Foundation.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15075

