The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stability of Multi-Agent Learning in Competitive Networks:
Delaying the Onset of Chaos
Aamal Hussain 1 , Francesco Belardinelli 1
1

Imperial College London
aamal.hussain15@imperial.ac.uk, francesco.belardinelli@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Kadan and Fu 2021) whilst others converge in time average
(Anagnostides et al. 2022; Hadikhanloo et al. 2022; Bailey
and Piliouras 2019).
Yet in practice the requirement of an arbitrary competitive game to exactly satisfy the zero-sum condition is restrictive. It therefore becomes important to study the behaviour
of learning agents in arbitrary competitive games.The challenge in taking this step is that there are infinitely many
realisations of games which can be considered competitive, making a case by case analysis intractable. Furthermore, the non-stationarity of learning in competitive games
often leads to complex behaviours such as cycles (Galla
2011; Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras 2018)
and even chaos (Griffin, Semonsen, and Belmonte 2022;
Sato, Akiyama, and Farmer 2002). In fact, recent work has
shown that chaotic dynamics occur in games even slightly
perturbed from the zero-sum setting (Galla and Farmer
2013; Sato, Akiyama, and Farmer 2002). In addition, recent
work (Hussain, Belardinelli, and Piliouras 2023; Sanders,
Farmer, and Galla 2018) has shown that the ability of learning dynamics to reach an equilibrium with low exploration
rates diminishes as the number of agents increases. These
technical challenges present a strong barrier towards ensuring the convergence of learning in competitive games with
many players.
However, in both (Hussain, Belardinelli, and Piliouras
2023) and (Sanders, Farmer, and Galla 2018) it was assumed
that all agents are directly influenced by all other agents in
the environment. In practice, however, this does not hold.
Many ML applications, including Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) enforce structured interactions between
models (Hoang et al. 2018; LI et al. 2017). Furthermore,
real world problems such as robotic systems (Hamann 2018;
Shokri and Kebriaei 2020) and competitive game playing
(Perolat et al. 2022) impose a communication network between agents. In economic settings, agents interact through
social networks either online or in communities.

The behaviour of multi agent learning in competitive network
games is often studied within the context of zero sum games,
in which convergence guarantees may be obtained. However,
outside of this class the behaviour of learning is known to display complex behaviours and convergence cannot be always
guaranteed. Nonetheless, in order to develop a complete picture of the behaviour of multi agent learning in competitive
settings, the zero sum assumption must be lifted.
Motivated by this we study the Q Learning dynamics, a popular model of exploration and exploitation in multi agent learning, in competitive network games. We determine how the
degree of competition, exploration rate and network connectivity impact the convergence of Q Learning. To study generic
competitive games, we parameterise network games in terms
of correlations between agent payoffs and study the average behaviour of the Q Learning dynamics across all games
drawn from a choice of this parameter. This statistical approach establishes choices of parameters for which Q Learning dynamics converge to a stable fixed point. Differently to
previous works, we find that the stability of Q Learning is
explicitly dependent only on the network connectivity rather
than the total number of agents. Our experiments validate
these findings and show that, under certain network structures, the total number of agents can be increased without
increasing the likelihood of unstable or chaotic behaviours.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Learning in competitive games requires agents
to maximise their individual, competing rewards whilst simultaneously exploring their actions to find optimal strategies. This leads to a highly non-stationary problem where
agents must react to the changing behaviour of adversarial agents. The study of Multi-Agent Learning in competitive settings has achieved a number of successes within
the context of zero-sum games and their network variants
These games model perfect competition between agents,
yielding an underlying structure which make them amenable
for studying multi-agent learning. In particular it is known
that certain learning dynamics asymptotically converge to
an equilibrium in network zero-sum games (Ewerhart and
Valkanova 2020; Leonardos, Piliouras, and Spendlove 2021;

Model and Contributions Motivated by this, we study
multi-agent learning in network games, in which interactions
between agents are modelled by an underlying communication network. In this setting, we study the Q-Learning dynamic (Sato and Crutchfield 2003; Tuyls, Hoen, and Vanschoenwinkel 2006), a foundational model for studying the

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17435

