The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Unified Self-Distillation Framework
for Multimodal Sentiment Analysis with Uncertain Missing Modalities
Mingcheng Li1,2 * , Dingkang Yang1,2 * , Yuxuan Lei1 , Shunli Wang1 , Shuaibing Wang1 , Liuzhen Su1 ,
Kun Yang1 , Yuzheng Wang1 , Mingyang Sun1 , Lihua Zhang1,2,3†
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory (CIT Lab)
3
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
mingchengli21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {dkyang20, lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

during the training and testing phases. In real applications,
the assumption will not hold due to many inevitable factors,
such as privacy, device, or security constraints, resulting in
significant degradation of model performance.
Recently, several efforts focus on solving the problem of
uncertain missing modalities in MSA, which can be broadly
divided into two groups: (i) joint learning methods (Pham
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Zhao, Li, and Jin 2021; Zeng,
Liu, and Zhou 2022; Liu et al. 2024), which try to learn integrated representations based on the relations among different modalities; (ii) generative methods (Du et al. 2018; Ma
et al. 2021; Luo, Xu, and Lai 2023; Lian et al. 2023), which
reconstruct missing modalities utilizing available modalities. However, these methods suffer from the following limitations: 1) only perform interactions between fixed modality missing cases and fail to address stochastic real-world
scenarios; 2) focus only on coarse-grained and localized interactions in missing modalities, leading to non-robust joint
representations and invalid elemental correlations; 3) ignore
redundant semantics in multimodal representations, resulting in performance bottlenecks.
To address the above issues, we propose a Unified
multimodal Missing modality self-Distillation Framework
(UMDF) for the MSA task under uncertain missing modalities. UMDF has the following three core contributions. (i)
We design a unified self-distillation mechanism in UMDF to
automatically learn robust inherent representations from the
consistent distribution of multimodal data representations by
bidirectional knowledge transfer within a single network.
The bidirectional knowledge transfer pathway can supervise the model to maintain similar feature distributions and
logits distributions between heterogeneous modality missing cases. This effective pathway inhibits the unidirectional
reliance on the learned features (Morcos et al. 2018) and is
beneficial in two ways: the knowledge transfer from more
to fewer modalities facilitates the recovery of lost information of the missing modalities, while in the opposite direction, enhances modality-specific features. (ii) We propose a
multi-grained crossmodal interaction module that progressively performs coarse- and fine-grained crossmodal attention on missing modalities. It can hierarchically capture the
inter-modality interactions and intra-modality dynamics to
complement and reproduce the semantics of missing ele-

Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) has attracted
widespread research attention recently. Most MSA studies
are based on the assumption of modality completeness. However, many inevitable factors in real-world scenarios lead to
uncertain missing modalities, which invalidate the fixed multimodal fusion approaches. To this end, we propose a Unified
multimodal Missing modality self-Distillation Framework
(UMDF) to handle the problem of uncertain missing modalities in MSA. Specifically, a unified self-distillation mechanism in UMDF drives a single network to automatically
learn robust inherent representations from the consistent distribution of multimodal data. Moreover, we present a multigrained crossmodal interaction module to deeply mine the
complementary semantics among modalities through coarseand fine-grained crossmodal attention. Eventually, a dynamic
feature integration module is introduced to enhance the beneficial semantics in incomplete modalities while filtering the
redundant information therein to obtain a refined and robust
multimodal representation. Comprehensive experiments on
three datasets demonstrate that our framework significantly
improves MSA performance under both uncertain missingmodality and complete-modality testing conditions.

Introduction
As an important part of human-computer interaction, Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) is becoming a hot research area, which aims to understand and interpret human
sentiments through multiple forms of human expressions
(e.g., language content, voice tone, and facial behavior).
Previous studies have shown that more effective and valuable joint multimodal representations can be obtained by
combining complementary features in different modalities
(Shraga et al. 2020; Springstein, Müller-Budack, and Ewerth
2021), benefiting from the evolution of learning-based techniques (Yang et al. 2023c; Chen et al. 2024; Li, Yang, and
Zhang 2023; Yang et al. 2023d). Most MSA works (Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2022a,d, 2023b, 2022b; Li, Wang, and Cui 2023) are
based on the assumptions that all modalities are available
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10074

