The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BaCon: Boosting Imbalanced Semi-supervised Learning via Balanced
Feature-Level Contrastive Learning
Qianhan Feng1,2 , Lujing Xie3 , Shijie Fang2,4 * , Tong Lin1,2†
1

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, China
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Yuanpei College, Peking University
4
Google, Shanghai, China
{fengqianhan, lujing xie}@stu.pku.edu.cn, shijiefang@google.com, lintong@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) reduces the need for extensive annotations in deep learning, but the more realistic
challenge of imbalanced data distribution in SSL remains
largely unexplored. In Class Imbalanced Semi-supervised
Learning (CISSL), the bias introduced by unreliable pseudolabels can be exacerbated by imbalanced data distributions.
Most existing methods address this issue at instance-level
through reweighting or resampling, but the performance is
heavily limited by their reliance on biased backbone representation. Some other methods do perform feature-level adjustments like feature blending but might introduce unfavorable noise. In this paper, we discuss the bonus of a more balanced feature distribution for the CISSL problem, and further propose a Balanced Feature-Level Contrastive Learning method (BaCon). Our method directly regularizes the
distribution of instances’ representations in a well-designed
contrastive manner. Specifically, class-wise feature centers
are computed as the positive anchors, while negative anchors are selected by a straightforward yet effective mechanism. A distribution-related temperature adjustment is leveraged to control the class-wise contrastive degrees dynamically. Our method demonstrates its effectiveness through
comprehensive experiments on the CIFAR10-LT, CIFAR100LT, STL10-LT, and SVHN-LT datasets across various settings. For example, BaCon surpasses instance-level method
FixMatch-based ABC on CIFAR10-LT with a 1.21% accuracy improvement, and outperforms state-of-the-art featurelevel method CoSSL on CIFAR100-LT with a 0.63% accuracy improvement. When encountering more extreme imbalance degree, BaCon also shows better robustness than other
methods.

Figure 1: Gradient of ABC on representation layer is still
biased. In contrast, BaCon provides an extra gradient that
narrows the gap between the estimated gradient g and the
ideal optimal gradient ĝ. r is the feature representation.

which may not hold true in realistic scenarios. Although
some Class Imbalanced Semi-supervised Learning (CISSL)
methods have been proposed, most of them resample and
redistribute at the instance level, ignoring the upstream representation that has a significant impact. Even if some methods (Fan et al. 2022) make up for this limitation with feature
blending from the perspective of representation, it may not
only bring more feature noise but also be subject to the spurious prior knowledge of the same distribution of labeled data
and unlabeled data. The issue of biased feature representation in the CISSL setting has yet to be thoroughly explored.
In this paper, we first examine the limitations of the stateof-the-art instance-level CISSL method called ABC (Auxiliary Balanced Classifier). ABC adds an auxiliary classification head onto the backbone classifier, and uses inversely
proportional Bernoulli mask to achieve balanced learning.
There are two sources of gradients that propagate back into
the upstream feature extractor: one from the original backbone classifier and the other from the auxiliary classifier.
As shown in Figure 1(a), the effect of the combination of
these two gradients on the representation layer is still very
different from the ideal optimal gradient direction. This

Introduction
Recently, several Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) methods have been proposed to alleviate the burden of timeconsuming data labeling. Most of these methods incorporate unlabeled samples into model training using consistency
constraints and pseudo-labeling (Sohn et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021). However, these methods are often studied under the assumption of equally distributed unlabeled data,
* Work done as a master student at Peking University.
†

Corresponding Aurthor.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11970

