The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Regulating Intermediate 3D Features for Vision-Centric Autonomous Driving
Junkai Xu1,2* , Liang Peng1,2,* , Haoran Cheng1,2,* , Linxuan Xia1,2,* ,
†
Qi Zhou1,2,* , Dan Deng2 , Wei Qian2 , Wenxiao Wang3 , Deng Cai1,2
1

State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
2
FABU Inc.
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
{xujunkai, pengliang, haorancheng}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Multi-camera perception tasks have gained significant attention in the field of autonomous driving. However, existing
frameworks based on Lift-Splat-Shoot (LSS) in the multicamera setting cannot produce suitable dense 3D features
due to the projection nature and uncontrollable densification
process. To resolve this problem, we propose to regulate intermediate dense 3D features with the help of volume rendering. Specifically, we employ volume rendering to process
the dense 3D features to obtain corresponding 2D features
(e.g., depth maps, semantic maps), which are supervised by
associated labels in the training. This manner regulates the
generation of dense 3D features on the feature level, providing appropriate dense and unified features for multiple perception tasks. Therefore, our approach is termed Vampire,
stands for “Volume rendering As Multi-camera Perception
Intermediate feature REgulator”. Experimental results on the
Occ3D and nuScenes datasets demonstrate that Vampire facilitates fine-grained and appropriate extraction of dense 3D
features, and is competitive with existing SOTA methods
across diverse downstream perception tasks like 3D occupancy prediction, LiDAR segmentation and 3D objection detection, while utilizing moderate GPU resources. We provide
a video demonstration in the supplementary materials and
Codes are available at github.com/cskkxjk/Vampire.

Figure 1: Method overview. The key idea is to regulate dense
intermediate 3D features in training, to produce appropriate
features for different downstream perception tasks.

tion from image features, generating task-specific features
tailored to meet the objectives (Li et al. 2022c; Huang et al.
2023; Wei et al. 2023; Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023; Zhou and
Krähenbühl 2022; Liu et al. 2022a,b). When demonstrating
promising performance on various perception tasks such as
3D object detection (Li et al. 2022c; Liu et al. 2022a), BEV
map segmentation (Li et al. 2022c; Liu et al. 2022b) and 3D
occupancy prediction (Huang et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023;
Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023), they require substantial GPU
memory to support the interaction between task queries and
image features (Zhang et al. 2022).
In contrast, forward projection / LSS-based methods
project 2D image features onto the 3D space, incorporating per-pixel depth estimation. They rely on implicit (Philion and Fidler 2020; Hu et al. 2021) or explicit (Li et al.
2022b,a; Huang et al. 2021) depth estimation to elevate image features to the 3D space, acquiring intermediate feature
representations such as BEV or 3D voxel representation for
task-specific heads. This paradigm is effective for objectlevel perception tasks, e.g., 3D object detection, but struggles with dense point / grid-level perception tasks, e.g., 3D
occupancy prediction. Using estimated per-pixel depth and
camera calibrations, these methods position 2D features at
the foremost visible surface of objects in the 3D space, leading to sparse 3D features.
An intuitive resolution would be to densify the sparse
3D features using a feature inpainting module. This enables
the model to guess and inpaint the empty regions based on

Introduction
Vision-centric 3D surrounding perception plays an important role in modern autonomous driving and robotics due
to its convenience and board applicability for downstream
tasks. Vision-based perception frameworks can be broadly
categorized into two paradigms (Li et al. 2023): backward
projection (or Transformer-based (Li et al. 2022a)) and forward projection (or LSS-based, as it originates from the concept of “Lift, Splat, Shoot” (Philion and Fidler 2020)).
Backward projection / Transformer-based approaches set
3D points in 3D space or BEV plane and then projects these
points back onto the 2D image. This procedure allows each
predefined 3D or BEV position to obtain corresponding image features. Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) architectures are widely used in this paradigm to aggregate informa* Work performed during an internship at FABU Inc.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6306

