The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Text-to-Image Generation for Abstract Concepts
Jiayi Liao1 * † , Xu Chen2 * ‡ , Qiang Fu2 , Lun Du2 ,
§
§
Xiangnan He3 , Xiang Wang3 , Shi Han2 , Dongmei Zhang2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
ljy0ustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xu.chen, qifu, lun.du, shihan, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com,
{xiangnanhe, xiangwang1223}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the substantial progress of largescale models across various domains, such as natural language processing and computer vision, facilitating the expression of concrete concepts. Unlike concrete concepts that
are usually directly associated with physical objects, expressing abstract concepts through natural language requires considerable effort since they are characterized by intricate semantics and connotations. An alternative approach is to leverage images to convey rich visual information as a supplement.
Nevertheless, existing Text-to-Image (T2I) models are primarily trained on concrete physical objects and often struggle to visualize abstract concepts. Inspired by the three-layer
artwork theory that identifies critical factors, intent, object
and form during artistic creation, we propose a framework
of Text-to-Image generation for Abstract Concepts (TIAC).
The abstract concept is clarified into a clear intent with a detailed definition to avoid ambiguity. LLMs then transform
it into semantic-related physical objects, and the conceptdependent form is retrieved from an LLM-extracted form pattern set. Information from these three aspects will be integrated to generate prompts for T2I models via LLM. Evaluation results from human assessments and our newly designed
metric concept score demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework in creating images that can sufficiently express abstract concepts.

Figure 1: (a) Unsatisfactory cases generated by DALL·E 2
for abstract concept: priority, ability, regular and morality.
(b) An illustration of “politeness” in the context of introducing cooperation skills. The prompt guiding the visualization is generated by TIAC, and the image is generated
by DALL·E 2. (c) Image on the left is generated by taking
word “fairness” as input, and the right one is produced with
prompt from TIAC (LLM+PE), consisting of physical objects like a scale to express “fairness”.

Introduction
Concepts are cognitive representations that encapsulate
ideas. The expression of concepts plays a pivotal role in
communication, especially within the context of profound
intellectual discourse. Recent advancements in large-scale
models in the field of natural language processing and computer vision (Cao et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023b; Wu et al.

2023) have demonstrated remarkable performance in conveying concrete concepts. These concrete concepts are perceptible entities or occurrences and are often associated
with physical objects, such as animals and planets. On the
contrary, how to express abstract concepts that encompass
rich and intricate connotations is less explored (Recchia and
Jones 2012; Liao, Chen, and Du 2023). Abstract concepts
serve a crucial role in accurately conveying philosophical
thoughts, moral perspectives, and emotional states in everyday life. Moreover, they can present themes in a deeper and
multi-dimensional manner in domains like art, literature, and
music, rich with creativity and aesthetic value. On the other
hand, abstract concepts are mentally constructed ideas that

* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work is done during the internship in Microsoft.
Corresponding author.
§
Xiangnan He and Xiang Wang are also affiliated with Institute
of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

3360

