The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge Enhanced Representation Learning for Drug Discovery
Thanh Lam Hoang1 , Marco Luca Sbodio1 , Marcos Martinez Galindo1 , Mykhaylo Zayats1
Raul Fernandez-Diaz1,3 , Victor Valls1 , Gabriele Picco1 , Cesar Berrospi2 , Vanessa Lopez1
1

IBM Research, Dublin research lab, Dublin, Ireland
IBM Research, Zurich research lab, Zurich, Switzerland
3
University College Dublin, Ireland
Emails: {t.l.hoang, marco.sbodio, vanlopez}@ie.ibm.com, ceb@zurich.ibm.com
{Marcos.Martinez.Galindo, raulfd, mykhaylo.zayats1, victor.valls}@ibm.com
2

Abstract

tities (such as diseases) may improve downstream prediction tasks. A joint representation of each of these entities
should take into account not only the intrinsic properties of
the entity itself, but also its relations with other entities. In
contrast to previous studies (Zhang et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2023), while their focus was narrow, concentrating on protein sequences, GO terms, and text descriptions, our work
encompasses a wider array of modalities—text, numbers,
protein sequences, SMILES (string representation of molecular graphs), categories, and entities like drugs, diseases, and
pathways.
Secondly, previous studies (Zhang et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2023) assumed that the graphs or datasets used for training
were carefully combined into a single source. However, in
our research, we deal with different KGs built using several
datasets from various sources. It’s worth highlighting that
merging these datasets into a single source is complex due to
the difficulty of aligning their structures automatically. For
example, in the STITCH knowledge graph (Szklarczyk et al.
2016), the connection labeled “interaction with”, denoting
the relationship between chemicals and proteins, is established by analyzing their co-occurrence within a Pubmed
abstract. This form of association might bear resemblance
to the “target of” relation found in the Uniprot knowledge
graph, however confirming their equivalence presents a challenging task because co-orcurrence in a Pubmed abstract
does not mean a protein is a target of a drug. Moreover, creating a comprehensive graph by combining multiple ones
demands significant computational resources. To address
these issues, we propose an approach based on ensemble
methods, which can effectively capture information from
separate and unaligned KGs.
Finally, while there are datasets for studying the problem
of drugs-proteins interactions, there are no publicly available multimodal knowledge graphs for this purpose. We aim
to provide the research community with such graphs, by selectively integrating knowledge from existing datasets.
The contributions of this work are summarised as follows:

Recent research on predicting the binding affinity between drug molecules and proteins use representations
learned, through unsupervised learning techniques, from
large databases of molecule SMILES and protein sequences.
While these representations have significantly enhanced the
predictions, they are usually based on a limited set of modalities, and they do not exploit available knowledge about existing relations among molecules and proteins. Our study reveals that enhanced representations, derived from multimodal
knowledge graphs describing relations among molecules and
proteins, lead to state-of-the-art results in well-established
benchmarks (first place in the leaderboard for Therapeutics
Data Commons benchmark “Drug-Target Interaction Domain
Generalization Benchmark”, with an improvement of 8 points
with respect to previous best result). Moreover, our results
significantly surpass those achieved in standard benchmarks
by using conventional pre-trained representations that rely
only on sequence or SMILES data. We release our multimodal knowledge graphs, integrating data from seven public
data sources, and which contain over 30 million triples. Pretrained models from our proposed graphs and benchmark task
source code are also released.

Introduction
Developing a concise representation of proteins and small
molecules is a crucial task in AI-based drug discovery. Recent studies (Rao et al. 2019; Rives et al. 2021) have focused on utilizing large databases of protein sequences or
molecules for self-supervised representation learning. These
representations are then fine-tuned using limited labeled data
for tasks like predicting the binding affinity between drugs
and targets. In the field of protein representation learning,
(Zhang et al. 2022) and (Zhou et al. 2023) have demonstrated that enhancing protein representations with additional information from knowledge graphs (KGs), such as
comprehensive textual data from the gene ontology (GO)
(Ashburner et al. 2000), can enhance the performance of
pre-trained representations on various protein properties and
protein-protein interaction tasks. Despite promising initial
findings, important research directions remain unexplored.
Firstly, it is important to investigate if joint robust representations of proteins, molecules and other associated en-

• We release to the research community a set of multimodal knowledge graphs, and a set of models pretrained
on those graphs using graph neural networks to derive
protein and drug representations1 . We hope that this will

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10544

https://github.com/IBM/otter-knowledge

