The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Gaussian Process Neural Additive Models
Wei Zhang1 , Brian Barr2 , John Paisley1
1

Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2
Capital One, New York, NY, USA
{wz2363, jwp2128}@columbia.edu, brian.barr@capitalone.com

where x ∈ Rd is an input vector with d features, y is the
target variable and the penalty between g(x) and y can be,
e.g., least squares for regression or the logistic regression
penalty for classification. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
The key innovation of NAM methods is that they learn a
feature-specific NN shape function. Whereas linear models
simply define fθi (xi ) = θi xi , with θi determining the impact of xi on y, the impact of each feature according to a
nonlinear function fθi (xi ) can be easily understood by inspection of a one-dimensional plot. Prior to the NAM framework, there have been many candidates for shape functions.
For example, Hastie and Tibshirani (1990) use the spline
function. Lou, Caruana, and Gehrke (2012) use boosted decision trees in a method called explainable boosting machines (EBMs). An alternative type of tree called Neural
Oblivious Decision Trees (Popov, Morozov, and Babenko
2019) was proposed as shape function in NODE-GAMs
(Chang, Caruana, and Goldenberg 2021). Even polynomial
regression fits into this framework.
Recently, Agarwal et al. (2021) proposed using a neural network as the shape function in (1), known as a neural additive model (NAMs). This approach has shown much
promise, but comes at the price of potential computational
issues. While Radenovic, Dubey, and Mahajan (2022) do
reduce computational expense by sharing neural network
layers across features, several practical concerns with neural network training remain. Meanwhile, over the past several decades, researchers have explored the relationship between kernel methods and neural networks (Neal 2012). Cho
and Saul (2009) introduced a new family of positive-definite
kernel functions called multilayer kernels, while Lee et al.
(2017) studied infinitely wide neural networks and the Gaussian process, showing the exact equivalence between the
two. One of the key findings in Lee et al. (2017) is that Gaussian process predictions typically outperform those of finitewidth neural networks.
In this paper, we use this GP/DNN insight to propose a
novel family of NAMs that leverage the Gaussian process
with RBF kernel as the shape function. To this end, we use
the random Fourier feature approximation of the Gaussian
process (Rahimi and Recht 2008) and call our framework a
Gaussian Process Neural Additive Model (GP-NAM). Unlike other models, the number of parameters in GP-NAM
only grows linearly as the input dimension increases, which

Abstract
Deep neural networks have revolutionized many fields, but
their black-box nature also occasionally prevents their wider
adoption in fields such as healthcare and finance, where interpretable and explainable models are required. The recent
development of Neural Additive Models (NAMs) is a significant step in the direction of interpretable deep learning for
tabular datasets. In this paper, we propose a new subclass of
NAMs that use a single-layer neural network construction of
the Gaussian process via random Fourier features, which we
call Gaussian Process Neural Additive Models (GP-NAM).
GP-NAMs have the advantage of a convex objective function and number of trainable parameters that grows linearly
with feature dimensionality. It suffers no loss in performance
compared to deeper NAM approaches because GPs are wellsuited for learning complex non-parametric univariate functions. We demonstrate the performance of GP-NAM on several tabular datasets, showing that it achieves comparable or
better performance in both classification and regression tasks
with a large reduction in the number of parameters.

Introduction
With the rapid evolution of deep neural networks, one major challenge has been interpreting and explaining what
they learn. DNNs are still generally considered a black-box
model because it is difficult to understand and explain why a
specific decision is made. This hinders their uptake in some
fields such as healthcare and finance, where explainability
is highly desired or even mandated by law. While post-hoc
explanations can be given using feature importance or counterfactual methods, they do not provide the inherent level of
interpretability contained in the weights of a simple linear
model, leading some to call for their total rejection in highstakes problems (Rudin 2019).
In this paper, we focus on the family of deep models
called neural additive models (NAMs) that attempt to unite
the flexibility of deep neural networks with the inherent explainability of linear models. Methodologically, the NAM
approximation is formulated as
min Lθ (y, g(x)),
θ

g(x) = f0 +

d
X

fθi (xi )

(1)

i=1

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16865

