The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ECHO-GL: Earnings Calls-Driven Heterogeneous Graph Learning for Stock
Movement Prediction
Mengpu Liu1 , Mengying Zhu1 * , Xiuyuan Wang2 , Guofang Ma3 , Jianwei Yin1, 2 , Xiaolin Zheng2
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, China
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, China
{mengpuliu, mengyingzhu, xiuyuanwang, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn, maguofang@zjgsu.edu.cn, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

55

Abstract

NASDAQ: AMZN

50

Stock movement prediction serves an important role in quantitative trading. Despite advances in existing models that enhance stock movement prediction by incorporating stock relations, these prediction models face two limitations, i.e., constructing either insufficient or static stock relations, which fail
to effectively capture the complex dynamic stock relations
because such complex dynamic stock relations are influenced
by various factors in the ever-changing financial market. To
tackle the above limitations, we propose a novel stock movement prediction model ECHO-GL based on stock relations
derived from earnings calls. ECHO-GL not only constructs
comprehensive stock relations by exploiting the rich semantic
information in the earnings calls but also captures the movement signals between related stocks based on multimodal
and heterogeneous graph learning. Moreover, ECHO-GL customizes learnable stock stochastic processes based on the post
earnings announcement drift (PEAD) phenomenon to generate the temporal stock price trajectory, which can be easily plugged into any investment strategy with different time
horizons to meet investment demands. Extensive experiments
on two financial datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
ECHO-GL on stock price movement prediction tasks together
with high prediction accuracy and trading profitability.

46

2017/7/20

2017/8/9
2017/8/18
2017/8/29
2017/7/27
... So yes, we’ve had numerous price increase -- or decrease,
excuse me, and we continue to have that in the AWS business ...

Amazon
Earnings Call on July 27th, 2017

Stock
Earnings Call

Graph
Schema

business
Entity

Topic

Investment
Cloud

commercial

Microsoft

AWS
Azure

Amazon
Technology

Microsoft
Earnings Call on July 20th, 2017

... The second component of that is the execution on new revenue; in
particular Azure, as well as Windows commercial, and billings in the quarter
were very good and quite encouraging overall...
NASDAQ: MSFT

75
71

2017/7/20

2017/7/27

2017/8/9

2017/8/18

2017/8/29

Figure 1: An example of earnings calls-driven stock relations’ effect on stock movements.

dicted stock correlation (Zhu et al. 2022). However, relying
solely on stock prices is sub-optimal for the real-world financial market because dynamic stock relations are influenced
by multiple factors, e.g., macroeconomic, industry relations,
company management, and investor perception. On the other
hand, there are side information-based methods incorporating wiki or industry relations (Feng et al. 2018; Sawhney
et al. 2021) to capture stock relations. However, these methods represent stock relations as static graphs, thus struggling
to adapt to ever-changing markets. Based on the above analysis, effective modeling of stock relations necessitates being driven by dynamic information that encompasses multiple influencing factors. Fortunately, taking inspiration from
previous studies (Qin and Yang 2019; Medya et al. 2022)
that leverage earnings calls’ rich semantic information to enhance financial forecasting, we explore the potential of utilizing earnings calls to model stock relations.
Motivation Example: Taking two earnings calls in July
2017 from Amazon and Microsoft as an example, we first
plot the stock price movements of Amazon and Microsoft
after Amazon’s earnings call on 27th July, along with the
two earnings calls’ main content in Figure 1. Then we depict a graph between the two stocks derived from their earnings calls. From Figure 1, we draw three observations below.

Introduction
Stock movement prediction serves an important role in
quantitative trading, which aims to predict the future trends
of a stock in order to assist investors in making good investment decisions. Traditional solutions for stock movement
prediction are based on deep time-series models, which treat
stock movements as independent of each other, ignoring the
valuable rich signals between related stocks’ movements.
Recently, a burgeoning research trend has emerged, focusing on enhancing stock movement prediction by modeling stock relations, which can be divided into two categories,
i.e., price-based methods (Li et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022) and
side information-based methods (Feng et al. 2018; Sawhney
et al. 2021). However, both categories of methods have their
limitations as follows. On the one hand, price-based methods predict stock movement based on the estimated empirical stock correlation matrix (Li et al. 2021) or modeling pre* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13972

