The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Context Enhanced Transformer for Single Image Object Detection in Video Data
Seungjun An* 1 , Seonghoon Park* 1 , Gyeongnyeon Kim* 1 ,
Jeongyeol Baek2 , Byeongwon Lee2 , Seungryong Kim1
1

Korea University, Seoul, Korea
2
SK Telecom, Seoul, Korea
{dkstmdwns, seong0905, kkn9975}@korea.ac.kr, {jeongyeol.baek, bwon.lee}@sk.com, seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
With the increasing importance of video data in real-world
applications, there is a rising need for efficient object detection methods that utilize temporal information. While existing video object detection (VOD) techniques employ various
strategies to address this challenge, they typically depend on
locally adjacent frames or randomly sampled images within a
clip. Although recent Transformer-based VOD methods have
shown promising results, their reliance on multiple inputs
and additional network complexity to incorporate temporal
information limits their practical applicability. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach to single image object detection, called Context Enhanced TRansformer (CETR), by incorporating temporal context into DETR using a newly designed memory module. To efficiently store temporal information, we construct a class-wise memory that collects contextual information across data. Additionally, we present a
classification-based sampling technique to selectively utilize
the relevant memory for the current image. In the testing, We
introduce a test-time memory adaptation method that updates
individual memory functions by considering the test distribution. Experiments with CityCam and ImageNet VID datasets
exhibit the efficiency of the framework on various video systems. The project page and code will be made available at:
https://ku-cvlab.github.io/CETR.

Figure 1: Comparisons between existing works and ours. (a)
standard DETR (Carion et al. 2020), (b) DETR-based video
object detection (Zhou et al. 2022), and (c) our proposed
framework, dubbed CETR. Our method effectively detects
objects in video data without adding heavy components.
aggregate features from nearby frames exploiting optical
flow (Zhu et al. 2017a; Wang et al. 2018) or LSTM (Kang
et al. 2017a,b). Nevertheless, these methods primarily focus
on short-term frames, thus limiting their ability to capture a
more extensive feature representation. To overcome this limitation, attention-based approaches (Chen et al. 2020; Deng
et al. 2019a,b) attempt to capture long-range temporal dependency by utilizing memory structures to aggregate features globally or locally. Yet, they depend on randomly sampled images within a clip, which struggle to integrate holistic contextual information from video data. Furthermore, the
construction of stacked memory modules to store features of
adjacent frames incurs high computational costs and unnecessary memory usage.
On the other hand, in light of the remarkable performance of Transformer-based models in image object detection (Carion et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022), e.g., detection
with Transformers (DETR), researchers have commenced
extending them to the video domain (Zhou et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022a). However, these methods exhibit an essential

Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental and essential
tasks in the computer vision field with its extensive versatility across a wide range of applications. Moreover, various
applications in real-world scenarios, including video surveillance (Nascimento and Marques 2006; Fu et al. 2019), autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2015, 2016), and robot navigation (Hernández et al. 2016), heavily rely on video data.
Despite the remarkable success of object detectors for a single image, directly applying them to video data encounters
challenges due to appearance deterioration caused by motions and occlusions.
To address this challenge, video object detection (VOD)
models (Zhu et al. 2017a; Wang et al. 2018) have been proposed to improve object detection performance by leveraging temporal information. Previous approaches usually
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

682

