The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data Roaming and Quality Assessment for Composed Image Retrieval
Matan Levy1 , Rami Ben-Ari2 , Nir Darshan2 , Dani Lischinski1
1

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
2
OriginAI, Israel
levy@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract

Despite the progress in foundation models and new CoIR
architectures, curating a dataset for CoIR remains a challenging chore, where the samples are triplets of queryimage, accompanying transition-text, and the target image,
serving as the ground-truth answer. There are several existing datasets for CoIR that differ significantly from each
other. Vo et al. (2019) propose a dataset of rendered images of simple 3D scenes. Other existing datasets suffer
from a small amount of data, and some are domain-specific
(e.g., shoes (Guo et al. 2018)), while in others, the lingual
modality is limited by transition-text used as a class label
(Isola, Lim, and Adelson 2015), or generated based on pairs
of image captions that differ by a single word (Han et al.
2017). Another dataset was labeled based on previous vision and language (V&L) models (Couairon et al. 2022).
Recently, Wu et al. (2021) introduced FashionIQ, another
domain-specific dataset for CoIR, which gained popularity
(e.g. (Goenka et al. 2022; Lee, Kim, and Han 2021; Liu et al.
2021) ) and contains human-annotated labels.
In addition to their small scale, shortcomings of these
datasets include: 1) Not all acceptable target images for a
given query are labeled as such, leading to incorrect count
of false-negatives (e.g., Fig. 5); 2) Lack of visual complexity (due to restriction to a specific domain); and 3) Modality
redundancy, i.e. target images may often be retrieved using
solely the query text, when descriptive enough to ignore the
query image. We further refer to this issue as (lack of) compositonality: where the target should be determined by its
query constituents combining the lingual and visual cues.
To break out from the previous domain-specific datasets
to general and natural image domain, Liu et al. (2021)
introduced the new CIRR (Composed Image Retrieval on
Real-life images) dataset that contains open domain natural images, taken from NLVR2 (Suhr et al. 2019). To the
best of our knowledge, CIRR is the only existing dataset
for CoIR based on natural images with human annotated
open-language texts. Despite attempts to reduce the falsenegatives and relying on direct human labeling, CIRR still
has two major shortcomings: 1) The image corpus is small,
alleviating retrieval; 2) Modality redundancy still exists (see
Sec. 5), as well as false-negatives (according to our observations), reflecting the challenge in creating a “clean” dataset.
In this work, we introduce a new large scale dataset for
CoIR, dubbed LaSCo (Large Scale Composed Image Re-

The task of Composed Image Retrieval (CoIR) involves
queries that combine image and text modalities, allowing
users to express their intent more effectively. However, current CoIR datasets are orders of magnitude smaller compared
to other vision and language (V&L) datasets. Additionally,
some of these datasets have noticeable issues, such as queries
containing redundant modalities. To address these shortcomings, we introduce the Large Scale Composed Image Retrieval (LaSCo) dataset, a new CoIR dataset which is ten
times larger than existing ones. Pre-training on our LaSCo,
shows a noteworthy improvement in performance, even in
zero-shot. Furthermore, we propose a new approach for analyzing CoIR datasets and methods, which detects modality redundancy or necessity, in queries. We also introduce a
new CoIR baseline, the Cross-Attention driven Shift Encoder
(CASE). This baseline allows for early fusion of modalities
using a cross-attention module and employs an additional
auxiliary task during training. Our experiments demonstrate
that this new baseline outperforms the current state-of-theart methods on established benchmarks like FashionIQ and
CIRR.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in the field of multi-modal learning (Radford et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2019) has been reflected in various
downstream tasks, e.g., VQA (Antol et al. 2015; Levy, BenAri, and Lischinski 2022), Visual Dialog (Das et al. 2017),
Image captioning (Li et al. 2020), Image Retrieval (in its
variations) (Baldrati et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021) and Composed Image Retrieval (CoIR) (Vo et al. 2019; Chen, Gong,
and Bazzani 2020). Image Retrieval (IR) is a longstanding
task that aims to find a desired image in a large corpus, given
a user query. While content-based image retrieval uses a single visual modality to convey the user intent (Barz and Denzler 2021; Dubey 2021; Zhong, Chen, and Qian 2020), providing a bi-modal query can mitigate miss-interpretations.
In CoIR the gist and attributes are more succinctly described
visually, and further intent is specified via a lingual modality (Han et al. 2017; Isola, Lim, and Adelson 2015; Vo et al.
2019; Guo et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Couairon et al. 2022). Some examples of CoIR queries and their
results are shown in Figures 1 and 5.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2991

