The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SurgicalSAM: Efficient Class Promptable Surgical Instrument Segmentation
Wenxi Yue1 , Jing Zhang1 , Kun Hu1 , Yong Xia2 , Jiebo Luo3 , Zhiyong Wang1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
{wenxi.yue, jing.zhang1, kun.hu, zhiyong.wang}@sydney.edu.au, yxia@nwpu.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu
2

Abstract
The Segment Anything Model (SAM) is a powerful foundation model that has revolutionised image segmentation.
To apply SAM to surgical instrument segmentation, a common approach is to locate precise points or boxes of instruments and then use them as prompts for SAM in a zeroshot manner. However, we observe two problems with this
naive pipeline: (1) the domain gap between natural objects
and surgical instruments leads to inferior generalisation of
SAM; and (2) SAM relies on precise point or box locations
for accurate segmentation, requiring either extensive manual
guidance or a well-performing specialist detector for prompt
preparation, which leads to a complex multi-stage pipeline.
To address these problems, we introduce SurgicalSAM, a
novel end-to-end efficient-tuning approach for SAM to effectively integrate surgical-specific information with SAM’s
pre-trained knowledge for improved generalisation. Specifically, we propose a lightweight prototype-based class prompt
encoder for tuning, which directly generates prompt embeddings from class prototypes and eliminates the use of explicit
prompts for improved robustness and a simpler pipeline. In
addition, to address the low inter-class variance among surgical instrument categories, we propose contrastive prototype learning, further enhancing the discrimination of the
class prototypes for more accurate class prompting. The results of extensive experiments on both EndoVis2018 and EndoVis2017 datasets demonstrate that SurgicalSAM achieves
state-of-the-art performance while only requiring a small
number of tunable parameters. The source code is available
at https://github.com/wenxi-yue/SurgicalSAM.

Reference-based

Tracking-based Detection-based

Input Image

Ground-Truth Mask

Point

Frozen

Bounding Box

Tuning

k Class Prototype for Class k

Precise Prompt
SAM

Precise Prompt
t

0

0

0

0

0

tt

t

PerSAM
Class: Monopolar Curved Scissors

SurgicalSAM

t

Track
Anything

…

1

2

3

4

5

Prototype-based Class
Prompt Encoder

SAM Image
Encoder

SAM Mask
Decoder
SurgicalSAM

Figure 1: Comparison of our SurgicalSAM against existing
detection-based, tracking-based, and reference-based zeroshot SAM frameworks for surgical instrument segmentation.
training the complete set of model parameters (i.e., full training) using SIS datasets, resulting in inefficiency. In addition,
due to the limited scale of the SIS datasets, the trained models tend to exhibit subpar generalisation performance.
The Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al.
2023) has recently gained significant attention as a pioneering foundation model for promptable segmentation. Utilising SAM for downstream medical tasks holds great promise
for enhancing training efficiency and leveraging strong pretrained knowledge. Current research predominantly employs
SAM in a zero-shot manner for medical image segmentation. However, the lack of sufficient medical data in SAM
pre-training and the substantial domain gap between natural
objects and medical targets hinders the direct generalisation
of SAM towards medical tasks. Many studies have reported
subpar performance of SAM in zero-shot medical image
segmentation (Deng et al. 2023; He et al. 2023; Wald et al.

Introduction
Surgical instrument segmentation (SIS) is a crucial task in
surgical vision, aimed at precisely delineating surgical instruments in operative scenes. It provides vital assistance
to surgeons and facilitates the development of advanced
computer-assisted operation systems (Shademan et al. 2016;
Jin et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Jian et al. 2020; Yue et al.
2023; Zhang and Tao 2020). Existing deep learning methods for SIS have achieved impressive results through the design and training of specialist models featuring task-specific
components. Nevertheless, these methods usually require
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6890

