The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

QCS-SGM+: Improved Quantized Compressed Sensing with Score-Based
Generative Models
Xiangming Meng1 * , Yoshiyuki Kabashima2
1

The Zhejiang University-University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University, China
2
Institute for Physics of Intelligence & Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, Japan
xiangmingmeng@intl.zju.edu.cn, kaba@phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

ing the magnitude (Boufounos and Baraniuk 2008). Interestingly, 1-bit CS have gained attention due to their simplicity in hardware implementation and robustness against
multiplicative errors (Boufounos and Baraniuk 2008; Zymnis, Boyd, and Candes 2009). Nevertheless, such nonlinear quantization operation invariably leads to information
loss, thereby undermining the effectiveness of standard CS
algorithms designed for analog measurements. To address
this issue, a plethora of quantized CS (QCS) algorithms
have been developed by explicitly considering the quantization effect (Boufounos and Baraniuk 2008; Zymnis, Boyd,
and Candes 2009; Dai and Milenkovic 2011; Plan and Vershynin 2012, 2013; Jacques et al. 2013; Xu and Kabashima
2013; Xu, Kabashima, and Zdeborová 2014; Awasthi et al.
2016; Meng, Wu, and Zhu 2018; Jung et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2020; Liu and Liu 2022; Zhu et al. 2022; Meng and
Kabashima 2023b). Among these, the recently proposed algorithm QCS-SGM (Meng and Kabashima 2023b) demonstrates exceptional state-of-the-art (SOTA) reconstruction
performance under low-precision quantization levels. The
key idea of QCS-SGM lies in utilizing the powerful scorebased generative models (SGM, also known as diffusion
models) (Song and Ermon 2019, 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al.
2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Nichol and Dhariwal
2021) as an implicit prior for the target signal. Intuitively,
from a Bayesian perspective, the more accurate the prior obtained, the fewer observations required. Owing to SGM’s
ability to capture the intricate structure of the target signal
x beyond simple sparsity, QCS-SGM can accurately reconstruct x even from a small number of severely quantized
noisy measurements.

In practical compressed sensing (CS), the obtained measurements typically necessitate quantization to a limited number
of bits prior to transmission or storage. This nonlinear quantization process poses significant recovery challenges, particularly with extreme coarse quantization such as 1-bit. Recently, an efficient algorithm called QCS-SGM was proposed
for quantized CS (QCS) which utilizes score-based generative models (SGM) as an implicit prior. Due to the adeptness
of SGM in capturing the intricate structures of natural signals,
QCS-SGM substantially outperforms previous QCS methods.
However, QCS-SGM is constrained to (approximately) roworthogonal sensing matrices as the computation of the likelihood score becomes intractable otherwise. To address this
limitation, we introduce an advanced variant of QCS-SGM,
termed QCS-SGM+, capable of handling general matrices effectively. The key idea is a Bayesian inference perspective on
the likelihood score computation, wherein expectation propagation is employed for its approximate computation. Extensive experiments are conducted, demonstrating the substantial superiority of QCS-SGM+ over QCS-SGM for general
sensing matrices beyond mere row-orthogonality.

Introduction
Compressed sensing (CS) has emerged as a ubiquitous
paradigm in signal processing and machine learning, aiming to accurately reconstruct high-dimensional signals from
a limited number of measurements (Donoho 2006; Candès
and Wakin 2008). The success of CS hinges on the assumption that, while the target signal may be high-dimensional, it
possesses an inherent low-dimensional representation such
as sparsity or low-rankness. Conventional CS models typically assume direct access to analog (continuous) measurements with infinite precision. In practice, however, analog measurements must be quantized into a finite number
of digital bits using an analog-to-digital converter (ADC
or quantizer) before further transmission, storage, or processing can occur (Boufounos and Baraniuk 2008; Zymnis, Boyd, and Candes 2009; Dai and Milenkovic 2011).
In the extreme case, measurements are quantized into a single bit, retaining only the sign information while disregard-

While QCS-SGM exhibits remarkable performance, it
has one fundamental limitation: it is derived under the
assumption that the sensing matrix A is (approximately)
row-orthogonal. For general matrices, QCS-SGM’s performance will deteriorate since its computation of the likelihood score (defined in (4)) becomes less accurate (Meng
and Kabashima 2023b). Although row-orthogonal matrices
are prevalent in conventional CS, in practical applications
one might encounter other types of matrices due to non-ideal
physical constraints or design choices. In fact, the investigation of general sensing matrices has long been an active and
important topic, such as the popular ill-conditioned matrices
and correlated matrices, among others (Manoel et al. 2015;

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14341

