The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Refining Latent Homophilic Structures over Heterophilic Graphs for
Robust Graph Convolution Networks
Chenyang Qiu1 , Guoshun Nan1 * , Tianyu Xiong1 , Wendi Deng1 , Di Wang1 , Zhiyang Teng2 , Lijuan
Sun1 , Qimei Cui1 , Xiaofeng Tao1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{cyqiu, nanguo2021, tyxiong, dengwendi, wdwdwd, sunlijuan, cuiqimei, taoxf}@bupt.edu.cn, chihyangteng@gmail.com
Abstract
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) are extensively utilized in various graph tasks to mine knowledge from spatial data. Our study marks the pioneering attempt to quantitatively investigate the GCN robustness over omnipresent
heterophilic graphs for node classification. We uncover that
the predominant vulnerability is caused by the structural outof-distribution (OOD) issue. This finding motivates us to
present a novel method that aims to harden GCNs by automatically learning Latent Homophilic Structures over heterophilic graphs. We term such a methodology as LHS. To
elaborate, our initial step involves learning a latent structure by employing a novel self-expressive technique based on
multi-node interactions. Subsequently, the structure is refined
using a pairwisely constrained dual-view contrastive learning approach. We iteratively perform the above procedure,
enabling a GCN model to aggregate information in a homophilic way on heterophilic graphs. Armed with such an
adaptable structure, we can properly mitigate the structural
OOD threats over heterophilic graphs. Experiments on various benchmarks show the effectiveness of the proposed LHS
approach for robust GCNs.

Figure 1: Illustration for the vulnerability of existing GPNN
under various threats on Squirrel, including a poisoning attack, and another two adapted from evasion attacks. The subfigures (a), (b), and (c) depict how we generate the above
three attacks, and (d) reports the significant performance
degradation under each attack.

Introduction
Graph-structured spatial data, such as social networks (Qiu
et al. 2022) and molecular graphs, is ubiquitous in numerous real-world applications (Li et al. 2022). Graph convolution networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017), following a neighborhood aggregation scheme, are well-suited to
handle these relational and non-Euclidean graph structures,
and have been widely applied in various graph tasks, including node classification and recommender systems. Recently,
there has been a surge in GCN approaches for challenging
heterophilic graphs (Zhu et al. 2020), where most neighboring nodes have different labels or features. These methods
can be divided into two categories: 1) Multi-hop-based approaches (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2021a; Wang
and Derr 2021); 2) Ranking-based approaches (Liu, Wang,
and Ji 2021; Yuan and Ji 2021; Yang et al. 2022). The former group learns node representations based on multi-hop
aggregations, while the latter performs selective node aggre-

gations by a sorting mechanism. These GCN methods continue to advance the state-of-the-art performance for node
classification and have enabled various downstream applications (Lin, Lan, and Li 2021; Qiu et al. 2023).
Despite the significant success of the current GCN methods on heterophilic graphs, these approaches are extremely
vulnerable to malicious threats that aim to distort the
structure of the target graph during testing. We conduct experiments to attack the state-of-the-art GPNN (Yang et al.
2022) method, which was trained on the popular Squirrel (Pei et al. 2020) benchmark for heterophilic graphs, using
samples created by various attacks. Fig.1 demonstrates that
the accuracy of node classification can be greatly reduced
under three different types of destructive attacks, including
a well-known poisoning attack (Jin et al. 2020), and two
attacks adapted from evasion attacks (Biggio et al. 2013;
Zhang et al. 2016). Specifically, as shown in Fig.1 (a), the
poisoning attack produces adversarial structural perturba-

* Guoshun Nan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8930

