The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PAC-Bayes Generalisation Bounds
for Dynamical Systems including Stable RNNs
Deividas Eringis1 , John Leth1 , Zheng-Hua Tan1 , Rafal Wisniewski1 , Mihály Petreczky2
1

2

Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Denmark
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
{der,jjl,zt,raf}@es.aau.dk, mihaly.petreczky@centralelille.fr

Abstract

The PAC-Bayesian inequality of this paper proposes a
bound on the difference between the generalisation loss and
empirical loss. This bound holds with high probability, and
it depends on the number of data points N and on the parameter (learning rate) λ. Moreover, for a suitable√choice of
λ the bound converges to zero at the rate O(1/ N ). The
latter rate is consistent with most of finite-sample bounds
available in the literature for various types of models.
In order to consider non i.i.d. data we assumed that inputs and outputs are bounded and they are weakly dependent. The latter represents a type of mixing condition. Moreover, we had to restrict attention to dynamical systems which
transform bounded and weakly dependent inputs to outputs
having the same properties. To this end, we required that
the dynamical systems satisfy the exponential convergence
(Pavlov and van de Wouw 2012) property. The latter concept
originates from control theory.
Motivation. PAC and PAC-Bayesian bounds are a major
tool for analysing learning algorithms. Moreover, by minimizing the error bound, new, theoretically well-founded
learning algorithms can be formulated. In particular, PACBayesian error bounds turned out to be useful for providing
non-vacuous error bounds for neural networks (Dziugaite
and Roy 2017). While there is a wealth of literature on PAC
(Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David 2014) and PAC-Bayesian
(Alquier 2021; Guedj 2019) bounds, for static models, much
less is known on dynamical systems.
Generalization bounds for RNNs. PAC bounds for RNN
were developed in (Koiran and Sontag 1998; Sontag 1998;
Chen, Li, and Zhao 2020) using VC dimension, in (Wei
and Ma 2019; Akpinar, Kratzwald, and Feuerriegel 2020;
Joukovsky et al. 2021; Chen, Li, and Zhao 2020) using
Rademacher complexity, and in (Zhang, Lei, and Dhillon
2018) using PAC-Bayesian approach. All the cited papers
assume noiseless models, a fixed number of time-steps, that
the training data are i.i.d sampled time-series, and the signals are bounded. In contrast, we consider (1) noisy models,
(2) generalisation loss defined on infinite time horizon, (3)
only one single time series available for training data.
Our contribution is consistent with recent results for linear
RNNs (Emami et al. 2021; Cohen-Karlik et al. 2023), on
their ability to extrapolate to longer sequences by training on
short sequences with stochastic gradient descent. Thus we
provide a different perspective, while extending to a more

In this paper, we derive a PAC-Bayes bound on the generalisation gap, in a supervised time-series setting for a special class
of discrete-time non-linear dynamical systems. This class includes stable recurrent neural networks (RNN), and the motivation for this work was its application to RNNs. In order to
achieve these results, we impose some stability constraints,
on the allowed models. Here, stability is understood in the
sense of dynamical systems. For RNNs, these stability conditions can be expressed in terms of conditions on the weights.
We assume the processes involved are essentially bounded
and the loss functions are Lipschitz. The proposed bound on
the generalisation gap depends on the mixing coefficient of
the data distribution, and the essential supremum of the data.
Furthermore, the bound converges to zero as the dataset’s size
increases. In this paper, we 1) formalise the learning problem, 2) derive a PAC-Bayesian error bound for such systems,
3) discuss various consequences of this error bound, and 4)
show an illustrative example, with discussions on computing
the proposed bound. Unlike other available bounds the derived bound holds for non i.i.d. data (time-series) and it does
not grow with the number of steps of the RNN.

Introduction
The Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)-Bayesian
framework has been a popular tool for obtaining generalisation bounds and to derive efficient learning algorithms, see
(Alquier 2021; Dziugaite and Roy 2017).
Contribution. In this paper we develop PAC-Bayesian
inequalities for a class of discrete-time dynamical systems
with hidden (unobserved) states. This class includes a wide
variety of dynamical systems, ranging from linear timeinvariant state-space representations (LTIs) to recurrent neural networks (RNNs). We view dynamical systems as hypotheses (predictors) which transform past inputs and outputs (labels) to estimates of the current output (label). That
is, our framework captures both time-series forecasting and
learning models which causally transform sequences of inputs to sequences of outputs. In the latter case, the dynamical
system at hand uses only past inputs. Furthermore, training
data represents a single time-series sampled from the input
and output processes. That is, the training data is not i.i.d.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11901

