The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Vision Transformer Off-the-Shelf: A Surprising Baseline for
Few-Shot Class-Agnostic Counting
Zhicheng Wang, Liwen Xiao, Zhiguo Cao, Hao Lu
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education; School of Artificial Intelligence and
Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
zhicheng wang@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Query Feature
Extraction
(Self-Attention)

Similarity Metric
(Cross-Attention)

Pred Density Map

Exemplar Feature
Extraction
(CNN)

…

Class-agnostic counting (CAC) aims to count objects of interest from a query image given few exemplars. This task is
typically addressed by extracting the features of query image and exemplars respectively and then matching their feature similarity, leading to an extract-then-match paradigm. In
this work, we show that CAC can be simplified in an extractand-match manner, particularly using a vision transformer
(ViT) where feature extraction and similarity matching are
executed simultaneously within the self-attention. We reveal
the rationale of such simplification from a decoupled view of
the self-attention. The resulting model, termed CACViT, simplifies the CAC pipeline into a single pretrained plain ViT.
Further, to compensate the loss of the scale and the orderof-magnitude information due to resizing and normalization
in plain ViT, we present two effective strategies for scale and
magnitude embedding. Extensive experiments on the FSC147
and the CARPK datasets show that CACViT significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art CAC approaches in both effectiveness (23.60% error reduction) and generalization, which
suggests CACViT provides a concise and strong baseline for
CAC. Code will be available.

(a) Prior Arts: Extract-then-Match
Self-Attention in Decouple View

concat
⊕

…
⊕

Exemplars with SE

Query
Feature
Extraction

Class
Information

Similarity
Metric

Exemplar
Feature
Extraction

Pred Density Map

ME from exemplars

(b) Ours: Extract-and-Match

Figure 1: High-level ideas between prior arts and ours. (a)
Previous ViT-based class-agnostic counting framework follows the extract-then-match paradigm with unshared feature
extractors (e.g., a ViT and a CNN) for the query image and
the exemplars and post-matching such as cross-attention after feature extraction; (b) Our ViT-based framework follows
an extract-and-match paradigm using self-attention in a decoupled view, with additional aspect-ratio-aware scale embedding (SE) and the order-of-magnitude embedding (ME)
for compensating the information loss of the scale in ViT.

Introduction
Object counting aims to estimate the number of objects from
a query image. Most prior object counting approaches target a specific domain, e.g., crowd (Zhang et al. 2015; Shu
et al. 2022; Zou et al. 2021), plant (Lu et al. 2017; Madec
et al. 2019), and car (Onoro-Rubio and López-Sastre 2016).
They often require numerous class-specific training data to
learn a good model (Wang et al. 2020). In contrast, ClassAgnostic Counting (CAC), whose goal is to estimate the
counting value of arbitrary categories given only few exemplars, has recently received much attention due to its potential to generalize to unseen scenes and reduced reliance on
class-specific training data (Lu, Xie, and Zisserman 2019;
Ranjan et al. 2021; Shi et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022).
CAC is first introduced by Lu et al. (Lu, Xie, and Zisserman 2019), which is by default formulated as a template matching problem, leading to an extract-then-match
paradigm. Previous models (Ranjan et al. 2021; Shi et al.
2022; Lin et al. 2022) use shared CNN for query images

and exemplars feature extraction, as the bottom-up feature
extraction approach of the CNN can adapt to images of entirely different sizes. Witnessing the ability of marking the
responses on the attention map by cross-attention mechanism, some models such as CounTR (Liu et al. 2022) employs cross-attention to match the features of query image
and exemplars. However, in CounTR the query feature and
exemplar feature are embedded separately by a ViT and a
CNN, and the matching part is achieved by an extra crossattention stage. This strategy introduces much redundancy
and task-specific designs, which is not in line with the trend
of task-agnostic foundation models.
Recently, the computer vision community has witnessed
great success with plain ViT in large multi-modal architectures (Touvron et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2022). Soon much work

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5832

