The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Multi-Intent Spoken Language Understanding via Hierarchical
Attention and Optimal Transport
Xuxin Cheng, Zhihong Zhu, Hongxiang Li, Yaowei Li, Xianwei Zhuang, Yuexian Zou*
School of ECE, Peking University, China
{chengxx, zhihongzhu, lihongxiang, ywl, xwzhuang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zouyx@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

filling. Qin et al. (2021) further proposes GL-GIN to develop
both a local slot-aware graph and a global intent-slot graph.
Song et al. (2022) generates the additional features to leverage the correlation between the slot and intent, which is summarized from the training data. Xing and Tsang (2022b) establishes the heterogeneous label graph and defines relations
between slot and intent to leverage the correlations between
the different labels, which also improves the performance.
Despite the promising progress that existing Multi-Intent
SLU models have made, we discover that most of these models still suffer from two main issues:
Scope Barrier. As shown in Figure 1, different from conventional SLU, the utterance in Multi-Intent SLU has multiple intents and the relationship between these intents is relatively weak (Cheng, Yang, and Jia 2023). As a result, each
intent in the utterance has its specific scope and the semantic information outside the scope may potentially impede the
accurate predictions. We refer this issue to scope barrier. To
prevent the negative impact from scope barrier, it is vital to
divide the scopes for different intent in the original utterance
as accurately as possible.
Unidirectional Guidance. Several previous studies (Li,
Li, and Qi 2018; Wang, Shen, and Jin 2018; Qin et al. 2019)
have verified that slot filling and intent detection are closely
tied and it is beneficial to jointly model them. However, most
of previous works (E et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2020, 2021) only
focus on the unidirectional guidance from intent to slot while
the guidance from slot to intent is neglected. In fact, the predicted slot could also help to generate more accurate predictions of intent (Xing and Tsang 2022a). Via achieving bidirectional guidance between slot and intent, the performance
of the SLU model can be further enhanced.
In this paper, to tackle the above two issues, we propose a
novel SLU framework termed HAOT. For scope barrier, hierarchical attention (Wang, Chen, and Hu 2019; Geng et al.
2022) is designed to progressively discover the semantic hierarchies layer-by-layer from the utterances in the unsupervised manner. Specifically speaking, we calculate the neighbouring affinity scores among the adjacent tokens, which indicate the tendency to merge the tokens into groups. To keep
the consistency of merged groups across different layers, we
maintain affinity scores to increase as layer gets deeper. During the training process, the semantically and spatially similar tokens are recursively merged according to affinity scores

Multi-Intent spoken language understanding (SLU) can handle complicated utterances expressing multiple intents, which
has attracted increasing attention from researchers. Although
existing models have achieved promising performance, most
of them still suffer from two leading problems: (1) each intent
has its specific scope and the semantic information outside the
scope might potentially hinder accurate predictions, i.e. scope
barrier; (2) only the guidance from intent to slot is modeled
but the guidance from slot to intent is often neglected, i.e. unidirectional guidance. In this paper, we propose a novel MultiIntent SLU framework termed HAOT, which utilizes hierarchical attention to divide the scopes of each intent and applies
optimal transport to achieve the mutual guidance between slot
and intent. Experiments demonstrate that our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance on two public Multi-Intent SLU
datasets, obtaining the 3.4 improvement on MixATIS dataset
compared to the previous best models in overall accuracy.

1

Introduction

As a core component of task-oriented dialogue systems, spoken language understanding (SLU) aims at accurately comprehending the user’s intent by constructing semantic frames
(Tur and De Mori 2011; Cheng et al. 2023a; Zhuang, Cheng,
and Zou 2023). In general, SLU consists of two subtasks, including slot filling and intent detection (Qin et al. 2019; Zhu
et al. 2023a,b; Cheng et al. 2023c). Slot filling could be regarded as a sequence labeling task to predict the slot for each
token and intent detection can be treated as a sentence-level
semantic classification task to predict the intent of the user.
In real-world scenarios, the given utterance universally includes multiple intents. As a result, researchers begin to explore Multi-Intent SLU (Xu and Sarikaya 2013; Kim, Ryu,
and Lee 2017). Gangadharaiah and Narayanaswamy (2019)
makes the first attempt to develop a multi-task framework to
jointly achieve multi-intent detection and slot filling, aiming
to improve the overall performance through more accurately
capturing the intents present in the utterances. Recently, Qin
et al. (2020) proposes the AGIF framework to introduce the
graph attention network (GAT) (Velickovic et al. 2018) and
take various intent knowledge to the decoding process of slot
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17844

