The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Physics-Informed Representation and Learning: Control and Risk Quantification
Zhuoyuan Wang1 , Reece Keller1 , Xiyu Deng1 , Kenta Hoshino2 , Takashi Tanaka3 , Yorie Nakahira1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Kyoto University
3
University of Texas at Austin
{zhuoyuaw, rdkeller, xiyud}@andrew.cmu.edu, hoshino@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, ttanaka@utexas.edu, yorie@cmu.edu

Abstract

over time (Samuelson and Yang 2018; Gómez et al. 2016).
These methods rely on accurate estimations of the probability of risk in the system, and standard methods for such risk
estimation are computationally heavy, especially for highdimensional systems. For both problems, existing methods
require computation that scales exponentially or linearly
with the time horizon of interest. To the best of our knowledge, there is no study that provides estimation of the value
function or risk probability in long time horizons without introducing additional computation, which can be very beneficial for systems with long-term performance requirements.
In order to address these challenges in computation,
this study proposes a unified framework to efficiently
estimate the value function and safety probability of
high-dimensional stochastic systems. The method leverages a comparison theorem (Yamada 1973) to find lowdimensional representations of the value function and safety
probability, and uses such low-dimensional features to construct low-dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs)
for the value function and safety probability calculation in
order to reduce the dimension of the problem for efficient
computation. We further propose a physics-informed neural network (PINN) to solve these PDEs for better sample
complexity and generalization abilities. We also propose an
autoencoder-like neural network to automatically identify
low-dimensional features of the system. Fig. 1 shows the
overall diagram of the proposed method. The advantages of
the proposed method are
1. A unified framework for accurate estimation of value
functions and safety probabilities of stochastic systems
(Fig. 3a).
2. Efficient estimation with much lower sample complexity
for high-dimensional systems (Fig. 5).
3. Generalization to unseen regions in the state space and
longer time horizons (Fig. 4).
4. Intuitive plug and use with automatic feature identification (Fig. 3b).

Optimal and safety-critical control are fundamental problems for stochastic systems, and are widely considered in
real-world scenarios such as robotic manipulation and autonomous driving. In this paper, we consider the problem
of efficiently finding optimal and safe control for highdimensional systems. Specifically, we propose to use dimensionality reduction techniques from a comparison theorem
for stochastic differential equations together with a generalizable physics-informed neural network to estimate the optimal value function and the safety probability of the system.
The proposed framework results in substantial sample efficiency improvement compared to existing methods. We further develop an autoencoder-like neural network to automatically identify the low-dimensional features of the system to
enhance the ease of design for system integration. We also
provide experiments and quantitative analysis to validate the
efficacy of the proposed method. Source code is available at
https://github.com/jacobwang925/path-integral-PINN.

Introduction
Optimal control and safety-critical control are the two central concerns for autonomous systems. These concerns are
particularly pronounced in real-world applications, e.g.,
manufacturing robots and autonomous cars. The operational
environment often introduces stochastic noise, which compounds the difficulties of achieving optimal performance
and ensuring safety. Traditional deterministic methods prove
inadequate for stochastic dynamics (Katsoulakis and Vilanova 2020). Furthermore, many real-world systems are
characterized by high-dimensional state spaces (e.g., multiagent systems), leading to substantial computational burdens
when devising optimal and safe control strategies.
Previous work on stochastic optimal control deals with
diverse uncertainty and randomness, but these methods
are not efficient for high-dimensional systems because forward rollouts and backward dynamic programming requires
computation that scales exponentially with the dimension
of the state (Gorodetsky, Karaman, and Marzouk 2018;
Frankowska and Zhang 2020). Previous studies on stochastic safe control aim to control the level of risk in the system and ensure the probability of safety does not decay

Related Work
Path Integral Optimal Control
Path integral control generally refers to numerical methods to solve a stochastic optimal control problem by repeatedly performing forward Monte Carlo rollouts of openloop dynamics. The original derivation of the path integral

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21699

