The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiDA: Disambiguated Domain Alignment for Cross-Domain Retrieval with
Partial Labels
Haoran Liu1, 2 , Ying Ma3 , Ming Yan4 , Yingke Chen5 , Dezhong Peng1, 2 , Xu Wang1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
National Innovation Center for UHD Video Technology, Chengdu, China
3
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
4
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
5
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, UK
HrLiu.ai@gmail.com, y.ma@hit.edu.cn, yanmingtop@gmail.com, yke.chen@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn,
wangxu.scu@gmail.com
2

Partial Label

Abstract

Radio

Driven by generative AI and the Internet, there is an increasing availability of a wide variety of images, leading to
the significant and popular task of cross-domain image retrieval. To reduce annotation costs and increase performance,
this paper focuses on an untouched but challenging problem,
i.e., cross-domain image retrieval with partial labels (PCIR).
Specifically, PCIR faces great challenges due to the ambiguous supervision signal and the domain gap. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel method called disambiguated
domain alignment (DiDA) for cross-domain retrieval with
partial labels. In detail, DiDA elaborates a novel prototypescore unitization learning mechanism (PSUL) to extract common discriminative representations by simultaneously disambiguating the partial labels and narrowing the domain
gap. Additionally, DiDA proposes a prototype-based domain
alignment mechanism (PBDA) to further bridge the inherent
cross-domain discrepancy. Attributed to PSUL and PBDA,
our DiDA effectively excavates domain-invariant discrimination for cross-domain image retrieval. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of DiDA through comprehensive experiments
on three benchmarks, comparing it to existing state-of-the-art
methods. Code available: https://github.com/lhrrrrrr/DiDA.

1

Oven

Pencil

···

Bucket

Pencil

···

Bucket

Pencil

···

Bucket

Pencil

···

Bucket

True Label
Radio

Oven

A “Radio” image of clipart domain.

Partial Label
Oven

Radio

True Label
Oven

Radio

An “Oven” image of real world domain.

Figure 1: Two images from different domains are equipped
with partial labels.

practical applications in many scenarios such as surveillance
(Liu et al. 2019) and e-commerce platforms (Lei et al. 2021).
One of the major challenges faced by CIR is the domain
gap caused by inconsistent feature distributions across distinct domains. To tackle this challenge, a rich line of studies (Sangkloy et al. 2016; Bhunia et al. 2022; Sain et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2022b; Sain et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022c,a, 2023a) have been proposed. Among them, fully supervised learning for CIR achieves excellent performance attributed to its reliance on precise annotated labels. However,
acquiring such precise annotations for diverse domains can
be costly, time-consuming, and even require expert knowledge. Undoubtedly, these limitations hinder the scalability
and practicality of existing CIR methods when dealing with
large-scale datasets or evolving domains. To overcome the
need for annotations, several unsupervised CIR (UCIR) approaches (Kim et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023b) have been
proposed. While these methods could learn latent relationships and semantics within and across domains without labels or correspondence, their retrieval performance is not yet
promising.
To strike a balance between high labeling costs and
achieving excellent performance, this paper introduces a
new paradigm called cross-domain image retrieval with partial labels (PCIR). In PCIR, each sample is equipped with a

Introduction

With the proliferation of digital platforms and the continuous generation of visual content, the need to organize, search, and retrieve images effectively has become
paramount. However, traditional image retrieval approaches
often suffer from limitations when confront with different
visual domains, e.g., medical images, art, fashion, and satellite imagery. This is where cross-domain image retrieval
(CIR) has emerged as a promising research direction to overcome these challenges, facilitating the exploration of images
across diverse domains. Given a query image from one domain, CIR aims to retrieve images from different domains
based on the similarity of visual representations. Notably,
CIR has important research implications in deepening the
comprehension of transferable visual features, along with
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3612

