The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quantile-Regression-Ensemble: A Deep Learning Algorithm for
Downscaling Extreme Precipitation
Thomas Bailie1 , Yun Sing Koh1 , Neelesh Rampal2 , Peter B. Gibson2
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
2
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, New Zealand
tbai869@aucklanduni.ac.nz, y.koh@auckland.ac.nz, Neelesh.Rampal@niwa.co.nz, Peter.Gibson@niwa.co.nz

BG Network
Quantile: 0-0.3

Abstract
Global Climate Models (GCMs) simulate low resolution climate projections on a global scale. The native resolution
of GCMs is generally too low for societal-level decisionmaking. To enhance the spatial resolution, downscaling is
often applied to GCM output. Statistical downscaling techniques, in particular, are well-established as a cost-effective
approach. They require significantly less computational time
than physics-based dynamical downscaling. In recent years,
deep learning has gained prominence in statistical downscaling, demonstrating significantly lower error rates compared
to traditional statistical methods. However, a drawback of
regression-based deep learning techniques is their tendency
to overfit to the mean sample intensity. Extreme values as
a result are often underestimated. Problematically, extreme
events have the largest societal impact. We propose QuantileRegression-Ensemble (QRE), an innovative deep learning algorithm inspired by boosting methods. Its primary objective
is to avoid trade-offs between fitting to sample means and extreme values by training independent models on a partitioned
dataset. Our QRE is robust to redundant models and not susceptible to explosive ensemble weights, ensuring a reliable
training process. QRE achieves lower Mean Squared Error
(MSE) compared to various baseline models. In particular,
our algorithm has a lower error for high-intensity precipitation events over New Zealand, highlighting the ability to represent extreme events accurately.

Low Quantile
Prediction
Collection

Predictors

BG Network
Quantile: 0.9-1.0

Weight Network

High Quantile
Prediction

Weights

Figure 1: An overview of Quantile-Regression-Ensemble.
The ensemble is formed by training each member on distinct quantiles of precipitation intensity. Samples are softly
assigned to a member via the Weight Network.

tions over a smaller geographical area is by coupling GCM
outputs with a Regional Climate Model (RCM). However,
the high computational cost of RCMs limits their practicality when downscaling GCM projections. In contrast to
RCMs, statistical downscaling methods directly construct
a map between low-resolution climate variables (e.g., humidity or pressure) from a GCM to a high-resolution climate variable such as precipitation, running orders of magnitude faster than RCM orientated methods. Deep learning
has recently emerged as a prominent method in statistical
downscaling. Existing literature is rich in approaches that
successfully use statistical downscaling (Baño-Medina et al.
2022; Adewoyin et al. 2021; Vandal et al. 2018; Oyama
et al. 2023). We adopt a similar methodology, mapping lowresolution meteorological variables to high-resolution precipitation over New Zealand. However, deep-learning-based
implementations often underestimate high-intensity extreme
events when trained over the observational record (BañoMedina et al. 2022; Rampal et al. 2022). To address this
concern, we introduce the Quantile-Regression-Ensemble
(QRE) algorithm as depicted in Figure 1, which trains a series of members on distinct subsets of precipitation observations corresponding to specific intensity levels. As a result,
members can achieve significantly lower error MSE within

Introduction
Given the large-scale socioeconomic impacts that extreme
weather events have on society, detailed information on their
spatial patterns, and how they may change under climate
change, is highly sought out by decision makers and stakeholders. For instance, extreme precipitation events can have
severe economic costs (Frame et al. 2020; Merz et al. 2010)
and cause large population displacement due to flooding,
with developing countries being particularly vulnerable. End
of century climate projections can be obtained via a GCM.
Despite their sophistication, however, the low spatial resolution of their output imposes large uncertainties at local
scales. Nevertheless, climate projections produced by GCMs
are invaluable for macro-level decision making. A potential solution is to enhance the resolution of climate projecCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21914

