The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

What Does a Query Answer Tell You?
Informativeness of Query Answers for Knowledge Bases
Luca Andolfi, Gianluca Cima, Marco Console, Maurizio Lenzerini
Sapienza University of Rome
{andolfi, cima, console, lenzerini}@diag.uniroma1.it

T = {E ⊑ ∃hS ∃hS− ⊑ E
hS ⊑ ¬hS− }
D = {E(Ava),
E(Bea),
hS(Bea, Carl )}
Intuitively, K describes an organization where employees
are assigned to supervisors that are themselves employees.
Moreover, employees cannot supervise their supervisors,
i.e., hS is anti-symmetric and irreflexive. Formally, the models of K are all the first-order interpretations I that satisfy
T for which Ava I , Bea I ∈ EI and (Bea I , Carl I ) ∈ hSI .
Suppose we want to retrieve from K information about
employees and their supervisors. This can be done with the
following first-order logic query (in fact, conjunctive query):

Abstract
Query answering for Knowledge Bases (KBs) amounts to extracting information from the various models of a KB, and
presenting the user with an object that represents such information. In the vast majority of cases, this object consists of
those tuples of constants that satisfy the query expression either in every model (certain answers) or in some model (possible answers). However, similarly to the case of incomplete
databases, both these forms of answers are a lossy representation of all the knowledge inferable from the query and the
queried KB. In this paper, we illustrate a formal framework
to characterize the information that query answers for KBs
are able to represent. As a first application of the framework,
we study the informativeness of current query answering approaches, including the recently introduced partial answers.
We then define a novel notion of answers, allowing repetition
of variables across answer tuples. We show that these answers
are capable of representing a meaningful form of information,
and we also study their data complexity properties.

1

q = {(x, y) | hS(x, y)}
An answer for q over K could be (Bea, Carl ), since Carl I
is the supervisor of Bea I in every model I of K.
Carefully choosing the right notion of answers for a specific application domain is crucial to obtain meaningful information from a KB. This is because query answers must
satisfy two seemingly antithetic needs. On the one hand,
they should represent as much as possible the information
that users require with their queries. On the other, they must
be simple and compact enough to be reasonably understood
and computed. Whenever a KB has only one single and finite
model, these requirements can be met simply by returning
all those data tuples that satisfy the query expression over
such model (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995). Under reasonable assumptions, this set is finite and represents all the
information defined by the query and the KB. In all the other
cases, we need more sophisticated answers.
To answer queries posed to KBs with multiple or even
infinite models, the majority of approaches proposed in the
literature fall in one of two families: certain answers or possible answers (see (Lipski 1979) for an early account). Intuitively, the former are constants that answer a given query
in every model of the KB, while the latter answer the query
in at least one of these models. Despite their wide adoption,
both certain and possible answers cannot represent all the information that a query requires in several applications (Console, Guagliardo, and Libkin 2016, 2022; Calautti, Console,
and Pieris 2021).
Example 2. Consider again the scenario of Example 1. It
is easy to verify that the set Θ of certain answers for q over
K is {(Bea, Carl )} while the set Π of possible answers for

Introduction

A Knowledge Base (KB) is a symbolic representation of the
knowledge pertaining to a specific domain of interest. In the
logical approach to KBs (Levesque and Lakemeyer 2001),
this representation consists of a logical theory, i.e., a finite
set of assertions expressed in some formal language. The
models of this theory define the semantics of the KB or, in
other words, all the possible worlds that are compatible with
the information it represents.
The main task of a system based on the KB paradigm is
to answer user-specified queries (Calvanese et al. 2007b; Bienvenu and Ortiz 2015; Calı̀, Gottlob, and Kifer 2013). In
simple words, a query is a formal expression describing the
information the user wants to retrieve. Answering a query
over a KB amounts to extracting the information specified
by the former from the models of the latter and represent
such information in a way that can be presented to users.
These representations are usually called answers.
Example 1. Assume logical predicates Employee/1 (E),
hasSupervisor/2 (hS). The KB K consists of the TBox T and
the ABox D defined as follows:
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10442

