The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reliable Conflictive Multi-View Learning
Cai Xu, Jiajun Si, Ziyu Guan, Wei Zhao* , Yue Wu, Xiyue Gao
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
{cxu@, jiajunsi@stu., zyguan@, ywzhao@mail., ywu@, xygao@}xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view learning aims to combine multiple features to
achieve more comprehensive descriptions of data. Most previous works assume that multiple views are strictly aligned.
However, real-world multi-view data may contain lowquality conflictive instances, which show conflictive information in different views. Previous methods for this problem
mainly focus on eliminating the conflictive data instances by
removing them or replacing conflictive views. Nevertheless,
real-world applications usually require making decisions for
conflictive instances rather than only eliminating them. To
solve this, we point out a new Reliable Conflictive Multiview Learning (RCML) problem, which requires the model
to provide decision results and attached reliabilities for conflictive multi-view data. We develop an Evidential Conflictive Multi-view Learning (ECML) method for this problem.
ECML first learns view-specific evidence, which could be
termed as the amount of support to each category collected
from data. Then, we can construct view-specific opinions
consisting of decision results and reliability. In the multiview fusion stage, we propose a conflictive opinion aggregation strategy and theoretically prove this strategy can exactly model the relation of multi-view common and viewspecific reliabilities. Experiments performed on 6 datasets
verify the effectiveness of ECML. The code is released at
https://github.com/jiajunsi/RCML.

Chick’N burger

Figure 1: Visualization of the conflictive multi-view data:
the text view is related to food “sauce”; however, the other
views show conflictive information, i.e., food “burger”.
Most of the previous studies on multi-view learning
(Liang, Zadeh, and Morency 2022; Zhao et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2023a) always assume that data of different views are
strictly aligned. For example, different views consistently
belong to the ground-truth category in a classification task.
However, in real-world settings, this assumption cannot always be guaranteed. Fig. 1 visualizes a case of users’ multiview generated content: the text and image views show conflictive food categories. As a result, this conflictive information in different views makes most multi-view learning
methods inevitably degenerate or even fail.
The prevalent solutions to this problem mainly aim to
eliminate the conflictive data instance. Pioneer works regard
the conflictive data as outliers (Marcos Alvarez et al. 2013;
Hou et al. 2022). They usually consist of 3 steps: 1) measuring the consistency of views; 2) identifying outliers as instances with significant inconsistencies across views; 3) removing outliers to construct a clean dataset. Recently, some
multi-view learning methods (Huang et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2023d) dedicate to learning alignment relations for the
original data and constructing new data instances accordingly. For example, the text view in Fig. 1 would be replaced
with this view of another aligned instance. Therefore, the
conflict in the original instances would be solved.
Nevertheless, real-world applications usually require
making decisions for conflictive instances rather than only
eliminating them. For instance, recommender systems need
to predict users’ preferences from their conflictive multiview review. Considering the decision of a conflictive instance might be unreliable, we need the model can answer

Introduction
Artificial intelligence systems usually perceive and understand the world from multi-view data. For example, automated vehicle systems sense their surroundings through
multiple sensors (e.g., camera, lidar, radar); recommender
systems capture users’ preferences from their multi-view
generated content such as textual review and visual review.
Integrating the consistent and complementary information
of multiple views could obtain a more comprehensive description of data instances, which boosts various tasks such
as clustering (Xu et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2022; Wen et al.
2022; Ektefaie et al. 2023), retrieval (Mostafazadeh et al.
2017; Qin et al. 2022) and recommendation (Fan et al. 2023;
Tan et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16129

