The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generating Novel Leads for Drug Discovery Using LLMs with Logical Feedback
Shreyas Bhat Brahmavar1,6 , Ashwin Srinivasan2 , Tirtharaj Dash3 ,
Sowmya Ramaswamy Krishnan4 , Lovekesh Vig5 , Arijit Roy4 , Raviprasad Aduri6
1

Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, BITS Pilani, Goa Campus, India
2
Department of Computer Science, BITS Pilani, Goa Campus, India
3
Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, USA
4
TCS Innovation Labs (Life Sciences Division), India
5
TCS Research, India
6
Department of Biological Sciences, BITS Pilani, Goa Campus, India
{f20190969,ashwin,tirtharaj,aduri}@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in, {lovekesh.vig,sowmya.rk1,roy.arijit3}@tcs.com
Abstract

humans to access as it was to represent human knowledge
in a machine-understandable form. Surprisingly, this reverse
bottleneck also appears to have been first identified in 1982.
The problem of ‘The Human Window’ (Kopec 1982; Michie
1982) refers to the difficulties faced by humans when interacting with a complex computing system, due to a mismatch in representations of the human and machine. Modern large language models (LLMs) would appear to have
resolved this difficulty through their impressive facility to
use natural language as a mechanism of communicating with
humans (Brown et al. 2020; Narang and Chowdhery 2022).
In fact, the true difficulties concerning the Human Window
arise from the need for a conceptual interface, not simply
a linguistic interface. That is, the mismatch has to be addressed at a concept-level.1 The intense interest in the methods and practices of ‘prompt engineering’ as an approach
to extract useful information from LLMs could be seen as
evidence of the deeper, conceptual mismatch that exists between LLMs and human representations. In this paper, we
are concerned with an immediate practical manifestation
of this, namely in the apparent need to be a sophisticated
prompt-engineer to be able to use the capability of an LLM
best.
Our specific interest is in the generation of novel leads
for early-stage drug-design. Here, the human is typically a
computational- or synthetic-chemist, who often uses knowledge that can be expressed in a logical form. For example, this may be in the form of generic constraints on values like molecular weight, hydrophobicity, synthetic accessibility score, etc.; and specific constraints like estimated
binding energy to the target site, size of the binding site,
presence of any specific anchors and so on. The usual
route to provide this as input to an LLM would be through
prompts, which combine what the chemist knows, and what
the chemist needs from the LLM. However, the free-text interface prompts make it difficult to settle on a single form
for this input, and the process becomes one of experimentation with phrasings or text, and orderings of textual se-

Large Language Models (LLMs) can be used as repositories
of biological and chemical information to generate pharmacological lead compounds. However, for LLMs to focus on
specific drug targets typically require experimentation with
progressively more refined prompts. Results thus become dependent not just on what is known about the target, but also
on what is known about the prompt-engineering. In this paper, we separate the prompt into domain-constraints that can
be written in a standard logical form, and a simple textbased query. We investigate whether LLMs can be guided,
not by refining prompts manually, but by refining the the logical component automatically, keeping the query unchanged.
We describe an iterative procedure LMLF (“Language Models with Logical Feedback”) in which the constraints are
progressively refined using a logical notion of generalisation. On any iteration, newly generated instances are verified against the constraint, providing “logical-feedback” for
the next iteration’s refinement of the constraints. We evaluate LMLF using two well-known targets (inhibition of the
Janus Kinase 2; and Dopamine Receptor D2); and two different LLMs (GPT-3 and PaLM). We show that LMLF, starting
with the same logical constraints and query text, can guide
both LLMs to generate potential leads. We find: (a) Binding
affinities of LMLF-generated molecules are skewed towards
higher binding affinities than those from existing baselines;
(b) LMLF results in generating molecules that are skewed
towards higher binding affinities than without logical feedback; (c) Assessment by a computational chemist suggests
that LMLF generated compounds may be novel inhibitors.
These findings suggest that LLMs with logical feedback may
provide a mechanism for generating new leads without requiring the domain-specialist to acquire sophisticated skills
in prompt-engineering.

Introduction
In 1982, Edward Feigenbaum identified a difficulty in the
transfer of human-knowledge to a machine, now famous as
“the Feigenbaum bottleneck” (Feigenbaum et al. 1977). In
a curious twist of fate, we now appear confronted by a “reverse bottleneck”. Machine knowledge, such as those contained in large foundation models, is at least as difficult for

1
Kopec distinguishes between ‘surface-level’ and ‘structurallevel’ mismatches. The use of natural language addresses the
surface-level mismatch, but it does not necessarily alleviate the
mismatch between the concepts employed.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21

