The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AdapterGNN: Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning Improves Generalization in GNNs
Shengrui Li1,2 * , Xueting Han2† , Jing Bai2
1

Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research Asia
lsr22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {chrihan, jbai}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

to different downstream tasks by fine-tuning (Zhou et al.
2019a,b; Wang et al. 2022). While fine-tuning all parameters from a pre-trained model can improve performance
(Peng et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2019), it usually requires a relatively large model architecture to effectively glean knowledge from pre-training tasks (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al.
2020). This becomes challenging when the downstream task
has limited data, as optimizing a large number of parameters
can lead to overfitting (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015).
Moreover, training and maintaining a separate large-scale
model for each task can prove to be inefficient as the number of tasks grows. To address these challenges, recent research has focused on developing parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) techniques that can effectively adapt pretrained models to new tasks (Ding et al. 2022), such as
adapter tuning (Houlsby et al. 2019), LoRA (Hu et al. 2021),
BitFit (Zaken, Ravfogel, and Goldberg 2021), prefix-tuning
(Li and Liang 2021), and the prompt tuning (Lester, AlRfou, and Constant 2021). PEFT seeks to tune a small portion of parameters and keep the left parameters frozen. This
approach reduces training costs and allows for use in lowdata scenarios. PEFT could be applied to the GNNs (Xia
et al. 2022b). In particular, the idea of prompt tuning has
been widely adopted to GNNs (Wu et al. 2023). This adoption involves either manual prompt engineering (Sun et al.
2022) or soft prompt tuning techniques (Liu et al. 2023; Diao
et al. 2022; Fang et al. 2022). However, prompt-based methods involve modifying only the raw input and not the inner architecture and thus struggling to match full fine-tuning
performance (Fang et al. 2022), unless in special few-shot
setting (Liu et al. 2023). Existing works lack study and comparison with other PEFT methods. And due to the inherent
difference between transformer-based models and GNNs,
not all NLP solutions can be directly applied to GNNs.
To address this issue, we propose an effective method,
AdapterGNN, that combines task-specific knowledge in tunable adapters with task-agnostic knowledge in the frozen
pre-trained model. Unlike the vanilla adapter (Houlsby et al.
2019) which exhibits poor performance when directly applied to GNNs, AdapterGNN is specifically designed to
cater to the non-transformer GNN architecture employing
novel techniques: (1) Dual adapter modules; (2) Batch normalization (BN); (3) Learnable scaling.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we conduct a comprehensive com-

Fine-tuning pre-trained models has recently yielded remarkable performance gains in graph neural networks (GNNs).
In addition to pre-training techniques, inspired by the
latest work in the natural language fields, more recent
work has shifted towards applying effective fine-tuning approaches, such as parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT).
However, given the substantial differences between GNNs
and transformer-based models, applying such approaches directly to GNNs proved to be less effective. In this paper, we
present a comprehensive comparison of PEFT techniques for
GNNs and propose a novel PEFT method specifically designed for GNNs, called AdapterGNN. AdapterGNN preserves the knowledge of the large pre-trained model and
leverages highly expressive adapters for GNNs, which can
adapt to downstream tasks effectively with only a few parameters, while also improving the model’s generalization ability. Extensive experiments show that AdapterGNN achieves
higher performance than other PEFT methods and is the only
one consistently surpassing full fine-tuning (outperforming
it by 1.6% and 5.7% in the chemistry and biology domains
respectively, with only 5% and 4% of its parameters tuned)
with lower generalization gaps. Moreover, we empirically
show that a larger GNN model can have a worse generalization ability, which differs from the trend observed in large
transformer-based models. Building upon this, we provide
a theoretical justification for PEFT can improve generalization of GNNs by applying generalization bounds. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Lucius-lsr/AdapterGNN.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2008; Wu
et al. 2020) have achieved remarkable success in analyzing graph-structured data (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017; Velickovic et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018) but face challenges such as the scarcity of labeled data and low out-ofdistribution generalization ability. To overcome these challenges, recent efforts have focused on designing GNNs pretraining approaches (Hu et al. 2019; Xia et al. 2022a; You
et al. 2020) that leverage abundant unlabeled data to capture
transferable intrinsic graph properties and generalize them
* Work is done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13600

