The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Symbolic Cognitive Diagnosis via Hybrid Optimization
for Intelligent Education Systems
Junhao Shen, Hong Qian* , Wei Zhang, Aimin Zhou
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education and School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University,
Shanghai 200062, China
shenjh@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {hqian, amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, zhangwei.thu2011@gmail.com

Abstract

In the past decades, extensive efforts have been dedicated
to developing CDA methods. To name a few, item response
theory (IRT) (Lord 1952), multidimensional IRT (MIRT)
(Sympson 1978), deterministic inputs, noisy and gate model
(DINA) (De La Torre 2008), neural cognitive diagnosis model
(NCDM) (Wang et al. 2020a), knowledge-association neural cognitive diagnosis model (KaNCD) (Wang et al. 2022),
and Q-augmented causal cognitive diagnosis model (QCCDM) (Liu et al. 2023a). Although these cognitive diagnosis
models (CDMs) have achieved remarkable progress, applying
them to educational scenarios still suffers from the dilemma
of generalization and interpretability. In real-world education scenarios, generalization (e.g., prediction of students’
responses) and interpretability (e.g., interaction function and
proficiency levels) are of equal importance for evaluating
a cognitive diagnosis method (Khosravi et al. 2022). The
procedure and outcome of a CDM should be comprehensible and trustworthy for users such as students, teachers and
parents. However, due to the complicated student-exercise
interaction (DiBello, Roussos, and Stout 2006), most existing
methods can hardly make the best of both worlds.

Cognitive diagnosis assessment is a fundamental and crucial
task for student learning. It models the student-exercise interaction, and discovers the students’ proficiency levels on each
knowledge attribute. In real-world intelligent education systems, generalization and interpretability of cognitive diagnosis
methods are of equal importance. However, most existing
methods can hardly make the best of both worlds due to the
complicated student-exercise interaction. To this end, this paper proposes a symbolic cognitive diagnosis (SCD) framework
to simultaneously enhance generalization and interpretability.
The SCD framework incorporates the symbolic tree to explicably represent the complicated student-exercise interaction
function, and utilizes gradient-based optimization methods to
effectively learn the student and exercise parameters. Meanwhile, the accompanying challenge is that we need to tunnel
the discrete symbolic representation and continuous parameter
optimization. To address this challenge, we propose to hybridly
optimize the representation and parameters in an alternating
manner. To fulfill SCD, it alternately learns the symbolic tree
by derivative-free genetic programming and learns the student and exercise parameters via gradient-based Adam. The
extensive experimental results on various real-world datasets
show the superiority of SCD on both generalization and interpretability. The ablation study verifies the efficacy of each
ingredient in SCD, and the case study explicitly showcases
how the interpretable ability of SCD works.

Introduction
Cognitive diagnosis assessment (CDA) (Liu 2021; Liu et al.
2023b) is a fundamental task in intelligence education systems (Anderson et al. 2014; Burns et al. 2014) with plenty applications, such as educational recommendation systems (Xu
and Zhou 2020) and exercise design (Jeckeln et al. 2021).
An illustrative example of CDA is shown in Figure I of Appendix. There are three main factors in CDA: students, exercises and knowledge attributes which are also referred to as
skills (e.g., calculation). The purpose of CDA is to model the
student-exercise interaction via an interaction function based
on response logs, and diagnose the students’ cognitive states,
i.e., inferring the proficiency levels on knowledge attributes.
* Corresponding Author: hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14928

Specifically, on the basis of the sigmoid interaction function, models like IRT and MIRT exhibit the interpretability
of interaction functions and relatively good generalization,
but the diagnostic outcomes (e.g., proficiency levels and exercise difficulty parameters) lack interpretability due to the
latent vectors vaguely corresponding to each knowledge attribute (Embretson and Reise 2013). Under the conjunctive
assumption, models like DINA possess the interpretability of
both interaction function and outcomes, but they may underperform in terms of generalization due to their simple forms
of interaction function (De La Torre 2011). Through neural
networks, models like NCDM show the strong generalization
and interpretability of outcomes, but they could lack interpretability of the interaction function due to the black-box
nature of neural networks (Murdoch et al. 2019; Du, Liu,
and Hu 2020). Most existing methods struggle to well balance the generalization and interpretability mainly because of
the dilemma of accurately modelling the complex interaction
function in a non-linear way and its intelligibility. To alleviate
this dilemma, a highly non-linear and explicable representation of interaction function, symbolic regression (SR), could
provide a good recipe to make the best of both worlds. SR
excels in finding a complicated non-linear function with high

