The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Expected Loss of Preconditioned Langevin Dynamics
Reveals the Hessian Rank
Amitay Bar∗ , Rotem Mulayoff∗ , Tomer Michaeli, Ronen Talmon
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
amitayb@campus.technion.ac.il

Abstract

for sampling from distributions. Here we view SGRLD as a
preconditioned version of LD, where the Riemannian metric
tensor plays the role of the preconditioner. This more general
viewpoint is of practical value, as preconditioning is commonly used for circumventing instabilities that stem from
an ill-conditioned loss landscape, in optimization problems
in general (Pock and Chambolle 2011; Dauphin, De Vries,
and Bengio 2015), and in NN training in particular (Kingma
and Ba 2014; Tieleman and Hinton 2012). Combining preconditioning and SGLD has been previously studied in the
past (Li et al. 2016; Marceau-Caron and Ollivier 2017). For
example, Marceau-Caron and Ollivier (2017) used a Fisher
matrix approximation for choosing the variance of the noise
in preconditioned SGLD.
In this paper, we consider a preconditioned LD and
study its expected loss near stationary points on a large
time scale. Specifically, we use a quadratic approximation
of the loss about the stationary point, leading to an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) process, which is mathematically
tractable. We show that when the preconditioner and the
noise covariance satisfy a particular relation, the expected
loss is linear in the Hessian rank. The Hessian of the loss
of NNs has attracted a lot of interest in recent years, as it
has been linked to model “complexity” (Arora et al. 2019;
Li, Luo, and Lyu 2020) and generalization (Huh et al. 2022)
and has been shown to exhibit interesting spectral properties (Papyan 2020). Yet, it is typically infeasible to compute
the rank of the Hessian of a NN (or even just store the Hessian) due to the large number of parameters. Our theoretical result suggests that we can estimate the Hessian rank at
minima by simply applying LD in its vicinity. Leveraging
our result, we devise an iterative Hessian rank estimation
algorithm, which does not require spectral decomposition of
the Hessian. Remarkably, the preconditioning matrix and the
covariance matrix revealing the Hessian rank lead to a Riemannian LD with a Riemannian metric that is equal to the
inverse of the preconditioner.
Additionally, we show that under certain conditions, the
expected loss at a large time scale depends only on the
interplay between the preconditioner and the noise covariance. This simple result enables us to analyze the impact
of different preconditioners on the expected loss. Specifically, we examine two preconditioning matrices which correspond to stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and

Langevin dynamics (LD) is widely used for sampling from
distributions and for optimization. In this work, we derive
a closed-form expression for the expected loss of preconditioned LD near stationary points of the objective function.
We use the fact that at the vicinity of such points, LD reduces to an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process, which is amenable
to convenient mathematical treatment. Our analysis reveals
that when the preconditioning matrix satisfies a particular relation with respect to the noise covariance, LD’s expected loss
becomes proportional to the rank of the objective’s Hessian.
We illustrate the applicability of this result in the context of
neural networks, where the Hessian rank has been shown to
capture the complexity of the predictor function but is usually
computationally hard to probe. Finally, we use our analysis to
compare SGD-like and Adam-like preconditioners and identify the regimes under which each of them leads to a lower
expected loss.

Introduction
Langevin dynamics (LD) has proven to be a powerful tool
across many domains. Its basic discretization, the unadjusted Langevin algorithm (ULA), along with other variants, such as the stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
(SGLD) method (Welling and Teh 2011) and its extensions,
are commonly used for sampling from distributions (Ding
et al. 2014; Wang, Fienberg, and Smola 2015) and for nonconvex optimization (Gelfand and Mitter 1991; Raginsky,
Rakhlin, and Telgarsky 2017; Xu et al. 2018; Chen, Du, and
Tong 2020; Borysenko and Byshkin 2021). LD and similar
stochastic differential equations (SDEs) are also used for analyzing the optimization process of neural networks (NNs),
as they serve as continuous-time analogues to popular optimizers, like SGD (Arora, Cohen, and Hazan 2018; Elkabetz
and Cohen 2021; Latz 2021; Zhu et al. 2019).
An important variant of SGLD is the stochastic gradient
Riemannian Langevin dynamics (SGRLD) method (Patterson and Teh 2013), which is an LD-type random process on
a Riemannian manifold that respects the Riemannian metric. Girolami and Calderhead (2011) used Riemannian LD as
an improved Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20328

