The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiffBEV: Conditional Diffusion Model for Bird’s Eye View Perception
Jiayu Zou1,3 , Kun Tian1,3 , Zheng Zhu2 , Yun Ye2 , Xingang Wang1 *
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
PhiGent Robotics
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zoujiayu2020@ia.ac.cn, kun.tian@phigent.ai, zhengzhu@ieee.org, yun.ye@phigent.ai, xingang.wang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

where pixels of different vehicles are connected; (2) The perception of static areas such as the pedestrian crossing and
walkway is too rough. In particular, there are a lot of redundant predictions on the nuScenes benchmark; (3) LSS
(Philion and Fidler 2020) has a poor discriminative ability
for background and foreground pixels. In the last two rows
of Fig. 1, the interested drivable area and vehicle objects are
misclassified into the background.
The above observations intuitively motivate us to explore more fine-grained and highly detailed BEV feature for
downstream perception tasks. Taking the noises in camera
parameters and LiDAR scans into consideration, we usually
obtain BEV representation with harmful noises. Diffusion
models naturally have the ability to denoise noisy samples
to the ideal data. Recently, the diffusion probability models (DPM) have illustrated their great power in generative
tasks (Meng et al. 2021; Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022; BondTaylor et al. 2022; Janner et al. 2022), but their potential
in BEV perception tasks has not been fully explored. In
this work, we propose DiffBEV, a novel framework that utilizes conditional DPM to improve quality of the BEV feature
and push the boundary of BEV perception. In DiffBEV, the
depth distribution or the BEV feature obtained from the view
transformer is the input of conditional DPM. DiffBEV explores the potential of conditional diffusion model and progressively refines the noisy BEV feature. Then, the crossattention module is proposed to fuse the fine-grained output
of conditional diffusion model and the original BEV feature. This module adaptively builds the content relationship
between the generated feature and the source BEV content,
which helps to obtain a more precise and compact perception result.
DiffBEV is an end-to-end framework and can be easily extended by altering task-specific decoders. In this paper, we evaluate the performance of BEV semantic segmentation on standard benchmarks, i.e. nuScenes (Caesar
et al. 2020), KITTI Raw (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012),
KITTI Odometry (Behley et al. 2019), and KITTI 3D Object (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012). DiffBEV achieves a
25.9% mIoU on the nuScenes benchmark, which is 6.2%
higher than previous best-performing approaches. DiffBEV
outperforms other methods in the segmentation of drivable
area, pedestrian crossing, walkway, and car by a substantial
margin (+5.0%, +10%, +6.7%, and +11.6% IoU scores).

BEV perception is of great importance in the field of autonomous driving, serving as the cornerstone of planning,
controlling, and motion prediction. The quality of the BEV
feature highly affects the performance of BEV perception.
However, taking the noises in camera parameters and LiDAR scans into consideration, we usually obtain BEV representation with harmful noises. Diffusion models naturally
have the ability to denoise noisy samples to the ideal data,
which motivates us to utilize the diffusion model to get a
better BEV representation. In this work, we propose an endto-end framework, named DiffBEV, to exploit the potential
of diffusion model to generate a more comprehensive BEV
representation. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to apply diffusion model to BEV perception. In practice, we design three types of conditions to guide the training of the diffusion model which denoises the coarse samples and refines the semantic feature in a progressive way.
What’s more, a cross-attention module is leveraged to fuse
the context of BEV feature and the semantic content of conditional diffusion model. DiffBEV achieves a 25.9% mIoU
on the nuScenes dataset, which is 6.2% higher than the bestperforming existing approach. Quantitative and qualitative results on multiple benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness
of DiffBEV in BEV semantic segmentation and 3D object
detection tasks.

Introduction
Bird’s Eye View (BEV) perception plays a crucial role in autonomous driving tasks, which need a compact and accurate
representation of the real world. One of the most important
components of BEV perception is the quality of the BEV
feature. Taking the classical LSS (Philion and Fidler 2020)
as an illustration, it first extracts image features from the
backbone encoder and then transforms them into BEV space
along with depth estimation. However, the downstream perception results are often distorted, since the flat-world assumption is not always valid and the feature distribution
in BEV is usually sparse. As shown in Fig. 1, when LSS
(Philion and Fidler 2020) is utilized as the view transformer,
the final segmentation results have three deficiencies: (1)
The prediction of dynamic object boundaries is ambiguous,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7846

