The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Optimal Transport View for Subspace Clustering and Spectral Clustering
Yuguang Yan1 , Zhihao Xu1 , Canlin Yang1 , Jie Zhang2 , Ruichu Cai1,3 * , Michael Kwok-Po Ng4
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
ygyan@gdut.edu.cn, xzhsqzr987@outlook.com, {yangcl0608,cairuichu}@gmail.com,
zj199607@connect.hku.hk, michael-ng@hkbu.edu.hk
ples, and then adopts the eigenvectors with the first k smallest eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix as the new representations of data (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001). After that,
K-means is conducted on the new representations to partition samples into clusters. Usually, the affinity matrix is
based on the Gaussian kernel or learned from data according to the pairwise distance (Bai and Liang 2020). For instance, to learn a better affinity matrix, subspace clustering
assumes that samples approximately lie in linear subspaces.
Based on this, a coefficient matrix is learned by considering
self-expressiveness, i.e., each sample can be represented as
a linear combination of other samples in the same subspace,
and the affinity matrix is constructed based on the coefficient
matrix (Lu et al. 2018). Under this paradigm, different regularizers are applied to the learning model of the coefficient
matrix (Lu et al. 2012; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Liu, Lin,
and Yu 2010; Lu et al. 2018).
In this paper, we provide an explanation for subspace
clustering and spectral clustering from the perspective of
optimal transport, which studies how to move a set of samples from one distribution to another with the minimal transport cost (Peyré and Cuturi 2017). Optimal transport is first
proposed by Monge in (Monge 1781) and then extended by
Kantorovich in (Kantorovitch 1958). Optimal transport develops a powerful computational tool to capture geometric
information involved in data (Benamou et al. 2015; An et al.
2022) and has been widely applied for estimating the discrepancy between two probability distributions (Courty, Flamary, and Tuia 2014; Courty et al. 2017b,a; Yan et al. 2018;
Flamary et al. 2018). However, the connection between optimal transport and clustering has not been well investigated
in the literature.
To fill this gap, we consider a self optimal transport model
involving only one group of samples, and present the connection from optimal transport to subspace clustering and
spectral clustering. We find that both subspace clustering
and spectral clustering can be explained in the framework
of optimal transport. In specific, the optimal transport matrix bridges the original feature space and the spectral embedding space, and spectral clustering can be interpreted as
finding spectral embeddings in the Stiefel manifold with a
consistent affinity matrix to the original features.
Based on this connection, we model spectral clustering
as a special optimal transport barycenter problem, and pro-

Abstract
Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in machine learning and data mining, and many algorithms have
been proposed in the past decades. Among them, subspace
clustering and spectral clustering are the most famous approaches. In this paper, we provide an explanation for subspace clustering and spectral clustering from the perspective of optimal transport. Optimal transport studies how to
move samples from one distribution to another distribution
with minimal transport cost, and has shown a powerful ability to extract geometric information. By considering a self
optimal transport model with only one group of samples, we
observe that both subspace clustering and spectral clustering
can be explained in the framework of optimal transport, and
the optimal transport matrix bridges the spaces of features
and spectral embeddings. Inspired by this connection, we propose a spectral optimal transport barycenter model, which
learns spectral embeddings by solving a barycenter problem
equipped with an optimal transport discrepancy and guidance
of data. Based on our proposed model, we take advantage
of optimal transport to exploit both feature and metric information involved in data for learning coupled spectral embeddings and affinity matrix in a unified model. We develop an
alternating optimization algorithm to solve the resultant problems, and conduct experiments in different settings to evaluate the performance of our proposed methods.

Introduction
Clustering aims to partition data samples into different clusters so that similar samples are grouped together (Xu and
Wunsch 2005). As one of the most fundamental problems in
machine learning and data mining, clustering has been applied in many real-world applications, from image clustering (Yang et al. 2010) to text analysis (Liu et al. 2015), and
many clustering methods have been proposed in the literature. Among them, subspace clustering and spectral clustering are important approaches being studied extensively (Nie
et al. 2016; Bai and Liang 2020; Wang et al. 2022).
Over the past decades, spectral clustering and subspace
clustering methods have been widely investigated due to
their promising performance. Spectral clustering first constructs an affinity matrix to capture the similarities of sam* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16281

