The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CARAT: Contrastive Feature Reconstruction and Aggregation for Multi-Modal
Multi-Label Emotion Recognition
Cheng Peng, Ke Chen * , Lidan Shou, Gang Chen ∗
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310000, China
{chengchng, chenk, should, cg}@zju.edu.cn

Textual
Modality

Multi-modal multi-label emotion recognition (MMER) aims
to identify relevant emotions from multiple modalities. The
challenge of MMER is how to effectively capture discriminative features for multiple labels from heterogeneous data.
Recent studies are mainly devoted to exploring various fusion
strategies to integrate multi-modal information into a unified
representation for all labels. However, such a learning scheme
not only overlooks the specificity of each modality but also
fails to capture individual discriminative features for different labels. Moreover, dependencies of labels and modalities
cannot be effectively modeled. To address these issues, this
paper presents ContrAstive feature Reconstruction and AggregaTion (CARAT) for the MMER task. Specifically, we devise a reconstruction-based fusion mechanism to better model
fine-grained modality-to-label dependencies by contrastively
learning modal-separated and label-specific features. To further exploit the modality complementarity, we introduce a
shuffle-based aggregation strategy to enrich co-occurrence
collaboration among labels. Experiments on two benchmark
datasets CMU-MOSEI and M3ED demonstrate the effectiveness of CARAT over state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/chengzju/CARAT.

...I thought that film was awful and I did
not really know what to expect from ...

Visual
Modality

Disgust
Textual
Visual
Acoustic

Relevance

Abstract

Sequence index

Emotions

Disgust, Sad

Relevance

Sad

Acoustic
Modality

Textual
Visual
Acoustic

Sequence index

Figure 1: An example of MMER (left) and correlations between two relevant emotions and the video sequence (right).

Morency 2019). The aggregation-based fusion employs averaging (Hazirbas et al. 2017), concatenation (Ngiam et al.
2011) or attention (Zadeh et al. 2018a) to integrate multimodal features. The alignment-based fusion (Pham et al.
2018, 2019) adopts the cross-modal adaptation to align latent information of different modalities. However, unifying
multiple modalities into one identical representation can inevitably neglect the specificity of each modality, thus losing the rich discriminative features. Although recent works
(Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Zhang et al.
2022) attempt to learn modality-specific representations,
they still utilize attention to fuse these representations into
one. Therefore, a key challenge of MMER is how to effectively represent multi-modal data while maintaining modality specificity and integrating complementary information.
As a multi-label task (Zhang and Zhou 2013), MMER
also needs to deal with complex dependencies among labels. Nowadays, massive studies attempt various methods
to explore label correlation, such as label similarity (Xiao
et al. 2019) and co-occurrence label graph (Ma et al. 2021).
However, these static correlations cannot reflect the collaborative relationship among labels. On the other hand, another tricky conundrum for MMER is how to learn dependencies between labels and modalities. Commonly, different modalities have inconsistent emotional expressions, and
conversely, different emotions focus on different modalities,
which means that inferring each potential label largely depends on the different contributions of different modalities.
As shown in Figure 1, we can infer sadness more easily from
the visual modality, while disgust can be predicted from both
textual and visual modalities. Therefore, another challenge

Introduction
Multi-modal Multi-label Emotion Recognition (MMER)
aims to identify multiple emotions (e.g., happiness and sadness) from multiple heterogeneous modalities (e.g., text, visual, and audio). Over the last decades, MMER has fueled
research in many communities, such as online chatting (Galik and Rank 2012), news analysis (Zhu, Li, and Zhou 2019)
and dialogue systems (Ghosal et al. 2019).
Different from single-modal tasks, multi-modal learning
synergistically processes heterogeneous information from
various sources, which introduces a challenge of how to capture discriminative representations from multiple modalities.
To this end, recent works propose various advanced multimodal fusion strategies to bridge the modality gap and learn
effective representations (Ramachandram and Taylor 2017).
According to the fusion manner, methods can be roughly
divided into three categories: aggregation-based, alignmentbased, and the mixture of them(Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and
* Ke Chen and Gang Chen are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14581

