The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Distribution Matching for Multi-Task Learning of Classification Tasks:
A Large-Scale Study on Faces & Beyond
Dimitrios Kollias1 * , Viktoriia Sharmanska2,3 , Stefanos Zafeiriou3
1

School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK
2
School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, UK
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
d.kollias@qmul.ac.uk, sharmanska.v@sussex.ac.uk, s.zafeiriou@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract

done based on the ground truth annotations with full or partial overlap across tasks. During training, all the tasks are
optimised simultaneously aiming at representation learning
that supports a holistic view of the framework.
What differentiates our work from these holistic approaches is exploring the idea of task-relatedness as means
for co-training different tasks. In our work, relatedness between tasks is either provided explicitly in a form of expert
knowledge, or is inferred based on empirical studies. Importantly, in co-training, the related tasks exchange their predictions and iteratively teach each other so that predictors of all
tasks can excel even if we have limited or no data for some
of them. We propose an effective distribution matching and
co-labeling approach based on distillation (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015), where knowledge exchange between tasks
is enabled via distribution matching over their predictions.
Up until now training holistic models has been primarily addressed by combining multiple datasets to solve individual tasks (Ranjan et al. 2017), or by collecting the annotations in terms of all tasks (Zamir et al. 2018; Kokkinos 2017). For example, in affective computing, two most
common tasks are predicting categorical expressions (e.g.,
happy, sad) and activation of action units (Ekman 1997) to
explain the affective state. Collecting annotations of AUs
is particularly costly, as it requires skilled annotators. The
datasets collected so far (Li, Deng, and Du 2017; BenitezQuiroz, Srinivasan, and Martinez 2016) have annotations
for only one task and, despite significant effort, there is
no dataset that has complete annotations of both tasks. Cotraining via task relatedness is an effective way of aggregating knowledge across datasets and transferring it across
tasks, especially with little or non-overlapping annotations,
or when not many training data are available, or when there
is a big discrepancy in the size of labeled data per task.
In this work we discuss two strategies to infer taskrelatedness, via domain knowledge and dataset annotation.
For example, the two aforementioned tasks of facial behavior analysis are interconnected with known strengths of relatedness in literature. In (Ekman 1997), the facial action
coding system (FACS) was built to indicate for each of the
basic expressions its prototypical AUs. In (Du, Tao, and
Martinez 2014), a dedicated user study has been conducted
to study the relationship between AUs and expressions. In
(Khorrami, Paine, and Huang 2015), the authors show that

Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a framework, where multiple
related tasks are learned jointly and benefit from a shared
representation space, or parameter transfer. To provide sufficient learning support, modern MTL uses annotated data
with full, or sufficiently large overlap across tasks, i.e., each
input sample is annotated for all, or most of the tasks. However, collecting such annotations is prohibitive in many real
applications, and cannot benefit from datasets available for
individual tasks. In this work, we challenge this setup and
show that MTL can be successful with classification tasks
with little, or non-overlapping annotations, or when there is
big discrepancy in the size of labeled data per task. We explore task-relatedness for co-annotation and co-training, and
propose a novel approach, where knowledge exchange is enabled between the tasks via distribution matching. To demonstrate the general applicability of our method, we conducted
diverse case studies in the domains of affective computing,
face recognition, species recognition, and shopping item classification using nine datasets. Our large-scale study of affective tasks for basic expression recognition and facial action unit detection illustrates that our approach is network
agnostic and brings large performance improvements compared to the state-of-the-art in both tasks and across all studied databases. In all case studies, we show that co-training via
task-relatedness is advantageous and prevents negative transfer (which occurs when MT model’s performance is worse
than that of at least one single-task model).

Introduction
Holistic frameworks, where several learning tasks are interconnected and explicable by the reference to the whole, are
common in computer vision. A diverse set of examples includes a scene understanding framework that reasons about
3D object detection, semantic segmentation and depth reconstruction (Wang, Fidler, and Urtasun 2015), a face analysis framework that addresses face detection, landmark localization, gender recognition, age estimation (Ranjan et al.
2017), a universal network for low-, mid-, high-level vision
(Kokkinos 2017), a large-scale framework of visual tasks for
indoor scenes (Zamir et al. 2018). Most if not all prior works
rely on building a multi-task framework where learning is
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2813

