The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CL2CM: Improving Cross-Lingual Cross-Modal Retrieval
via Cross-Lingual Knowledge Transfer
Yabing Wang123 * , Fan Wang3 , Jianfeng Dong15† , Hao Luo34†
1

Zhejiang Gongshang University
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
4
Hupan Lab, Zhejiang Province
5
Zhejiang Key Lab of E-Commerce
Abstract

correspondence between V-T. As shown in Figure 1(a), the
straightforward baseline method directly attempts to align
visual and target-language representations, similar to conventional cross-modal alignment methods (Kim et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2022; Dong et al. 2022b). But it suffers from the
noisy translation issue. Previous efforts (Wang et al. 2022;
Jain et al. 2021; Zhang, Hu, and Jin 2022) attempt to alleviate this issue by incorporating the matching between
visual and source-language representations, and treat the
source language as the focal point, as shown in Figure 1(b).
However, these methods are limited to instance-level matching 1 in the visual-text domain, as they match image-text
pairs relying on global feature vectors. On the other hand,
some endeavors (Ni et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021; Zeng
et al. 2022) utilize cross-modal fusion modules to model
fine-grained interactions between image regions and targetlanguage words, as depicted in Figure 1(c). Although these
methods demonstrate promising performance, they entail
huge computational costs, as all possible query-candidate
pairs need to be fed into the fusion modules during inference. In light of the above discussions, we argue that conventional approaches still face a dilemma between achieving
reliable alignment of V-T and computational efficiency.
In this paper, we propose a novel solution: improving
the alignment between vision and target language using
cross-lingual knowledge transfer. We note that existing
multi-lingual pre-trained models, such as mBERT (Devlin
et al. 2018), have demonstrated remarkable performance in
cross-lingual alignment but have not been fully utilized in
CCR tasks, where they are typically only used as multilingual text backbones. Furthermore, cross-lingual sentences
exhibit more analogous modality structures, with a smaller
gap compared to visual elements. These properties provide
a unique opportunity to comprehensively explore the knowledge between different languages and transfer it to align V-T.
In specific, we propose a novel framework named CrossLingual to Cross-Modal (CL2CM) that aims to address
two main challenges mentioned above: 1) noisy translations
and 2) reliable and comprehensive correspondence learning. As shown in Figure 1(d), CL2CM consists of a cross-

Cross-lingual cross-modal retrieval has garnered increasing
attention recently, which aims to achieve the alignment between vision and target language (V-T) without using any
annotated V-T data pairs. Current methods employ machine translation (MT) to construct pseudo-parallel data pairs,
which are then used to learn a multi-lingual and multi-modal
embedding space that aligns visual and target-language representations. However, the large heterogeneous gap between
vision and text, along with the noise present in target language translations, poses significant challenges in effectively
aligning their representations. To address these challenges,
we propose a general framework, Cross-Lingual to CrossModal (CL2CM), which improves the alignment between vision and target language using cross-lingual transfer. This
approach allows us to fully leverage the merits of multilingual pre-trained models (e.g., mBERT) and the benefits of
the same modality structure, i.e., smaller gap, to provide reliable and comprehensive semantic correspondence (knowledge) for the cross-modal network. We evaluate our proposed
approach on two multilingual image-text datasets, Multi30K
and MSCOCO, and one video-text dataset, VATEX. The results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method and its high potential for large-scale retrieval.

Introduction
As the internet continues to expand globally, users from
diverse linguistic backgrounds increasingly access multimodal content online, such as images and videos. Nevertheless, accurately retrieving such content poses considerable challenges, particularly for non-English speakers, as the
majority of human-annotated datasets are only available in
English. To address this issue, cross-lingual cross-modal retrieval (CCR) has emerged as a crucial area of research, aiming to develop models applicable to non-English languages
without incurring substantial manual annotation costs.
The primary challenge for CCR lies in effectively achieving cross-lingual transfer and establishing reliable correlations between V-T. A prevalent approach is to construct
pseudo-parallel data pairs using MT and explicitly learn the
* Work done during an internship at DAMO Academy.

1

†

Instance level matching refers to the matching between individual image and text instances, and the alignment loss is applied
to the final embedding layer, similar to the CLIP model.

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5651

