The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Agile Multi-Source-Free Domain Adaptation
Xinyao Li1 , Jingjing Li1,2 * , Fengling Li3 , Lei Zhu4 , Ke Lu1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC
3
University of Technology Sydney
4
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
xinyao326@outlook.com, lijin117@yeah.net, {fenglingli2023, leizhu0608}@gmail.com, kel@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

Method

Param.

Backbone

Acc.

Throughput

Efficiently utilizing rich knowledge in pretrained models has
become a critical topic in the era of large models. This
work focuses on adaptively utilizing knowledge from multiple source-pretrained models to an unlabeled target domain
without accessing the source data. Despite being a practically useful setting, existing methods require extensive parameter tuning over each source model, which is computationally expensive when facing abundant source domains
or larger source models. To address this challenge, we propose a novel approach which is free of the parameter tuning over source backbones. Our technical contribution lies in
the Bi-level ATtention ENsemble (Bi-ATEN) module, which
learns both intra-domain weights and inter-domain ensemble
weights to achieve a fine balance between instance specificity
and domain consistency. By slightly tuning source bottlenecks, we achieve comparable or even superior performance
on a challenging benchmark DomainNet with less than 3%
trained parameters and 8 times of throughput compared
with SOTA method. Furthermore, with minor modifications,
the proposed module can be easily equipped to existing methods and gain more than 4% performance boost. Code is available at https://github.com/TL-UESTC/Bi-ATEN.

CAiDA
PMTrans
ATEN (ours)
Bi-ATEN (ours)

120.2M
447.4M
4.9M
10.6M

ResNet50
Swin
Swin
Swin

46.8
59.1
59.1
59.6

91
46
970
369

Table 1: Computation overhead and performance comparison between different methods on DomainNet.

et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2021) emerges as a promising technique to address these challenges by enabling holistic adaptation of multiple pretrained source models to an unlabeled
target domain, while not accessing source training data.
Existing MSFDA methods (Ahmed et al. 2021; Dong
et al. 2021; Han et al. 2023; Shen, Bu, and Wornell 2023)
typically tackle the problem via a two-step framework, i.e.,
(1) Tune each source model thoroughly towards target domain, and (2) Learn source importance weights to assemble
the source models. However, their overwhelming limitations
in computational efficiency and scalability prevent their applications on large-scale problems. For step (1), the number
of models to tune increases linearly along with the number
of source domains, which could become unacceptable for
large-scale problems with abundant source domains. The necessity of tuning all parameters for each model also makes
it infeasible to scale up these methods to larger models. In
Table 1 we compare the performance and trainable parameters of CAiDA (Dong et al. 2021), PMTrans1 (Zhu, Bai, and
Wang 2023) and our methods on a challenging benchmark
DomainNet (Peng et al. 2019) with 6 domains. As a typical
MSFDA framework, CAiDA performs poorly due to limited performance of ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016) backbone.
By equipping a stronger backbone SwinTransformer (Liu
et al. 2021), a potential performance boost of +12.3% is
achieved at a cost of four times of parameters to tune. On
the other hand, we aim to achieve superior performance by
equipping SwinTransformer while demanding significantly
less training cost, presenting a more feasible and agile solution for MSFDA on large models. For step (2), current
MSFDA methods learn domain-level ensemble weights, ap-

Introduction
Large-scale models have drawn significant attention for
their remarkable performance across a spectrum of applications (Ramesh et al. 2022; Irwin et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2020).
Considering that training large models from scratch requires
tremendous computational costs, fine-tuning has become a
predominant approach to transfer knowledge from large pretrained models to downstream tasks (Long et al. 2015; Guo
et al. 2020). However, this paradigm heavily relies on labeled training data and suffers from significant performance
decay when target data exhibits distribution shift from pretraining data (Ben-David et al. 2010). Moreover, we usually
have multiple pretrained models trained on different sources
or architectures on hand, e.g., medical diagnostic models
trained on distinct regions or patient groups. Demands to
maximally utilizing knowledge from multiple pretrained
models are common in real world applications. To this end,
Multi-Source-Free Domain Adaptation (MSFDA) (Ahmed
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
PMTrans is a single-source domain adaptation method and we
evaluate it on MSFDA setting by taking its single-best results.

13673

