The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Point-to-Spike Residual Learning for Energy-Efficient 3D Point Cloud
Classification
Qiaoyun Wu1,2,3 , Quanxiao Zhang1,2,3 , Chunyu Tan1,2,3 , Yun Zhou1,4 , Changyin Sun1,2,3
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University
Engineering Research Center of Autonomous Unmanned System Technology, Ministry of Education
3
Anhui Provincial Engineering Research Center for Unmanned System and Intelligent Technology
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
wuqiaoyun@ahu.edu.cn, zhouy@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

ing. SNNs are composed of spiking neurons and each neuron provides spike signals only when its membrane potential exceeds a certain threshold. The generated spike signals
would be propagated to the neurons in the next layer, contributing to the membrane potential charging. Based on this,
the communication between neurons occurs through sparse
spike signals, and the process of input spikes in neurons only involves simple accumulate (AC) operations on the membrane potential. Compared with traditional artificial neural
networks (ANNs), which require abundant MAC operations
among real-value signals, SNNs show excellent energy consumption advantages (Kim et al. 2020).
To date, SNNs have been successfully applied to a variety of areas in the field of neuromorphic computing, such as
visual image classification and tracking, robot decision control (Oikonomou, Kansizoglou, and Gasteratos 2023), etc.
In these applications, SNNs achieve performance comparable to conventional ANNs with low power consumption
and high biological rationality. Following these successes, it
is desirable to extend SNNs to 3D point cloud processing
for advanced 3D vision tasks with embedded and energysaving requirements. To achieve the extension, two key issues deserve much attention: (1) The generation of spike signals should be closely related to the geometry of 3D point
clouds. (2) Spike sequences in high-dimensional hidden space should have the ability to represent different geometric
contexts of 3D points.
In this paper, we focus on developing SNNs for energyefficient 3D point cloud classification. To address the first
issue, we exploit the spatial localization property that kernel
point convolutions (Thomas et al. 2019) maintain and the
spiking processing mechanism of Integrate-Fire (IF) neurons (Bulsara et al. 1996). We define spatial-aware kernel point
spiking neurons to relate spiking generation to point position in 3D space. The neurons take spike sequences from
local structures as inputs and replace abundant MAC operations in kernel point convolutions (KPConv) with simple
kernel weight AC operations for membrane potential charging. Driven by the sparse nature of spiking inputs and the AC
replacement, the proposed neurons present impressive power efficiency compared to conventional KPConv (Thomas
et al. 2019) and are promising for the implementation in
neuromorphic architectures. For the second issue, we design 3D spiking residual blocks by integrating our kernel

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have revolutionized neural
learning and are making remarkable strides in image analysis and robot control tasks with ultra-low power consumption
advantages. Inspired by this success, we investigate the application of spiking neural networks to 3D point cloud processing. We present a point-to-spike residual learning network for
point cloud classification, which operates on points with binary spikes rather than floating-point numbers. Specifically, we
first design a spatial-aware kernel point spiking neuron to relate spiking generation to point position in 3D space. On this
basis, we then design a 3D spiking residual block for effective
feature learning based on spike sequences. By stacking the
3D spiking residual blocks, we build the point-to-spike residual classification network, which achieves low computation
cost and low accuracy loss on two benchmark datasets, ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN. Moreover, the classifier strikes
a good balance between classification accuracy and biological characteristics, allowing us to explore the deployment of
3D processing to neuromorphic chips for developing energyefficient 3D robotic perception systems.

Introduction
3D point clouds have become a popular representation form of physical entities in the last few years, and have a
wide range of applications in computer vision and robotics. Among various 3D point cloud processing researches,
the classification of 3D point clouds is of great importance.
Over the past decade, 3D point cloud classification methods based on deep learning have demonstrated high and relatively stable classification accuracy on benchmark datasets (Thomas et al. 2019; Choy, Gwak, and Savarese 2019).
However, these methods require a large number of multiplyaccumulate (MAC) operations, resulting in high computational cost and high energy consumption, which also limits
the usage of these methods in embedded systems of robots.
Spiking neural networks, as the third generation of neural
networks, simulate the information encoding and transmitting of biological neurons, which have achieved extremely high computing efficiency on neuromorphic hardwares,
e.g., Loihi (Davies et al. 2018). Therefore, it would be natural to consider designing SNNs for 3D point cloud processCopyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6092

