The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Density Matters: Improved Core-Set for Active Domain Adaptive Segmentation
Shizhan Liu1 * , Zhengkai Jiang2 * , Yuxi Li2 * , Jinlong Peng2 , Yabiao Wang2† , Weiyao Lin1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
shanluzuode@sjtu.edu.cn, zhengkjiang@tencent.com, cookieyxli@gmail.com,
jeromepeng@tencent.com, caseywang@tencent.com, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Active domain adaptation has emerged as a solution to balance the expensive annotation cost and the performance of
trained models in semantic segmentation. However, existing
works usually ignore the correlation between selected samples and its local context in feature space, which leads to inferior usage of annotation budgets. In this work, we revisit the
theoretical bound of the classical Core-set method and identify that the performance is closely related to the local sample distribution around selected samples. To estimate the density of local samples efficiently, we introduce a local proxy
estimator with Dynamic Masked Convolution and develop a
Density-aware Greedy algorithm to optimize the bound. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach. Moreover, with very few labels, our scheme achieves
comparable performance to the fully supervised counterpart.

: Avg Radial Distance

: Max Radial Distance

: Training Sample

: Selected Sample

Classical
Core-set Loss
Bound

Our Core-set
Loss Bound

Figure 1: Compared with the classical Core-set loss
bound (Sener and Savarese 2017), we find the ‘Average Radial Distance’ in feature space is a tighter bound, which is
highly correlated to local sample distribution.

et al. 2022) as metrics to select samples for annotation. They
select regions with either higher uncertainty or larger differences from the source domain. However, these methods
usually ignore the fact that selected samples can be highly
correlated with their local context (e.g. local sample density
and adjacent structures) in the feature space, which leads to
inevitable redundancy within annotation budget.
One potential solution to the aforementioned problem is
the Core-set approach, which uses a small set to approximate a large set (Sener and Savarese 2017; Kim and Shin
2022). However, applying the Core-set approach to semantic segmentation with large amount of pixel-level candidates
confronts two issues. Firstly, the classical solution (Wolf
2011) to Core-set problems is essentially minimizing the radius required to cover extreme points in neighborhood (as
shown in Fig. 1). When the number of candidate points becomes larger, extreme points can not effectively reflect the
local properties in feature space. Secondly, in the classical
greedy solution of Core-set, the discrepancy between data
points is evaluated equally, regardless of the local context of
each candidate. In contrast, the representative ability of samples may vary across different positions in the feature space,
hence the discrepancy measurement should also depend on
different data points.
To address these challenges, we first revisit the theoretical bound of classical Core-set loss (Sener and Savarese
2017) and derive a new upper bound from the perspective
of expectation. This new bound indicates the Core-set per-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation has become increasingly crucial in
various applications, such as autonomous driving (Teichmann et al. 2018), virtual try-on (Ayush et al. 2019), and
smart healthcare (Shi et al. 2020). In recent years, remarkable progress has been made in this field (Chen et al. 2017;
He et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Cheng, Schwing, and
Kirillov 2021). However, annotating each pixel in an image is extremely costly. Thus, domain adaptation techniques
have been introduced to overcome the high cost of annotation (Chang et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2021). Unfortunately, the performance of unsupervised domain adaptation methods still lags far behind that
of fully supervised training on the target domain. Therefore,
active domain adaptation has emerged as a solution to balance the expensive annotation cost and the performance of
the trained segmentation model, which involves labeling a
few additional samples from the target domain to help transfer knowledge from the source domain to the target domain.
Existing active domain adaptation methods for semantic segmentation primarily rely on either modeling uncertainty (Prabhu et al. 2021; Shin et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2022a)
or data diversity (Ning et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2022a; Wu
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13999

