The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decouple Content and Motion for Conditional Image-to-Video Generation
Cuifeng Shen1 , Yulu Gan1 , Chen Chen2∗ , Xiongwei Zhu3 , Lele Cheng3 , Tingting Gao3 , Jinzhi
Wang1 *
1

Peking University
Chinese Academy of Science
3
Kuaishou Technology
{cuifeng.shen,ganyulu}@stu.pku.edu.cn, chen.chen@ia.ac.cn, {zhuxiongwei, lisize}@kuaishou.com, jinzhiw@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The goal of conditional image-to-video (cI2V) generation is
to create a believable new video by beginning with the condition, i.e., one image and text. The previous cI2V generation
methods conventionally perform in RGB pixel space, with
limitations in modeling motion consistency and visual continuity. Additionally, the efficiency of generating videos in
pixel space is quite low. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach to address these challenges by disentangling the target RGB pixels into two distinct components: spatial content
and temporal motions. Specifically, we predict temporal motions which include motion vector and residual based on a
3D-UNet diffusion model. By explicitly modeling temporal
motions and warping them to the starting image, we improve
the temporal consistency of generated videos. This results in a
reduction of spatial redundancy, emphasizing temporal details.
Our proposed method achieves performance improvements by
disentangling content and motion, all without introducing new
structural complexities to the model. Extensive experiments
on various datasets confirm our approach’s superior performance over the majority of state-of-the-art methods in both
effectiveness and efficiency.

Figure 1: Motivations and our ideas. Conventional methods
(see in (b)), involve extending the RGB space with time
sequences, resulting in limited memory efficiency and temporal coherence. Latent Diffusion Models employ a variational autoencoder for compression (depicted in (a)), enhancing efficiency but potentially reducing spatial quality
and poor temporal coherence because temporal consistency
hasn’t been directly modeled. Our approach (refer to (c))
decouples the content and motion, capitalizing on existing
temporal coherence in compressed video data, resulting in a
memory-efficient and temporally consistent video generation
approach.

Introduction
Deep generative models have garnered wide attention, driven
by the emergence of approaches like Generative Adversarial
Models (Goodfellow et al. 2020) and Diffusion Models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020). These models have recently demonstrated remarkable success in tasks such as image generation.
In the field of the conditional Image-to-Video (cI2V), most
works (Ramesh et al. 2021; He et al. 2022a; Yu et al. 2022;
Mei and Patel 2022; Voleti, Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Pal
2022; Blattmann et al. 2023) have showcased the potential
and versatility of these cutting-edge techniques.
A line of works (Yu et al. 2022; Mei and Patel 2022; Voleti,
Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Pal 2022) in cI2V aims to directly
extend images into videos by generating a series of image
frames in RGB space (see in Fig 1(b)). However, they encounter the following challenges: (1) Information redundancy
of videos makes it difficult for a model to focus on the video’s
important temporal information. The slight variations present

in each frame, combined with inherent redundancies within
the video space, lead to a neglect of temporal details for the
model when attempting to construct the video. This neglect
hinders the ability of the model to focus on sequential video
frames effectively. Consequently, the process of pixel-based
generation can cause the model to disproportionately highlight the spatial content, thereby complicating the modeling
of temporal motions. Achieving accurate and efficient generation of temporal information is notably demanding. (2)
Time consuming. Generating the whole video for each frame
in pixel space consumes significant resources, i.e., for a 16frame 128x128x3 video, the target vector dimension would
be 16x128x128x3.
To address the high computational request of directly ex-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4757

