The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Communication-Efficient Collaborative Regret Minimization
in Multi-Armed Bandits
Nikolai Karpov, Qin Zhang
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
nkarpov@iu.edu, qzhangcs@indiana.edu

T -time single-agent algorithm A on input I is defined to be


X
(µ? − µπt ) ,
(1)
E[Reg(A(I, T ))] = E 

Abstract
In this paper, we study the collaborative learning model,
which concerns the tradeoff between parallelism and communication overhead in multi-agent multi-armed bandits. For
regret minimization in multi-armed bandits, we present the
first set of tradeoffs between the number of rounds of communication among the agents and the regret of the collaborative
learning process.

t∈[T ]
1

where µ? , max {µi }. Without loss of generality, we asi∈[N ]

sume that the best arm is unique.
The Collaborative Learning Model. The CL model was
formalized in Tao, Zhang, and Zhou (2019). In this model,
we have K agents and a set of N arms I = {1, 2, . . . .N },
where arm i has mean µi . Again let µ? , maxi∈[N ] {µi }.
The learning proceeds in rounds. Within each round, at each
(k)
time step t, each agent k (k ∈ [K]) pulls arm πt based on
its previous pull outcomes and messages received from other
(k)
agents; the arms {πt }k∈[K] can be the same or different
for different agents. At the end of each round, the K agents
communicate with each other to exchange newly observed
information and determine the number of time steps for the
next round. The number of time steps for the first round is
fixed at the beginning. See Figure 1 for an illustration of the
CL model.
It is worth mentioning that the lengths of rounds are not
required to be determined beforehand in the CL model.
Though for most CL algorithms in the literature (including
the one proposed in this paper), the round lengths are indeed
fixed at the beginning of the algorithms. This relaxation will
only make the lower bound proof harder/stronger.
The expected regret of a T -time K-agent collaborative algorithm AK for MAB on input I is defined to be



X X 
µ? − µπ(k)  .
E [Reg(AK (I, T ))] = E 

Introduction
One of the biggest challenges with machine learning is scalability. In recent years, a series of papers (Tao, Zhang, and
Zhou 2019; Karpov, Zhang, and Zhou 2020; Wang et al.
2020b; Karpov and Zhang 2022b,a) studied bandit problems
in the collaborative learning (CL) model, where multiple
agents interact with the environment to learn simultaneously
and cooperatively. One of the most expensive resources in
the CL model is communication, which consists of the number of communication steps (round complexity) and the total bits of messages exchanged between agents (bit complexity). Communication directly contributes to the learning time due to network bandwidth constraints and latency,
and it can also lead to significant energy consumption, especially for deep-sea or outer-space exploration tasks. Moreover, when messages are sent using mobile devices, communication can result in significant data usage. In this paper, we focus on the round complexity in the CL model and
consider a basic problem in the bandit theory named regret
minimization in multi-armed bandits (MAB for short). We
try to investigate the round-regret tradeoffs for MAB in the
CL model.
In the rest of this section, we will first introduce the CL
model and the MAB problem. We then describe our results
and place them within the context of the literature.

t

t∈[T ] k∈[K]

(2)

Regret Minimization in MAB. In the single-agent learning model, we have one agent and a set of arms I =
{1, 2, . . . , N }; the arm i is associated with a distribution Di
with support [0, 1] and (unknown) mean µi . At each time
step t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the agent pulls arm πt and receives a
reward rt from distribution Dπt . The expected regret of a

The Batched Learning Model. The CL model is closely
related to the batched learning model, which has recently received considerable attention in bandit theory (Perchet et al.
2015; Jun et al. 2016; Agarwal et al. 2017; Jin et al. 2019;
Gao et al. 2019; Esfandiari et al. 2019; Bai et al. 2019; Karpov and Zhang 2020; Jin et al. 2021).

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13076

We use [n] to denote {1, 2, . . . , n}.

