The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Domain Recommendation to Attract Users via Domain Preference Modeling
Hyunjun Ju1 , SeongKu Kang1, 2 , Dongha Lee3 , Junyoung Hwang1 , Sanghwan Jang1 , Hwanjo Yu1 *
1

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Republic of Korea
2
University of Illinois at Urban-Champaign (UIUC), United States
3
Yonsei University, Republic of Korea
{hyunjunju, jyhwang, s.jang, hwanjoyu}@postech.ac.kr, seongku@illinois.edu, donalee@yonsei.ac.kr
Domain Set

Domain Set

Abstract
Recently, web platforms are operating various service domains simultaneously. Targeting a platform that operates
multiple service domains, we introduce a new task, MultiDomain Recommendation to Attract Users (MDRAU), which
recommends items from multiple “unseen” domains with
which each user has not interacted yet, by using knowledge
from the user’s “seen” domains. In this paper, we point out
two challenges of MDRAU task. First, there are numerous
possible combinations of mappings from seen to unseen domains because users have usually interacted with a different
subset of service domains. Second, a user might have different preference for each of the target unseen domains, which
requires recommendations to reflect users’ preference on domains as well as items. To tackle these challenges, we propose DRIP framework that models users’ preference at two
levels (i.e., domain and item) and learns various seen-unseen
domain mappings in a unified way with masked domain modeling. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of DRIP in MDRAU task and its ability to capture users’
domain-level preferences.

Users

Sources (Seen)

Users

Sources (Seen)

Targets (Unseen)

Targets (Unseen)

Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of MDRAU task. A platform operates five different service domains, and each user
partially interacts with a subset of the entire service domains. MDRAU aims to provide recommendations from
each user’s unseen domains to attract users.

Most CDR studies (Man et al. 2017; Kang et al. 2019;
Zhu et al. 2022, 2021b; Fu et al. 2019) have focused on
transferring user preference information from a source domain to a target domain. Given a recommender system employed for each domain, they learn a mapping function that
Introduction
acts as a bridge between the representation spaces of the
two domains. To provide unseen domain recommendations,
Nowadays, web platforms are operating various service do을 나눌 때
they transfer the user embedding from the source domain
mains simultaneously (e.g., music Limitation
streaming,
game
store,
- Source가
여러 개
여서 나타날
수 있는 문제점
- Target이
여러to
개 여서
나타날 수 있는 문제점
to the target domain using the mapping function and generand eBook subscription). They allow
users
experience
- Source & Targets이 모두 여러 개여서 나타날 수 있는 문제점
ate recommendations based on the transferred user embeddiverse domains within a single platform
and
promote
the
3가지 측면으로 정리?
ding. More recently, (Cao et al. 2022b, 2023, 2022a) have
mutual growth of all service domains through the Recomachieved improved recommendation accuracy by modeling
mender System (RS). For such multi-domain platforms, recdomain-specific and domain-shared information separately,
ommending items from unseen domains with which each
and selectively transferring the domain-shared information.
user has not interacted yet plays an essential role in the platDespite their effectiveness, the existing studies have targeted
form’s growth, user satisfaction, and business success. That
the case of a single seen-unseen domain pair (i.e., one-tois, users typically utilize a few domains rather than all doone), and the case of multiple seen-unseen domains (i.e.,
mains, and accurate recommendations that align with user
many-to-many) has not been studied well. Especially, they
preference can attract users into unexplored domains. To this
do not consider making unified recommendations that inend, Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR), which recomclude items from multiple domains.
mends items from unseen (target) domains based on user
In practical scenarios, it is becoming increasingly cominteraction history in seen (source) domains, has gained sigmon for platforms to offer services in more than two donificant research attention.1
mains. This creates a need to promote user engagement
* Corresponding Author
across multiple unseen domains by attracting users with acCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
curate personalized recommendations. We refer to this probIntelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

In this paper, the terms “seen” and “unseen” are defined from
the perspective of each user; as each user interacts with a different
subset of service domains, the seen and unseen domain sets vary for

each user. A user can be considered a cold-start user in the user’s
unseen service domain (Man et al. 2017; Kang et al. 2019).

8582

