The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Continual Vision-Language Retrieval via Dynamic Knowledge Rectification
Zhenyu Cui1 , Yuxin Peng1 * , Xun Wang2 , Manyu Zhu2 , Jiahuan Zhou1
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
ByteDance Inc
cuizhenyu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {pengyuxin, jiahuanzhou}@pku.edu.cn, {wangxun.2, zhumanyu}@bytedance.com

Data Stream

Abstract
The recent large-scale pre-trained models like CLIP have
aroused great concern in vision-language tasks. However,
when required to match image-text data collected in a streaming manner, namely Continual Vision-Language Retrieval
(CVRL), their performances are still limited due to the catastrophic forgetting of the learned old knowledge. To handle this issue, advanced methods are proposed to distil the
affinity knowledge between images and texts from the old
model to the new one for anti-forgetting. Unfortunately, existing approaches neglect the impact of incorrect affinity,
which prevents the balance between the anti-forgetting of
old knowledge and the acquisition of new knowledge. Therefore, we propose a novel framework called Dynamic Knowledge Rectification (DKR) that simultaneously achieves incorrect knowledge filtering and rectification. Specifically, we
first filter the incorrect affinity knowledge calculated by the
old model on the new data. Then, a knowledge rectification
method is designed to rectify the incorrect affinities while
preserving the correct ones. In particular, for the new data
that can only be correctly retrieved by the new model, we
rectify them with the corresponding new affinity to protect
them from negative transfer. Additionally, for those that can
not be retrieved by either the old or the new model, we introduce paired ground-truth labels to promote the acquisition of
both old and new knowledge. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
DKR and its superiority against state-of-the-art methods.

Image

A woman holding
... with one candle
near a man with
... in his lap.
Text Description

lap

candle

lap ＋ man

Unseen
Class

Unseen
Combination
Unseen
Distribution

Figure 1: Challenges in CVLR. In addition to the unseen
class label concerned by CIL, CVLR involves the unseen
class combination and the unseen class distribution.

datasets come one by one, the above strategies always fail to
handle all the datasets well. Their performance can be significantly degraded on the learned old datasets due to the wellknown catastrophic forgetting challenge (De Lange et al.
2021). Therefore, in this paper, we focus on adapting CLIP
to new datasets while maintaining its performance on old
datasets, known as the task of Continual Vision-Language
Retrieval (CVLR).
So far, most continual learning works focus on how to
achieve the anti-forgetting of class information of the images in the learned old datasets (Masana et al. 2022) which
is also known as class incremental learning (CIL). However,
the existing CIL methods can not be directly used to handle
the CVLR task. As shown in Fig. 1, on the one hand, images
and text descriptions in the CVLR task do not have the necessary category label information for CIL, which prevents
correctly matching images with corresponding descriptions.
On the other hand, CVLR exhibits a more complicated scenario where the text description usually meets the unseen
class label, the unseen class combination, and the unseen
class distribution. These challenges leave the CVLR task
still an unsolved problem.
To tackle the above challenges, knowledge distillation has
become an effective solution to CVLR task (Wang, Herranz,
and van de Weijer 2021; Srinivasan et al. 2022; Dong et al.
2021; Ni et al. 2023), which involves transferring old knowledge learned by the old model to the new model. Recent
works (Dong et al. 2021; Ni et al. 2023) regarded the affinity
relationship between image-text pairs calculated by the old
model as old knowledge and developed knowledge distillation to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting problem. How-

Introduction
In recent years, the pre-trained CLIP model (Radford et al.
2021) has become a milestone for vision-language retrieval,
where an image is retrieved via a text description of its
contents or vice versa. Owing to the large-scale pre-trained
dataset, CLIP has demonstrated its promising ability to
tackle new datasets in a zero-shot manner but still suffers
from inadequate performance (Gu et al. 2021; Xu et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2023). Hence, various works adopt finetuning and adapter strategies to improve the performance
of the pre-trained CLIP model on new datasets (Gao et al.
2023a; Luo et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022). However, when
facing a practical and crucial scenario where a series of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11704

