The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Depression Detection via Capsule Networks with Contrastive Learning
Han Liu1 , Changya Li1 , Xiaotong Zhang1 * , Feng Zhang2 , Wei Wang3 ,
Fenglong Ma4 , Hongyang Chen5 , Hong Yu1 , Xianchao Zhang1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, China
4
The Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
5
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, lichangya.dut@gmail.com, zxt.dut@hotmail.com, zfeng.maria@gmail.com,
ehomewang@ieee.org, fenglong@psu.edu, dr.h.chen@ieee.org, {hongyu, xczhang}@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

depression tendencies but also provide doctors with valuable
references to aid in their assessment and treatment.
Several methods (Yates, Cohan, and Goharian 2017;
Wolohan et al. 2018) attempt to predict whether a user suffers from depression based on online posts. They utilize convolutional neural networks or the n-gram and LIWC features
to extract post representations, and use a neural network or
traditional classifier to fulfill the prediction. Although they
can obtain promising results, these black-box models face
a significant challenge in terms of interpretability. Specifically, by using these models, people cannot gain a deeper
understanding about how they accurately detect depression
signs from online posts. In clinical applications and medical
decision-making, the lack of interpretability may hinder the
model credibility and reliability seriously.
Recently, Nguyen et al. (2022) propose an effective depression detection method which contains two components:
a questionnaire model used to detect the presence of symptoms from PHQ9 (Kroenke, Spitzer, and Williams 2001),
and a depression model used to predict the label. This work
has shown impressive performance and can generalize to
similar datasets well. However, it still exists the following
issues. First, it employs a two-stage training strategy, which
inevitably causes the effectiveness of the upstream questionnaire model directly affects the performance of the downstream depression model. Second, it relies heavily on large
amounts of human-labeled data to train the questionnaire
model, which is labor-intensive and time-consuming.
In this paper, we propose a novel capsule network integrated with contrastive learning for depression detection
(DeCapsNet). As illustrated in Figure 1, DeCapsNet first
collects the representative posts for each user by leveraging
the elaborately designed depression symptom descriptions
according to the PHQ9, which is a questionnaire widely
used by clinicians in the depression screening process. Then
DeCapsNet extracts symptom capsules from representative
posts with the attention mechanism, and integrates these
symptom capsules into depression capsules with dynamic
routing for the subsequent depression detection. In addition,
by integrating with contrastive learning, DeCapsNet can obtain more class-indicative embeddings, thus boosting the
performance greatly. The overall framework of DeCapsNet
is in an explicit hierarchical reasoning manner, and employs

Depression detection is a challenging and crucial task in psychological illness diagnosis. Utilizing online user posts to
predict whether a user suffers from depression seems an effective and promising direction. However, existing methods
suffer from either poor interpretability brought by the blackbox models or underwhelming performance caused by the
completely separate two-stage model structure. To alleviate
these limitations, we propose a novel capsule network integrated with contrastive learning for depression detection
(DeCapsNet). The highlights of DeCapsNet can be summarized as follows. First, it extracts symptom capsules from user
posts by leveraging meticulously designed symptom descriptions, and then distills them into class-indicative depression
capsules. The overall workflow is in an explicit hierarchical
reasoning manner and can be well interpreted by the Patient
Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ9), which is one of the most
widely adopted questionnaires for depression diagnosis. Second, it integrates with contrastive learning, which can facilitate the embeddings from the same class to be pulled closer,
while simultaneously pushing the embeddings from different
classes apart. In addition, by adopting the end-to-end training strategy, it does not necessitate additional data annotation, and mitigates the potential adverse effects from the upstream task to the downstream task. Extensive experiments on
three widely-used datasets show that in both within-dataset
and cross-dataset scenarios our proposed method outperforms
other strong baselines significantly.

Introduction
Depression is a serious health condition which can have
severe consequences (Hu et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022;
Zhang, Yang, and Ananiadou 2023), including emotional
distress, social withdrawal, and even suicide. Despite the
widespread awareness of its gravity, there are still many individuals with depression who have not been identified. As
people usually tend to express their emotions on social media, utilizing user online posts to identify early depression is
a promising research direction. This type of automated diagnosis can not only assist patients in detecting early signs of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22231

