The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Not to Regret
David Sychrovský1,2 , Michal Šustr2,5 , Elnaz Davoodi3 ,
Michael Bowling4 , Marc Lanctot3 , Martin Schmid1,5
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, Charles University
Artificial Intelligence Center, Czech Technical University
3
Google DeepMind
4
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
5
EquiLibre Technologies
sychrovsky@kam.mff.cuni.cz, michal.sustr@aic.fel.cvut.cz, schmid@equilibretechnologies.com
2

Abstract
The literature on game-theoretic equilibrium finding predominantly focuses on single games or their repeated play. Nevertheless, numerous real-world scenarios feature playing a game
sampled from a distribution of similar, but not identical games,
such as playing poker with different public cards or trading
correlated assets on the stock market. As these similar games
feature similar equilibra, we investigate a way to accelerate
equilibrium finding on such a distribution. We present a novel
“learning not to regret” framework, enabling us to meta-learn
a regret minimizer tailored to a specific distribution. Our key
contribution, Neural Predictive Regret Matching, is uniquely
meta-learned to converge rapidly for the chosen distribution
of games, while having regret minimization guarantees on any
game. We validated our algorithms’ faster convergence on a
distribution of river poker games. Our experiments show that
the meta-learned algorithms outpace their non-meta-learned
counterparts, achieving more than tenfold improvements.

Introduction
Regret minimization, a fundamental concept in online convex optimization and game theory, plays an important role
in decision-making algorithms (Nisan et al. 2007). In games,
a common regret minimization framework is to cast each
player as an independent online learner. This learner interacts repeatedly with the game, which is represented by a
black-box environment and encompasses the strategies of all
other players or the game’s inherent randomness. When all
the learners employ a regret minimizer, their average strategy converges to a coarse correlated equilibrium (Hannan
1957; Hart and Mas-Colell 2000). Furthermore, in two-player
zero-sum games, the average strategy converges to a Nash
equilibrium (Nisan et al. 2007). Regret minimization has
become the key building block of many algorithms for finding Nash equilibria in imperfect-information games (Bowling
et al. 2015; Moravcik et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2018;
Brown et al. 2020; Brown and Sandholm 2019b; Schmid et al.
2021).
While these algorithms made progress in single game playing, in many real-world scenarios, players engage in more
than just one isolated game. For instance, they might play
poker with various public cards, solve dynamical routing
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15202

problems, or trade correlated assets on the stock market.
These games, while similar, are not identical and can be
thought of as being drawn from a distribution. Despite its
relevance, this setting has been largely unexplored, with a
few recent exceptions such as (Harris et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022).
In this work, we shift focus to this distributional setting.
The black-box environment which the learners interact with
corresponds to a game sampled from a distribution. This perspective aligns with the traditional regret minimization framework, but with an added twist: the game itself is sampled.
Our goal is to reduce the expected number of interactions
needed to closely approximate an equilibrium of the sampled
game. This is crucial both for online gameplay and offline
equilibrium learning, as fewer steps directly translate to a
faster algorithm.
In either the single-game or distributional settings, the
worst-case convergence of regret minimizers against a strict
adversary cannot occur at a rate faster than O(T −1/2 ) (Nisan
et al. 2007). However in practice, algorithms often converge
much faster than the worst-case bound suggests. Consider
CFR+ (Tammelin 2014), which empirically converges at the
rate of O(T −1 ) in poker games1 despite having the same
O(T −1/2 ) worst case guarantees (Burch 2018). Another example of variations in practical performance is discounted
CFR with three parameters (DCF Rα,β,γ ), where the authors
reported that they “found the optimal choice of α, β and γ
varied depending on the specific game” (Brown and Sandholm 2019a).
These empirical observations are in line with no-free
lunch theorems for optimization, which state that no learning algorithm can dominate across all domains (Wolpert and
Macready 1997). Thus to improve performance on a domain,
it is necessary to use a specialized algorithm, at the expense
of deteriorating the performance outside of this domain.
A popular approach to find such algorithms is the
meta-learning paradigm, namely a variant of “learning to
1
The strong empirical performance of the algorithm was one
of the key reasons behind essentially solving Limit Texas Holdem
poker, one of the largest imperfect information games to be solved to
this day (Bowling et al. 2015). CFR+ required only 1, 579 iterations
to produce the final strategy, far less than what the worst-case bound
suggests.

