The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FoSp: Focus and Separation Network for Early Smoke Segmentation
Lujian Yao, Haitao Zhao* , Jingchao Peng, Zhongze Wang, Kaijie Zhao
East China University of Science and Technology
{lujianyao, zzwang, kjzhao}@mail.ecust.edu.cn, haitaozhao@ecust.edu.cn, starry-sky@outlook.com

Abstract

(e)

Early smoke segmentation (ESS) enables the accurate identification of smoke sources, facilitating the prompt extinguishing of fires and preventing large-scale gas leaks. But
ESS poses greater challenges than the conventional object
and regular smoke segmentation due to its small scale and
transparent appearance, which can result in high miss detection rate and low precision. To address these issues,
a Focus and Separation Network (FoSp) is proposed. We
first introduce a focus module employing bidirectional cascade which guides low-resolution and high-resolution features towards mid-resolution to locate and determine the
scope of smoke, reducing the miss detection rate. Next,
we propose a separation module that separates smoke images into a pure smoke foreground and a smoke-free background, enhancing the contrast between smoke and background fundamentally, and improving segmentation precision. Finally, a domain fusion module is developed to integrate the distinctive features of the two modules which can
balance recall and precision to achieve high Fβ . Furthermore,
to promote the development of ESS, we introduce a highquality real-world dataset called SmokeSeg, which contains
more small and transparent smoke images than the existing
datasets. Experimental results show that our model achieves
the best performance on three available smoke segmentation datasets: SYN70K (mIoU : 83.00%), SMOKE5K (Fβ :
81.6%) and SmokeSeg (Fβ : 72.05%). The code can be found
at https://github.com/LujianYao/FoSp.

✓

(d)

𝐹𝐹75𝛽
!

FoSp

70 Segformer
DeepLabV3+
70

(a) Smoke

clear gap

attention
Region
65 FoSp-s
(b) Atten-based (c) Sepa-based 65

ambiguous

narrow
ambiguous

60
60

PSPNet

OCRNet
OCRNet-s
DeepLabV3+-s
PSPNet-s

55
FLops
10
210
10 60
60 110
110 160Flops
55

(d) Thick vs BG (e) Trans vs BG (f) Sepa vs BG (g) Flops & Params

Figure 1: Motivation and Comparison. In this figure, ”Sepa”
means ”Separation” and ”BG” means ”Background”.

ESS is particularly challenging due to three main reasons:
① As a small non-rigid object, early smoke exhibits strong
variability, resulting in diverse patterns due to differences
in scenes, lighting conditions, and wind intensities. ② As a
transparent object, the low contrast will make it difficult to
distinguish between the smoke and the background. ③ Unlike other transparent object detection (e.g., glass segmentation (Mei et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022)), the transparency of
early smoke is variable. The conventional smoke image only
has a transparent part at the edge, but the early smoke also
has transparency in the main body.
The thick part of the smoke behaves like common objects,
with distinct edges and noticeable color. However, transparent smoke has low contrast with the background, making it
difficult to distinguish. From the perspective of pixel distribution, Fig. 1d illustrates a gap between the thick parts
of smoke and the background, making it relatively easy to
segment. Conversely, Fig. 1e shows that the distribution of
transparent smoke has a large ambiguous overlapping region
with the surrounding background. The larger the overlapping region is, the more difficult to distinguish them.
Previous regular smoke segmentation methods (Li et al.
2018; Yuan et al. 2019a,b, 2022) primarily emphasize larger
receptive fields to cope with the variability and blurred edges
of smoke. However, directly applying binary segmentation
can result in high miss detection (incomplete segmentation)
and low precision (rough-edge segmentation) as the early
smoke is small and transparent.

Introduction
In wildlife, smoke is an important indicator of fire. Early
smoke segmentation (ESS) enables rapid identification of
the location of the fire (Muhammad, Ahmad, and Baik 2018;
Robinson 1979), facilitating the timely extinguishing of the
flames by rescue personnel and preventing the occurrence
of large fires. In industrial production, ESS can also aid in
promptly detecting the location of gas leaks and prevent the
spread of toxic and harmful gases (Hsu et al. 2021).
Smoke segmentation is usually defined as a binary segmentation task (e.g., salient object detection (Borji et al.
2015; Qin et al. 2019), small object segmentation (Wang,
Zhou, and Wang 2019; Liu et al. 2021)), but the task of
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6621

