The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

M2SD:Multiple Mixing Self-Distillation for Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Jinhao Lin1, 2 , Ziheng Wu2 , Weifeng Lin1, 2 , Jun Huang2 , RongHua Luo1 *
1

South China University of Technology
2
Alibaba Group
csljh jasper@mail.scut.edu.cn, zhoulou.wzh@alibaba-inc.com, eelinweifeng@mail.scut.edu.cn,
huangjun.hj@alibaba-inc.com, rhluo@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot Class-incremental learning (FSCIL) is a challenging task in machine learning that aims to recognize new
classes from a limited number of instances while preserving
the ability to classify previously learned classes without retraining the entire model. This presents challenges in updating the model with new classes using limited training data,
particularly in balancing acquiring new knowledge while retaining the old. We propose a novel method named Multiple
Mxing Self-Distillation (M2SD) during the training phase to
address these issues. Specifically, we propose a dual-branch
structure that facilitates the expansion of the entire feature
space to accommodate new classes. Furthermore, we introduce a feature enhancement component that can pass additional enhanced information back to the base network by
self-distillation, resulting in improved classification performance upon adding new classes. After training, we discard
both structures, leaving only the primary network to classify
new class instances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach achieves superior performance over previous
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: This is a schematic diagram of the boosting of our
method in FSCIL. Our method can significantly reduce the
intra-class distance, boost the inter-class distance, and have
better spacing for the added classes. It is reflected in the accuracy results and the visual distribution of the final features,
detailed analysis in Table 1 and Figure 4.

Introduction
Deep learning has had a significant impact on computer
vision, particularly in image classification (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2017; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Ren et al. 2015). Currently, most computer vision scenarios,
including classification, rely on data-driven discriminative
tasks, requiring obtaining the specific task data distribution
and designing targeted loss functions before model training to achieve better results. Even though numerous publicly
available datasets have produced excellent results in various
scenarios, the classification task suffers from a significant
limitation: it often performs poorly when new classes are
added, particularly when the amount of data in these new
classes is insufficient and uneven (Ren et al. 2019; Zhu et al.
2021b).
In many real-world scenarios, the situation may worsen
when new classes have only a few instances. To address
this challenge, researchers have introduced Few-shot Learning(FSL)(Chen et al. 2019) to Class Incremental Learn-

ing(CIL)(Wu et al. 2019) and proposed Few-shot Class Incremental Learning (FSCIL)(Ayub and Wagner 2020). One
of the significant challenges FSCIL faces is catastrophic forgetting. Introducing new classes to predefined models for
a classification task by fine-tuning can potentially lead to
an overemphasis on the new classes, possibly resulting in a
decline in performance for the existing classes(Kirkpatrick
et al. 2017).
To address this problem, various methods(Shi et al. 2021)
incorporate more robust regularization with the objective
function during incremental sessions, resulting in a minor
change in the parameters of the new model relative to the
original one. Unlike the regularization methods, the idea behind FACT(Zhou et al. 2022) is to prepare for the arrival of
new data in advance, which is akin to forward compatibility
in software updates. It is more concerned with obtaining a
feature space in the base session of FSCIL that is suitable
for subsequent incremental learning sessions.
We are inspired by the idea of FACT and propose a

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3422

