The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MolTailor: Tailoring Chemical Molecular Representation to Specific Tasks via
Text Prompts
Haoqiang Guo, Sendong Zhao* , Haochun Wang, Yanrui Du, Bing Qin
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{hqguo, sdzhao, hchwang, yrdu, bqing}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Sulfonamide group

Sulfon…

Deep learning is now widely used in drug discovery, providing significant acceleration and cost reduction. As the most
fundamental building block, molecular representation is essential for predicting molecular properties to enable various
downstream applications. Most existing methods attempt to
incorporate more information to learn better representations.
However, not all features are equally important for a specific
task. Ignoring this would potentially compromise the training
efficiency and predictive accuracy. To address this issue, we
propose a novel approach, which treats language models as an
agent and molecular pretraining models as a knowledge base.
The agent accentuates task-relevant features in the molecular
representation by understanding the natural language description of the task, just as a tailor customizes clothes for clients.
Thus, we call this approach MolTailor. Evaluations demonstrate MolTailor’s superior performance over baselines, validating the efficacy of enhancing relevance for molecular
representation learning. This illustrates the potential of language model guided optimization to better exploit and unleash the capabilities of existing powerful molecular representation methods. Our code and appendix are available at
https://github.com/SCIR-HI/MolTailor.

Carboxylic acid group

Carbo…

Trifluoromethyl group

Triflu…

Phenyl group

Phen…

Ether group

Ether

……

……

Molecular
Pretraining
Model
Encode

General
Molecular Representation

Tailor
Lipo

Task-Specific
Molecular Representation

Figure 1: Most existing molecular pretraining models (e.g.
Grover, MolCLR) attempt to encode as much molecular information as possible (e.g. various functional groups and
molecular weight) into a vector to obtain general molecular representation. However, for specific downstream tasks
(e.g. Lipo, predicting lipophilicity of compounds), features
are not equally important (e.g. Sulfonamide and Carboxylic
acid groups significantly increase the hydrophilicity, being
more critical than the remaining groups). By understanding
task descriptions, MolTailor adjusts the weights of different
features in the representation to obtain task-specific molecular representation.

Introduction
In recent years, AI technology has been widely applied to
various stages of drug design, such as compound synthesis
and screening, etc. (Mamoshina et al. 2016). This has greatly
improved the efficiency and reduced the cost of drug development. Molecular representation learning serves as the cornerstone for AI techniques in drug design, empowering a
wide range of downstream tasks such as molecular property
prediction and drug-drug interaction judgment (Xia et al.
2023). Molecular representations are essentially vector embeddings for molecules, analogous to word embeddings in
NLP. The idea of encoding molecules as mathematical vectors dates back to the 1940s (Wiener 1947).
The development of molecular representation learning
can be roughly divided into four phases. In the first phase,
molecular representations were constructed through expert
knowledge, which can be categorized into two types: descriptors (Wiener 1947) and fingerprints (Rogers and Hahn

2010). Descriptors focus on the inherent chemical characteristics of molecules, while fingerprints contain structural
information. In the second phase, inspired by deep learning,
some works (Gilmer et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019; Song et al.
2020) started to learn molecular representations from labeled data using supervised learning. However, the scarcity
of labeled data, due to the expensive experimental cost and
time required, limits further improvements to model performance and generalization.
The success of pretrained language models in NLP (Devlin et al. 2018) has demonstrated the potential of selfsupervised learning. Building upon this, in the third phase,
some works pretrained sequence-based models to learn
molecular representation by mimicking successful NLP pretrained language models. (Chithrananda, Grand, and Ramsundar 2020; Kim et al. 2021; Ross et al. 2022). Concurrently, others pretrained graph-based models (Hu et al. 2019;
You et al. 2020). More recently, in the fourth phase, researchers are no longer limited to pretraining solely on the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18144

