The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Text-Based Occluded Person Re-identification via Multi-Granularity Contrastive
Consistency Learning
Xinyi Wu1 , Wentao Ma2 * , Dan Guo3 , Tongqing Zhou1 * , Shan Zhao3 , Zhiping Cai1 *
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
School of Information and Artificial Intelligence, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei, China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, HeFei University of Technology, Hefei, China
{wuxinyi17, zhoutongqing, zpcai}@nudt.edu.cn, wtma@ahau.edu.cn, {guodan, zhaoshan}@hfut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

trajectory

Text-based Person Re-identification (T-ReID), which aims
at retrieving a specific pedestrian image from a collection
of images via text-based information, has received significant attention. However, previous research has overlooked
a challenging yet practical form of T-ReID: dealing with
image galleries mixed with occluded and inconsistent personal visuals, instead of ideal visuals with a full-body and
clear view. Its major challenges lay in the insufficiency of
benchmark datasets and the enlarged semantic gap incurred
by arbitrary occlusions and modality gap between text description and visual representation of the target person. To
alleviate these issues, we first design an Occlusion Generator (OGor) for the automatic generation of artificial occluded images from generic surveillance images. Then, a
fine-granularity token selection mechanism is proposed to
minimize the negative impact of occlusion for robust feature learning, and a novel multi-granularity contrastive consistency alignment framework is designed to leverage intra/inter-granularity of visual-text representations for semantic
alignment of occluded visuals and query texts. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method exhibits superior performance. We believe this work could inspire the community
to investigate more dedicated designs for implementing TReID in real-world scenarios. The source code is available
at https://github.com/littlexinyi/MGCC.

(a) Traditional Text-based
person ReID: Only partial
visuals be identified

Query
‘man in a black
hat and a black
backpack.
He Retrieval
has blue jeans
and
white
plimsolls.’

One Image Gallery of
Pedestrian Tracks
(b) Text-based occluded
person ReID: Comprehensive
visual identification

Figure 1: Illustration of person ReID: (a) Text-based person
ReID and (b) Text-based occluded person ReID.

checking, a novel and feasible paradigm for person ReID,
text-based person ReID (T-ReID) (Li et al. 2017; Zhu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2020b; Ma et al. 2023), has been proposed
recently. As shown in Figure 1(a), the cross-modal correlations are established between verbal descriptions and widely
monitored images, to remedy the absence of visual cues in
real-world scenarios.
Generally, T-ReID needs to process visual and textual
modalities, which is aimed at learning a common semantic representation space between visual and textual modalities, to better align image and text. For this purpose, recent works firstly employ different models to extract the feature representations of different modalities from local feature level (Chen et al. 2022), global feature level (Chen et al.
2021b), and multi-granularity feature level (Farooq et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022a). Then they focus on exploring
image-text pairs for semantic alignment in common representation space.
Unfortunately, we observe that the model training process employed by these methods on existing public benchmark datasets (Li et al. 2017; Ding et al. 2021; Zhu et al.
2021) is based on a strong assumption: the information on
image modality is holistic (without occlusions), namely, the
model can extract effective feature representations of images. This is definitely unrealistic, wherein the person ReID
techniques currently face a fundamental and long-standing

Introduction
Person Re-identification (ReID) is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision (CV), playing a paramount
role in plenty of applications such as intelligent video
surveillance, urban security, and smart retailing (Ye et al.
2021; Zeng et al. 2022).
However, existing person ReID methods (Yao et al. 2019;
Ding et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b) usually use images of
a specific person as the probes, which have limitations in
real-world urgent scenarios. For instance, when police officers try to locate criminals (suspects) or lost children within
a shopping mall, they typically lack any photographic references of the individuals. Fortunately, they can take verbal
descriptions of the target person from witnesses and crosscheck them with surveillance videos. To release manually
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6162

