The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Online Restless Multi-Armed Bandits with Long-Term Fairness Constraints
Shufan Wang, Guojun Xiong, Jian Li
Stony Brook University
{shufan.wang, guojun.xiong, jian.li.3}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract

and Szepesvári 2020) by allowing arms that are not activated
to change state, which leads to “restless” arms, and hence
extends its applicability. For simplicity, we refer to a restless
arm as an arm in the rest of the paper. Rewards are generated with each transition depending on whether the arm is
activated or not. The goal of the decision maker (DM) is to
maximize the expected total reward over an infinite horizon
under an “instantaneous activation constraint” that at most
B arms can be activated at any decision epoch.
However, the basic RMAB model fails to provide any guarantee on how activation will be distributed among arms. This
is also a salient design and ethical concern in practice, including mitigating data bias for healthcare (Mate, Perrault,
and Tambe 2021; Li and Varakantham 2022a) and societal
impacts (Yin et al. 2023; Biswas et al. 2023), providing quality of service guarantees to clients in network resource allocation (Li, Liu, and Ji 2019), just to name a few. In this
paper, we introduce a new RMAB model with fairness constraints, dubbed as RMAB-F to address fairness concerns in
the basic RMAB model. Specifically, we impose “long-term
fairness constraints” into RMAB problems such that the DM
must ensure a minimum long-term activation fraction for
each arm (Li, Liu, and Ji 2019; Chen et al. 2020; D’Amour
et al. 2020; Li and Varakantham 2022a), as motivated by
aforementioned resource allocation and healthcare applications. The DM’s goal now is to maximize the long-term
reward while satisfying not only “instantaneous activation
constraint” in each decision epoch but also “long-term fairness constraint” for each arm. Our objective is to develop
low-complexity reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms with
order-of-optimal regret guarantees to solve RMAB-F without knowing the underlying MDPs associated with each arm.
Though online RMAB has been gaining attentions, existing solutions cannot be directly applied to our online
RMAB-F. First, existing RL algorithms including state-ofthe-art colored-UCRL2 (Ortner et al. 2012) and Thompson
sampling methods (Jung and Tewari 2019; Akbarzadeh and
Mahajan 2022), suffer from an exponential computational
complexity and regret bounds grow exponentially with the
size of state space. This is because those need to repeatedly solve Bellman equations with an exponentially large
state space for making decisions. Second, though much effort has been devoted to developing low-complexity RL
algorithms with order-of-optimal regret for online RMAB,

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) have been widely used
to model sequential decision making problems with constraints. The decision maker (DM) aims to maximize the expected total reward over an infinite horizon under an “instantaneous activation constraint” that at most B arms can be activated at any decision epoch, where the state of each arm
evolves stochastically according to a Markov decision process (MDP). However, this basic model fails to provide any
fairness guarantee among arms. In this paper, we introduce
RMAB-F, a new RMAB model with “long-term fairness constraints”, where the objective now is to maximize the longterm reward while a minimum long-term activation fraction
for each arm must be satisfied. For the online RMAB-F setting (i.e., the underlying MDPs associated with each arm
are unknown to the DM), we develop a novel reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm named Fair-UCRL. We prove that
Fair-UCRL ensures probabilistic sublinear bounds on both
the reward regret and the fairness violation regret. Compared
with off-the-shelf RL methods, our Fair-UCRL is much
more computationally efficient since it contains a novel exploitation that leverages a low-complexity index policy for
making decisions. Experimental results further demonstrate
the effectiveness of our Fair-UCRL.

Introduction
The restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) model (Whittle
1988) has been widely used to study sequential decision
making problems with constraints, ranging from wireless
scheduling (Sheng, Liu, and Saigal 2014; Cohen, Zhao,
and Scaglione 2014), resource allocation in general (Glazebrook, Hodge, and Kirkbride 2011; Larrañaga, Ayesta, and
Verloop 2014; Borkar, Ravikumar, and Saboo 2017), to
healthcare (Bhattacharya 2018; Mate, Perrault, and Tambe
2021; Killian, Perrault, and Tambe 2021). In a basic RMAB
setting, there is a collection of N “restless” arms, each of
which is endowed with a state that evolves independently
according to a Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman
1994). If the arm is activated at a decision epoch, then it
evolves stochastically according to one transition kernel,
otherwise according to a different transition kernel. RMAB
generalizes the Markovian multi-armed bandits (Lattimore
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15616

