The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Multi-Modal Contrastive Diffusion Model for Therapeutic Peptide Generation
Yongkang Wang1 * , Xuan Liu1 * , Feng Huang1 , Zhankun Xiong1 , Wen Zhang1,2 3†
1
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan 430070, China
{wyky481, lx666, fhuang233, xiongzk}@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, zhangwen@mail.hzau.edu.cn
2

Abstract

In recent years, deep generative models (DGMs) have
demonstrated success in generating images (Liu and Chilton
2022), texts (Iqbal and Qureshi 2022), proteins (Wu et al.
2021), and also gained popularity in peptides. DGMs explored a more expansive chemical space that affords the
creation of structurally novel peptides, by training neural networks to approximate the underlying distribution of
observed or known ones (Wan, Kontogiorgos, and Fuente
2022). For example, autoregression-based methods depicted
peptide sequences as sentences composed of residue tokens,
so that the problem can be solved by predicting residue arrangement via recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Müller,
Hiss, and Schneider 2018; Capecchi et al. 2021). Variational
autoencoder (VAE)-based methods generated new peptide
sequences by sampling from the latent space learned through
an encoder-decoder architecture, with or without therapeutic properties as conditional constraints (Ghorbani et al.
2022; Szymczak et al. 2023b). Generative adversarial network (GAN)-based methods trained the generator and discriminator using known data, which compete against each
other to generate new peptides (Tucs et al. 2020; Oort et al.
2021; Lin, Lin, and Lane 2022). Nowadays, diffusion models (Yang et al. 2023) are prevalent in the generation of protein sequences and structures, owing to their superior capability in fitting distributions compared to prior techniques
(Shi et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2022). Likewise, these advanced
diffusion models can be extended to peptide generation and
are expected to deliver favorable outcomes.

Therapeutic peptides represent a unique class of pharmaceutical agents crucial for the treatment of human diseases. Recently, deep generative models have exhibited remarkable
potential for generating therapeutic peptides, but they only
utilize sequence or structure information alone, which hinders the performance in generation. In this study, we propose a Multi-Modal Contrastive Diffusion model (MMCD),
fusing both sequence and structure modalities in a diffusion
framework to co-generate novel peptide sequences and structures. Specifically, MMCD constructs the sequence-modal
and structure-modal diffusion models, respectively, and devises a multi-modal contrastive learning strategy with intercontrastive and intra-contrastive in each diffusion timestep,
aiming to capture the consistency between two modalities
and boost model performance. The inter-contrastive aligns sequences and structures of peptides by maximizing the agreement of their embeddings, while the intra-contrastive differentiates therapeutic and non-therapeutic peptides by maximizing the disagreement of their sequence/structure embeddings simultaneously. The extensive experiments demonstrate that MMCD performs better than other state-of-theart deep generative methods in generating therapeutic peptides across various metrics, including antimicrobial/anticancer score, diversity, and peptide-docking.

Introduction
Therapeutic peptides, such as antimicrobial and anticancer
peptides, are a unique class of pharmaceutical agents that
comprise short chains of amino acids, exhibiting significant
potential in treating complex human diseases (Jakubczyk
et al. 2020). Traditionally, therapeutic peptides are discovered through a comprehensive screening of sequence spaces
using phage/yeast display technologies (Muttenthaler et al.
2021) or computational tools trained for scoring desired
properties (Lee et al. 2017; Lee, Wong, and Ferguson 2018).
However, the combinatorial space of possible peptides is
vast and only a small solution satisfies therapeutic requirements; thus, such screening methods based on brute force
can be time-consuming and costly.

Despite the commendable progress of efforts above, they
focused on generating either sequences (i.e., residue arrangements) or structures (i.e., spatial coordinates of backbone atoms), ignoring that models fusing information from
both modalities may outperform their uni-modal counterparts (Huang et al. 2021). However, how to effectively integrate the multi-modal information and capture their consistency in peptide generation is a major challenge. Additionally, compared with generation tasks for images, texts,
and proteins that involve millions of labeled samples, public
datasets for therapeutic peptides typically contain only thousands of sequence or structure profiles, induced by the high
cost of in vitro screening. This limited amount of available
data may result in overfitting (Webster et al. 2019), which
confines generated outcomes within a restricted distribution,
consequently compromising the model’s generalization abil-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3

