The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Large Occluded Human Image Completion via Image-Prior Cooperating
Hengrun Zhao* 1 , Yu Zeng* 2 , Huchuan Lu†1 , Lijun Wang1 ,
1

Dalian University of Technology
2
Johns Hopkins University
zhaohengrun@mail.dlut.edu.cn, yzeng22@jhu.edu, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, ljwang@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
The completion of large occluded human body images poses
a unique challenge for general image completion methods.
The complex shape variations of human bodies make it difficult to establish a consistent understanding of their structures.
Furthermore, as human vision is highly sensitive to human
bodies, even slight artifacts can significantly compromise image fidelity. To address these challenges, we propose a large
occluded human image completion (LOHC) model based
on a novel image-prior cooperative completion strategy. Our
model leverages human segmentation maps as a prior, and
completes the image and prior simultaneously. Compared
to the widely adopted prior-then-image completion strategy
for object completion, this cooperative completion process
fosters more effective interaction between the prior and image information. Our model consists of two stages. The first
stage is a transformer-based auto-regressive network that predicts the overall structure of the missing area by generating
a coarse completed image at a lower resolution. The second
stage is a convolutional network that refines the coarse images. As the coarse result may not always be accurate, we propose a Dynamic Fusion Module (DFM) to selectively fuses
the useful features from the coarse image with the original
input at spatial and channel levels. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate our method’s superior performance
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: A demonstration of our method and several representative image completion methods (Zheng et al. 2022a;
Zhao et al. 2021a; Suvorov et al. 2022) for completing images under various occlusions.

Introduction
Image completion (a.k.a. image inpainting) refers to the task
of reconstructing the missing part of partially visible images
based on the information of visible parts in the image. It has
been an active research topic in the past decades. Traditional
methods (Efros and Freeman 2001; Kwatra et al. 2005) and
earlier deep learning-based methods (Yu et al. 2018, 2019)
are mainly focused on the background inpainting problem, i.e. completing the background part in an image, which
achieved superior performance and have been incorporated
in many practical applications. Recent research has started
paying more attention to a more difficult object inpainting
problem, i.e. completing missing or partially missing objects
in an image (Zhao et al. 2021b; Zeng, Lin, and Patel 2022;

Xie et al. 2023). Compared to background inpainting, object
inpainting is a much harder problem and requires a higherlevel semantic understanding of image data. Although recent
advance in deep generative models (Suvorov et al. 2022;
Zhao et al. 2021a; Zheng et al. 2022a) have shown great
promise, object inpainting remains a significant and challenging problem within the field of computer vision.
Among all objects, the completion of the human in an
image presents unique challenges due to both its intrinsic
difficulties and the elevated scrutiny from human viewers.
As human bodies have distinct features from the surrounding environment, the traditional inpainting principle based
on borrowing features from the background is no longer effective. Due to the presence of clothes, different parts of the
human body can possess unique features, which brings additional challenges for modeling. In addition, compared to
other objects, human vision is more adapted to perceive the

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7469

