The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mitigating Large Language Model Hallucinations via Autonomous
Knowledge Graph-Based Retrofitting
Xinyan Guan1,2 * , Yanjiang Liu1,2 * , Hongyu Lin1 , Yaojie Lu1† ,
Ben He1,2 , Xianpei Han1,3 , Le Sun1,2†
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{guanxinyan2022,hongyu,luyaojie,xianpei,sunle}@iscas.ac.cn,
liuyanjiang22@mails.ucas.ac.cn,benhe@ucas.edu.cn
Abstract

Incorporating factual knowledge in knowledge graph is regarded as a promising approach for mitigating the hallucination of large language models (LLMs). Existing methods
usually only use the user’s input to query the knowledge graph,
thus failing to address the factual hallucination generated
by LLMs during its reasoning process. To address this problem, this paper proposes Knowledge Graph-based Retrofitting
(KGR), a new framework that incorporates LLMs with KGs
to mitigate factual hallucination during the reasoning process
by retrofitting the initial draft responses of LLMs based on the
factual knowledge stored in KGs. Specifically, KGR leverages
LLMs to extract, select, validate, and retrofit factual statements within the model-generated responses, which enables
an autonomous knowledge verifying and refining procedure
without any additional manual efforts. Experiments show that
KGR can significantly improve the performance of LLMs on
factual QA benchmarks especially when involving complex
reasoning processes, which demonstrates the necessity and effectiveness of KGR in mitigating hallucination and enhancing
the reliability of LLMs.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained increasing
prominence in artificial intelligence. The emergence of potent
models such as ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) and LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023) has led to substantial influences on many
areas like society, commerce, and research. However, LLMs
still suffer from severe factual hallucination problems, i.e.,
LLMs can frequently generate unsupported false statements
regarding factual information due to their lack of intrinsic
knowledge (Ji et al. 2023). For example, in Figure 1, ChatGPT fails to provide an accurate response to the query “When
is Frédéric Chopin’s father’s birthday?” due to a wrong belief
that Nicolas Chopin’s birthday is on June 17, 1771. Factual
hallucination poses a severe challenge for LLM applications,
particularly in real-world situations where factual accuracy
holds significance. Consequently, the endeavor to alleviate
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18126

factual hallucinations in LLMs has become a research hotspot
in NLP field (Liu et al. 2021; Kang and Hashimoto 2020).
On the other hand, Knowledge Graphs (KGs) store a substantial amount of high-quality factual information, which
can significantly alleviate factual hallucination if incorporated with LLMs. For example, in Figure 1, we can retrofit
the erroneous statement “Nicolas Chopin was born on June
17, 1771” by referring to the provided factual knowledge
“(Nicolas Chopin, date of birth, 1771-04-15T00:00:0)” in
Wikidata. Recent work has focused on integrating LLMs
with KGs by retrieving the entities in the query within knowledge graphs. Then the obtained factual triples are utilized
as an additional context for LLMs to enhance their factual
knowledge (Baek, Aji, and Saffari 2023; Chase 2022). Unfortunately, these approaches are limited to retrieving factual
knowledge relevant to entities explicitly mentioned within
the given query. However, the fundamental capability of large
language models involves intricate and multi-step reasoning.
Such reasoning processes often necessitate the validation and
augmentation of factual knowledge that may be employed
during the reasoning process. For example, in the case shown
in Figure 1, LLM fails to answer the question because it
requires an intermediate knowledge about “Nicolas Chopin
was born on April 15, 1771”. However, such information
does not refer to entities appearing in the query. As a result,
previous approaches are inadequate in addressing the factual
hallucination appearing in the reasoning processes of LLMs.
In this paper, we propose Knowledge Graph-based
Retrofitting (KGR), a new framework that incorporates LLMs
with KGs to mitigate factual hallucination during the entire
reasoning process of LLMs. Instead of retrieving factual information from KGs using original queries, the main idea
behind KGR is to autonomously retrofit the initial draft responses of LLMs based on the factual knowledge stored in
KGs. However, achieving the above process is challenging
because draft responses generated by large language models typically contain a mixture of various information about
the reasoning process, making the extraction, verification,
and revision of relevant knowledge in it very challenging.
Therefore, the key to integrating Knowledge Graphs into the
reasoning process of large models to mitigate factual hallucinations lies in efficiently extracting the information requiring

