The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

X4D-SceneFormer: Enhanced Scene Understanding on 4D Point Cloud Videos
through Cross-Modal Knowledge Transfer
Linglin Jing4,1 * , Ying Xue2,3 * , Xu Yan2,3† , Chaoda Zheng2,3 , Dong Wang1 , Ruimao Zhang3,2 ,
Zhigang Wang1 , Hui Fang4 , Bin Zhao1 , Zhen Li3,2†
1

Shanghai AI laboratory
FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen
3
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen
4
Department of Computer Science, Loughborough University
{jinglinglin}@pjlab.org.cn, {xuyan1@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn
(c) Knowledge Transfer (b) Multi Modal (a) Single Modal

2

Abstract
The field of 4D point cloud understanding is rapidly developing with the goal of analyzing dynamic 3D point cloud sequences. However, it remains a challenging task due to the
sparsity and lack of texture in point clouds. Moreover, the
irregularity of point cloud poses a difficulty in aligning temporal information within video sequences. To address these
issues, we propose a novel cross-modal knowledge transfer
framework, called X4D-SceneFormer. This framework enhances 4D-Scene understanding by transferring texture priors from RGB sequences using a Transformer architecture
with temporal relationship mining. Specifically, the framework is designed with a dual-branch architecture, consisting
of an 4D point cloud transformer and a Gradient-aware Image Transformer (GIT). The GIT combines visual texture and
temporal correlation features to offer rich semantics and dynamics for better point cloud representation. During training,
we employ multiple knowledge transfer techniques, including temporal consistency losses and masked self-attention, to
strengthen the knowledge transfer between modalities. This
leads to enhanced performance during inference using singlemodal 4D point cloud inputs. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our framework on various
4D point cloud video understanding tasks, including action
recognition, action segmentation and semantic segmentation.
The results achieve 1st places, i.e., 85.3% (+7.9%) accuracy
and 47.3% (+5.0%) mIoU for 4D action segmentation and semantic segmentation, on the HOI4D challenge, outperforming previous state-of-the-art by a large margin. We release
the code at https://github.com/jinglinglingling/X4D.

Point Cloud
Model
4D Point Cloud

Point Cloud
Model
4D Point Cloud

Multi-modal
Model
4D Point Cloud &
RGB Sequences

Multi-modal
Model
4D Point Cloud &
RGB Sequences

Point Cloud
Model
Knowledge
Transfer
Gradientaware
Transformer

Training Phase

Point Cloud
Model
Training and Inference
Training only

Inference Phase

Figure 1: 4D Cross-Modal Knowledge Transfer. (a) Previous 4D point cloud analysis methods take point cloud only
as their input. (b) Although cross-modal approaches enhance
performance, they introduce extra computation overhead in
both training and inference. (c) Our method takes additional
2D images during the training for 4D cross-modal knowledge transfer. During the inference, the point cloud model
can be independently deployed.
geometric information in 3D space, a facet particularly advantageous for real-world interactions. These attributes are
pivotal for understanding 3D dynamic environments, including tasks like action recognition/segmentation (Hoai, Lan,
and De la Torre 2011; Jing et al. 2022), and 4D semantic
segmentation (Xie, Tian, and Zhu 2020).
Previous works in 4D point cloud representation learning
predominantly stem from extending existing 3D point cloud
models (Fan and Kankanhalli 2021; Wen et al. 2022) to 4D,
which involves incorporating additional temporal learning
modules that enable feature interactions across time (Xiao
et al. 2022; Zhong et al. 2022). However, due to the sparsity
and lack of texture in point clouds, these methods are limited
in capturing comprehensive semantic details. Nevertheless,
such semantic information remains crucial, particularly for

Introduction
Exploring point cloud sequences in 4D (integrating 3D
space with 1D time) has garnered considerable interest in
recent years (Fan and Kankanhalli 2021; Wen et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2022) due to their capacity to offer a wealth of dynamic information within our 3D environment. Compared to
conventional videos, 4D point clouds deliver direct access to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Xu Yan and Zhen Li.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2670

