The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Neural Networks with Soft Association between Topology and Attribute
Yachao Yang1 , Yanfeng Sun1 * , Shaofan Wang1 , Jipeng Guo2 ,
Junbin Gao3 , Fujiao Ju1 , Baocai Yin1
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology, Beijing Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
2
College of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China
3
Discipline of Business Analytics, The University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW
2006, Australia.
yangyc@emails.bjut.edu.cn, {yfsun, wangshaofan, jfj2017, ybc}@bjut.edu.cn, guojipeng@buct.edu.cn,
junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

GNNs can be broadly classified into two categories:
spectral-based GNNs and spatial-based GNNs. Spectralbased GNNs utilize the eigendecomposition of the Laplacian matrix of the graph to update node representations
by transforming and aggregating the eigenvectors. Spatialbased GNNs perform information propagation and aggregation directly in the graph structure. Some researchers (Ma
et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021) have shown
that spectral-based GNNs are designed to optimize a unified
objective optimization framework, including a graph Laplacian regularization and feature-fitting term. The Laplacian
regularization term utilizes the topology smooth feature to
acquire a stable embedding that eliminates noise, and the
feature fitting term establishes a link between the node embedding and the node attributes.
However, recent studies have revealed that the interference between topology and attribute can have a detrimental impact on the performance of GNNs. On the one
hand, topology frequently influences the representation of
attributes. GNNs that prioritize topological smoothness tend
to minimize differences between interconnected nodes, leading to over-smoothing issues when multiple layers are
stacked and resulting in the loss of node attribute information (Jin et al. 2021). The challenge becomes more pronounced in the context of heterophilic graphs, as relying
on inaccurate topological relations for transfer can yield
entirely distinct representations for two seemingly similar
nodes. On the other hand, inaccurate or incomplete node attributes may distort the encoding of topology. In tasks like
node link prediction, GNNs that rely on both attribute and
topology often exhibit inferior performance compared to encoding methods that exclusively hinge on topology, such
as matrix factorization (Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2007) and
random block model (Airoldi et al. 2008).
In a recent development, Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2022)
introduced the utilization of the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al. 2005) to enforce
the mutual exclusivity of attribute and topology. By doing
so, they effectively eliminate shared information and derive two independent representations. This approach serves
to mitigate the interference that arises from the interplay
between attribute and topology. Compared with the previous methods, Yang et al.’s model exhibits impressive perfor-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown great performance in learning representations for graph-structured data.
However, recent studies have found that the interference between topology and attribute can lead to distorted node representations. Most GNNs are designed based on homophily
assumptions, thus they cannot be applied to graphs with
heterophily. This research critically analyzes the propagation principles of various GNNs and the corresponding challenges from an optimization perspective. A novel GNN
called Graph Neural Networks with Soft Association between Topology and Attribute (GNN-SATA) is proposed.
Different embeddings are utilized to gain insights into attributes and structures while establishing their interconnections through soft association. Further as integral components of the soft association, a Graph Pruning Module (GPM)
and Graph Augmentation Module (GAM) are developed.
These modules dynamically remove or add edges to the
adjacency relationships to make the model better fit with
graphs with homophily or heterophily. Experimental results
on homophilic and heterophilic graph datasets convincingly
demonstrate that the proposed GNN-SATA effectively captures more accurate adjacency relationships and outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches. Especially on the heterophilic
graph dataset Squirrel, GNN-SATA achieves a 2.81% improvement in accuracy, utilizing merely 27.19% of the original number of adjacency relationships. Our code is released
at https://github.com/wwwfadecom/GNN-SATA.

Introduction
A growing trend has recently been observed in generating
data characterized by intricate relationships and interdependencies between objects, frequently represented as graph
data. Illustrative examples encompass social networks (Guo
et al. 2022), citation networks (Zhao et al. 2021), and financial networks (Bi et al. 2022). Graph neural networks
(GNNs) have been proven highly effective in various graph
data applications, including recommender systems (Fan
et al. 2019), data mining (Wu et al. 2020a), and natural language processing tasks (Wu et al. 2020b).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9260

