The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards a More Burkean Approach to Computational Social Choice
Omer Lev
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
omerlev@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

Liquid democracy / proxy voting A method in which
each voter can transfer their vote to another voter, i.e.,
let the other voter vote on their behalf. This voter can,

in turn, transfer their own vote (along with the votes
transferred to them by others) onwards to other voters1 . This results in an election in which only a subset
of voters participate, each with a different weight (depending on the number of voters who have – directly or
through others – given each agent their votes). There have
been several papers discussing various aspects and variations of the model (Brill 2019; Brill and Talmon 2018;
Zhang and Grossi 2021), and while Kahng, Mackenzie, and Procaccia (2021) (later strengthened by Caragiannis and Micha (2019)) raised the issue of too high
concentration of power, several responses have been authored to tackle these issues, among other topics (Gölz
et al. 2021; Bloembergen, Grossi, and Lackner 2019;
Abramowitz and Mattei 2019; Colley, Grandi, and Novaro 2021; Becker et al. 2021).
Liquid democracy came to the fore when it was adopted
by the Pirate Party in Germany, and later, in various variants, in a few other organizations.
Blockchain-related As part of a general vision (Shapiro
and Talmon 2022), some researchers attempt to
move decision-making to a blockchain-based mechanism (Poupko, Shapiro, and Talmon 2022), exploring
various coalitional and consensual mechanisms to make
it work (Abramowitz et al. 2021; Elkind et al. 2021; Meir
et al. 2022).
Blockchain-like mechanisms were discussed for several
decades, but their current meaning began with Bitcoin in
2008. Smart contracts (contracts that – as long as they
involve assets kept on the blockchain – can be enforced
through the blockchain) in their current form were popularized by Ethereum since 2015. For decision-making
purposes, the idea of DAOs (Decentralized Autonomous
Organization) has been suggested, but so far there has
been very little practical use.
Sortition The process of reaching a decision by choosing a
group of people by lottery, and letting them decide. In
the last few years there has been research – including
very high-profile (Flanigan et al. 2021) – on how to select
agents while representing various predetermined groups
appropriately (Flanigan et al. 2020; Flanigan, Kehne,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In proxy voting (Cohensius et al. 2017), the transfer is a step
only, so longer chains cannot exist.

In the last few years, a lot of the activity of the computational social choice community has focused on novel mechanisms for reaching decisions by large groups of people.
While this research makes meaningful scientific contributions, many of these mechanisms are not quite useful in realistic decision-making settings. Moreover, their radicalism
ignores the centuries-old experience we have with large-scale
human decision-making, and what it teaches us about what
works. We believe it is important the community engage with
mechanisms which are widely-used in the real world, as they
may hold a key to a deeper understanding of how people reach
decisions and the way that helps them do that productively.
Moreover, letting the community bring its analysis and understanding to these will allow for algorithmic suggestions
that have some chance of being implemented (and, thus, can
contribute to the public debate on these topics). In particular,
we highlight the relatively less-investigated role of parties and
grouping of voters and candidates, and the role of executive
capacity in analyzing decision-making structures.
By preserving the method of nature in the conduct of the
state, in what we improve we are never wholly new; in
what we retain we are never wholly obsolete.
Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in
France, 1790

In the past several years, prominent computational social
choice researchers working on voting mechanisms began exploring several novel topics, expanding the COMSOC realm
far and wide. Some of these novel topics have to do with
trying to understand existing mechanisms, which are widely
used throughout the world and in various political systems
(e.g., multi-winner elections (Lackner and Skowron 2023;
Aziz, Lang, and Monnot 2016; Aziz et al. 2017; Elkind et al.
2017; Faliszewski et al. 2017)). Other directions investigate
less common systems, some of which seek to supplant existing decision-making systems. Among the most commonly
researched are:

22607

