The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Uni-MIS: United Multiple Intent Spoken Language Understanding via Multi-View
Intent-Slot Interaction
Shangjian Yin, Peijie Huang* , Yuhong Xu
College of Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University, China
sjy8460@163.com, {pjhuang, xuyuhong}@scau.edu.cn

Utterance-level
Intent

Abstract

Chunk-level
Intent

So far, multi-intent spoken language understanding (SLU)
has become a research hotspot in the field of natural language processing (NLP) due to its ability to recognize and
extract multiple intents expressed and annotate corresponding sequence slot tags within a single utterance. Previous research has primarily concentrated on the token-level intentslot interaction to model joint intent detection and slot filling, which resulted in a failure to fully utilize anisotropic
intent-guiding information during joint training. In this work,
we present a novel architecture by modeling the multi-intent
SLU as a multi-view intent-slot interaction. The architecture
resolves the kernel bottleneck of unified multi-intent SLU
by effectively modeling the intent-slot relations with utterance, chunk, and token-level interaction. We further develop
a neural framework, namely Uni-MIS, in which the unified
multi-intent SLU is modeled as a three-view intent-slot interaction fusion to better capture the interaction information after special encoding. A chunk-level intent detection decoder
is used to sufficiently capture the multi-intent, and an adaptive
intent-slot graph network is used to capture the fine-grained
intent information to guide final slot filling. We perform extensive experiments on two widely used benchmark datasets
for multi-intent SLU, where our model bets on all the current
strong baselines, pushing the state-of-the-art performance of
unified multi-intent SLU. Additionally, the ChatGPT benchmark that we have developed demonstrates that there is a considerable amount of potential research value in the field of
multi-intent SLU.

Atis_Flight_No # Atis_Airfare
......

Atis_Flight_No

TP

......

FN
AF

FN FN FN
AF AF AF

Atis_Airfare

Token-level
Intent

FN FN FN
AF AF AF

Utterance

List the flight number between LA and Seattle and show me the cheapest ticket

Slot

O O

O

FN
AF
O

FN
AF

O

FN FN
AF AF
B-FC O

FN
AF
B-TC

O

O

O O

FN
AF
B-CR

FN
AF
O

Figure 1: An example with multi-intent detection and
slot filling: “FN”, “AF”, “FC”, “TC”, “CR” and “TP”
denote “Flight No”, “Airfare”, “froc.ctn”, “toloc.ctn”,
“cost relative” and “Transition Point”. The multi-intent information can be categorised into three levels.

In real-life scenarios, users often express multiple intents
within a single utterance, and the Amazon internal dataset
showed that 52% of examples are multi-intent (Gangadharaiah and Narayanaswamy 2019). Figure 1 shows a two-intent
example, which contains a classification task to classify the
intent labels (i.e., predict the intents as : Atis Flight No
and Atis Airfare) and a sequence labeling task to predict the slot label sequence (i.e., label the utterance as {O,
O, O, O, O, B-frloc.ctn, O, B-toloc.ctn, O, O, O, O,
B-toloc.ctn, O }). However, most prior work only focused on the simple single-intent scenario, failing to effectively handle the multi-intent setting with the original network.
To deal with multi-intent scenarios, an increasing number
of studies have begun to focus on modeling SLU in multiintent settings. Xu and Sarikaya (2013) and Kim, Ryu, and
Lee (2017) first explored the multi-intent SLU. Then Qin
et al. (2020a) proposed an adaptive interaction framework
(AGIF) to achieve fine-grained multi-intent information integration for token-level slot filling, which however suffers
from information leakage issues due to its autoregressive
architecture. Qin et al. (2021b) further proposed a globallocally graph interaction network (GL-GIN) to model slot
dependency and interaction between multiple intents, which
unfortunately potentially suffers from the fact that the intent information is misaligned as it simply treats intent detection as a token-level task. Recently, Huang et al. (2022)
proposed a chunk-level intent detection (CLID) framework
to split multi-intent into single-intent with an intent transi-

Introduction
Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) plays a crucial role
in task-oriented dialog systems, with the primary objective
of constructing a semantic frame that encapsulates the user’s
request. This semantic frame is meticulously crafted through
intent detection, identifying the user’s intentions, and slot
filling, extracting pertinent semantic elements. Since the two
sub-tasks of intent detection and slot filling are closely tied
(Tur and Mori 2011), dominant SLU systems adopt joint
models to model the correlation between them (Liu and Lane
2016; Goo, Gao, and Hsu 2018; Qin, Che, and Li 2019).
*

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19395

