The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

No Internal Regret with Non-convex Loss Functions
Dravyansh Sharma
Carnegie Mellon University
dravyans@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

and Mansour 2007). While the external regret has been studied in a wide variety of general settings owing to its popularity, the study of internal and swap regret has largely been
limited to the case of finite action space, also known as finite experts setting. In this work, we consider the problem
of minimizing internal regret in the presence of continuously many infinite experts, and non-convex loss functions,
in both full information (i.e., learner observes loss for all experts) and partial feedback (learner only observes their incurred loss) settings. We will particularly focus on the case
of Lipschitz losses and piecewise-constant losses motivated
by known applications. Internal regret is closely connected
to correlated equilibria in multi-player repeated games (Foster and Vohra 1999; Blum and Mansour 2011).

Internal regret is a measure of performance of an online learning algorithm, which measures the change in performance by
substituting every occurrence of a given action i by an alternative action j. Algorithms for minimizing internal regret
are known for the finite experts setting, including a general
reduction to the problem of minimizing external regret for
this case. The reduction however crucially depends on the
finiteness of the action space. In this work we approach the
problem of minimizing internal regret for a continuous action space. For
√ the full information setting, we show how
to obtain Õ( T ) internal regret for the class of Lipschitz
functions, as well as non-Lipschitz dispersed functions, i.e.
the non-Lipschitzness may not concentrate in a small region
of the action space. We also consider extensions to partial
feedback settings, and again obtain sublinear internal regret.
Finally we discuss applications of internal regret minimization over continuous spaces to correlated equilibria in pricing
problems and auction design, as well as to data-driven hyperparameter tuning.

Related Work
Internal regret. The notion of internal regret was first introduced by (Foster and Vohra 1998) in the context of calibrated forecasting. Several low internal regret algorithms
have been developed, from initial algorithms with convergence guarantees without regret upper bounds (Foster
and Vohra 1999; Hart and Mas-Colell 2000), to general
potential-based algorithms with low regret bounds (CesaBianchi and Lugosi 2003), as well as algorithms based on
reduction to external regret (Blum and Mansour 2007; Stoltz
and Lugosi 2005, 2007). Note that the algorithms, as well as
reductions due to (Stoltz 2005; Blum and Mansour 2007) to
external regret, were
√ obtained for the finite experts setting. A
lower bound of Ω( N T ) on a related notion called swap regret for any randomized algorithm was given by (Blum and
Mansour 2007) √
and further improved in the recent work of
(Ito 2020) to Ω( N T log N ).
Bandit setting. For the
√ bandit setting (Stoltz 2005) gave
an algorithm with O(N T log N ) regret which runs in exponential time. (Blum and Mansour 2007) obtained a polynomial
√ time algorithm with slightly worse regret bound of
O(N N T log N ) via a reduction argument. Recent work
of (Ito 2020) modifies their
√ approach to give a polynomial
time algorithm with O(N T ) regret bound, resulting in a
more efficient reduction to external regret without needing
first-order bounds.
Other related notions of regret. (Mohri and Yang 2014)
consider a generalization of swap regret called conditional
swap regret, which considers all possible modifications of

Introduction
We consider the problem of repeatedly making decisions in
an uncertain environment, using the standard online learning framework. The algorithm or learner has a continuous
space C of actions, and the following game is played for T
rounds. At each round or time step t, the learner chooses an
action (possibly probabilistically), the environment makes
its “move” by choosing a loss function over the space of
actions, and the learner then incurs the loss for its action
chosen. The most popular metric for measuring the performance of the algorithm is computing its (external, as it is unrelated to learner’s choices) ‘regret’ with respect to the best
fixed action from C played across all rounds, in hindsight.
However, this may not be useful in common cases where no
single fixed action works well over the entire course of the
algorithm’s interaction with its environment
One alternative approach to determine if the learner performed well in choosing the actions is to compute the ‘regret’ of substituting the chosen actions with alternative actions. This gives rise to the notions of internal regret or swap
regret (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2003; Stoltz 2005; Blum
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14919

