The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FoX: Formation-Aware Exploration in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Yonghyeon Jo, Sunwoo Lee, Junghyuk Yeom, Seungyul Han*
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea
{yonghyeonjo, sunwoolee, yumjunghyuk, syhan}@unist.ac.kr

Exploration Space

Abstract
Recently, deep multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has gained significant popularity due to its success in various
cooperative multi-agent tasks. However, exploration remains
a challenging problem in MARL due to the partial observability of the agents and the exploration space that can grow exponentially as the number of agents increases. Firstly, in order to
address the scalability issue of the exploration space, we define a formation-based equivalence relation on the exploration
space and aim to reduce the search space by exploring only
meaningful states in different formations. Then, we propose a
novel formation-aware exploration (FoX) framework that encourages partially observable agents to visit the states in diverse formations by guiding them to be well aware of their
current formation solely based on their observations. Numerical results show that the proposed FoX framework significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art MARL algorithms
on Google Research Football (GRF) and sparse Starcraft II
multi-agent challenge (SMAC) tasks.

Exploration w/o
Formation-awareness

Equivalent States

Formation-aware
Exploration (ours)

Formation
Agent
Exploration

(a)

Formation
Agent
Sight

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of formation-based state equivalence. Defining state equivalence under formations can
reduce the search space efficiently. (b) Illustration of
formation-awareness. Our method encourages agents to be
fully aware of the formation.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has successfully solved various real-world application challenges such as traffic control (Chu et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020d), games (Vinyals et al. 2019), and robotic controls
(Kalashnikov et al. 2018). With its increasing popularity,
many multi-agent learning algorithms have been introduced
(Tan 1993; Lowe et al. 2017; Rashid et al. 2020). The
MARL algorithms can be broadly classified into three categories. First, the fully decentralized methods (Tan 1993;
Zhang et al. 2018a) train agents independently. Second, the
fully centralized methods (Gupta, Egorov, and Kochenderfer 2017) share information among agents for more efficient
training. Finally, The CTDE methods (Foerster et al. 2018;
Sunehag et al. 2017; Rashid et al. 2020) provide global information during training to alleviate the nonstationarity while
maintaining scalability. As a result, MARL algorithms have
achieved significant success in various applications.
However, MARL algorithms still face challenges from
partial observability (Sukhbaatar, Fergus et al. 2016). Even
in the traditional RL, exploration is critical to prevent the

agent from converging to sub-optimal policies (Ostrovski
et al. 2017). To address exploration in traditional RL, exploration methods based on curiosity (Ostrovski et al. 2017;
Pathak et al. 2017; Burda et al. 2018) have been proposed.
Among the curiosity explorations, count-based exploration
has demonstrated simple yet efficient exploration in singleagent RL problems (Burda et al. 2018; Tang et al. 2017).
Unfortunately, the single-agent approaches may struggle in
the context of MARL as partial observability makes efficient exploration even more challenging. As consideration
for agent relationships exponentially increases the search
space, (Wang et al. 2019) techniques such as utilizing the
influence between agents (Wang et al. 2019) or social influence (Jaques et al. 2019) have been introduced, but despite
these efforts, efficient exploration in MARL still remains a
challenge (Zheng et al. 2021).
In realistic scenarios, soccer for example, it is often impractical to consider the entire information of the field upon
formulating a strategy. Rather, coaches formulate strategies
based on a formation, which contains the distance information between the players in soccer games. For a team
with high speed, a formation that allows quick transition between offense and defense would be beneficial while fac-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12985

