The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Let There Be Sound: Reconstructing High Quality Speech from Silent Videos
Ji-Hoon Kim* , Jaehun Kim* , Joon Son Chung
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{jh.kim, kjaehun, joonson}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

two major obstacles. One is the existence of homophenes,
words that have almost identical lip movements but distinct phonemes (e.g. ‘bit’ and ‘pit’). The ambiguity of homophenes brings the one-to-many relationship between lip
motions and phonemes (Chung et al. 2017; Kim, Yeo, and
Ro 2022). Another obstacle is the multiple variations in
speech; same phonemes can be mapped to diverse speech
styles based on individual characteristics such as timbre, intonation, and accents (Elias et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2022).
Numerous attempts have been made to improve the quality of LTS systems. Existing works (Le Cornu and Milner
2015, 2017) utilise hand-crafted visual features. However,
deep-learning based approaches employ end-to-end methods that generate auditory features directly from silent lip
motions. Early deep-learning based methods (Ephrat and Peleg 2017; Kumar et al. 2019) estimate linear predictive coding (LPC) features within a short video clip. Recently, many
works (Prajwal et al. 2020; Kim, Hong, and Ro 2021; Yadav
et al. 2021; He et al. 2022; Mira et al. 2022; Kim, Hong,
and Ro 2023) adopt mel-spectrogram as a regression target because it contains more sufficient acoustic information
than LPC. Despite the advances, the previous methods do
not fully address the one-to-many mapping issue, suffering
from a mispronounced and over-smoothed synthetic speech.
In this paper, we propose a novel LTS system that highly
improves the synthetic quality by alleviating the intrinsic one-to-many mapping problem. To disambiguate homophenes, we employ self-supervised speech representations as a condition for linguistic information. Previous studies (Baevski et al. 2020; Hsu et al. 2021) have proved that
self-supervised learning (SSL) speech models can acquire
rich speech representations without manually labeled text.
In particular, it has been demonstrated that the representations from specific layers of the SSL model contain elaborate linguistic information independent of paralinguistic features (wen Yang et al. 2021; Chang, Yang, and Lee 2022).
Motivated by this, we explore the intermediate layers of SSL
model and utilise the hidden representations to produce accurate content without using text labels.
Moreover, we adopt acoustic variance information such
as pitch and energy in order to model diverse speech variations. With the help of the acoustic variations, the model
can not only ease the one-to-many mapping but also learn
prosody of speech which is a key factor for realistic speech

The goal of this work is to reconstruct high quality speech
from lip motions alone, a task also known as lip-to-speech.
A key challenge of lip-to-speech systems is the one-to-many
mapping caused by (1) the existence of homophenes and
(2) multiple speech variations, resulting in a mispronounced
and over-smoothed speech. In this paper, we propose a novel
lip-to-speech system that significantly improves the generation quality by alleviating the one-to-many mapping problem
from multiple perspectives. Specifically, we incorporate (1)
self-supervised speech representations to disambiguate homophenes, and (2) acoustic variance information to model
diverse speech styles. Additionally, to better solve the aforementioned problem, we employ a flow based post-net which
captures and refines the details of the generated speech. We
perform extensive experiments on two datasets, and demonstrate that our method achieves the generation quality close to
that of real human utterance, outperforming existing methods
in terms of speech naturalness and intelligibility by a large
margin. Synthesised samples are available at our demo page:
https://mm.kaist.ac.kr/projects/LTBS.

Introduction
Have you ever wondered what Charlie Chaplin’s movies
would sound like if they weren’t silent? Indeed, there have
been many discussions about what is said in archival silent
movies (Smith 1987; Midgley 2006). The ability to reconstruct speech from silent videos opens up interesting applications, such as redubbing silent movies, simulating natural utterance for those who suffer from aphonia, and understanding conversations at a distance.
As a result, the research in lip-to-speech has attracted an
increasing amount of attention in recent years (Kumar et al.
2019; Mira et al. 2022; Kim, Hong, and Ro 2023). This line
of research has also benefited from the advances in deep
learning methods, and in particular, self-supervised learning, since the training leverages natural occurrence of audio
and video as a mode of supervision.
A lip-to-speech (LTS) system aims to learn a mapping
from silent lip movements to the corresponding speech.
This is a challenging one-to-many mapping caused by the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2759

