The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Boosting Multiple Instance Learning Models for Whole Slide Image Classification:
A Model-Agnostic Framework Based on Counterfactual Inference
Weiping Lin1 * , Zhenfeng Zhuang1 * , Lequan Yu2 , Liansheng Wang1†
1

2

Department of Computer Science at School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
wplin@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhuangzhenfeng@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lqyu@hku.hk, lswang@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

methods focus on instance prediction, existing MIL methods
can be categorized into the bag-based and the instance-based
(Qu et al. 2022b). Bag-based models merely train a bag classifier with the bag-level label. Firstly, features of massive
patches (instances) in a WSI are extracted by a vision encoder. These features are then aggregated into a slide (bag)
representation to produce the slide-level prediction. Nevertheless, the slide-level prediction contains very limited information and lacks interpretability since there are thousands of
patches in a WSI, representing various structures and pathological conditions. On the other hand, instance-based approaches usually train an instance classifier, supervised by
the acquired pseudo labels. Instance-level prediction provides an insight into regions of interest, thereby making WSI
analysis become more fine-grained and reliable.
Existing instance-based MIL methods can be further categorized into two cases, specific models and boosting frameworks for existing MIL models. In the first case, specific
methods are tailored to differentiate between positive and
negative instances for each individual model, with DGMIL
(Qu et al. 2022a) being a typical representative. On the other
hand, boosting frameworks are designed to improve the performance of existing MIL models, where WENO (Qu et al.
2022b) is a such framework for attention-based methods.
Even though these models and frameworks have shown excellent performance in the classification of both bags and instances, there are still limitations. The model-specific methods designed for instance prediction are restricted to particular MIL models, making they can’t adapt to other cases.
Although boosting frameworks exist for a group of models,
MIL models still necessitate specific indispensable mechanisms in many cases. In summary, there is not yet an absolutely general framework for boosting MIL models.
The attention mechanism is commonly utilized to aggregate the instance feature in MIL models (Vaswani et al.
2017; Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018; Li, Li, and Eliceiri
2021; Lu et al. 2021; Shao et al. 2021), by which we can approximate the instance prediction or pseudo label. However,
the attention score demonstrates which features are more relevant to the model output, instead of how the features affect
the output. In other words, it focuses more on correlation
rather than causality. Rethinking the definition of MIL, a
slide will be labeled as positive if there is at least one positive
instance in it and will be labeled as negative only if all in-

Multiple instance learning is an effective paradigm for whole
slide image (WSI) classification, where labels are only provided at the bag level. However, instance-level prediction
is also crucial as it offers insights into fine-grained regions
of interest. Existing multiple instance learning methods either solely focus on training a bag classifier or have the
insufficient capability of exploring instance prediction. In
this work, we propose a novel model-agnostic framework
to boost existing multiple instance learning models, to improve the WSI classification performance in both bag and
instance levels. Specifically, we propose a counterfactual
inference-based sub-bag assessment method and a hierarchical instance searching strategy to help to search reliable
instances and obtain their accurate pseudo labels. Furthermore, an instance classifier is well-trained to produce accurate predictions. The instance embedding it generates is
treated as a prompt to refine the instance feature for bag prediction. This framework is model-agnostic, capable of adapting to existing multiple instance learning models, including those without specific mechanisms like attention. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate the competitive performance of our method. Code will be available at
https://github.com/centurion-crawler/CIMIL.

Introduction
Pathological slides are regarded as the gold standard for the
diagnosis of complex diseases (Cai et al. 2021), which are
usually scanned as whole slide images (WSI) with very high
resolution (e.g., 80, 000 × 80, 000 pixels at 40× magnification). And the patterns of tissues and cells in WSI are very
complicated. Even with experienced pathologists, the finegrained manual annotation for a WSI still incurs extensive
costs. In most cases, only slide-level labels are available,
posing a significant challenge for deep learning in WSI analysis.
Due to the limited annotations and the gigapixels, multiple instance learning (MIL) (Maron and Lozano-Pérez 1997)
has become a well-known paradigm for WSI analysis. In this
approach, each WSI is considered as a bag and the cropped
patches from it are the instances. According to whether the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3477

