The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Label-Noise Learning with Local Diversity Product Regularization
Xiaochen Zhou, Xudong Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
xiaochenzhou@sjtu.edu.cn, wxudong@ieee.org

Abstract

Schemes

Training data in federated learning (FL) frameworks can
have label noise, since they must be stored and annotated on
clients’ devices. If trained over such corrupted data, the models learn the wrong knowledge of label noise, which highly
degrades their performance. Although several FL schemes
are designed to combat label noise, they suffer performance
degradation when the clients’ devices only have limited local training samples. To this end, a new scheme called federated label-noise learning (FedLNL) is developed in this paper.
The key problem of FedLNL is how to estimate a noise transition matrix (NTM) accurately in the case of limited local
training samples. If a gradient-based update method is used
to update the local NTM on each client’s device, it can generate too large gradients for the local NTM, causing a high
estimation error of the local NTM. To tackle this issue, an
alternating update method for the local NTM and the local
classifier is designed in FedLNL, where the local NTM is updated by a Bayesian inference-based update method. Such an
alternating update method makes the loss function of existing NTM-based schemes not applicable to FedLNL. To enable federated optimization of FedLNL, a new regularizer on
the parameters of the classifier called local diversity product
regularizer is designed for the loss function of FedLNL. The
results show that FedLNL improves the test accuracy of a
trained model by up to 25.98%, compared with the state-ofthe-art FL schemes that tackle label-noise issues.

FedLSR
FedCorr
RoFL
VolMinNet-FL
Accurate NTM

5000
samples/clients

500
samples/clients

82.7
86.3
89.9
90.4
90.7

78.3
75.3
80.4
69.1
89.2

Table 1: Test accuracies (%) of the selected schemes over
CIFAR-10 dataset under different settings of local training
samples (pair-flipping noise, noise rate 0.4).

The first category (e.g., FedCorr (Xu et al. 2022)) utilizes a
label-correction mechanism to relabel noisy labels. The second category (e.g., RoFL (Yang et al. 2022b) and FedLSR
(Jiang et al. 2022)) leverages self-supervised learning to
obtain more robust representations. Besides the above two
categories, another type of FL schemes can be developed
by extending a noise transition matrix-based scheme to the
FL framework. For example, the state-of-the-art NTM-based
scheme called VolMinNet (Li et al. 2021) can be extended
to the FL framework (denoted as VolMinNet-FL) by minimizing the loss function of VolMinNet via FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017). The performance of these schemes is evaluated over CIFAR-10 dataset with a high noise rate under
two settings: one with 5000 samples on each client’s device
and the other with 500 samples on each client’s devices, as
presented in Table 1. The results show that only RoFL and
VolMinNet-FL achieve acceptable accuracies when there are
enough local training samples (i.e. 5000 samples per client),
while all the four schemes suffer low accuracies when there
are only limited local training samples (i.e., 500 samples per
client). However, it is common that most clients’ devices
in an FL system only have limited local training samples
(McMahan et al. 2017). Thus, it is necessary to develop a
new FL scheme to tackle the label-noise issue, especially in
the case of limited local training samples.
According to Table 1, self-supervised learning and NTMbased schemes are two promising approaches to tackling the
label-noise issue in the FL framework, since they are effective to combat label noise when there are enough local
training samples. However, when there are only limited lo-

Introduction
Labels of training data are indispensable for a supervised
learning task. In a federated learning (FL) framework, the
labels need to be annotated on clients’ devices since the
training data are kept by clients’ devices. However, some
of the labels can be wrong due to carelessness or a lack
of expert knowledge. Those wrong labels are referred to as
noisy labels and the corresponding training samples are referred to as noisy samples. When a classifier (e.g., a neural
network) is trained over such a training dataset with noisy
labels, it learns wrong knowledge from such noisy labels,
which highly degrades its performance.
So far several FL schemes have been developed to tackle
the label-noise issue. These schemes can be classified into
the following categories according to the utilized techniques.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17141

