The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Unsupervised Domain Adaptation: Pseudo Label Guided Mixup for
Adversarial Prompt Tuning
Fanshuang Kong1 , Richong Zhang1,2 * , Ziqiao Wang3 , Yongyi Mao3
1

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
{kongfs, zhangrc}@act.buaa.edu.cn, {zwang286, ymao}@uottawa.ca
Abstract
To date, a backbone of methods for unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) involves learning label-discriminative features via a label classifier and domain-invariant features
through a domain discriminator in an adversarial scheme.
However, these methods lack explicit control for aligning the
source data and target data within the same label class, degrading the classifier’s performance in the target domain. In
this paper, we propose PL-Mix, a pseudo label guided Mixup
method based on adversarial prompt tuning. Specifically, our
PL-Mix facilitates class-dependent alignment and can alleviate the impact of noisy pseudo-labels. We then theoretically
justify that PL-Mix can improve the generalization for UDA.
Extensive experiments of the comparison with existing models also demonstrate the effectiveness of PL-Mix.

Positive sample

Effect of label classifier

Negative sample

Classification boundary

Misclassified sample

Domain shift trajectory

(a)

Existing Methods
Source

Target

PL-Mix

(b)
Source

Expected Results
Target

0.6
0.9

Introduction

Learning Results

0.4
0.1

Figure 1: Illustration of existing methods and PL-Mix.

Deep learning’s success is partially attributed to extensive
datasets with abundant labels (Zhao et al. 2018). However,
due to the significant costs of data collection and label annotation, it is important to develop the model capable of transferring knowledge from label-abundant domains to labelscarce domains, a concept known as domain adaptation (Pan
and Yang 2010). Particularly, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a more complex but crucial situation, where
target domain labels are unavailable during training. This
paper focuses on such a UDA setting, where various methods have been proposed for better performance (Wu and Shi
2022; Du et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019;
Luo et al. 2022; Cai and Wan 2019; Qu et al. 2019). These
approaches commonly involve two aspects: learning labeldiscriminative features using the label classifier, and acquiring domain-invariant features via the domain discriminator (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015). The goal is to align target
data with the source data while maintaining source domain
label discriminability.
With the development of the pre-trained language model
(PLM), prompt tuning, wherein soft prompts are learned for
specific downstream tasks, has showcased the resilience and
robustness under domain shifts (Brown et al. 2020). AdSPT (Wu and Shi 2022) proposes an adversarial soft prompt

tuning method to solve the UDA problem. This method
adopts distinct soft prompts for each individual domain to alleviate the domain discrepancy. Despite these efforts of further aligning target data with source data through domainspecific soft prompt representation, as depicted in Figure 1
(a), there is no explicit mechanism facilitates the positive (or
negative) data of the source domain to be attracted towards
the corresponding positive (or negative resp.) data of the target domain. That is, source data might align with different
class-labeled target data, leading to suboptimal classification
performance in the target domain, despite good alignment
between source and target data.
In this work, to tackle the problem in Figure 1(a), we enhance the original adversarial prompt tuning (Wu and Shi
2022) with pseudo label guided Mixup (Zhang et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2020), namely PL-Mix. Specifically, we apply
Mixup to train both the label classifier and the domain discriminator. While the domain discriminator is supervised by
the ground truth domain labels, the label classifier suffers
the challenge of lacking labels in the target domain. Accordingly, following previous works (Wu, Inkpen, and El-Roby
2020; Yan et al. 2020; Mao et al. 2019; Sahoo et al. 2023),
we use the label classifier to assign the pseudo label to target data for Mixup synthetic label generation. The fusion of
pseudo labels and Mixup enables the creation of intermedi-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18399

