The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EVE: Efficient Vision-Language Pre-training with Masked Prediction and
Modality-Aware MoE
Junyi Chen1 * , Longteng Guo2 , Jia Sun3 , Shuai Shao3 , Zehuan Yuan3 , Liang Lin1 , Dongyu Zhang1†
1

Sun Yat-sen University
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Bytedance Inc
chenjy765@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, longteng.guo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {sunjia.ly, shaoshuai.0516, yuanzehuan}@bytedance.com
linliang@ieee.org, zhangdy27@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
78

Building scalable vision-language models to learn from diverse, multimodal data remains an open challenge. In this
paper, we introduce an Efficient Vision-languagE foundation
model, namely EVE, which is one unified multimodal Transformer pre-trained solely by one unified pre-training task.
Specifically, EVE encodes both vision and language within a
shared Transformer network integrated with modality-aware
sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) modules, which capture
modality-specific information by selectively switching to different experts. To unify pre-training tasks of vision and language, EVE performs masked signal modeling on image-text
pairs to reconstruct masked signals, i.e., image pixels and
text tokens, given visible signals. This simple yet effective
pre-training objective accelerates training by 3.5x compared
to the model pre-trained with Image-Text Contrastive and
Image-Text Matching losses. Owing to the combination of
the unified architecture and pre-training task, EVE is easy
to scale up, enabling better downstream performance with
fewer resources and faster training speed. Despite its simplicity, EVE achieves state-of-the-art performance on various
vision-language downstream tasks, including visual question
answering, visual reasoning, and image-text retrieval.

VQA Accuracy

4.3x faster
77

76
EVE-Base(Ours)
ALBEF
MAMO
VLMO
VL-BEiT

75

74

0 200 500

850

1700
GPU Training Hours

3800

Figure 1: Performance of different models on VQA test-dev
under different training hours. Training hours of all models
are reproduced by us on A100 GPUs.

fusion (e.g., dot product) for the interaction of vision and
language. Some alternative methods (Zeng, Zhang, and Li
2022) use deep neural networks, such as Transformer Encoders, to perform deep fusion on modality interaction, but
lead to difficulties in scaling up and low efficiency. Unified
methods (Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Wang et al. 2022b) use
a modality-shared Transformer to encode different modalities jointly. This approach simplifies the framework and improves the speed, helping with model scaling up. However,
they overlook the inherent gap between modalities, leading
to lower overall performance. Image is continuous, redundant, and low-level on the raw signals, while text is discrete,
refined, and high-level. Directly using a shared Transformer
to encode different modalities with semantic gap poses problems. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the differences
between different modalities carefully.
Previous methods also have explored numerous pretraining tasks for vision-language pre-training, including
Image-Text Contrastive Learning (Radford et al. 2021),
Image-Text Matching (Li et al. 2021), Word-Patch Alignment (Chen et al. 2020), Masked Language Modeling (Su
et al. 2020), Masked Image Modeling (Bao et al. 2022b),
and so on. They have been widely used to improve
vision-language pre-training. While incorporating more pre-

Introduction
Vision-Language Pre-training aims to learn a general multimodal representation that can be transferred to various
vision-language downstream tasks, such as vision-language
understanding and image-text retrieval. A vision-language
foundation model should have excellent performance while
being easy to train and scale up, which can be achieved
through the model architecture and the pre-training tasks.
The model architectures of recent methods can be roughly
divided into two categories: dual-encoder architecture and
unified architecture. Dual-encoder methods (Radford et al.
2021; Zeng, Zhang, and Li 2022) employ modality-specific
models (e.g. BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), ViT (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021)) to encode different modalities separately and
a fusion module to integrate them. As for the fusion module, some methods (Radford et al. 2021) employ shallow
* This work was done while Junyi was an intern at ByteDance.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1110

