The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Scene Generalized Trajectory Global Graph Solver with Composite Nodes
for Multiple Object Tracking
Yan Gao1 , Haojun Xu1 , Jie Li1∗ , Nannan Wang1 , Xinbo Gao1,2∗
1

Xidian University
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yangao, haojunxu}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn, leejie@mail.xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The global multi-object tracking (MOT) system can consider interaction, occlusion, and other “visual blur” scenarios to ensure effective object tracking in long videos. Among
them, graph-based tracking-by-detection paradigms achieve
surprising performance. However, their fully-connected nature poses storage space requirements that challenge algorithm handling long videos. Currently, commonly used methods are still generated trajectories by building one-forward
associations across frames. Such matches produced under the
guidance of first-order similarity information may not be optimal from a longer-time perspective. Moreover, they often lack
an end-to-end scheme for correcting mismatches. This paper proposes the Composite Node Message Passing Network
(CoNo-Link), a multi-scene generalized framework for modeling ultra-long frames information for association. CoNoLink’s solution is a low-storage overhead method for building constrained connected graphs. In addition to the previous method of treating objects as nodes, the network innovatively treats object trajectories as nodes for information interaction, improving the graph neural network’s feature representation capability. Specifically, we formulate the graphbuilding problem as a top-k selection task for some reliable
objects or trajectories. Our model can learn better predictions
on longer-time scales by adding composite nodes. As a result, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art in several
commonly used datasets.

𝒯

𝑮𝒇𝒖𝒍𝒍𝒚

𝑮𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒂𝒍_𝒇𝒖𝒍𝒍𝒚

𝑮𝒑𝒂𝒓𝒕

Figure 1: Node connectivity relationship graphs for different
graph structures. The 2nd bolded gray link in T indicates
that the connection in each graph is the relationship between
the blue node in the first frame and the nodes in the next
frame.

2020; Bergmann, Meinhardt, and Leal-Taixé 2019; Bewley et al. 2016) or appearance features (Pang et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2021). The trajectories formed by such local
trackers can satisfy the accuracy requirements. However, severe object occlusion and appearance changes in crowded
scenes can pose challenges for long-term identity preservation. Many studies have executed offline associations over
the entire video frame to obtain long-range trajectories. Such
global trackers typically require the construction of global
appearance and motion cues or pairwise association between
tracklets on all frames based on graphical representations.
To maximize the applicability to each scenario, recent
graph-based MOT studies (Brasó and Leal-Taixé 2020;
Hornáková et al. 2020, 2021; Cetintas, Brasó, and LealTaixé 2023) have adopted a generic approach to global tracking by using a unified module to process videos in a single
framework. While the research has shown promising results,
there are still some issues with the generalized graph-based
approach. A significant challenge is the need to consider
the time cues of video clips more. Generic methods generally use a uniform, fully-connected graph-building system, and due to storage constraints, the node information
encoded is limited to neighboring frames, forming trajectories that may not be optimal in the temporal dimension. In
contrast, when humans perform dynamic tracking, they must
maintain the temporal consistency of the perceived object

Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) aims to generate trajectories
for all moving objects in a video stream. It is a fundamental module for video content analysis in application areas
such as autonomous driving and intelligent robotics. In recent years, tracking-by-detection as the dominant paradigm
in the field divides the task into (i) frame-by-frame object detection and (ii) data association, i.e., linking potential targets
to the correct object trajectory whenever possible. Data association is performed mainly on neighboring frames, greedily
matching trajectories with detection proposals through simple cues such as position and motion prediction (Zhang et al.
2022; Tokmakov et al. 2021; Zhou, Koltun, and Krähenbühl
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1842

