The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causal Strategic Learning with Competitive Selection
Kiet Q. H. Vo1,2 , Muneeb Aadil1,2 , Siu Lun Chau1 , Krikamol Muandet1
1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
huynh.vo@cispa.de, s8muaadi@stud.uni-saarland.de, siu-lun.chau@cispa.de, muandet@cispa.de

Abstract

their variables to receive more favorable decisions, resulting in either genuine improvements or gaming (Bechavod
et al. 2021). Although in both scenarios agents receive better
decision outcomes, gaming is undesirable for the decision
makers as it negatively impacts their utility. Learning under strategic behavior is well-studied in both economics and
machine learning (Hardt et al. 2016; Perdomo et al. 2020;
Dranove et al. 2003; Dee et al. 2019; Munro 2022). Our
work aligns with research efforts to identify causal features
that reduce gaming effects and to promote genuine agent improvements (Miller, Milli, and Hardt 2020), an approach often referred to as causal strategic learning (CSL).
Let us consider a college admission example from Harris et al. (2022). The college, acting as the decision
maker (DM), aims to evaluate applicants (agents) by predicting their prospective college GPAs based on their submitted
high school GPAs and SAT scores. For transparency, the college makes this evaluation rule public. In response, applicants can strategically direct their efforts on certain exams
(high school or SAT) to optimise their evaluations. Recognising this strategic approach, the college’s objective is to
formulate and publicise an evaluation rule that maximises
the expected college GPA (or agents’ outcome) for all applicants. Envision a scenario where a student’s college GPA is
causally determined by their high school GPA only, yet the
deployed rule considers both exam results. There is potential for gaming behavior under this rule, if an applicant emphasises their SAT preparation over their high school GPA,
since this might boost their evaluation without necessarily
improving the actual college academic performance.
The above example underscores the necessity of incorporating causal knowledge into decision making to incentivise
agents towards genuine improvement, aligning with what
Miller, Milli, and Hardt (2020) have proven. CSL presents
numerous challenges. For example, Alon et al. (2020) explore mechanism designs that incentivise agents to respond
with the intended outcomes of the DM, assuming knowledge
of the true underlying causal structure. Similarly, Munro
(2022) also assumes knowledge of casual information and
incorporates stochasticity into their released decision rule to
discourage gaming. However, without prior causal knowledge, learning the true causal mechanism in practice is challenging due to confounding bias in observational data. To
address this, Shavit, Edelman, and Axelrod (2020) show that

We study the problem of agent selection in causal strategic
learning under multiple decision makers and address two key
challenges that come with it. Firstly, while much of prior
work focuses on studying a fixed pool of agents that remains
static regardless of their evaluations, we consider the impact
of selection procedure by which agents are not only evaluated, but also selected. When each decision maker unilaterally
selects agents by maximising their own utility, we show that
the optimal selection rule is a trade-off between selecting the
best agents and providing incentives to maximise the agents’
improvement. Furthermore, this optimal selection rule relies on incorrect predictions of agents’ outcomes. Hence, we
study the conditions under which a decision maker’s optimal
selection rule will not lead to deterioration of agents’ outcome
nor cause unjust reduction in agents’ selection chance. To that
end, we provide an analytical form of the optimal selection
rule and a mechanism to retrieve the causal parameters from
observational data, under certain assumptions on agents’ behaviour. Secondly, when there are multiple decision makers,
the interference between selection rules introduces another
source of biases in estimating the underlying causal parameters. To address this problem, we provide a cooperative protocol which all decision makers must collectively adopt to recover the true causal parameters. Lastly, we complement our
theoretical results with simulation studies. Our results highlight not only the importance of causal modeling as a strategy
to mitigate the effect of gaming, as suggested by previous
work, but also the need of a benevolent regulator to enable it.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) has gained significant popularity in facilitating personalised decision making across diverse domains such as healthcare (Wiens et al. 2019; Chau
et al. 2021; Ghassemi and Mohamed 2022), criminal justice (Kleinberg et al. 2018), college admissions (Harris et al.
2022), hiring (Deshpande, Pan, and Foulds 2020), and credit
scoring (Björkegren and Grissen 2020). In these critical domains, mutual trust between decision makers and agents
who are affected by the decisions is of utmost importance.
As a result, the decision makers might need to render algorithmic rules transparent to all stakeholders. However, this
transparency can incentivise agents to strategically adjust
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15411

