The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BiPFT: Binary Pre-trained Foundation Transformer with Low-Rank Estimation
of Binarization Residual Polynomials
Xingrun Xing1,2,3 , Li Du3 , Xinyuan Wang4 , Xianlin Zeng4 , Yequan Wang3 , Zheng Zhang3 * ,
Jiajun Zhang1 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
Beihang University
xingxingrun2023@ia.ac.cn, duli@baai.ac.cn, buaa42wxy@gmail.com, zengxianlin@buaa.edu.cn,
tshwangyequan@gmail.com, zhangz.goal@gmail.com, jjzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Pretrained foundation models offer substantial benefits for
a wide range of downstream tasks, which can be one of
the most potential techniques to access artificial general
intelligence. However, scaling up foundation transformers
for maximal task-agnostic knowledge has brought about
computational challenges, especially on resource-limited devices such as mobiles. This work proposes the first Binary Pretrained Foundation Transformer (BiPFT) for natural language understanding (NLU) tasks, which remarkably saves 56× operations and 28× memory. In contrast
to previous task-specific binary transformers, BiPFT exhibits a substantial enhancement in the learning capabilities of binary neural networks (BNNs), promoting BNNs
into the era of pre-training. Benefiting from extensive pretraining data, we further propose a data-driven binarization
method. Specifically, we first analyze the binarization error
in self-attention operations and derive the polynomials of
binarization error. To simulate full-precision self-attention,
we define binarization error as binarization residual polynomials, and then introduce low-rank estimators to model
these polynomials. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of BiPFTs, surpassing task-specific baseline by
15.4% average performance on the GLUE benchmark. BiPFT
also demonstrates improved robustness to hyperparameter
changes, improved optimization efficiency, and reduced reliance on downstream distillation, which consequently generalize on various NLU tasks and simplify the downstream
pipeline of BNNs. Our code and pretrained models are publicly available at https://github.com/Xingrun-Xing/BiPFT.

Figure 1: Comparison of training pipelines for binary transformers. FP indicates full-precision. For downstream tasks,
finetuning BiPFT replaces previous task-specific pipelines.

small datasets or open scenes. In natural language understanding (NLU) tasks, BERT (Devlin et al. 2018; He, Gao,
and Chen 2023), which uses the transformer encoder architecture and the bi-directional masked prediction training, is
widely applied. However, the self-attention (Vaswani et al.
2017a; Carlini et al. 2023) and MLP layers in BERT involve
substantial floating-point operations and memory consumption. How to get a compact pretrained foundation model in
computationally limited settings, such as inference at mobile
devices, has become a problem of significant value.
This work aims to propose the first 1-bit pretrained foundation model for NLU tasks with a BERT like architecture.

Introduction
In recent years, pre-trained foundation models (PFM) (OpenAI 2023) have demonstrated impressive emergent intelligence phenomena in various fields such as natural language
processing (Touvron et al. 2023) and computer vision (Kirillov et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). As the model size and
pre-training data increase, task-agnostic knowledge from
pretraining effectively generalizes to downstream tasks with
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16094

