The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Collaborative Learning across Heterogeneous Systems with Pre-Trained Models
Trong Nghia Hoang
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Washington State University
trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu

1

Introduction

new task context. This will re-imagine the existing paradigm
of model fine-tuning, producing models that are both effective and interpretable when adapting to new tasks. Next,
(C2) comprehension focuses on statistical techniques to associate, align and re-combine relevant prototypes extracted
from different pre-trained models (Hoang et al. 2020; Lam
et al. 2021) to solve new tasks. This is a key issue in continual learning where the learning agents need to infer the
correspondence between knowledge modules that were distilled in different contexts and orders. This has been preliminarily investigated in the context of neural networks that
decompose into sets of neurons (Yurochkin et al. 2019).
Finally, the comprehensive (C3) resource-aware collaborative learning framework will leverage these capabilities
to facilitate large-scale learning scenarios featuring an evergrowing network of heterogeneous learning agents that seek
to communicate and reuse relevant knowledge to collaboratively solve their respective tasks. With the emergence of
large pre-trained models which encapsulate vast expertise,
a key challenge lies in addressing their sheer scale of complexity and seamlessly integrating them into the envisioned
resource-aware collaborative learning framework.

Modern problem-solving systems are frequently integrated
into a complex and federated information network. For instance, think of a smart health monitoring system that compiles and disseminates analytical findings derived from a
wide range of private patient data scattered across various
hospitals, clinics and numerous personal medical wearable
devices. All of which may have unique ownership, hardware setups, data distributions and representations. Federated learning (FL) (Konečný et al. 2016) was proposed to
address the decentralized data issue but has mostly been
studied in settings where local systems are expected to use
the same learning model, which might not fit with the local
hardware and representation constraints. In addition, learned
knowledge is often represented in task-specific forms which
is difficult to adapt to unseen task scenarios. To mitigate such
constraints, my research envisions a generalization of federated learning which can integrate information seamlessly
across different local systems. Within this framework, pretrained models capturing related expertises are broken down
into a diverse set of task-agnostic functions, each associated
with distinct task embedding patterns. Local solution models can then be represented using subsets of these functions,
selected based on their proximity to the task data. This approach transforms model aggregation into a set summarization problem, affording it the desirable adaptability, transferability, and compositionality across different information
silos and tasks with different model and data representations.

2

References
Hoang, Q. M.; Hoang, T. N.; Low, K. H.; and Kingsford,
C. 2019a. Collective Model Fusion of Multiple Black-Box
Experts. In Proc. ICML.
Hoang, T. N.; Hoang, Q. M.; Low, K. H.; and How, J. P.
2019b. Collective Online Learning of Gaussian Processes in
Massive Multi-Agent Systems. In Proc. AAAI.
Hoang, T. N.; Lam, C. T.; Low, K. H.; and Jaillet, P. 2020.
Learning Task-Agnostic Embedding of Multiple Black-Box
Experts for Multi-Task Model Fusion. In Proc. ICML.
Konečný, J.; McMahan, H. B.; Ramage, D.; and Richtárik, P.
2016. Federated Optimization: Distributed Machine Learning for On-Device Intelligence. CoRR, abs/1610.02527.
Lam, C. T.; Hoang, T. N.; Low, K. H.; and Jaillet, P. 2021.
Model Fusion for Personalized Learning. In Proc. ICML.
Yurochkin, M.; Agarwal, M.; Ghosh, S.; Greenewald, K.;
Hoang, T. N.; and Khazaeni, Y. 2019. Bayesian Nonparametric Federated Learning of Neural Networks. In Proc.
ICML.

Research Summary

To realize the above vision, my research focuses on developing the following computational capabilities. First, (C1)
expression pertains to a learning collaborator’s capacity to
determine what information to communicate to facilitate
the global decomposition of local models into reusable patterns (Hoang et al. 2019b,a). This approach facilitates the
representation of prior problem-solving expertise in a modular and transferable fashion, where distinct facets of knowledge are individually encapsulated within these contextindependent model prototypes, which can be recombined in
novel ways to synthesize new problem-solving skills to a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22668

