The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Approximate Integer Solution Counts over Linear Arithmetic Constraints
Cunjing Ge1, 2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
gecunjing@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

with an in general better performance. In practice, it often
still has difficulties when the number of variables is greater
than 10 (preventing many applications). The relation between the number of lattice points inside a polytope and the
volume of a polytope has been studied for approximate integer counting (Ge et al. 2019). However, it is inevitable that
the approximation bounds may far off from exact counts. A
more recent work (Ge and Biere 2021) introduced factorization preprocessing techniques to reduce polytopes dimensionality, which are orthogonal to lattice counting, they also
require polytopes in specific forms.
An algorithm for sampling lattice points in a polytope
was introduced in (Kannan and Vempala 1997), which can
be used to approximate the integer solution count, though
we are not aware of any implementation. Since then, there
have been a lot of works about sampling real points, such
as Hit-and-run method (Lovász 1999; Lovász and Vempala
2006a), and approximating polytopes’ volume (Lovász and
Deák 2012; Cousins and Vempala 2015, 2018). As a result,
the state-of-the-art volume approximation algorithms could
solve general polytopes around 100 dimensions. Naturally,
we wonder if they could be extended to integer cases.
The primary contribution of this paper is a novel approximate lattice counting algorithm, in detail, it includes new
methods with theoretical results as follows.

Counting integer solutions of linear constraints has found interesting applications in various fields. It is equivalent to the
problem of counting lattice points inside a polytope. However, state-of-the-art algorithms for this problem become too
slow for even a modest number of variables. In this paper, we propose a new framework to approximate the lattice counts inside a polytope with a new random-walk sampling method. The counts computed by our approach has
been proved approximately bounded by a (ϵ, δ)-bound. Experiments on extensive benchmarks show that our algorithm
could solve polytopes with dozens of dimensions, which significantly outperforms state-of-the-art counters.

Introduction
As one of the most fundamental type of constraints, linear
constraints (LCs) have been studied thoroughly in many areas. In this paper, we consider the problem of counting approximately the number of integer solutions of a set of LCs.
This problem has many applications, such as counting-based
search (Zanarini and Pesant 2007; Pesant 2016), simple temporal planning (Huang et al. 2018), probabilistic program
analysis (Geldenhuys, Dwyer, and Visser 2012; Luckow
et al. 2014), etc.. It also includes as a special case several combinatorial counting problems that have been studied, like that of estimating the permanent of a matrix (Jerrum
and Sinclair 1989; Gamarnik and Katz 2010; Harviainen,
Röyskö, and Koivisto 2021), the number of contingency tables (Cryan et al. 2002; Desalvo and Zhao 2020), solutions
to knapsack problems (Dyer et al. 1993), etc.. Moreover, it
can be incorporated as a subroutine for #SMT (LA) (Ge et al.
2018). Since a set of LCs represents a convex polytope, its
integer solutions correspond to lattice points inside the polytope. Accordingly, we do not distinguish the concepts of
polytopes and sets of LCs in this paper.
It is well-known that counting lattice points in a polytope is #P-hard (Valiant 1979). On the implementation front,
the first practical tool for lattice counting is L ATT E (Loera et al. 2004), which is an implementation of Barvinok’s algorithm (Barvinok 1993, 1994). The tool BARVI NOK (Verdoolaege et al. 2007) is the successor of L ATT E

• A lattice sampling method is introduced, which is a combination of Hit-and-run random walk and rejection sampling. We proved that it generates samples in distribution
limited by Hit-and-run method, which is nearly uniform.
• A dynamic stopping criterion is proposed, which could
be calculated by variance of approximations while running. We proved that errors of outputs approximately lie
in [1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ] with probability at least 1 − δ, given ϵ, δ.
We evaluated our algorithm on an extensive set of random
and application benchmarks. We not only compared our tool
with integer counters, but also with #SAT counters by translating LCs into propositional logic formulas. Experimental
results show that our approach scales to polytopes up to
80 dimensions, which significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art counters. We also observe that counts computed by
our algorithm are bounded well by theoretical guarantees.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8022

