The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ACT: Empowering Decision Transformer with Dynamic Programming via
Advantage Conditioning
Chen-Xiao Gao, Chenyang Wu, Mingjun Cao, Rui Kong, Zongzhang Zhang* , Yang Yu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{gaocx, wucy, caomj, kongr}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

of Markov Decision Process (MDP) and employing Bellman
update to derive value estimates for subsequent policy optimization (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019; Kostrikov,
Nair, and Levine 2022; Brandfonbrener et al. 2021).

Decision Transformer (DT), which employs expressive sequence modeling techniques to perform action generation,
has emerged as a promising approach to offline policy optimization. However, DT generates actions conditioned on a
desired future return, which is known to bear some weaknesses such as the susceptibility to environmental stochasticity. To overcome DT’s weaknesses, we propose to empower
DT with dynamic programming. Our method comprises three
steps. First, we employ in-sample value iteration to obtain
approximated value functions, which involves dynamic programming over the MDP structure. Second, we evaluate action quality in context with estimated advantages. We introduce two types of advantage estimators, IAE and GAE, which
are suitable for different tasks. Third, we train an AdvantageConditioned Transformer (ACT) to generate actions conditioned on the estimated advantages. Finally, during testing,
ACT generates actions conditioned on a desired advantage.
Our evaluation results validate that, by leveraging the power
of dynamic programming, ACT demonstrates effective trajectory stitching and robust action generation in spite of the
environmental stochasticity, outperforming baseline methods
across various benchmarks. Additionally, we conduct an indepth analysis of ACT’s various design choices through ablation studies. Our code is available at https://github.com/
LAMDA-RL/ACT.

1

In the meantime, the past few years have witnessed huge
success in applying sequence modeling to natural language
processing (Vaswani et al. 2017; Brown et al. 2020). In light
of the similarity between language sequences and RL trajectories, a lot of works have explored the idea of modeling
RL trajectories using sequence modeling approaches (Wen
et al. 2023). For example, Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen
et al. 2021) models offline trajectories extended with the
sum of the future rewards along the trajectory, namely the
return-to-go (RTG). RTG characterizes the quality of the
subsequent trajectory, and DT learns to predict future actions given RTG. During testing, we deliberately provide DT
with a high RTG to generate an above-average action. This
approach, known as conditional sequence generation, has
achieved remarkable success in offline policy optimization.
However, we note that RTG-conditioned generation is defective. Firstly, RTG is a hindsight indicator of a complete
trajectory. It cannot be computed if we only have incomplete trajectory segments. Besides, we cannot ascertain the
most suitable target RTG during testing, which poses a risk
of choosing an inappropriate one and degenerating the performance. Secondly, conditioning on RTG fails to leverage
the inherent structure of MDPs and cannot stitch trajectory
as classical offline RL methods do. Therefore, DT cannot
achieve much better performance than RL methods. Lastly,
when the environment is stochastic, DT tends to exploit
the occasional high return in the offline dataset mistakenly,
which negatively impacts its performance.

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) optimizes policies by interacting with the environment often for millions of
steps (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018). Such enormous sample complexity prohibits RL from real-world applications (Wu and Zhang 2023) such as robotics and healthcare. As an alternative, offline RL optimizes policies with
a pre-collected dataset (Levine et al. 2020) and has gained
increasing attention in recent years for its potential in reallife scenarios (Kumar et al. 2021b; Shiranthika et al. 2022;
Zhou, Zhang, and Yu 2023; Zhou et al. 2024).

In this paper, we present Advantage-Conditioned Transformer (ACT), a method that empowers the traditional DT
with dynamic programming to effectively address the abovementioned challenges. To tackle the limitations of conditioning on RTG, we introduce advantages as replacements.
To obtain the advantage, we first approximate value functions with separate neural networks. Afterward, we introduce two types of advantage estimations, namely IAE and
GAE, which exhibit different characteristics and are proven
suited for different types of tasks empirically. We evaluate

Building upon online RL, a lot of algorithms address offline policy optimization following the spirit of dynamic programming (Levine et al. 2020), i.e. leveraging the structure
* Zongzhang Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12127

