The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HybridGait: A Benchmark for Spatial-Temporal Cloth-Changing Gait
Recognition with Hybrid Explorations
Yilan Dong1 , Chunlin Yu1 , Ruiyang Ha1 ,
Ye Shi1 , Yuexin Ma1 , Lan Xu1 , Yanwei Fu2 , Jingya Wang1 *
1

ShanghaiTech University
2
Fudan University
yilandong@outlook.com; yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn; {yuchl, hary2022, shiye, mayuexin, xulan1,
wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Abstract

2006; Hossain et al. 2010) typically have a short-term in-thelab assumption that only a fixed gallery of clothes is imposed
to mimic such variations at a fixed location, thereby disregarding the natural changes in appearance over time and
space. The very recently proposed benchmarks (Zhu et al.
2021a; Zheng et al. 2022b) break the previous laboratory assumption by introducing an in-the-wild setup, however, they
not only overlook the variations in clothing and accessories
but also fail to account for changes over time.
To address the aforementioned issues, we present the first
in-the-wild cloth-changing gait recognition benchmark, CCGait, which captures appearance changes over time and
space. Our dataset can facilitate the development of more
robust and resilient gait recognition systems that can perform effectively in real-world situations especially for clothchanging scenarios. Critically, our proposed dataset possesses unique features that set it apart from pre-existing
datasets (Zheng et al. 2022b; Zhu et al. 2021b; Takemura
et al. 2018; Yu, Tan, and Tan 2006). Firstly, the raw videos
were captured over a 92-day period, providing a diverse
range of cloth changes occurring at various frequencies
without human intervention. Secondly, our dataset includes
footage from both indoor and outdoor surveillance systems,
capturing individuals walking along different routes and at
varying speeds. Lastly, the CCGait tool provides a range of
multi-modal statistics, such as 2D silhouettes, 2D/3D keypoints, and 3D human meshes. These features make our
dataset a valuable resource for researchers in the field, enabling them to analyze and evaluate gait recognition algorithms under different conditions and scenarios.
We look at the problem of cloth-changing gait recognition under in-the-wild scenarios. Previous works utilize
2D silhouette information for robust extraction of gait features, while more recently 3D human meshes have been exploited to leverage the invariant properties against clothing
and viewpoint variations (Zheng et al. 2022b; Han et al.
2022). However, to enable the integration of human meshes
with silhouettes, existing approaches typically adopt a simple and straightforward fusion strategy, which may be inadequate in bridging the modality gap and extracting mutual
information from two modalities. On this ground, a more
careful design is needed to unify the two sharply different
representation structures, and make full use of 3D meshes.
To implement this vision, we propose a SMPL-aided hy-

Existing gait recognition benchmarks mostly include minor
clothing variations in the laboratory environments, but lack
persistent changes in appearance over time and space. In this
paper, we propose the first in-the-wild benchmark CCGait
for cloth-changing gait recognition, which incorporates diverse clothing changes, indoor and outdoor scenes, and multimodal statistics over 92 days. To further address the coupling effect of clothing and viewpoint variations, we propose a hybrid approach HybridGait that exploits both temporal dynamics and the projected 2D information of 3D human meshes. Specifically, we introduce a Canonical Alignment Spatial-Temporal Transformer (CA-STT) module to encode human joint position-aware features, and fully exploit
3D dense priors via a Silhouette-guided Deformation with
3D-2D Appearance Projection (SilD) strategy. Our contributions are twofold: we provide a challenging benchmark
CCGait that captures realistic appearance changes across
an expanded and space, and we propose a hybrid framework HybridGait that outperforms prior works on CCGait
and Gait3D benchmarks. Our project page is available at
https://github.com/HCVLab/HybridGait.

Introduction
Gait recognition is an intriguing biometric task that aims to
identify individuals based on their unique walking patterns.
Unlike traditional biometric identifiers such as faces, fingerprints, and irises, gait information is a non-cooperative identifier as well as a non-invasive differentiator, making it a effective and secure option. Consequently, gait recognition has
garnered significant interest in the research community, with
potential applications in security, surveillance, crime analysis and forensic search.
Extracting reliable gait features while mitigating distractions like viewpoint, and pose variations has long been a
challenge in the gait community. To date, the role of clothing and accessories has also gaining increasing attention
towards more practical scenarios. More recently, the longterm vision (Xu and Zhu 2021) presents a new challenge
for cloth-changing person re-identification, involving nonstationary cloth-changes over a long time scale. Unfortunately, recent advances in gait recognition (Yu, Tan, and Tan
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1600

