The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Integrated Systems for Computational Scientific Discovery
Pat Langley
Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise
2164 Staunton Court, Palo Alto, CA 94306 USA
http://www.isle.org/∼langley/

Abstract

However, despite this continuing activity and steady progress, research has focused almost exclusively on the individual components of discovery, with little attention to their
coordination. A fuller understanding of science must await
AI systems that integrate these elements, as must computational artifacts that pursue autonomous long-term research.
For example, consider an agent that controls an experimental laboratory with access to an unfamiliar set of substances.
The system should group items into categories, identify laws
about their behavior, and devise deeper models that explain
the observations. Or imagine an undersea robot on a mission
to study deep-sea trenches, where it encounters new rock
formations and unfamiliar organisms. The agent should categorize landforms and species, find laws about their interactions, and propose explanations for them, even if it can only
observe passively. Such scenarios require integrated discovery systems and the time has come for AI to develop them.
In this paper, we address the challenges that this vision
poses for the field. We begin by reviewing characteristics of
scientific discovery that differentiate it from machine learning and data mining. After this, we examine eight component abilities that play roles in the discovery process, including systems that illustrate them, as we should understand the
elements before considering their combination. Next we recount some partial integrations that can serve as role models
for future work. Finally, we analyze specific hurdles the research community must overcome to develop complete discovery systems, along with scientific fields and testbeds that
can help drive development and evaluation of such artifacts.

This paper poses the challenge of developing and evaluating
integrated systems for computational scientific discovery. We
note some distinguishing characteristics of discovery tasks,
examine eight component abilities, review previous successes
at partial integration, and consider hurdles the AI research
community must leap to transform the vision for integrated
discovery into reality. In closing, we discuss promising scientific domains in which to test such computational artifacts.

Introduction
The scientific enterprise is one of humanity’s most impressive achievements and scientific discovery is the engine that
drives it forward. The AI community has long recognized
the latter’s importance, as reflected by active research in
the area for over four decades. Simon (1966) introduced
the idea of automating the discovery process and the first
notable successes emerged during the 1970s, with systems
like DENDRAL (Lindsay et al., 1980) and Bacon (Langley, 1981). Progress continued through the 1980s and 1990s,
with researchers addressing an ever broader range of scientific problems in fields as diverse as astrophysics, biology,
chemistry, ecology, particle physics, and the social sciences.
By the turn of the century, there were numerous cases in
which computer-enabled discoveries had led to publication
in the refereed scientific literature (Langley, 2000).
Computational scientific discovery has become even more
active in recent years, with researchers from applied mathematics, physics, mechanical engineering, and other disciplines joining the AI scientists who launched the movement.
Early approaches relied primarily on symbolic processing
and search through spaces of discrete structures, while many
later efforts have turned to statistical techniques and neural
networks that carry out parametric search. What these two
groups have in common is their commitment to developing general mechanisms that reproduce the full depth and
breadth of human discovery. Recurring interest in this topic
has been reflected by at least 12 symposia and workshops
since 1989 and by multiple edited volumes (Shrager and
Langley, 1990; Džeroski and Todorovski, 2007; Addis et al.,
2019) that have reported progress in the area.

Characteristics of Scientific Discovery
The scientific enterprise is diverse in that it studies many
distinct types of phenomena and accounts for them in many
different ways, yet there are common features to them all
that are worth recounting. We can define the discovery task
in generic, domain-independent terms:
• Given: Scientific data to be described or explained
• Given: Knowledge about the scientific domain
• Given: A space of candidate categories, laws, or models
• Find: Candidates that describe or explain the observations
This formulation is similar to that for data mining (Fayyad
et al., 1996), which is often associated with ‘knowledge discovery’, but there are some critical differences.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22598

