The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SwitchTab: Switched Autoencoders Are Effective Tabular Learners
Jing Wu* , Suiyao Chen* , Qi Zhao,
Renat Sergazinov, Chen Li, Shengjie Liu, Chongchao Zhao, Tianpei Xie, Hanqing Guo, Cheng Ji,
Daniel Cociorva, Hakan Brunzell
Amazon Buyer Risk Prevention
4575 La Jolla Village Dr
San Diego, California 92122 USA
{jingwua, suiyaoc, qqzhao, renserg, chenlii, zycjlsj, zchongch, lukexie, hanqiguo, cjiamzn, cociorva, brunzell}@amazon.com
Abstract
Salient

Self-supervised representation learning methods have
achieved significant success in computer vision and natural
language processing (NLP), where data samples exhibit
explicit spatial or semantic dependencies. However, applying
these methods to tabular data is challenging due to the less
pronounced dependencies among data samples. In this paper,
we address this limitation by introducing SwitchTab, a novel
self-supervised method specifically designed to capture
latent dependencies in tabular data. SwitchTab leverages
an asymmetric encoder-decoder framework to decouple
mutual and salient features among data pairs, resulting in
more representative embeddings. These embeddings, in turn,
contribute to better decision boundaries and lead to improved
results in downstream tasks. To validate the effectiveness
of SwitchTab, we conduct extensive experiments across
various domains involving tabular data. The results showcase
superior performance in end-to-end prediction tasks with
fine-tuning. Moreover, we demonstrate that pre-trained
salient embeddings can be utilized as plug-and-play features to enhance the performance of various traditional
classification methods (e.g., Logistic Regression, XGBoost,
etc.). Lastly, we highlight the capability of SwitchTab to
create explainable representations through visualization of
decoupled mutual and salient features in the latent space.

Image1

Mutual

Salient

Image2
City

Job

Degree

Data1

Chicago

Engineer

Ph.D.

Data2

New York

Trader

Ph.D.

Feature
Decoupling

Salient

Mutual

Salient

Engineer
Chicago

Ph.D.

Trader
New York

Engineer

Ph.D.
Big City

Trader

Figure 1: Given a pair of images, a person can easily distinguish the salient digits and mutual background due to the
well-structured spatial relationships. However, it becomes
challenging to distinguish a pair of tabular samples. For
instance, feature City may be salient between data points
“Chicago” and “New York” for word counts, however, still
sharing some latent mutual information (e.g., big cities),
making it challenging for decoupling. Note that this decoupling process is for illustration only. In the implementation,
all the decoupled samples are computed in the feature space.

Introduction
While representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013) has made remarkable advancements in computer
vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) domains, tabular data, which is ubiquitous in real-world applications and critical industries such as healthcare (Qayyum
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2017, 2019), manufacturing (Borisov
et al. 2022; Chen, Lu, and Li 2017; Wang et al. 2023a; Chen
et al. 2020a), agriculture (Liakos et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2022;
Tao et al. 2022) and various engineering fields (Chen et al.
2018; Zhu et al. 2018; Chen 2020; Wang et al. 2023b), has
not fully benefited from its transformative power and remains relatively unexplored. The unique challenges posed
by tabular datasets stem from their inherent heterogeneity,

which lacks explicit spatial relationships in images (e.g.,
similar background and distinct characters) or semantic dependencies in languages. Tabular data typically comprises
redundant features that are both numerical and categorical, exhibiting various discrete and continuous distributions
(Grinsztajn, Oyallon, and Varoquaux 2022). These features
can be either dependent or entirely independent from each
other, making it difficult for representation learning models to capture crucial latent features for effective decisionmaking or accurate predictions across diverse samples.
When comparing data samples, mutual features consists

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15924

