The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedMut: Generalized Federated Learning via Stochastic Mutation
Ming Hu1 , Yue Cao1 , Anran Li1 , Zhiming Li1 , Chengwei Liu1 , Tianlin Li1 ,
Mingsong Chen2 , Yang Liu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
MoE Engineering Research Center of SW/HW Co-Design Tech. and App., East China Normal University, China
ecnu hm@163.com, {CAOY0033, anran.li, zhiming001}@ntu.edu.sg, lcwj3ntu@gmail.com, tianlin001@ntu.edu.sg,
mschen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, yangliu@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

problem (Karimireddy et al. 2020). Since the traditional
FedAvg method only coarse-grained aggregates all the received local models to generate a global model, the conflict weights among local models cannot be wisely resolved.
Thus, the global model trained by FedAvg may easily be
worse-generalized. In other words, FL training may fall
into a worse-generalized local optimum. To address this issue, state-of-the-art FL optimization methods attempt to use
global variables (Karimireddy et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020),
client grouping strategies (Fraboni et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2020), or knowledge distillation technologies (Lin et al.
2020; Zhu, Hong, and Zhou 2021). Although these methods
can slightly improve the inference performance of the global
model, they still have serious limitations, e.g., requirements
of additional data or not compatible with the secure aggregation mechanism. Therefore, how to improve the inference
performance of secure FL without additional data has become an important challenge.
From the perspective of geometric, due to the data heterogeneity, the loss landscapes (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) of different clients are slightly different, where
a loss landscape shows the loss values of a target model
with different parameter values on a specific dataset. Specifically, a model may achieve a low inference loss in a client,
but may suffer from a higher inference loss in other clients.
Therefore, to train a high-performance global model, it is
important to optimize all the local models towards a more
generalized direction. Many previous works (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997; Stutz, Hein, and Schiele 2021; Foret
et al. 2020) observed that the well-generalized solutions are
located in flat areas rather than sharp areas of the loss landscapes. Typically, since the tasks of each local model are the
same, the loss landscapes of each client are still similar. Intuitively, there is a greater probability that the flat optimal
areas of different clients partially overlap compared to the
sharp optimal areas. In other words, when the model converges into the overlapping region, it can achieve a high inference performance in the majority of clients.
Figure 1 illustrates the loss landscapes of two clients (i.e.,
Client 1 and Client 2) with heterogeneous data. Figure 1(a)
shows the loss landscapes of Client 1 and Figure 1(b) shows
that of Client 2. Each client has two optimal areas, i.e.,
the sharp one (located at the bottom of the figure) and the
flat one (located at the top of the figure), respectively. Fig-

Although Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative
model training without sharing the raw data of clients, it encounters low-performance problems caused by various heterogeneous scenarios. Due to the limitation of dispatching
the same global model to clients for local training, traditional Federated Average (FedAvg)-based FL models face the
problem of easily getting stuck into a sharp solution, which
results in training a low-performance global model. To address this problem, this paper presents a novel FL approach
named FedMut, which mutates the global model according
to the gradient change to generate several intermediate models for the next round of training. Each intermediate model
will be dispatched to a client for local training. Eventually,
the global model converges into a flat area within the range
of mutated models and has a well-generalization compared
with the global model trained by FedAvg. Experimental results on well-known datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our FedMut approach in various data heterogeneity scenarios.

Introduction
As a well-known distribution machine learning paradigm,
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al.
2021c; Hu et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2023) has been widely
used in various applications, such as Internet of Things (IoT)
systems (Zhang et al. 2020b; Li et al. 2021a; Hu et al. 2023a;
Jia et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2021), medical health (Rieke et al.
2020), and digital finance (Long et al. 2020). Traditional
FL methods are based on the Federated Averaging (FedAvg)
mechanism, which dispatches a global model to multiple local clients and aggregates their trained local models to update the global model. In this way, FL can enable collaborative machine learning without sharing data. Furthermore, to
prevent privacy problems caused by gradient leakage, FedAvg adopts a secure aggregation mechanism (Bonawitz
et al. 2017).
Although FL is promising in protecting the privacy, its
performance is still seriously limited by data heterogeneity. Specifically, since the data on local clients are nonIID (Independent and Identically Distributed) (Huang et al.
2021), the optimization directions of local clients are divergent, resulting in the notorious “gradient divergence”
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12528

