The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond Mimicking Under-Represented Emotions: Deep Data Augmentation with
Emotional Subspace Constraints for EEG-Based Emotion Recognition
Zhi Zhang1,2 , Shenghua Zhong1, * , Yan Liu2
1

Shenzhen University, the College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen, 518052, Guangdong, China
2
the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, the Department of Computing, Hong Kong, 999077, China
zhi271.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, csshzhong@szu.edu.cn, yan.liu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

et al. 2017; Thammasan, Fukui, and Numao 2017). However, a significant challenge is that deep learning algorithms
require extensive training data to obtain high-performance
models (Li et al. 2021). Compared with image and natural language data, EEG data acquisition is labor-intensive
and time-consuming, resulting in limited available EEG data
(Wei et al. 2015; Lin and Jung 2017), which restricts the potential of deep learning algorithms (Hu et al. 2019).
To tackle this problem, data augmentation is widely applied. Traditional data augmentation methods, such as geometric transformation and noise addition, are often argued
to be unsuitable for EEG signals (Bao et al. 2021). If we rotate or shift the EEG data, the feature of time domain will be
destroyed (Wang et al. 2018). If the EEG signal is noisy, the
amplitude and data distribution of the original signal will be
changed. (Bao et al. 2021).
As an alternative, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) have garnered widespread attention for their ability
to mimic the observed distributions and generate real-like
augmented data (Bao et al. 2021; Luo and Lu 2018). GANs
depend heavily on extensive, diverse, and high-quality training examples (Zhao et al. 2020). However, several studies
that used public datasets are observed to have a high imbalance of emotional data (Wirawan, Wardoyo, and Lelono
2022). For example, the AMIGOS dataset (SantamariaGranados et al. 2018) is skewed toward higher arousal ratings, while the DEAP dataset (Koelstra et al. 2011) contains a higher proportion of positive emotions compared to
negative ones (Wang et al. 2022). We concur that current
GANs can generate real-like samples for well-represented
majority emotions. However, for underrepresented minority
categories, merely mimicking observed distributions can be
problematic, potentially leading to issues, e.g., mode collapse (Zheng et al. 2020). As depicted in Fig. 1(a), if an emotion category lacks sufficient data, mimicking the observed
distribution will increase sample density but not fulfill potential emotional subspaces like well-represented ones, hindering the development of unbiased emotion recognition
systems.
To overcome this challenge, we propose a novel paradigm
for augmenting EEG signals in emotion recognition, as depicted in Fig. 1(b). (1) We propose sampling EEG signals
from the majority category and using them as starting points
for generating new data. These EEG signals are considered

In recent years, using Electroencephalography (EEG) to recognize emotions has garnered considerable attention. Despite
advancements, limited EEG data restricts its potential. Thus,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are proposed to
mimic the observed distributions and generate EEG data.
However, for imbalanced datasets, GANs struggle to produce
reliable augmentations for under-represented minority emotions by merely mimicking them. Thus, we introduce Emotional Subspace Constrained Generative Adversarial Networks (ESC-GAN) as an alternative to existing frameworks.
We first propose the EEG editing paradigm, editing reference EEG signals from well-represented to under-represented
emotional subspaces. Then, we introduce diversity-aware and
boundary-aware losses to constrain the augmented subspace.
Here, the diversity-aware loss encourages a diverse emotional
subspace by enlarging the sample difference, while boundaryaware loss constrains the augmented subspace near the decision boundary where recognition models can be vulnerable. Experiments show ESC-GAN boosts emotion recognition performance on benchmark datasets, DEAP, AMIGOS,
and SEED, while protecting against potential adversarial attacks. Finally, the proposed method opens new avenues for
editing EEG signals under emotional subspace constraints,
facilitating unbiased and secure EEG data augmentation.

Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning technology, artificial intelligence systems have developed fantastic perception and computing capabilities. Nonetheless, it is critical to
enable AI to communicate emotionally with humans to meet
their emotional and psychological needs. To this end, affective computing strives to develop systems that bridge the gap
between human emotions and machine intelligence (Tao and
Tan 2005). In recent years, researchers have increasingly focused on analyzing the EEG of different emotions, applying
these research results to emotional artificial intelligence.
With the advancement of deep learning in image and natural language processing, attention is being paid to its application in EEG-based emotion recognition (Song et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Zhao, Yan, and Lu 2021; Tripathi
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10252

