The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Goal Interaction Graph Planning Framework for Conversational
Recommendation
Xiaotong Zhang, Xuefang Jia, Han Liu* , Xinyue Liu, Xianchao Zhang
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
zxt.dut@hotmail.com, jiaxuefang@hotmail.com, liu.han.dut@gmail.com, xyliu@dlut.edu.cn, xczhang@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

that they may make the final decisions during their interactions with the system (He et al. 2017). Furthermore, most
methods tend to focus solely on a single type of conversation, such as recommendation.
Recently, multi-goal conversational recommender system
(MG-CRS) (Liu et al. 2020) is proposed, which contains
various types of conversations, e.g. chitchat and QuestionAnswering (QA). MG-CRS aims to naturally guide the
conversation from non-recommended scenarios to recommended scenarios, and proactively recommend to the user,
which is more closer to realistic scenarios (Ram et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2014). Figure 1 shows a conversation in MGCRS, along with the user profile, the domain knowledge,
and a goal sequence with each goal containing two levels
of goals (goal type and goal entity). The two-level goal sequences allow for greater control over the flow of dialogue
and keep the dialogue as consistent as possible. Planning
reasonable goal sequences for dialogues is a core issue in
MG-CRS. Guided by the planned goal sequence, the system
controls the transition of the dialogue and naturally leads the
users to accept the goal at the end of the sequence.
To tackle this challenging task, MGCG (Liu et al. 2020)
uses a CNN-based classifier to plan the goal sequences with
dialogue history and the previous goal. Some methods such
as TCP (Wang, Lin, and Li 2022), UniMIND (Deng et al.
2022), and TPNet (Wang, Lin, and Li 2023b) regard the goal
planning task as a seq2seq paradigm (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014). In particular, TCP constructs a target-driven
conversation planner to plan the goal path. UniMIND generates goals by finetuning a pretrained language model. TPNet is also a target-driven method and employs task-specific
prompts for dialogue generation. Although these methods
have considered various dialogue information as shown in
Figure 1, but they neglect to capture the correlations between
goals, which is helpful for predicting subsequent goals (Liu
et al. 2022). To solve this issue, MGNN (Liu et al. 2022)
constructs a hierarchical goal graph to capture the correlations of goals, and learns goal representations through GCN
(Kipf and Welling 2017) for information propagation. However, MGNN separately propagates the representations of
goal types and entities by GCN, and the information of goal
entities can only be transferred to the goal type via a topic
gate, which cannot capture the high-order relations between
different levels of goals. Moreover, the edges of the graphs

Multi-goal conversational recommender system (MG-CRS)
which is more in line with realistic scenarios has attracted
a lot of attention. MG-CRS can dynamically capture the demands of users in conversation, continuously engage their interests, and make recommendations. The key of accomplishing these tasks is to plan a reasonable goal sequence which
can naturally guide the user to accept the recommended goal.
Previous works have demonstrated that mining the correlations of goals from the goal sequences in the dialogue corpus
is helpful for recommending the goal that the user is interested in. However, they independently model correlations for
each level of goal (i.e., goal type or entity) and neglect the
order of goals appear in the dialogue. In this paper, we propose a goal interaction graph planning framework which constructs a directed heterogeneous graph to flexibly model the
correlations between any level of goals and retain the order
of goals. We design a goal interaction graph learning module to model the goal correlations and propagate goal representations via directed edges, then use an encoder and a
dual-way fusion decoder to extract the most relevant information with the current goal from the conversation and domain
knowledge, making the next-goal prediction fully exploit the
prior goal correlations and user feedback. Finally we generate engaging responses based on the predicted goal sequence
to complete the recommendation task. Experiments on two
benchmark datasets show that our method achieves significant improvements in both the goal planning and response
generation tasks.

Introduction
Conversational recommendation system (CRS) supports its
users to achieve recommendation-related goals through a
multi-turn dialogue (Jannach et al. 2022; Lei et al. 2020),
and has been widely applied to voice assistants (Jannach
et al. 2022), sociable recommendation (Hayati et al. 2020),
and the e-commerce sites (Reschke, Vogel, and Jurafsky
2013; Fu et al. 2020), which not only improves user experience by providing them with rich choices, but also provides
great commercial value (Jannach and Jugovac 2019; Chen
et al. 2019). However, previous methods often assume that
users clearly know their preferences, disregarding the fact
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19578

