The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unveiling Implicit Deceptive Patterns in Multi-Modal Fake News
via Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning
Yiqi Dong1 , Dongxiao He1,2 * , Xiaobao Wang2 * , Youzhu Jin3 , Meng Ge4 , Carl Yang5 , Di Jin1,2
1

2

School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
3
Beijing-Dublin International College, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China,
4
Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
5
Department of Computer Science, Emory University, Georgia, USA.
{dongyiqi, hedongxiao,wangxiaobao}@tju.edu.cn, youzhu.jin@ucdconnect.ie, gemeng@nus.edu.sg,
j.carlyang@emory.edu, jindi@tju.edu.cn.
Abstract

In the current Internet landscape, the rampant spread of fake
news, particularly in the form of multi-modal content, poses
a great social threat. While automatic multi-modal fake news
detection methods have shown promising results, the lack
of explainability remains a significant challenge. Existing
approaches provide superficial explainability by displaying
learned important components or views from well-trained
networks, but they often fail to uncover the implicit deceptive patterns that reveal how fake news is fabricated. To address this limitation, we begin by predefining three typical deceptive patterns, namely image manipulation, cross-modal inconsistency, and image repurposing, which shed light on the
mechanisms underlying fake news fabrication. Then, we propose a novel Neuro-Symbolic Latent Model called NSLM,
that not only derives accurate judgments on the veracity of
news but also uncovers the implicit deceptive patterns as explanations. Specifically, the existence of each deceptive pattern is expressed as a two-valued learnable latent variable,
which is acquired through amortized variational inference
and weak supervision based on symbolic logic rules. Additionally, we devise pseudo-siamese networks to capture distinct deceptive patterns effectively. Experimental results on
two real-world datasets demonstrate that our NSLM achieves
the best performance in fake news detection while providing
insightful explanations of deceptive patterns.

1

A picture authentically shows
former U.S. President Donald
Trump holding a "24-karat,
gold-plated Trump bill."

This is Elon musk and his parent.
They had a black women helper.
Who was not allowed to seat on
their sofas.

(a) Image manipulation

(b) Image repurposing

Figure 1: Typical examples of fake news manifesting different deceptive patterns.

(LLMs) such as ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023), which inadvertently generates and propagates fake information due to AI
hallucination (Goldstein et al. 2023). On the other hand, the
Internet is increasingly flooded with multi-modal (e.g., text
and image) online posts, renowned for their heightened allure and deceptive attributes (Cao et al. 2020). Consequently,
developing automatic detection systems to verify and combat multi-modal fake news has become an urgent necessity.
Existing efforts utilizing Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
have been made to tackle the multi-modal fake news detection problem by integrating various features (Dhawan et al.
2022) by constructing graph (Jin et al. 2022a,b) or exploring cross-modal correlations (Qi et al. 2021; Dong et al.
2023). While achieving promising results, such methods
often lack explainability and are commonly referred to as
“black boxes”, as they focus on learning unclear latent features (Mishima and Yamana 2022). Poor explainability not
only extremely undermines user trust but also impedes system debugging and upgrading. Recently, several approaches
have attempted to provide explanations by highlighting the
contributive semantics components within text description
and image region (Wu, Liu, and Zhang 2023), exhibiting

Introduction

Nowadays, the Internet’s rapid expansion has greatly facilitated the dissemination and acquisition of information.
However, this also provides an avenue for malicious actors
to fabricate and spread fake news with ulterior motives. The
ubiquity of fake news makes it challenging for individuals to
discern reliable information online and significantly threatens the modern media ecosystem (Allcott and Gentzkow
2017; Wang et al. 2023). This hazard becomes even more
evident against the backdrop of Large Language Models
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8354

