The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Runtime Analysis of the (µ + 1) GA: Provable Speed-Ups
from Strong Drift towards Diverse Populations
Benjamin Doerr1 , Aymen Echarghaoui2 , Mohammed Jamal2 , Martin S. Krejca1
1

Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), CNRS, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
2
École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
firstname.lastname@polytechnique.edu

Abstract

block hypothesis (Holland 1975) also struggled to explain
crossover (Mitchell, Holland, and Forrest 1993)).
The main difficulty towards understanding crossover via
mathematical tools are the usually complicated population
dynamics. We note that even when only regarding mutationbased algorithms, still the majority of runtime analyses regards algorithms with trivial populations such as randomized local search or the (1 + 1) EA. The particular difficulty
when adding crossover is that we need to understand the diversity of the population. Crossover can only be effective
when sufficiently different, good solutions are available.
This core problem is easily visible in the existing runtime analyses of crossover-based algorithms. That diversity,
more precisely, arriving at a state with a diverse population,
is the crucial ingredient for profiting from crossover was
already discussed very clearly in the first runtime analysis
of a crossover-based algorithm (Jansen and Wegener 2002),
which analyzes how the (µ + 1) genetic algorithm (GA) optimizes the J UMP benchmark. Unfortunately, the positive effect of crossover could be shown here only for unrealistically
small crossover rates. Doerr, Happ, and Klein (2012), without taking uncommon assumptions, showed an advantage of
crossover when solving the all-pairs-shortest-path problem.
This problem, asking for a short path between any two vertices, already in the problem definition contains a strong diversity mechanism that in particular prevents the population
from converging to a single genotype. Consequently, it is
not clear how the insights gained in that work extend to algorithms without diversity mechanisms.
The maybe most convincing proof for an advantage from
crossover was given by Dang et al. (2018), who again regarded how the (µ + 1) GA optimizes J UMP functions. Interestingly, without particular modifications of the algorithm
or non-standard parameter settings, the authors managed to
show that the (µ + 1) GA repeatedly arrives at diverse populations and keeps this diversity for a moderate time. More
precisely, once the population is concentrated on the local
optima of the J UMP function, it takes an expected time of
O(nµ + µ2 log µ) iterations to reach a population in which
all genotype classes contain at most µ/2 individuals. A diversity of the order of magnitude is kept for an expected
number of O(µ2 ) iterations. Given these numbers, the best
runtime results are obtained for a relatively large population
sizes of order Θ̃(n), where a runtime gain of roughly a factor

Most evolutionary algorithms used in practice heavily employ crossover. In contrast, the rigorous understanding of how
crossover is beneficial is largely lagging behind. In this work,
we make a considerable step forward by analyzing the population dynamics of the (µ + 1) genetic algorithm when optimizing the J UMP benchmark. We observe (and prove via
mathematical means) that once the population contains two
different individuals on the local optimum, the diversity in
the population increases in expectation. From this drift towards more diverse states, we show that a diversity suitable
for crossover to be effective is reached quickly and, more importantly, then persists for a time that is at least exponential in
the population size µ. This drastically improves over the previously best known guarantee, which is only quadratic in µ.
Our new understanding of the population dynamics easily
gives stronger performance guarantees. In particular, we derive that population sizes logarithmic in the problem size n
already suffice to gain an Ω(n)-factor runtime improvement
from crossover (previous works achieved comparable bounds
only with µ = Θ(n) or via a non-standard mutation rate).

Introduction
The vast majority of the applications of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) uses crossover, that is, new solutions (offspring) are generated from two existing solutions (parents).
Surprisingly, there is very little rigorous evidence for the
usefulness of crossover. This is not only a fundamental open
question, but more importantly also indicates that our understanding of the working principles of crossover is very limited, which means that there is very little trustworthy advice
how to best employ crossover in evolutionary algorithms.
In this work, we shall analyze crossover via theoretical means, more specifically, via mathematical runtime analyses, which have given many important insights
and explanations in the past (Neumann and Witt 2010;
Auger and Doerr 2011; Jansen 2013; Zhou, Yu, and Qian
2019; Doerr and Neumann 2020). Unfortunately, when it
comes to understanding crossover, the mathematical runtime analysis area was not very successful (but we note that
other attempts to understand crossover, e.g., the building
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20683

