The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Preventing Eviction-Caused Homelessness through ML-Informed Distribution of
Rental Assistance
Catalina Vajiac* 1 , Arun Frey* 2 , Joachim Baumann* 3,4 , Abigail Smith* 5 ,
Kasun Amarasinghe1 , Alice Lai1 , Kit Rodolfa2 , Rayid Ghani1
1

Carnegie Mellon University,
2
Stanford University,
3
University of Zurich,
4
Zurich University of Applied Sciences,
5
NORC at the University of Chicago
cvajiac@cs.cmu.edu, arunfrey@law.stanford.edu, baumann@ifi.uzh.ch, als1@u.northwestern.edu, {kamarasi, alicelai,
ghani}@andrew.cmu.edu, krodolfa@law.stanford.edu

Abstract

to keep them stably housed. Experimental evidence suggests that such assistance is effective at reducing subsequent homelessness: using quasi-random variation in funding availability of a rental assistance program in Chicago,
it was shown that individuals who called when funding was
available were 76% less likely to become homeless in the
subsequent 6 months compared to those who called when
funding was unavailable (Evans, Sullivan, and Wallskog
2016). A similar program in NYC randomized the provision
of financial assistance to households and reduced average
days in shelter from 32 nights among the control group to
10 nights among the treatment group in the 2 years following funding (Rolston, Geyer, and Locke 2013).
For rental assistance programs to be a viable homelessness prevention strategy, they need to be effective (i.e. prevent individuals from falling into homelessness), efficient
(i.e. target individuals at risk of falling into homelessness)
(Burt 2007), and equitable. Currently, however, these programs prioritize individuals based on simple heuristics (e.g.
first come, first served) instead of their likelihood of future
homelessness. In addition, they place the burden of applying
for funding on the individuals facing eviction and overlook
those who need help but do not apply. The administrative
process can create long delays, so that even eligible tenants
often remain on a waitlist for multiple months and can end
up evicted before they receive assistance.
In this paper, we describe our collaboration with the Allegheny County Department of Human Services (ACDHS)
to improve the allocation of rental assistance by prioritizing
individuals with the highest likelihood of falling into homelessness. We combine rich county and state administrative
data with court records to predict homelessness among all
individuals currently facing eviction, regardless of whether
they contacted the county for financial support. Using data
from January 2012 through August 2023, we develop a series of machine learning (ML) models that predict a tenant’s
need for homelessness services in the next 12 months, allowing ACDHS to proactively prioritize rental assistance to
the most vulnerable tenants. In particular, we make the fol-

Rental assistance programs provide individuals with financial assistance to prevent housing instabilities caused by evictions and avert homelessness. Since these programs operate
under resource constraints, they must decide who to prioritize. Typically, funding is distributed by a reactive or firstcome-first serve allocation process that does not systematically consider risk of future homelessness. We partnered with
Allegheny County, PA to explore a proactive allocation approach that prioritizes individuals facing eviction based on
their risk of future homelessness. Our ML system that uses
state and county administrative data to accurately identify individuals in need of support outperforms simpler prioritization approaches by at least 20% while being fair and equitable
across race and gender. Furthermore, our approach would
identify 28% of individuals who are overlooked by the current process and end up homeless. Beyond improvements to
the rental assistance program in Allegheny County, this study
can inform the development of evidence-based decision support tools in similar contexts, including lessons about data
needs, model design, evaluation, and field validation.

1

Introduction

Homelessness remains a pervasive and pressing issue across
the United States. In January 2022, more than 500k individuals experienced homelessness on a single night (de Sousa
et al. 2022). Rising eviction rates and the lack of affordable
housing contribute to this problem: as the gap between housing costs and income levels continues to grow, an increasing
number of households struggle to pay rent, eventually facing
eviction and, in some cases, homelessness.
To curb rates of homelessness, policymakers are increasingly seeking to reduce the rate of entry into homelessness
(Culhane, Metraux, and Byrne 2011). One popular prevention strategy is rental assistance programs, which provide
temporary financial assistance to individuals facing eviction
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22393

