The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Algorithmic Foundation of Federated Learning with Sequential Data
Mingrui Liu
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University
4400 University Drive, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
mingruil@gmu.edu

his Ph.D. in Computer Science at The University of Iowa in
August 2020. His research interests include machine learning, mathematical optimization, statistical learning theory,
and deep learning. He has served as an area chair for NeurIPS/AISTATS/IJCAI. Dr. Liu has published over 20 papers on
leading machine learning venues such as NeurIPS, ICML,
ICLR and JMLR. He has co-organized the CVPR 2022 tutorial on AUC maximization (Yang et al. 2022). His work (Liu
et al. 2022; Ji et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2020; Hao, Gong, and
Liu 2024) received spotlights at NeurIPS and ICLR.

Abstract
The current analysis of federated optimization algorithms for
training deep neural networks assumes that the data is nonsequential (e.g., images), which incurs a smooth loss objective. In contrast, edge devices generate lots of sequential data
every day, where these sequences exhibit significant sequential correlation at different time stamps (e.g., text messages).
In order to learn from such sequential data, people typically
use a class of neural networks that is inherently nonsmooth,
with a potentially unbounded smoothness parameter. Examples include recurrent neural networks, long-short-term memory networks, and transformers. It remains unclear how to
design provably efficient algorithms for training these neural
networks to learn from sequential data. My goal is to lay the
algorithmic foundation of federated learning with sequential
data, which contributes novel algorithms for learning from
a range of real-world sequential data (e.g., natural language,
electronic health record, transportation, time series, etc.) using state-of-the-art deep neural networks.
In this talk, I will first motivate the problem by showing
that the transformer, which is widely used for sequential data
learning, has an unbounded smooth landscape. Then, I will
introduce provably efficient federated deep learning algorithms in the presence of unbounded smoothness. In particular, I will introduce a few efficient algorithms for various
settings of federated learning, including homogeneous data,
heterogeneous data, and partial client participation. The main
result is twofold. First, we show that the designed algorithms
provably small computational and communication complexities. Second, we establish fundamental hardness results in the
unbounded smoothness setting. Ultimately, I will discuss the
future challenges of extending our research framework from
medium-scale neural networks to large language models.

References
Crawshaw, M.; Bao, Y.; and Liu, M. 2023a. EPISODE:
Episodic Gradient Clipping with Periodic Resampled Corrections for Federated Learning with Heterogeneous Data.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.
Crawshaw, M.; Bao, Y.; and Liu, M. 2023b. Federated
Learning with Client Subsampling, Data Heterogeneity, and
Unbounded Smoothness: A New Algorithm and Lower
Bounds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Crawshaw, M.; Liu, M.; Orabona, F.; Zhang, W.; and
Zhuang, Z. 2022. Robustness to Unbounded Smoothness
of Generalized SignSGD. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Guo, Y.; Liu, M.; Yang, T.; and Rosing, T. 2020. Improved
Schemes for Episodic Memory-based Lifelong Learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33.
Hao, J.; Gong, X.; and Liu, M. 2024. Bilevel Optimization
under Unbounded Smoothness: A New Algorithm and Convergence Analysis. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Ji, K.; Liu, M.; Liang, Y.; and Ying, L. 2022. Will Bilevel
Optimizers Benefit from Loops. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Liu, M.; Zhuan, Z.; Lei, Y.; and Liao, C. 2022. A
Communication-Efficient Distributed Gradient Clipping Algorithm for Training Deep Neural Networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Yang, T.; Ying, Y.; Narasimhan, H.; and Liu, M. 2022. Deep
AUC Maximization: From Algorithms to Practice. IEEE /
CVF Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference.

Federated Learning with Sequential Data. This talk involves the line of work (Liu et al. 2022; Crawshaw, Bao,
and Liu 2023a,b), which focus on federated optimization algorithms for autoregressive models. These models, including transformer, are shown to have unbounded smoothness
parameter (Crawshaw et al. 2022).
Biography. Dr. Mingrui Liu is an assistant professor at the
Department of Computer Science at George Mason University since August 2021. Before that he was a postdoctoral
fellow at Boston University from 2020-2021. He received
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22675

