The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DocFormerv2: Local Features for Document Understanding
Srikar Appalaraju1 * , Peng Tang1 , Qi Dong1 , Nishant Sankaran1 , Yichu Zhou2 † , R. Manmatha1
1

AWS AI Labs
School of Computing at University of Utah
{srikara, tangpen, qdon, nishsank, manmatha}@amazon.com, flyaway@cs.utah.edu
2

Abstract
We propose DocFormerv2, a multi-modal transformer for
Visual Document Understanding (VDU). The VDU domain
entails understanding documents (beyond mere OCR predictions) e.g., extracting information from a form, VQA
for documents and other tasks. VDU is challenging as it
needs a model to make sense of multiple modalities (visual, language and spatial) to make a prediction. Our approach, termed DocFormerv2 is an encoder-decoder transformer which takes as input - vision, language and spatial
features. DocFormerv2 is pre-trained with unsupervised tasks
employed asymmetrically i.e., two novel document tasks on
encoder and one on the auto-regressive decoder. The unsupervised tasks have been carefully designed to ensure that
the pre-training encourages local-feature alignment between
multiple modalities. DocFormerv2 when evaluated on nine
challenging datasets shows state-of-the-art performance on
all over strong baselines - On TabFact (+4.3%), InfoVQA
(+1.4%), FUNSD (+1.0%). Furthermore, to show generalization capabilities, on three VQA tasks involving scene-text,
DocFormerv2 outperforms previous comparably-sized models and even does better than much larger models (such as
GIT2, PaLI and Flamingo) on these tasks. Extensive ablations
show that due to its novel pre-training tasks, DocFormerv2
understands multiple modalities better than prior-art in VDU.

Figure 1: Visual Document Understanding: Snippet of a document receipt from DocVQA (Mathew, Karatzas, and Jawahar 2021). VDU tasks could include a model asked to predict
”SOLD TO” address (VQA) or predict all relations (”SOLD
TO” → <address>, ”SHIP TO” → <address>) or asked to
infer info from table (at the top).

from documents, the naive approach of linearizing the OCRtext and feeding it to a language model is sub-optimal. This
is because the content of a document is presented according to a visual layout and structure that must be taken into
account for accurate understanding. Naively linearizing the
text from left-to-right will result in sub-optimal performance
as the semantic meaning alters based on layout, as shown in
Figure 1 - Table 5,4 has experiments demonstrating this. Instead, VDU requires a multi-modal approach that can comprehend text and visual features in the context of a document’s 2D layout.
Multi-modal training in general entails feature alignment.
Specific to vision-language learning this means aligning a
piece of text with an arbitrary span of pixels in visual space
(Ho et al. 2022; Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Radford et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022a; Alayrac et al. 2022; Biten et al.
2022; Appalaraju et al. 2021; Hao et al. 2023; Appalaraju
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022b). How those features are aligned makes a big difference. In VDU, a majority
of the tasks require local and layout-relative understanding
of the document. For example, in document VQA, semantic
labeling or entity extraction, a model needs to make sense
of text in-relation to where the text is placed in a document.
E.g.: ”1” when placed at the top-right/bottom-left of a document is to be interpreted as a page-number vs as a number
when placed anywhere else.
Based on this domain understanding of VDU and its

Introduction
Documents have become ubiquitous carriers of information,
including forms, tables, invoices, and other structured documents. Many such documents require visual and layout understanding to make sense (just the text string is insufficient). Visual Document Understanding (VDU) is the task
of leveraging machine learning techniques to comprehend
such scanned documents, such as PDFs or images. Popular VDU tasks include Document and Tables VQA (Mathew
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019), sequence labeling for keyvalue identification in forms (Jaume, Ekenel, and Thiran
2019), entity extraction (Seunghyun et al. 2019), and document classification (Harley, Ufkes, and Derpanis 2015).
While modern deep-learning based OCR models (Litman
et al. 2020) have proven to be effective in extracting text
* Corresponding author.
†

Work conducted during an internship at Amazon.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

709

