The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LR-XFL: Logical Reasoning-Based Explainable Federated Learning
Yanci Zhang, Han Yu
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Joint NTU-WeBank Research Centre on Fintech, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{yanci001, han.yu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

humans by providing explanations. A wide range of studies
have successfully provided explanations for black-box AI
models. For instance, approaches like Grad-CAM (Selvaraju
et al. 2017) analyse the output of the final convolutional
layer of a given neural network and calculate how changes
to each region of an input image affect the output to identify the most important image regions for decision-making.
Model-agnostic algorithms like SHAP (Lundberg and Lee
2017) and LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) assess the importance of features at the instance level. However, these approaches cannot clearly illustrate the model
decision-making processes, but rather provide a post-hoc
analysis of the models.
Concept-based models, as a bridge between symbolic AI
(based on rules and logic) and statistical AI (e.g., neural networks), extract concepts from the model by mapping the
hidden information of the last layer of neurons in a neural network to human-understandable concepts (Kim et al.
2018) or constraining concepts as a part of a neural network (Koh et al. 2020). However, the concepts are still isolated and at the instance level. Logic rules, however, can
connect the activated concepts during the prediction to illustrate the reasoning process (Lee et al. 2022). Instance-level
logic rules can be further connected to form a global classlevel rule (Barbiero et al. 2022). Such logic-based explanations are beneficial as they illustrate the decision-making
process in a manner that is readily understood by humans.
Traditional logic-based concept models are designed for
centralised AI frameworks and cannot be directly applied in
FL settings. Integrating logic rules into FL faces three important challenges:
1. Local Accuracy vs. Global Representativeness:
Clients, with access to only partial or potentially skewed
data, may derive rules that seem accurate within their
local context but could introduce biases or misrepresent
the broader global perspective. It is imperative for the
server to generate comprehensive and globally accurate
rules.
2. Conflict Resolution and Rule Combination: The merging of logic rules at a central server can lead to conflicts.
A simplistic connection of local rules using the logical
‘AND’ operator might introduce conflicts, and combining rules with the ‘OR’ operator could dilute the overall
rule accuracy. Moreover, determining the optimal com-

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging approach for training machine learning models collaboratively while preserving
data privacy. The need for privacy protection makes it difficult
for FL models to achieve global transparency and explainability. To address this limitation, we incorporate logic-based explanations into FL by proposing the Logical Reasoning-based
eXplainable Federated Learning (LR-XFL) approach. Under
LR-XFL, FL clients create local logic rules based on their local data and send them, along with model updates, to the FL
server. The FL server connects the local logic rules through a
proper logical connector that is derived based on properties of
client data, without requiring access to the raw data. In addition, the server also aggregates the local model updates with
weight values determined by the quality of the clients’ local data as reflected by their uploaded logic rules. The results
show that LR-XFL outperforms the most relevant baseline by
1.19%, 5.81% and 5.41% in terms of classification accuracy,
rule accuracy and rule fidelity, respectively. The explicit rule
evaluation and expression under LR-XFL enable human experts to validate and correct the rules on the server side, hence
improving the global FL model’s robustness to errors. It has
the potential to enhance the transparency of FL models for
areas like healthcare and finance where both data privacy and
explainability are important.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (Kairouz, McMahan et al. 2021) is
a collaborative training paradigm that jointly trains artificial
intelligence (AI) models from a set of FL clients without
exposing their local data. Under the guidance of a central
server, clients improve their local models from the information gained from other clients. The general idea is that
clients upload their model updates rather than data to the FL
server. The server aggregates the received models and returns the updated global model to clients so that they can further train it. This privacy-protection joint training schema,
however, introduces complexities, particularly in explaining
the decision-making process, given the server’s lack of direct access to client datasets.
Explainable AI (XAI) (Gunning et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2019; Yu et al. 2014) is gaining attention in recent years. The
aim of XAI is to make AI model behaviours interpretable to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21788

