The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Frequency Shuffling and Enhancement for Open Set Recognition
Lijun Liu1,2 , Rui Wang1,2 * , Yuan Wang3 ,
Lihua Jing1,2 , Chuan Wang1
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Electronic Engineering,Tsinghua University
{liulijun, wangrui, jinglihua, wangchuan}@iie.ac.cn, wy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Training

Abstract
Open-Set Recognition (OSR) aims to accurately identify
known classes while effectively rejecting unknown classes
to guarantee reliability. Most existing OSR methods focus
on learning in the spatial domain, where subtle texture and
global structure are potentially intertwined. Empirical studies
have shown that DNNs trained in the original spatial domain
are inclined to over-perceive subtle texture. The biased semantic perception could lead to catastrophic over-confidence
when predicting both known and unknown classes. To this
end, we propose an innovative approach by decomposing the
spatial domain to the frequency domain to separately consider
global (low-frequency) and subtle (high-frequency) information, named Frequency Shuffling and Enhancement (FreSH).
To alleviate the overfitting of subtle texture, we introduce the
High-Frequency Shuffling (HFS) strategy that generates diverse high-frequency information and promotes the capture
of low-frequency invariance. Moreover, to enhance the perception of global structure, we propose the Low-Frequency
Residual (LFR) learning procedure that constructs a composite feature space, integrating low-frequency and original
spatial features. Experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed FreSH consistently trumps the stateof-the-arts by a considerable margin.

High
Original

Open Set AUROC

95

Low
Ours

80
65
50

Qriginal High

Low

Ours

80

85
90
95
Closed Set Accuracy

Figure 1: A comparison of spatial-domain models trained
with the high-frequency band, low-frequency band, original spatial images, and the FreSH on four datasets. CNNs
trained with the original images exhibit similar performance
trends to those trained with low-frequency bands.

discriminative-based methods. The generative-based methods generate unknown classes (Ge et al. 2017; Chen et al.
2021b) or reconstruct known classes (Oza and Patel 2019;
Huang et al. 2022). The discriminative-based methods focus on designing various distance loss functions to constrain
embedding distributions (Chen et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2022).
However, the above methods train with the original spatialdomain images (marked as ‘Original’ in Figure 1), where
the global structure and local texture of the object are potentially coupled together. In fact, these semantic elements play
distinct roles during representation learning. Inspired by the
frequency domain theory, the spatial-domain image can be
disassembled through frequency transformation (Wang et al.
2020; Yao et al. 2022), where the global structure is encompassed within low-frequency bands (marked as ‘Low’
in Figure 1), and the local texture is contained in highfrequency bands (marked as ‘High’).
As illustrated in the left of Figure 1, it is more straightforward for humans to identify low-frequency images
compared to unintuitive high-frequency images. And this
observation has also inspired other computer vision researchers (Van den Branden Lambrecht and Kunt 1998;
Luo et al. 2022). However, empirical studies on neural networks (Yin et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020) reveal that CNNs
trained in the original spatial domain are more inclined to

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have dominated various
visual recognition tasks and yielded outstanding performance (He et al. 2016; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2017). Traditional DNNs show strong capabilities in ClosedSet Recognition (CSR), where test samples are limited to
known classes that appeared in training phase (i.e., closedset). In the more realistic and challenging open-set setting,
the model may face unknown classes (i.e., open-set) during
inference, and vanilla DNNs tend to predict them incorrectly
as known classes with high confidence (Yang et al. 2020).
Recently, the Open-Set Recognition (OSR) task (Scheirer
et al. 2012) has drawn considerable attention, which not only
requires distinguishing between the training categories but
also indicates whether an image belongs to a category that
has never encountered (Yang et al. 2020). Existing efforts
for OSR are inspired by two aspects: generative-based and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3675

