The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Instance-Conditional Timescales of Decay for Non-Stationary Learning
Nishant Jain, Pradeep Shenoy
Google Research India
{nishantjn, shenoypradeep}@google.com

Abstract

2

0

C

Ye

LE

G
eo

Lo

We study the problem of concept drift–a slow change in patterns of input data and label associations over time–in supervised models trained in an offline or batch-learning fashion
(see e.g., (Yao et al. 2022)). Although concept drift is ubiquitous in user-facing AI applications, prevalent practice is still
to train batch-learned models from scratch on newer data
at regular intervals. By giving equal weight to each training instance, standard batch-learned models overemphasize
past, irrelevant data. Alternative approaches favor sequential updates in a streaming data setting, including online
learning (Hazan et al. 2016), and continual learning (Zeno
et al. 2018; Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019;
Delange et al. 2021). These approaches are myopic by design (i.e., only have access to the very latest data) and typically overemphasize recent data–in particular, they implicitly downweight past data exponentially as a function of instance age (see e.g., Hoeven, Erven, and Kotłowski (2018);
Jones et al. (2023)).
We believe that modeling concept drift can benefit substantially from a richer representational language for importance weighting to improve forward transfer, and an

4

c
-1
00
a
FM rbo
oW ok
-T
im
e
M
IM
I
C
H
uf
fp
os
t
Ar
xi
v
W
in
d
Ai
rli
ne
G
as
N
ew
s
Tr
af
fic

Introduction

Performance Gains on Various Datasets

6

AR

1

% Gain over best baseline

Slow concept drift is a ubiquitous, yet under-studied problem
in practical machine learning systems. In such settings, although recent data is more indicative of future data, naively
prioritizing recent instances runs the risk of losing valuable information from the past. We propose an optimizationdriven approach towards balancing instance importance over
large training windows. First, we model instance relevance
using a mixture of multiple timescales of decay, allowing us
to capture rich temporal trends. Second, we learn an auxiliary scorer model that recovers the appropriate mixture of
timescales as a function of the instance itself. Finally, we propose a nested optimization objective for learning the scorer,
by which it maximizes forward transfer for the learned model.
Experiments on a large real-world dataset of 39M photos over
a 9 year period show upto 15% relative gains in accuracy
compared to other robust learning baselines. We replicate
our gains on two collections of real-world datasets for nonstationary learning, and extend our work to continual learning
settings where, too, we beat SOTA methods by large margins.

Datasets

Figure 1: M U S CAT E L: (a) Our approach significantly improves model performance on future data compared to bestperforming baselines. (b) Gains are replicated across a wide
range of real-world datasets. See text for details.
optimization-driven approach towards effectively estimating
the relevance of past information for future performance. Towards this end, we make 3 technical contributions: First, we
model the age-dependent importance of an instance using
a mixture of exponential basis functions, allowing significant flexibility in capturing temporal trends. Second, we
customize importance weights for individual instances by
learning an auxiliary instance-conditional importance scor-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12773

