The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When Model Meets New Normals:
Test-Time Adaptation for Unsupervised Time-Series Anomaly Detection
Dongmin Kim, Sunghyun Park, Jaegul Choo
KAIST
tommy.dm.kim@kaist.ac.kr, psh01087@kaist.ac.kr, jchoo@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Time-series anomaly detection deals with the problem of detecting anomalous timesteps by learning normality from the
sequence of observations. However, the concept of normality evolves over time, leading to a "new normal problem",
where the distribution of normality can be changed due to the
distribution shifts between training and test data. This paper
highlights the prevalence of the new normal problem in unsupervised time-series anomaly detection studies. To tackle
this issue, we propose a simple yet effective test-time adaptation strategy based on trend estimation and a self-supervised
approach to learning new normalities during inference. Extensive experiments on real-world benchmarks demonstrate that
incorporating the proposed strategy into the anomaly detector
consistently improves the model’s performance compared to
the baselines, leading to robustness to the distribution shifts.

Introduction
In real-world monitoring systems, the continuous operation
of numerous sensors generates substantial real-time measurements. Time-series anomaly detection aims to identify observations that deviate from the concept of normality (Ruff et al.
2021; Pang et al. 2022) within a sequence of observations.
Examples of anomalous events include physical attacks on
industrial systems (Mathur and Tippenhauer 2016; Han et al.
2021), unpredictable robot behavior (Park, Hoshi, and Kemp
2018), faulty sensors from wide-sensor networks (Wang,
Kuang, and Duan 2015; Rassam, Maarof, and Zainal 2018),
cybersecurity attacks (Su et al. 2019; Abdulaal, Liu, and
Lancewicki 2021), and spacecraft malfunctions (Hundman
et al. 2018; Shin et al. 2020; Liu, Liu, and Peng 2016).
However, detecting abnormal timesteps presents significant challenges due to several factors. Firstly, the complex
nature of system dynamics, characterized by the coordination
of multiple sensors, complicates the task. Secondly, the increasing volume of incoming signals to monitoring systems
adds to the difficulty. Lastly, acquiring labels for abnormal
behaviors is problematic. To address these challenges, unsupervised time-series anomaly detection models (Xu et al.
2022; Audibert et al. 2020; Su et al. 2019; Park, Hoshi, and
Kemp 2018; Malhotra et al. 2016) have emerged, focusing
on learning normal patterns from available training datasets.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13113

Nevertheless, the concept of normality can change over
time, widely known as a distribution shift (QuinoneroCandela et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2022b; Sun et al. 2020;
Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz 2021; Wang et al. 2021, 2022),
as can be seen in the Fig. 1-(a). We have observed that offthe-shelf models are susceptible to such shifts, leading to a
"new normal problem", where the distribution of normality
during test time cannot be fully characterized solely based
on training data. Without consideration of distribution shifts,
these models tend to rely on past observations and generate
false alarms, compromising the consistency of monitoring
systems (Dragoi et al. 2022; Cao, Zhu, and Pang 2023).
Recently, test-time adaptation mechanisms (Wang et al.
2021, 2022; Niu et al. 2022) have been proposed to adapt
models for alleviating performance degradation due to distribution shifts between training and test datasets, especially
in the computer vision field. Test-time adaptation methods
update the model parameters to generalize to different data
distributions, without relying on either additional supervision
from labels or access to training data. Time-series anomaly
detection task also shares motivation for applying test-time
adaptation strategies; frequent access to past data for adaptation is costly as monitoring systems work in real-time (Abdulaal, Liu, and Lancewicki 2021; Shin et al. 2020; Su et al.
2019) and model update without supervision is desired as acquiring labels is often limited (Geiger et al. 2020; Ruff et al.
2021; Audibert et al. 2020). Motivated by these advancements, we propose a test-time adaptation for unsupervised
time-series anomaly detection under distribution shifts.
Our paper highlights the prevalence of the new normal
problem in time-series anomaly detection literature. To address this issue properly, we propose a simple yet effective
adaptation strategy using trend estimates and model updates
with normal instances based on the model’s prediction itself.
Trend estimate, given by the exponential moving average
of the observations, follows the expected value of a timeseries with adaptation to changing conditions (Muth 1960)
with computational efficiency. After model deployment, we
update the model parameters with the normalized input sequence, which is detrended by subtracting the trend estimate,
to learn complicated dynamics that cannot be captured solely
on the trend estimate. Our proposed method makes the model
robust to such distribution shifts, thereby increasing detector
performance, as shown in Fig. 1-(b) and Fig. 1-(c).

