The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MAPTree: Beating “Optimal” Decision Trees with Bayesian Decision Trees
Colin Sullivan* , Mo Tiwari* , Sebastian Thrun
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
colins26@stanford.edu, motiwari@stanford.edu, thrun@stanford.edu

Abstract

sztajn, Oyallon, and Varoquaux 2022). Decision trees naturally work with complex data where the features can be
of mixed data types, e.g., binary, categorical, or continuous.
Furthermore, decision trees are highly interpretable and the
prediction-generating process can be inspected, which can
be a necessity in domains such as law and healthcare. Furthermore, inference in decision trees is highly efficient as
it relies only on efficient feature value comparisons. Given
decision trees’ popularity, an improvement upon existing decision tree approaches would have widespread impact.
Contributions: In this work, we:
• Formalize a connection between maximum a posteriori inference of Bayesian Classification and Regression
Trees (BCART) and AND/OR search problems,
• Propose an algorithm, dubbed MAPTree, for search on
AND/OR graphs that recovers the maximum a posteriori
tree of the BCART posterior over decision trees,
• Demonstrate that MAPTree is significantly faster than
previous sampling-based approaches,
• Demonstrate that the tree recovered by MAPTree either
a) outperforms current state-of-the-art algorithms in performance, or b) demonstrates comparable performance
but with smaller trees, and
• Provide a heavily optimized C++ implementation that is
also callable from Python for practitioners.

Decision trees remain one of the most popular machine learning models today, largely due to their out-of-the-box performance and interpretability. In this work, we present a
Bayesian approach to decision tree induction via maximum
a posteriori inference of a posterior distribution over trees.
We first demonstrate a connection between maximum a posteriori inference of decision trees and AND/OR search. Using this connection, we propose an AND/OR search algorithm, dubbed MAPTree, which is able to recover the maximum a posteriori tree. Lastly, we demonstrate the empirical performance of the maximum a posteriori tree both on
synthetic data and in real world settings. On 16 real world
datasets, MAPTree either outperforms baselines or demonstrates comparable performance but with much smaller trees.
On a synthetic dataset, MAPTree also demonstrates greater
robustness to noise and better generalization than existing approaches. Finally, MAPTree recovers the maxiumum a posteriori tree faster than existing sampling approaches and, in
contrast with those algorithms, is able to provide a certificate
of optimality. The code for our experiments is available at
https://github.com/ThrunGroup/maptree.

Introduction
Decision trees are amongst the most widely used machine
learning models today due to their empirical performance,
generality, and interpretability. A decision tree is a binary tree in which each internal node corresponds to an
if/then/else comparison on a feature value; a label for
a datapoint is produced by determining the corresponding
leaf node into which it falls. The predicted label is usually
the majority vote (respectively, mean) of the label of training datapoints at the leaf node in classification (respectively,
regression).
Despite recent advances in neural networks, decision trees
remain a popular choice amongst machine learning practitioners. Decision trees form the backbone of more complex
ensemble models such as Random Forest (Breiman 2001)
and XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016), which have been
the leading models in many machine learning competitions
and often outperform neural networks on tabular data (Grin-

Related Work
In this work, we focus on the construction of individual decision trees. We compare our proposed algorithm with four
main classes of prior algorithms: greedy algorithms, “Optimal” Decision Trees (ODTs), “Optimal” Sparse Decision
Trees (OSDTs), and sampling-based approaches.
The most popular method for constructing decision trees
is a greedy approach that recursively splits nodes based on
a heuristic such as Gini impurity or entropy (in classification) or mean-squared error (in regression) (Quinlan 1986).
However, individual decision trees constructed in this manner often overfit the training data; ensemble methods such
as Random Forest and XGBoost attempt to ameliorate overfitting but are significantly more complex than a single decision tree (Breiman 2001; Chen and Guestrin 2016).
So-called “optimal” decision trees reformulate the problem of decision tree induction as a global optimization prob-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9019

