The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SDGAN: Disentangling Semantic Manipulation for Facial Attribute Editing
Wenmin Huang1 , Weiqi Luo1∗ , Jiwu Huang2 , Xiaochun Cao3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Media Security, Shenzhen University, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
huangwm36@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {luoweiqi, caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jwhuang@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Facial attribute editing has garnered significant attention, yet
prevailing methods struggle with achieving precise attribute
manipulation while preserving irrelevant details and controlling attribute styles. This challenge primarily arises from the
strong correlations between different attributes and the interplay between attributes and identity. In this paper, we propose Semantic Disentangled GAN (SDGAN), a novel method
addressing this challenge. SDGAN introduces two key concepts: a semantic disentanglement generator that assigns facial representations to distinct attribute-specific editing modules, enabling the decoupling of the facial attribute editing
process, and a semantic mask alignment strategy that confines attribute editing to appropriate regions, thereby avoiding undesired modifications. Leveraging these concepts, SDGAN demonstrates accurate attribute editing and achieves
high-quality attribute style manipulation through both latentguided and reference-guided manners. We extensively evaluate our method on the CelebA-HQ database, providing both qualitative and quantitative analyses. Our results establish that SDGAN significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art techniques, showcasing the effectiveness of our approach. The code implementing our model is available at https://github.com/sysuhuangwenmin/SDGAN.

Input

+ Bangs

Input

+ Eyeglasses

Input

- Bangs

Figure 1: Illustration of correct modification and unrelated
preservation (the 1st row) & style manipulation (the 2nd
row) with the proposed SDGAN.
age) and between attributes and identity; 2) Style Manipulation: Adding or removing attributes have limited real-world
applicability. In many cases, there is a need to manipulate
the style of the target attribute, such as different styles of
eyeglasses: sunglasses, myopic glasses, and reading glasses,
as shown in the 2nd row in Fig. 1. However, this task poses
particular challenges as labeled databases with diverse attribute styles are often unavailable.
Numerous related approaches have been proposed to
achieve accurate modifications while preserving unrelated
attributes. These methods can be broadly categorized into two groups: image-to-image translation and latent space manipulation, based on differences in their underlying principles. Image-to-image translation methods typically employ
an encoder-decoder architecture to directly learn the translation between the original and edited images. Early works
(Shen et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018) use cycle-consistent
and adversarial losses to train different models for various
attributes. More recent studies (Liu et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020) have adopted conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs) and used attribute labels as generative conditions, enabling a single model to handle multiple attribute
editing tasks; On the other hand, those methods based on
latent space manipulation (Wang et al., 2022; Pehlivan et
al., 2023) utilize GAN inversion to obtain the latent representation of a given face. They then manipulate this latent
representation along semantic directions and feed it into a

Introduction
Facial attribute editing aims to modify facial images by altering specific attributes, finding applications in diverse realworld domains, including entertainment, visual effects, and
e-commerce. With the rapid development of deep generative models, facial attribute editing powered with generative
adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) has
achieved impressive progress (He et al. 2019; Lee et al.
2020; Dalva, Altındiş, and Dundar 2022; Shi et al. 2022).
The challenges in facial attribute editing primarily arise
from two main aspects: 1) Correct Modification and Unrelated Preservation: An effective model should accurately manipulate the target attribute while preserving irrelevant details such as non-target attributes, identity information, and
illumination, as illustrated in the 1st row in Fig. 1. Achieving
this ideal facial attribute editing is difficult due to the strong
correlation between different attributes (e.g., eyeglasses and
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2374

