The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revisiting Open-Set Panoptic Segmentation
Yufei Yin1 , Hao Chen2 , Wengang Zhou1,3, * , Jiajun Deng4 , Haiming Xu4 , Houqiang Li1,3, *
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Zhejiang University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
4
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
yinyufei@mail.ustc.edu.cn, haochen.cad@zju.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn,
jiajun.deng@adelaide.edu.au, hai-ming.xu@adelaide.edu.au, lihq@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

In this paper, we focus on the open-set panoptic segmentation (OPS) task to circumvent the data explosion problem.
Different from the close-set setting, OPS targets to detect
both known and unknown categories, where the latter is not
annotated during training. Different from existing work that
only selects a few common categories (≤ 16) as unknown
ones, we move forward to the real-world scenario by considering the various tail categories (∼ 1k). To this end, we first
build a new dataset with long-tail distribution for the OPS
task. Based on this dataset, we additionally add a new class
type for unknown classes and re-define the training annotations to make the OPS definition more complete and reasonable. Moreover, we analyze the influence of several significant factors in the OPS task and explore the upper bound of
performance on unknown classes with different settings. Furthermore, based on the analyses, we design an effective twophase framework for the OPS task, including thing-agnostic
map generation and unknown segment mining. We further
adopt semi-supervised learning to improve the OPS performance. Experimental results on different datasets validate the
effectiveness of our method.

1

Figure 1: Comparison between COCO and LVIS-PS. The
first row presents images, and the subsequent two rows
present the annotations of COCO and LVIS-PS, respectively.
In this paper, we propose to circumvent the data explosion
problem by studying a more realistic setting, termed openset panoptic segmentation task (OPS). As an extension of
panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2019), OPS requires
to detect instances that are not annotated in the training set,
a.k.a. the unknown category. In this setting, the annotation
complexity does not increase as the dataset grows. On one
hand, the tail categories1 can be regarded as unknown categories, and no annotations for them are needed for training. On the other hand, the annotations of panoptic segmentation do not have overlapping ambiguity compared to the
box-level ones, and each pixel is one-to-one mapped to a
target. Therefore, OPS is a proper setting for robust perception network training where the dataset complexity exceeds
manual label capability.
Only a few works have been explored on the OPS task.
The pioneering work EOPSN (Hwang et al. 2021) first extends panoptic segmentation to the open-set setting and proposes an exemplar-based approach to discover unlabeled
objects in the training set. Nevertheless, the existing OPS
benchmark is in small scale and suffers some limitations in
setting: (1) The COCO dataset (Lin et al. 2014) utilized in
the benchmark only includes 80 common categories, omit-

Introduction

Recent decades have witnessed a surge of high-quality
datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Everingham et al. 2010; Lin et al.
2014; Cordts et al. 2016; Gupta, Dollar, and Girshick 2019),
which lead to tremendous advances in visual perception algorithms (He et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al.
2016; He et al. 2017). However, the thirst for data is far from
being satisfied since the models cannot perform robustly in
complex real-world scenarios. Datasets with a large variety
are crucial to the generalization performance for neural networks, but simply adding more labeled samples is not a viable solution. As the size and complexity of the datasets increase, the problem of long-tail distribution and label ambiguity becomes more significant. We refer to this problem as
data explosion. Since it is unrealistic to extensively generate categorical labels for thousands of classes, we look for
a more feasible approach by revisiting the relation between
the categorical labels and the perception tasks.
* Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6747

The tail parts of categories in long-tail distribution

