The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attack Deterministic Conditional Image Generative Models for Diverse and
Controllable Generation
Tianyi Chu1 , Wei Xing1 , Jiafu Chen1 , Zhizhong Wang1 , Jiakai Sun1 , Lei Zhao1 * , Haibo Chen,2
Huaizhong Lin1∗
1
Zhejiang University,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{chutianyi, wxing, chenjiafu, endywon, csjk, cszhl, linhz}@zju.edu.cn, hbchen@njust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

• Ill-posed task: There are no constraints on the structure
or texture of the generated content, and the only requirement is that the generated samples are visually reasonable. For instance, the inpainting results of a masked face
can be either happy or angry.

Existing generative adversarial network (GAN) based conditional image generative models typically produce fixed output for the same conditional input, which is unreasonable for
highly subjective tasks, such as large-mask image inpainting
or style transfer. On the other hand, GAN-based diverse image generative methods require retraining/fine-tuning the network or designing complex noise injection functions, which
is computationally expensive, task-specific, or struggle to
generate high-quality results. Given that many deterministic conditional image generative models have been able to
produce high-quality yet fixed results, we raise an intriguing question: is it possible for pre-trained deterministic conditional image generative models to generate diverse results
without changing network structures or parameters? To answer this question, we re-examine the conditional image generation tasks from the perspective of adversarial attack and
propose a simple and efficient plug-in projected gradient descent (PGD) like method for diverse and controllable image
generation. The key idea is attacking the pre-trained deterministic generative models by adding a micro perturbation to
the input condition. In this way, diverse results can be generated without any adjustment of network structures or finetuning of the pre-trained models. In addition, we can also
control the diverse results to be generated by specifying the
attack direction according to a reference text or image. Our
work opens the door to applying adversarial attack to lowlevel vision tasks, and experiments on various conditional image generation tasks demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method.

• Semi-ill-posed task: These tasks constrain the structure
or texture of the generated result, beyond just being visually reasonable. For instance, given a content image and
a style reference, the stylized result is required to be similar to the content image in structure while preserving the
stroke/color of the style image.
• Well-posed task: These tasks require the generated results to be consistent with the input condition in both
structure and texture, and thus relatively fixed generation
result is expected. These tasks include small-scale superresolution, dehazing, denoising, etc.
Note that the tasks may not strictly fall into one of the categories. For example, in the case of image inpainting with an
extremely small masked area (e.g., a few pixels), it can be
considered as having only one reasonable generation result,
and therefore is closer to a well-posed task in the definition.
Traditional conditional image generative methods generate images based on the statistical information of the condition. For instance, super-resolution via bicubic interpolation and face generation based on eigen pattern (Turk and
Pentland 1991). However, for tasks like label-guided image generation, traditional methods often struggle to generate visually plausible results. In recent years, the development and in-depth study of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) have been able to exhibit superior
performance in generative tasks, even surpassing humanlevel abilities. Vanilla GAN samples random noise from a
Gaussian distribution z ∼ Pz and maps it to the real image
distribution y = fθ (z) ∼ Py . Thousands of GAN-based
models have been proposed and trained in various subtasks
of conditional image generation (e.g., inpainting, style transfer, super-resolution, dehazing) these years. However, most
models designed for these subtasks are deterministic, as the
models’ inputs are only user-defined deterministic conditions (such as images) rather than randomly sampled noise.
This implies that for a fixed condition input x, the model
can only produce a unique corresponding output y = fθ (x),

Introduction
Conditional image generation (e.g., image inpainting, style
transfer, super-resolution, denoising) is one of the representative subtasks of image synthesis, which typically uses a
label, a part of an image, or reference images to guide the
model to generate visually plausible images. Unlike highlevel vision tasks, such as image classification, conditional
image generation is a highly subjective task. That is, different generation results are allowed within the scope of visual
plausibility. Such task can be classified into three categories
based on the degree of constraints on generated content:
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1362

