The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Active Reinforcement Learning for Robust Building Control
Doseok Jang, Larry Yan, Lucas Spangher, Costas J. Spanos
University of California, Berkeley
djang@berkeley.edu, yanlarry@berkeley.edu, lucas spangher@berkeley.edu, spanos@berkeley.edu

Abstract

select training environments such that the resulting RL agent
performs well in average conditions and is also robust to uncommon but dangerous scenarios in the test environment.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful tool for optimal
control that has found great success in Atari games, the game
of Go, robotic control, and building optimization. RL is also
very brittle; agents often overfit to their training environment
and fail to generalize to new settings. Unsupervised environment design (UED) has been proposed as a solution to this
problem, in which the agent trains in environments that have
been specially selected to help it learn. Previous UED algorithms focus on trying to train an RL agent that generalizes
across a large distribution of environments. This is not necessarily desirable when we wish to prioritize performance in
one environment over others. In this work, we will be examining the setting of robust RL building control, where we wish
to train an RL agent that prioritizes performing well in normal weather while still being robust to extreme weather conditions. We demonstrate a novel UED algorithm, ActivePLR,
that uses uncertainty-aware neural network architectures to
generate new training environments at the limit of the RL
agent’s ability while being able to prioritize performance in
a desired base environment. We show that ActivePLR is able
to outperform state-of-the-art UED algorithms in minimizing
energy usage while maximizing occupant comfort in the setting of building control.

Overview of HVAC Setpoint Control
Our focus is on robust RL for building energy consumption,
which represent 73% of electricity usage and 40% of greenhouse gases in the US (U.S. Department of Energy—EIA
2020). Buildings are generating increasingly large amounts
of sensory information that can be used to increase energy efficiency, such as temperature, airflow, humidity, occupancy, light, and energy usage (Hayat et al. 2019).
There are several ways buildings can be automatically controlled: heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) units, energy storage systems, plug-in electric vehicles, photovoltaic power sources, and lights (Gong et al.
2022). We will focus on HVAC as it represents roughly a
third of total building energy consumption (Wemhoff and
Frank 2010). Traditionally, HVAC setpoint control has been
approached through model-predictive control (MPC, Kou
et al. 2021) or a heuristic rule-based-controller (RBC, Mathews et al. 2001).1 MPC is generally not scalable to high
dimensional input or output spaces compared to RL, and
heuristics are inflexible.
Recently, RL-based HVAC setpoint control has grown in
popularity(Das et al. 2022). Rizvi and Pertzborn (2022) used
Q-learning to control HVAC setpoints in the presence of unseen disturbances. Kurte et al. (2020) demonstrated how RL
and meta-RL could train an RL HVAC agent that quickly
adapts to different buildings. Xu et al. (2020) explored how
to use transfer learning to train an RL HVAC controller that
outperforms a RBC baseline across a variety of simulated
buildings and climates. Figure 1 illustrates the flow of information in our RL HVAC control setup.
As climate change continues, we will experience more
droughts, heat waves, rising temperatures, and cold snaps
(Masson-Delmotte et al. 2021). These extreme weather
events are likely underrepresented in the training data, but
are essential to account for in reliable and safe building control. For example, consider an RL controller trained on the

Introduction
Reinforcement learning has demonstrated remarkable success in solving sequential decision-making tasks such as the
game of Go (Silver et al. 2017), Atari games (Mnih et al.
2013), energy pricing (Jang et al. 2021; Gunn et al. 2022),
and many others. However, RL agents often overfit to their
training environment and fail to generalize to new environments(Zhang et al. 2018). This is a serious issue in tasks
where we expect underlying dynamics in the environment
not to stay static, e.g. when there is distribution shift between
the training environment and the test environment. Here, we
explore the use of RL in residential and commercial building control, where most often an agent is trained to optimize
performance in normal weather conditions. When underlying weather conditions exhibit extremes or drift due to long
term effects such as climate change, control often fails. We
endeavor to address distribution shift by using uncertainty to

1
”setpoints” are the numbers a human might input into their
thermostat to tell the HVAC systems their desired temperature.
”Setpoint control” is the problem of automatically determining
these setpoints to optimize some objective.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22150

