The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Leveraging Opposite Gender Interaction Ratio as a Path towards
Fairness in Online Dating Recommendations Based on User Sexual Orientation
Yuying Zhao1 , Yu Wang1 , Yi Zhang1 , Pamela Wisniewski1 , Charu Aggarwal2 , Tyler Derr1
1

Vanderbilt University
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
{yuying.zhao, yu.wang.1, yi.zhang, pam.wisniewski, tyler.derr}@vanderbilt.edu, charu@us.ibm.com
2

Abstract

However, while RS improve user satisfaction, fairness
concerns still exist if systems are solely designed to maximize overall utility. For example, race-related fairness
has been investigated to decrease racial homogamy via
agent-based model interventions on online dating platforms (Ionescu, Hannák, and Joseph 2021). Additionally, in
online dating, different gender identities have diverse characteristics, motivations, preferences, etc (Abramova et al.
2016). Thus, if ignored, this generally leads to an inherent
distinction in recommendation quality across gender identities, which has motivated past work on gender-aware system modifications to ensure equitable outcomes (Zheng et al.
2018). Nevertheless, although the aforementioned fairness
perspectives are crucial and provide additional consideration
beyond utility, another important sensitive user characteristic associated with dating is their sexual orientation, but less
commonly discussed in the literature.
In one of the most basic forms, the satisfaction of a
recommendation is contingent upon users’ sexual orientations and the gender identity of those being recommended
to them. Various sexual orientations indicate users’ sexual
preferences, including but not limited to homosexual individuals who prefer the same gender as their romantic partner, heterosexual individuals who prefer the opposite gender, and bisexual individuals who are attracted to both genders. However, even for bisexual individuals the spectrum as
to their preference on dating certain genders varies, raising
further challenges in the recommendation system. To exacerbate this issue, studies have shown that personal experiences with online dating significantly differ by sexual orientation (Rosenfeld and Thomas 2010; Finkel et al. 2012).
With diverse preferences and demands, could users with
various sexual orientations be treated similarly? Unfortunately, unfairness would be likely to exist for the heteronormativity assumption. Specifically, heterosexual users are
generally the majority of dating applications (if without specific design, such as Grindr, which is designed specifically
for the LGBTQ community), and RS inherently tend to perform better for users aligned with the preferences/behaviors
of the majority while compromising the performance of the
minority; thus, leading to the unfairness. However, while
these minority groups by definition are lower in percentage,
they are also increasing in size (Jones 2021) and nearly twice
as likely to report using an online dating platform (McClain

Online dating platforms have gained widespread popularity
as a means for individuals to seek potential romantic relationships. While recommender systems have been designed
to improve the user experience in dating platforms by providing personalized recommendations, increasing concerns
about fairness have encouraged the development of fairnessaware recommender systems from various perspectives (e.g.,
gender and race). However, sexual orientation, which plays a
significant role in finding a satisfying relationship, is underinvestigated. To fill this crucial gap, we propose a novel metric, Opposite Gender Interaction Ratio (OGIR), as a way to
investigate potential unfairness for users with varying preferences towards the opposite gender. We empirically analyze a
real online dating dataset and observe existing recommender
algorithms could suffer from group unfairness according to
OGIR. We further investigate the potential causes for such
gaps in recommendation quality, which lead to the challenges
of group quantity imbalance and group calibration imbalance.
Ultimately, we propose a fair recommender system based on
re-weighting and re-ranking strategies to respectively mitigate these associated imbalance challenges. Experimental results demonstrate both strategies improve fairness while their
combination achieves the best performance towards maintaining model utility while improving fairness.

Introduction
Online dating has grown increasingly popular and is now a
leading way of finding romantic partners and even meeting
new friends (Rosenfeld, Thomas, and Hausen 2019). For example, in 2022 it was estimated that 30% of U.S. adults had
used online dating and even upwards of 51% among lesbian,
gay or bisexual adults (McClain and Gelles-Watnick 2023).
To accommodate this growing demand, various platforms
have emerged, e.g., OkCupid, Tinder, and Grindr. With the
booming of users, the challenge of information/choice overload (Pronk and Denissen 2020) and unawareness (Finkel
et al. 2012) have made recommender systems (RS) even
more important, which learn user preferences via their behaviors on the platform. This ultimately provides users with
recommended partners that hopefully match their interests
and significantly enhance their experience (Xia et al. 2015).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22547

