The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Combating Data Imbalances in Federated Semi-supervised Learning
with Dual Regulators
Sikai Bai1 * , Shuaicheng Li2 * † , Weiming Zhuang3‡ ,
Jie Zhang4‡ , Kunlin Yang2 , Jun Hou2‡ , Shuai Zhang2 , Shuai Yi2 , Junyu Gao5
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
SenseTime Research
3
Sony AI
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{whitesk1973, gjy3035}@gmail.com, {lishuaicheng, yangkunlin, houjun, yishuai, zhangshuai}@sensetime.com,
weiming001@e.ntu.edu.sg, jie-comp.zhang@polyu.edu.hk

60

Abstract

57.53

Supervised learning
55 with 100% data

Accuracy(%)

Federated learning has become a popular method to learn
from decentralized heterogeneous data. Federated semisupervised learning (FSSL) emerges to train models from a
small fraction of labeled data due to label scarcity on decentralized clients. Existing FSSL methods assume independent
and identically distributed (IID) labeled data across clients
and consistent class distribution between labeled and unlabeled data within a client. This work studies a more practical and challenging scenario of FSSL, where data distribution is different not only across clients but also within a client
between labeled and unlabeled data. To address this challenge, we propose a novel FSSL framework with dual regulators, FedDure. FedDure lifts the previous assumption with
a coarse-grained regulator (C-reg) and a fine-grained regulator (F-reg): C-reg regularizes the updating of the local model
by tracking the learning effect on labeled data distribution;
F-reg learns an adaptive weighting scheme tailored for unlabeled instances in each client. We further formulate the client
model training as bi-level optimization that adaptively optimizes the model in the client with two regulators. Theoretically, we show the convergence guarantee of the dual regulators. Empirically, we demonstrate that FedDure is superior to
the existing methods across a wide range of settings, notably
by more than 11% on CIFAR-10 and CINIC-10 datasets.

50
45 Supervised learning
40
35
30

with 10% data 39.95
35.52

41.84

45.56

37.38

x
+
+
re
ch
vg
vg h rox
Pro
at
Du
dA
Fe UDA Fed UDA FedA atc edP atch edM
ed urs)
F
F
M F xM
+
+
(o
Fix
Fi

Figure 1: Existing federated semi-supervised learning
(FSSL) methods cannot address heterogeneity between labeled and unlabeled data within a client (internal imbalance)
and heterogeneous data across clients (external imbalance);
some of them are even worse than supervised FL using 10%
data (green line, which is FedAvg* in Table 1). Our proposed
FedDure significantly outperforms existing methods. These
experiments are based on three runs on CIFAR-10 and we
provide more description in Section Experiments.

Introduction
The majority of existing FL works (McMahan et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2020; Li, He, and Song 2021) assume that the
private data in clients are fully labeled, but the assumption is unrealistic in real-world federated applications as annotating data is time-consuming, laborious, and expensive.
To remedy these issues, federated semi-supervised learning (FSSL) is proposed to improve model performance with
limited labeled and abundant unlabeled data on each client
(Jin et al. 2020a). In particular, prior works (Jeong et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021) have achieved competitive performance by exploring inter-client mutual knowledge. However, they usually focus on mitigating heterogeneous data
distribution across clients (external imbalance) while as-

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging privacy-preserving
machine learning technique (McMahan et al. 2017), where
multiple clients collaboratively learn a model under the coordination of a central server without exchanging private
data. It has empowered a wide range of applications, including healthcare (Kaissis et al. 2020; Li et al. 2019), consumer
products (Hard et al. 2018; Niu et al. 2020), and etc.
* Equal contribution.
†

Project leader.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

10989

