The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Threshold-Based Responsive Simulated Annealing for Directed Feedback Vertex
Set Problem
Qingyun Zhang1 , Yuming Du1 , Zhouxing Su1 * , Chu-Min Li2 , Junzhou Xu3 , Zhihuai Chen3
Zhipeng Lü1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
MIS, University of Picardie Jules Verne, France
3
TCS Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., China
{qingyun zhang, yumingdu, suzhouxing}@hust.edu.cn, chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr, {xujunzhou, chenzhihuai1}@huawei.com,
zhipeng.lv@hust.edu.cn
Abstract

track. As a classical combinatorial optimization, DFVSP has
been studied for nearly 60 years (Lempel and Cederbaum
1966). The solution methods of DFVSP can be mainly categorized into exact algorithms, approximation algorithms,
and metaheuristic algorithms. Specifically, Smith and Walford (1975) presented a graph partitioning technique, which
was the first algorithm in the literature to find an optimal solution for DFVSP. Lin and Jou (2000) used three
new powerful reduction rules, and developed an exact algorithm based on the branch-and-bound framework. Qian, Ye,
and Pardalos (1996) designed a non-polynomial pseudo approximate algorithm for solving DFVSP. Pardalos, Qian,
and Resende (1998) developed a greedy randomized adaptive search (GRASP) algorithm for solving DFVSP. Based
on Pardalos, Qian, and Resende (1998), Festa, Pardalos,
and Resende (2001) presented FORTRAN subroutines using
GRASP for solving DFVSP and directed feedback arc set
problem (DFASP). Galinier, Lemamou, and Bouzidi (2013)
presented a powerful simulated annealing algorithm (SAFVSP), which uses a new representation of solutions based
on topological ordering and a new neighborhood structure.
Cutello and Pappalardo (2015) proposed an enhanced genetic algorithm with a special local search improvement
strategy. Zhou (2016) presented a belief propagation-guided
decimation (BPD) algorithm to solve DFVSP. Based on SAFVSP (Galinier, Lemamou, and Bouzidi 2013), Tang, Feng,
and Zhong (2017) introduced a nonuniform neighborhood
sampling (NNS) strategy, and Russo et al. (2022) proposed
a stochastic simulated annealing algorithm. Recently, Sun
et al. (2023) presented an efficient stochastic local search
algorithm called IDTS which alternates between a thresholding search stage and a descent stage to solve DFVSP.
This paper presents a threshold-based responsive simulated annealing algorithm (TRSA) to solve DFVSP. TRSA
is a combination of threshold search strategy and simulated annealing strategy with ‘temperature rise’, aiming to
strengthen the search capabilities by employing a neighborhood structure based on the closing-opening swap, an incremental neighborhood evaluation technique, and three neighborhood acceleration strategies. The main contributions can
be summarized as follows:

As a classical NP-hard problem and the topic of the PACE
2022 competition, the directed feedback vertex set problem
(DFVSP) aims to find a minimum subset of vertices such
that, when vertices in the subset and all their adjacent edges
are removed from the directed graph, the remainder graph is
acyclic. In this paper, we propose a threshold-based responsive simulated annealing algorithm called TRSA for solving
DFVSP. First, we simplify the problem instances with two
new reduction rules proposed in this paper and eight reduction rules from the literature. Then, based on a new solution
representation, TRSA solves DFVSP with a fast local search
procedure featured by a swap-based neighborhood structure
and three neighborhood acceleration strategies. Finally, all
these strategies are incorporated into a threshold-based responsive simulated annealing framework. Computational experiments on 140 benchmark instances show that TRSA is
highly competitive compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
Specifically, TRSA can improve the best known results for 53
instances, while matching the best known results for 79 ones.
Furthermore, some important features of TRSA are analyzed
to identify its success factors.

Introduction
The directed feedback vertex set problem (DFVSP) is a classical discrete optimization problem and has been proven to
be NP-hard (Yannakakis 1978). It involves obtaining a directed acyclic graph by removing as few vertices as possible
from a given directed graph. DFVSP has wide applications
in various domains, ranging from Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) circuit design (Hudli and Hudli 1994; Orenstein, Kohavi, and Pomeranz 1995), partial scan design of
circuit (Lee and Reddy 1990), program verification (Seymour 1995), deadlock resolution (Jain, Hajiaghayi, and Talwar 2005), network attack (Mugisha and Zhou 2016), constraint satisfaction (Bar-Yehuda et al. 1994), Bayesian inference (Bar-Yehuda et al. 1998), tournament (Ramanujan and
Szeider 2017; Zehavi 2023), and so on.
DFVSP is the topic of the Parameterized Algorithms
and Computational Experiments (PACE) 2022 competition,
which consists of two tracks: Exact track and heuristic
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Different from other metaheuristic algorithms such as
SA-FVSP and IDTS that use topological ordering for so-

20856

