The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contrastive Credibility Propagation for Reliable Semi-supervised Learning
Brody Kutt, Pralay Ramteke, Xavier Mignot, Pamela Toman, Nandini Ramanan, Sujit Rokka
Chhetri, Shan Huang, Min Du, William Hewlett
Palo Alto Networks, AI Research
{bkutt, pramteke, xmignot, ptoman, nramanan, schhetri, shuang1, midu, whewlett}@paloaltonetworks.com

Abstract
Producing labels for unlabeled data is error-prone, making
semi-supervised learning (SSL) troublesome. Often, little is
known about when and why an algorithm fails to outperform
a supervised baseline. Using benchmark datasets, we craft five
common real-world SSL data scenarios: few-label, open-set,
noisy-label, and class distribution imbalance/misalignment in
the labeled and unlabeled sets. We propose a novel algorithm
called Contrastive Credibility Propagation (CCP) for deep
SSL via iterative transductive pseudo-label refinement. CCP
unifies semi-supervised learning and noisy label learning for
the goal of reliably outperforming a supervised baseline in any
data scenario. Compared to prior methods which focus on a
subset of scenarios, CCP uniquely outperforms the supervised
baseline in all scenarios, supporting practitioners when the
qualities of labeled or unlabeled data are unknown.

1

Introduction

A fundamental goal of semi-supervised learning (SSL) is to
ensure the use of unlabeled data results in a classifier that outperforms a baseline trained only on labeled data (supervised
baseline). However, this is often not the case (Oliver et al.
2018). The problem is often overlooked as SSL algorithms
are frequently evaluated only on clean and balanced datasets
where the sole experimental variable is the number of given
labels. Worse, in the pursuit of maximizing label efficiency,
many modern SSL algorithms such as (Berthelot et al. 2019;
Sohn et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2022; Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2021)
and others rely on a mechanism that directly encourages the
marginal distribution of label predictions to be close to the
marginal distribution of ground truth labels (known as distribution alignment). This assumption is rarely true in practice.
We identify five key dataset quality variables (data variables)
that can strongly impact SSL algorithm performance and are
common in real-world datasets.
1. Few-label: Varying the number of labeled samples per
class typically while the amount of unlabeled data grows
or is held constant.
2. Open-set: Including and varying the ratio of out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples, i.e. samples which belong to
no class, in the unlabeled data.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21294

3. Noisy-label: Varying the percent of given labels that are
incorrect.
4. Class distribution imbalance/misalignment: Varying
the disparity of class frequency distributions between labeled and unlabeled data. We explore increasingly imbalanced distributions in the labeled and unlabeled data
separately (while keeping the other uniform to ensure
misalignment).
Thoroughly evaluating the practicality of an SSL algorithm
requires analyzing its response to these variables at differing
severity. Identifying specific quality issues in a dataset can
be challenging for practitioners. Often, real-world SSL workflows encounter scarcity and noise in labeled data, which is
also sampled from a distribution distinct from the unlabeled
data, derived from the often unknown target distribution.
Moreover, the unlabeled data distribution may be inaccessible
due to privacy concerns or real-time data collection in fully
autonomous systems. Consequently, such systems necessitate external components like Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
detectors to prevent failures, albeit at the cost of increased
complexity. Instead of maximizing the robustness to any one
data variable, we strive to build an SSL algorithm that is
robust to all data variables, i.e. can match or outperform a
supervised baseline. To address this challenge, we first hypothesize that sensitivity to pseudo-label errors is the root
cause of all failures. This rationale is based on the simple
fact that a hypothetical SSL algorithm consisting of a pseudolabeler with a rejection option and means to build a classifier
could always match or outperform its supervised baseline if
the pseudo-labeler made no mistakes. Such a pseudo-labeler
is unrealistic, of course. Instead, we build into our solution
means to work around those inevitable errors.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows. To the
best of our knowledge, our work is the first to 1) define an
SSL algorithm that unifies a pseudo-labeling strategy and an
approach to overcome label noise 2) use credibility vectors
to properly represent uncertainty during pseudo-label generation 3) propose a generalized contrastive loss for non-discrete
positive pairs 4) demonstrate a reliable performance boost
over a supervised baseline across five real-world data scenarios at differing levels of severity. The rest of this work is
organized as follows. We overview related works in Sec. 2.
We introduce CCP in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4, we detail our experimental results before concluding in Sec. 5.

