The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DIUSum: Dynamic Image Utilization for Multimodal Summarization
Min Xiao1,2 , Junnan Zhu1,2 , Feifei Zhai1,3 , Yu Zhou1,3 * , Chengqing Zong1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Fanyu AI Laboratory, Zhongke Fanyu Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
{ min.xiao, junnan.zhu, yzhou, cqzong }@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, zhaifeifei@zkfy.com
（a）

Abstract
Existing multimodal summarization approaches focus on fusing image features in the encoding process, ignoring the individualized needs for images when generating different summaries. However, whether intuitively or empirically, not all
images can improve summary quality. Therefore, we propose a novel Dynamic Image Utilization framework for multimodal Summarization (DIUSum) to select and utilize valuable images for summarization. First, to predict whether an
image helps produce a high-quality summary, we propose an
image selector to score the usefulness of each image. Second,
to dynamically utilize the multimodal information, we incorporate the hard and soft guidance from the image selector.
Under the guidance, the image information is plugged into
the decoder to generate a summary. Experimental results have
shown that DIUSum outperforms multiple strong baselines
and achieves SOTA on two public multimodal summarization
datasets. Further analysis demonstrates that the image selector can reflect the improved level of summary quality brought
by the images.

（b）

Article: the gulf emirate of dubai is to replicate
ancient and modern wonders of the world in a #.#billion-dollar city to be shaped like a falcon .
Ref Summary: world wonders come to dubai.
Article: a suicide car bomber killed four security
agents in an attack on a us diplomatic convoy in the
northern iraqi town of mosul , a us official said tuesday.
Ref Summary: four killed in suicide bomb strike on us
diplomatic convoy.

Figure 1: Examples of useful and useless images. The green
part indicates that it is associated with the left image.
dataset
MMS
MSMO

text-input
(ROUGE-1)
49.16
41.92

multi-input
(ROUGE-1)
49.23
41.85

dynamic-input
(ROUGE-1)
54.64
45.49

Table 1: The influence of feeding different source modalities
on the datasets of MMS (Li et al. 2018) and MSMO (Zhu
et al. 2018).

Introduction
With the development of vision-language pretraining, multimodal summarization has achieved significant progress in
recent years. Image information can help enhance or supplement text information to produce high-quality summaries.
When fed an image and a text, multimodal summarization
methods try to fuse multimodal information and generate a
summary. Existing studies mainly concentrate on effectively
integrating visual information into the process of feature encoding (Zhu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2023; Qiu
et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2023).
However, there remains an important issue that has received little attention: Whether an image helps improve the
quality of the summary? As shown in Figure 1, the green
part underlined text represents the content corresponding to
the image. It can be observed that the image in Figure 1
(a) is related to a part of the article but does not significantly contribute to generating the summary. In contrast,
the image in Figure 1 (b) is associated with both the article and the summary. So that the image can help highlight

the core content of the article. The above two cases indicate
that different samples require different modality information
to obtain accurate summaries. To verify whether the existing model can meet the individual needs of different source
modalities, we conduct an empirical study to explore the influence of providing different source modalities. As shown
in Table 1, text-only and multimodal input summarization
models are trained on the standard benchmarks. In the experiment, we test each sample with the text-only and multimodal models, and then report the higher ROUGE-1 score as
the dynamic-input result. Ideally, the dynamic result means
the upper bound that can be obtained by dynamically utilizing the source inputs. It also indicates that if we correctly
choose the source inputs for each sample, the quality of the
summary could be greatly improved.
Existing studies focus on fusing all image information
with different methods (Zhang, Zhang, and Pan 2022; Liang
et al. 2023), such as attention-based fusion (Li et al. 2018;
Libovický and Helcl 2017; Calixto, Liu, and Campbell
2017a), gated-based fusion (Li et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2017)

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19297

