The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exact, Fast and Expressive Poisson Point Processes via Squared Neural Families
Russell Tsuchida1 , Cheng Soon Ong1, 2 , Dino Sejdinovic3
1

2

Data61-CSIRO
Australian National University
3
University of Adelaide

Abstract
We introduce squared neural Poisson point processes
(SNEPPPs) by parameterising the intensity function by the
squared norm of a two layer neural network. When the hidden layer is fixed and the second layer has a single neuron,
our approach resembles previous uses of squared Gaussian
process or kernel methods, but allowing the hidden layer to
be learnt allows for additional flexibility. In many cases of interest, the integrated intensity function admits a closed form
and can be computed in quadratic time in the number of hidden neurons. We enumerate a far more extensive number of
such cases than has previously been discussed. Our approach
is more memory and time efficient than naive implementations of squared or exponentiated kernel methods or Gaussian
processes. Maximum likelihood and maximum a posteriori
estimates in a reparameterisation of the final layer of the intensity function can be obtained by solving a (strongly) convex optimisation problem using projected gradient descent.
We demonstrate SNEPPPs on real, and synthetic benchmarks,
and provide a software implementation.

1

Figure 1: A SNEPPP spatial intensity function fit (left) to
200,000 events using NASA wildfire data (right) (NASA
FIRMS 2023). In § 5.4, we discuss a video of a spatiotemporal fit using 100 million events.

Desiderata for Intensity Functions We discuss three useful properties that intensity functions should possess: expressivity, tractable integration and tractable optimisation.
Firstly, one needs to choose a function class H from which
to represent the intensity function λ ∈ H. This function
class should be expressive enough to represent the data at
hand. Importantly, λ must be nonnegative, which precludes
direct application of some of the standard choices of H such
as RKHSs or certain neural networks. Secondly, computing
the expected number of points in a set requires integrating
the intensity function, as does measuring the likelihood of a
given realisation from a PPP. The integrated intensity function therefore needs to be evaluated often in a typical model
fitting and testing pipeline. Computing or approximating the
integrated intensity function can be challenging for all but
simple models and observation windows. Finally, even if the
integrated intensity function can be computed, finding plausible members of the function class H can be difficult. Even
point estimation (i.e. choosing a single “best” λ ∈ H) according to some optimisation criterion can be hard if the optimisation criterion is nonconvex, which is typically the case
for non-trivial hypothesis classes H.

Introduction

Intensity Functions Our goal is to develop machine learning methods for learning intensity functions, which are central building blocks for probabilistic models of points in
sets. An intensity function λ quantifies the number of points
N(A) in a set A ⊆ X divided by the size of the set, as the size
of the set approaches zero. In other words, λ is a nonnegative
function that may be integrated over the set A against some
measure µ to give the expected number of points. We give
formal definition of intensity functions and inhomogeneous
Poisson point processes (PPPs) in § 2.1. PPPs and their extensions find a wide range of applications in, e.g., seismology (Ogata 1988), ecology (Renner et al. 2015) and popularity prediction in social networks (Mishra, Rizoiu, and
Xie 2016). The domain X may be of arbitrary dimension d,
although much attention in statistics has been given to the
one, two, three and four dimensional settings, which are often identified with the qualifiers “queueing” or “temporal”
(1D), “spatial” (2D or 3D) or “spatio-temporal” (3D or 4D).
Here we consider the case of arbitrary dimension d.

Contributions We introduce a new class of intensity functions that addresses each of the three desiderata mentioned
above. We use the squared Euclidean norm of a two layer
neural network to parameterise the intensity function. This
represents a highly flexible universal approximating func-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20559

