The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Colour Passing Revisited: Lifted Model Construction with Commutative Factors
Malte Luttermann1,2 , Tanya Braun3 , Ralf Möller1,2 , Marcel Gehrke2
1

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Lübeck, Germany
2
Institute of Information Systems, University of Lübeck, Germany
3
Data Science Group, University of Münster, Germany
malte.luttermann@dfki.de, tanya.braun@uni-muenster.de, {moeller, gehrke}@ifis.uni-luebeck.de

Abstract

ence using PFGs. Lifted inference exploits symmetries in a
relational model to compute marginal distributions more efficiently while maintaining exact answers (Niepert and Van
den Broeck 2014). Poole (2003) first introduces PFGs and
lifted variable elimination (LVE) as an algorithm to perform
lifted inference in PFGs. LVE has then been refined and
developed further by many researchers to reach its current
form (De Salvo Braz, Amir, and Roth 2005, 2006; Milch
et al. 2008; Kisyński and Poole 2009; Taghipour et al. 2013a;
Braun and Möller 2018). Other inference algorithms operating on PFGs include the lifted junction tree (LJT) algorithm, which is designed to handle sets of queries (Braun
and Möller 2016). The well-known colour passing (CP) algorithm (originally named “CompressFactorGraph”) introduced by Kersting, Ahmadi, and Natarajan (2009) builds on
the work by Singla and Domingos (2008) and is commonly
used to construct a lifted representation from a given factor
graph (FG). The CP algorithm incorporates a colour passing procedure to detect symmetries in a graph similar to the
Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (Weisfeiler and Leman 1968),
which is commonly used to test for graph isomorphism.
Even though the CP algorithm is technically able to construct a PFG, CP in its current form is used as an intermediate step for lifted belief propagation and hence, CP is bound
to this specific algorithm and does not introduce logvars to
output a valid PFG. Furthermore, the CP algorithm does
not handle commutative factors (i.e., factors that map to a
unique output value regardless of the order of some input
values) and is dependent on the order of the factors’ argument lists (i.e., identical factors where the arguments of one
factor are permuted are not recognised). Both impose significant limitations for practical applications as taking commutative factors into account and finding identical factors independent of the order of their argument lists result in more
compressed models and thus allow for an additional speedup
during inference. Other works establish a connection between automorphism groups and coloured graphs (Niepert
2012; Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2013; Holtzen, Millstein, and
Van den Broeck 2020) by searching for symmetries in a full
joint probability distribution without exploiting a factorisation of the distribution. However, these works do not introduce logvars and hence, their lifted representation is dependent on a specific inference algorithm as well.

Lifted probabilistic inference exploits symmetries in a probabilistic model to allow for tractable probabilistic inference
with respect to domain sizes. To apply lifted inference, a lifted
representation has to be obtained, and to do so, the so-called
colour passing algorithm is the state of the art. The colour
passing algorithm, however, is bound to a specific inference
algorithm and we found that it ignores commutativity of factors while constructing a lifted representation. We contribute
a modified version of the colour passing algorithm that uses
logical variables to construct a lifted representation independent of a specific inference algorithm while at the same time
exploiting commutativity of factors during an offline-step.
Our proposed algorithm efficiently detects more symmetries
than the state of the art and thereby drastically increases compression, yielding significantly faster online query times for
probabilistic inference when the resulting model is applied.

1

Introduction

Parametric factor graphs (PFGs) combine probabilistic modeling with first-order logic by introducing logical variables
(logvars), allowing for reasoning under uncertainty about individuals and their relationships. A fundamental task using
PFGs is to perform probabilistic inference, i.e., to compute
marginal distributions of random variables (randvars) given
observations for other randvars. To allow for tractable probabilistic inference (e.g., inference requiring polynomial time)
with respect to domain sizes of logvars, PFGs with corresponding inference algorithms have been developed, where
the main idea is to use a representative for indistinguishable
individuals for computations. To perform lifted inference, a
lifted representation has to be constructed first. In this paper, we study the problem of lifted model construction—
that is, we aim to obtain a lifted representation, equivalent
to a given propositional (ground) model, which can then be
used for lifted probabilistic inference. In particular, we consider the problem of lifted model construction independent
of a specific inference algorithm and under consideration of
commutative factors, i.e., factors that map to identical values
regardless of the order of their arguments.
Over the last two decades, there has been a considerable
amount of research dealing with lifted probabilistic inferCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To overcome the limitations of neglecting commutative

20500

