The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Factorized Explainer for Graph Neural Networks
Rundong Huang1 , Farhad Shirani2∗ , Dongsheng Luo2 *
1

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
2
Florida International University, Miami, U.S.
rundong.huang@tum.de, {fshirani,dluo}@fiu.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received increasing attention due to their ability to learn from graph-structured data.
To open the black-box of these deep learning models, posthoc instance-level explanation methods have been proposed to
understand GNN predictions. These methods seek to discover
substructures that explain the prediction behavior of a trained
GNN. In this paper, we show analytically that for a large
class of explanation tasks, conventional approaches, which
are based on the principle of graph information bottleneck
(GIB), admit trivial solutions that do not align with the notion
of explainability. Instead, we argue that a modified GIB principle may be used to avoid the aforementioned trivial solutions.
We further introduce a novel factorized explanation model
with theoretical performance guarantees. The modified GIB is
used to analyze the structural properties of the proposed factorized explainer. We conduct extensive experiments on both
synthetic and real-world datasets to validate the effectiveness
of our proposed factorized explainer.

Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in real-world applications, manifesting in various domains such as social networks (Fan et al. 2019), molecular structures (Mansimov
et al. 2019; Chereda et al. 2019), and knowledge graphs (Liu
et al. 2022). This has led to significant interest in learning
methodologies specific to graphical data, particularly, graph
neural networks (GNNs). GNNs commonly employ messagepassing mechanisms, recursively transmitting and fusing messages among neighboring nodes on graphs. Thus, the learned
node representation captures both node attributes and neighborhood information, thereby enabling diverse downstream
tasks such as node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018), graph classification (Xu et al. 2019),
and link prediction (Lu et al. 2022).
Despite the success of GNNs in a wide range of domains,
their inherent “black-box” nature and lack of interpretability,
a characteristic shared among many contemporary machine
learning methods, is a major roadblock in their utility in
sensitive application scenarios such as autonomous decision
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12626

systems. To address this, various GNN explanation methods have been proposed to understand the graph-structured
data and associated deep graph learning models (Ying et al.
2019; Luo et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2022). In particular, posthoc instance-level explanation methods provide an effective
way to identify determinant substructures in the input graph,
which plays a vital role in trustworthy deployments (Ying
et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020). In the context of graph classification, the objective of graph explanation methods is, given
a graph G, to extract a minimal and sufficient subgraph, G∗ ,
that can be used to determine the instance label, Y . The
Graph Information Bottleneck principle (GIB) (Wu et al.
2020) provides an intuitive principle that is widely adopted
as a practical instantiation. At a high level, the GIB principle
finds the subgraph G∗ which minimizes the mutual information between the original graph G and the subgraph G∗ and
maximizes the mutual information between the subgraph G∗
and instance label Y by minimizing I(G, G∗ ) − αI(G∗ , Y ),
where the hyperparameter α > 0 captures the tradeoff between minimality and informativeness of G∗ (Miao, Liu,
and Li 2022). As an example, the GNNExplainer method
operates by finding a learnable edge mask matrix, which is
optimized by the GIB objective (Ying et al. 2019). The PGExplainer also uses a GIB-based objective and incorporates
a parametric generator to learn explanatory subgraphs from
the model’s output (Luo et al. 2020).
There are several limitations in the existing explainability
approaches. First, as shown analytically in this work, existing GIB-based methods suffer from perceptually unrealistic
explanations. Specifically, we show that in a wide-range of
statistical scenarios, the original GIB formulation of the explainability problem has a trivial solution where the achieved
explanation G∗ signals the predicted value of Y , but is independent of the input graph G, otherwise. That is, the Markov
chain G∗ ↔ Y ↔ G holds. As a result, the explanation G∗
optimizing the GIB objective may consist of a few disconnected edges and fails to align with the high-level notion
of explainability. To alleviate this problem, PGExplainer includes an ad-hoc connectivity constraint as the regularization
term (Luo et al. 2020). However, without theoretical guarantees, the effectiveness of the extra regularization is marginal
in more complicated datasets (Shan et al. 2021). Second,
although previous parametric explanation methods, such as
PGExplainer (Luo et al. 2020) and ReFine (Wang et al. 2021),

