The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discovering Sequential Patterns with Predictable Inter-event Delays
Joscha Cüppers1 , Paul Krieger2 , Jilles Vreeken1
1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
2
Saarland University
joscha.cueppers@cispa.de, s8pakrie@stud.uni-saarland.de, vreeken@cispa.de

delays, such as Whit Monday happening 49 days after Easter
Monday, and outright fail when the relationship is ‘far’ and
‘loose’ such as Easter occurring between 82 to 114 days after New Year’s. In this paper, we present a method that can
find and describe all these types of dependencies and delays.
To do so, we propose to explicitly model the distributions
of inter-event delays in pattern occurrences. That is, as patterns we do not just consider serial episodes, but also discrete distributions that model the number of time-steps between subsequent events of a pattern. This allows us to dis82−114
49
cover patterns like New Year −
−−−−→ Easter Monday −→
Whit Monday, which specify there is a uniformly distributed
delay of 82 to 114 days between New Year’s and Easter
Monday, and a fixed delay of 49 days until Whit Monday.
We define the problem of mining a succinct and nonredundant set of sequential patterns in terms of the Minimal
Description Length Principle (MDL) (Grünwald 2007), by
which we are after that model that compresses the data best.
Simply put, unlike existing methods we do not plainly prefer patterns with ‘compact’ occurrences but rather those for
which the inter-event delays are reliably predictable, no matter if these delays are short or long. This way we can automatically determine which discrete-valued distribution best
characterizes the inter-event delays. In practice, we consider
Uniform, Gaussian, Geometric, or Poisson distributions, but
this set can be trivially extended.
The resulting problem does not lend itself for exact
search, which is why we propose the effective H OPPER algorithm to efficiently discover good pattern sets in practice.
Starting from just the singletons, H OPPER considers combinations of current patterns as candidates, uses an optimistic
estimate to prune out unpromising candidates, explores both
short and far dependencies, assigns the best-fitting delay distributions, and greedily chooses the candidate that improves
the score most.
Through extensive evaluation, we show that H OPPER
works well in practice. On synthetic data we demonstrate
that unlike the state-of-the-art, we recover the ground truth
well both in terms of patterns and delay distributions even in
challenging settings where patterns include delays of hundreds of time steps. On real-world data, we show that H OP PER discovers easily interpretable patterns with meaningful
delay distributions. We make all code, synthetic data, and
real-world datasets available in the supplementary material.

Abstract
Summarizing sequential data with serial episodes allows nontrivial insight into the data generating process. Existing methods penalize gaps in pattern occurrences equally, regardless
of where in the pattern these occur. This results in a strong
bias against patterns with long inter-event delays, and in addition that regularity in terms of delays is not rewarded or
discovered—even though both aspects provide key insight.
In this paper we tackle both these problems by explicitly
modeling inter-event delay distributions. That is, we are not
only interested in discovering the patterns, but also in describing how many times steps typically occur between their
individual events. We formalize the problem in terms of the
Minimum Description Length principle, by which we say the
best set of patterns is the one that compresses the data best.
The resulting optimization problem does not lend itself to exact optimization, and hence we propose H OPPER to heuristically mine high quality patterns. Extensive experiments show
that H OPPER efficiently recovers the ground truth, discovers
meaningful patterns from real-world data, and outperforms
existing methods in discovering long-delay patterns.

Introduction
Summarizing event sequences is one of the key problems in
data mining. Most existing methods do so in terms of serial
episodes and allow for gaps (Tatti and Vreeken 2012) and
interleaving (Bhattacharyya and Vreeken 2017) of pattern
occurrences. By penalizing every gap equally regardless of
where in a pattern it occurs, these methods have a strong
bias against long inter-event delays, whereas methods that
do not penalize gaps (Fowkes and Sutton 2016) are prone to
discover spurious dependencies. What both of these classes
lack is a pattern to be able to specify when the next symbol
is to be expected.
To illustrate, let us consider a toy example of a single
event sequence of all national holidays of a given country over the span of multiple years. As is usual, some holidays are ‘fixed’ as they always occur on the same date every year, and others depend on the lunar cycle and hence
‘move’ around. Existing methods have no trouble finding
holidays that occur right after each another, e.g. 1st Christmas Day right before 2nd Christmas Day, struggle with long
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8346

