The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Assume-Guarantee Reinforcement Learning
Milad Kazemi1 , Mateo Perez2 , Fabio Somenzi2 ,
Sadegh Soudjani3 , Ashutosh Trivedi2 , and Alvaro Velasquez2
1
King’s College London, UK
University of Colorado Boulder, USA
3
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Germany
milad.kazemi@kcl.ac.uk
{mateo.perez, fabio, ashutosh.trivedi, alvaro.velasquez}@colorado.edu
sadegh@mpi-sws.org
2

Abstract

1) Solve Markov games

We present a modular approach to reinforcement learning (RL)
in environments consisting of simpler components evolving
in parallel. A monolithic view of such modular environments
may be prohibitively large to learn, or may require unrealizable communication between the components in the form of a
centralized controller. Our proposed approach is based on the
assume-guarantee paradigm where the optimal control for the
individual components is synthesized in isolation by making
assumptions about the behaviors of neighboring components,
and providing guarantees about their own behavior. We express these assume-guarantee contracts as regular languages
and provide automatic translations to scalar rewards to be used
in RL. By combining local probabilities of satisfaction for each
component, we provide a lower bound on the probability of satisfaction of the complete system. By solving a Markov game
for each component, RL can produce a controller for each
component that maximizes this lower bound. The controller
utilizes the information it receives through communication,
observations, and any knowledge of a coarse model of other
agents. We experimentally demonstrate the efficiency of the
proposed approach on a variety of case studies.

Guarantee

Assume

1

2

2) Compose
1

..
.

3
..
.

2

3

Figure 1: An overview of assume-gurantee RL. We first form
a two player game for each assume-guarantee contract and
solve these games with RL. We then compose the resulting
controllers and provide a lower bound on its performance.

Introduction
One approach to synthesize a distributed controller is to first
synthesize a centralized controller and then decompose it
into a controller for each component. However, the resulting
controllers require the full state information of all the components in general, which may be unrealizable. In the case
where there is only partial or no communication between each
component, producing a distributed controller is undecidable
for infinite time horizons and NP-hard for fixed time horizons (Chatterjee, Chmelik, and Tracol 2016). Can we apply
reinforcement learning (RL) for distributed policy synthesis
without incurring these costs while still providing guarantees
on performance? In addressing this question, we propose an
assume-guarantee approach to RL, where we locally design
a controller for each component by abstracting the behavior
of neighboring components as an assume-guarantee contract.
This contract defines a game: the opponent (environment)
may produce the worst-case behavior for the neighboring
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21223

components that still satisfy the assumption, while the controller maximizes the probability of satisfying the guarantee.
The probabilities of satisfaction from each game can then be
combined to provide a lower bound on the performance of
the resulting distributed controller.
Large environments are often composed of a number of
smaller environments with well-defined and often slim interfaces. For instance, consider the traffic intersection signal
control problem for a 3 × 3-grid traffic network shown in
Fig. 2 with 9 intersections each equipped with a traffic light.
The goal is to design policies to schedule the traffic light
signals to keep congestion below some defined threshold.
Note that the dynamics for each intersection only depends on
the condition of adjacent intersections. It may be desirable to
reduce unnecessary communication between the controllers
of various intersections; in particular, a centralized control
algorithm may be undesirable. Additionally, since the dynamics depend on the flow of traffic, the exact dynamics may not
be known and, hence, it is desirable to use RL to design a
control policy.
We work with environments that are naturally decomposable into simpler entities, whose interaction with the rest
of the environment is abstracted as an uncontrollable environment. We apply RL to compute policies for individual
components in the environment by making assumptions on
the behavior of other components in the environment, under
which the correctness of the behavior of the individual component is guaranteed. Furthermore, we need to orchestrate

