The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Active Learning with Noise Stability
Xingjian Li1 * , Pengkun Yang2 * , Yangcheng Gu3 , Xueying Zhan1 , Tianyang Wang4 ,
Min Xu1† , Chengzhong Xu5
1

Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Center for Statistical Science, Tsinghua University
3
School of Software, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Alabama at Birmingham
5
State Key Lab of IOTSC, University of Macau
lixj04@gmail.com, yangpengkun@tsinghua.edu.cn, guyc19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
sinezhan17@gmail.com, tw2@uab.edu, mxu1@cs.cmu.edu, czxu@um.edu.mo
Abstract
Uncertainty estimation for unlabeled data is crucial to active
learning. With a deep neural network employed as the backbone model, the data selection process is highly challenging
due to the potential over-confidence of the model inference.
Existing methods resort to special learning fashions (e.g. adversarial) or auxiliary models to address this challenge. This tends
to result in complex and inefficient pipelines, which would
render the methods impractical. In this work, we propose a
novel algorithm that leverages noise stability to estimate data
uncertainty. The key idea is to measure the output derivation
from the original observation when the model parameters are
randomly perturbed by noise. We provide theoretical analyses
by leveraging the small Gaussian noise theory and demonstrate that our method favors a subset with large and diverse
gradients. Our method is generally applicable in various tasks,
including computer vision, natural language processing, and
structural data analysis. It achieves competitive performance
compared against state-of-the-art active learning baselines.

Introduction
The success of training a deep neural network highly depends
on a huge amount of labeled data. However, much data is
unlabeled in the era of big data , and data annotation cost
could be extremely high, such as in medical area (Gorriz
et al. 2017; Konyushkova, Sznitman, and Fua 2017). Due
to limited annotation budget, it might be more feasible to
annotate a portion of the given data. Then a question can be
naturally raised: which data is deserved for being annotated?
Active learning was proposed to solve this question. One of
the main ideas is to select the most uncertain/informative data
from an unlabeled pool for annotation. The newly annotated
data is then used to train a task model in supervised fashion. Nevertheless, uncertainty estimation with deep neural
networks (DNNs) remains challenging, due to the potential
over-confidence of deep models (Ren et al. 2021). That is,
considering classification problems, the primitive softmax

output (as a score) does not necessarily reflect a reliable uncertainty or confidence of the prediction. Several methods
have been proposed to address this challenge. For example,
deep Bayesian methods (Gal and Ghahramani 2016) provide
a more accurate estimate of uncertainty (e.g. in terms of entropy or mutual information) with the posterior predictive
probability over the model parameters. Many other methods
propose to employ auxiliary models for a better estimate, such
as query-by-committee (QBC) (Freund et al. 1997a; Gorriz
et al. 2017), Variational Auto-Encoder (Sinha, Ebrahimi, and
Darrell 2019), adversarial learning (Ducoffe and Precioso
2018; Mayer and Timofte 2020) and Graph Convolutional
Network (Caramalau, Bhattarai, and Kim 2021).
Despite the advances in uncertainty estimation, they rely
on additional models or ad-hoc learning fashions, highly
limiting their applications. Furthermore, many of them fail
in considering the diversity of the selected data, throwing a
risk of selecting redundant or similar examples in practical
scenarios of batch acquisition. Motivated to address these
issues, our work aims to design a more general and effective
active learning algorithm.
In this work, we study the problem of deep active learning
from a different perspective named noise stability. Given a
well-trained model and a data example, we are interested in
how the model behavior changes when a slight perturbation
is imposed on the model parameters. Specifically, we observe
the deviation on the deep features of DNNs. A data example
which is sensitive to such perturbations, is regarded as uncertain under the current model. The sensitivity can be measured
by the magnitude of the feature deviation. Furthermore, the
deviation direction implies common and different patterns
among examples, which provides meaningful information to
encourage diversity. Imagine the ideal case that, when the
network perturbation causes the ablation of recognizing a specific pattern, examples that highly depend on this pattern will
have more changes than others on corresponding elements of
the feature vector1 .
1
In real cases, a random perturbation leads to a complex change
in model parameters, e.g. some extracted patterns are affected more
than others, which consequently results in much denser deviation
directions among examples.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13655

