The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Double-Descent Curves in Neural Networks:
A New Perspective Using Gaussian Processes
Ouns El Harzli1 * , Bernardo Cuenca Grau1 , Guillermo Valle-Pérez 2 , Ard A. Louis 2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford

Abstract

approaches the number of training examples and, past this
so-called interpolation threshold, it starts decreasing again
finding its global minimum when the number of parameters
goes to infinity. Understanding these surprising observations
at a more fundamental level is an important step towards
tackling the deeper question as to why DNNs generalise so
well in practice (Geiger, Petrini, and Wyart 2020).
A number of mathematical frameworks for explaining the
double-descent phenomenon in a variety of DNN architectures have been proposed (Mei and Montanari 2019; Hastie
et al. 2019; Advani, Saxe, and Sompolinsky 2020; Liu, Liao,
and Suykens 2020). Assuming a teacher-student setting (Seung and Sompolinsky 1992), these works derive an analytical expression for the generalisation error as a function of
n
the ratios γ = N
between the number n of training examples
and the width N of the neural network and ψ = nd between
the number of training examples and the dimension d of the
input. For a fixed value of ψ and varying γ, the generalisation error derived in these approaches follows a double descent curve; furthermore, the value of the generalisation error for a given γ and ψ is obtained as a limit where n, N and
d go to infinity while γ and ψ remain constant. These works
typically assume that all layers except the last one remain
untrained, and thus coincide with random features models
(Liao, Couillet, and Mahoney 2020; Gerace et al. 2020).
A (largely orthogonal) line of research has studied the
equivalence between infinitely-wide neural networks with
random weights and Gaussian processes with a particular
covariance function (Lee et al. 2018; Matthews et al. 2018)
called the NNGP (or conjugate) kernel. In the limit of infinite width, the class of functions obtained by choosing
the network weights randomly converges in distribution to
a Gaussian process, where the structure of the covariance
function is defined inductively on the number of layers. The
random feature map corresponding to an NNGP is, however,
not explicitly known and thus its study falls within the realm
of the nonparametric kernel literature (Györfi et al. 2002;
Berthier, Bach, and Gaillard 2020).
In this paper, we establish a novel connection between
both of these orthogonal lines of research. Given a fullyconnected neural architecture defined by the input dimension, the layer widths, the activation function, and the distribution of the weights, we derive an analytical expression for
a width-dependent NNGP kernel which generalises the em-

Double-descent curves in neural networks describe the phenomenon that the generalisation error initially descends with
increasing parameters, then grows after reaching an optimal number of parameters which is less than the number of
data points, but then descends again in the overparameterized
regime. In this paper, we use techniques from random matrix
theory to characterize the spectral distribution of the empirical feature covariance matrix as a width-dependent perturbation of the spectrum of the neural network Gaussian process
(NNGP) kernel, thus establishing a novel connection between
the NNGP literature and the random matrix theory literature
in the context of neural networks. Our analytical expressions
allow us to explore the generalisation behavior of the corresponding kernel and GP regression. Furthermore, they offer a
new interpretation of double-descent in terms of the discrepancy between the width-dependent empirical kernel and the
width-independent NNGP kernel.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved unparalleled success across
a wide range of tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Hannun et al. 2014; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Schmidhuber 2015). Surprisingly, however, the
best-performing deep neural networks (DNNs) operate in a
highly over-parametrised regime, where the number of parameters in the model is much larger than the number of
training examples (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). This appears to violate the conventional statistical wisdom of biasvariance trade-off which predicts that, in order to avoid overfitting and obtain the best possible generalisation, the number of parameters should be lower than the number of training examples (Mohri, Rostamizadeh, and A.Talwalkar 2012;
Vapnik 1995; Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David 2014).
The generalisation error of DNNs as a function of the
number of parameters has been studied empirically (Belkin
et al. 2019; Nakkiran et al. 2021), and it has been observed
that it follows a double-descent curve instead of the classical
U-shaped curve characteristic of the bias-variance trade-off.
Specifically, for a fixed number of training examples, the
generalisation error increases as the number of parameters
* Corresponding author: ouns.elharzli@new.ox.ac.uk
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11856

