The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LAMM: Label Alignment for Multi-Modal Prompt Learning
Jingsheng Gao1 , Jiacheng Ruan1 , Suncheng Xiang2 , Zefang Yu1
Ke Ji3 , Mingye Xie1 , Ting Liu1 , Yuzhuo Fu1 *
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
{gaojingsheng, jackchenruan, xiangsuncheng17, yuzefang, xiemingye, louisa liu, yzfu}@sjtu.edu.cn
keji@seu.edu.cn
Abstract
Feature space

With the success of pre-trained visual-language (VL) models such as CLIP in visual representation tasks, transferring
pre-trained models to downstream tasks has become a crucial paradigm. Recently, the prompt tuning paradigm, which
draws inspiration from natural language processing (NLP),
has made significant progress in VL field. However, preceding methods mainly focus on constructing prompt templates
for text and visual inputs, neglecting the gap in class label representations between the VL models and downstream
tasks. To address this challenge, we introduce an innovative label alignment method named LAMM, which can dynamically adjust the category embeddings of downstream
datasets through end-to-end training. Moreover, to achieve
a more appropriate label distribution, we propose a hierarchical loss, encompassing the alignment of the parameter
space, feature space, and logits space. We conduct experiments on 11 downstream vision datasets and demonstrate that
our method significantly improves the performance of existing multi-modal prompt learning models in few-shot scenarios, exhibiting an average accuracy improvement of 2.31(%)
compared to the state-of-the-art methods on 16 shots. Moreover, our methodology exhibits the preeminence in continual learning compared to other prompt tuning methods. Importantly, our method is synergistic with existing prompt
tuning methods and can boost the performance on top of
them. Our code and dataset will be publicly available at
https://github.com/gaojingsheng/LAMM.

llama

CLIP

alpaca..？

CLIP

llama!

alpaca

A photo of [ CLASS ]

Feature space

A photo of [ Trained CLASS ]

llama

alpaca

Figure 1: CLIP is more inclined to classify an image as belonging to a similar category. Altering the category text feature’s position can enhance CLIP’s recognition capabilities.

how to effectively transfer pre-trained VL models to downstream tasks a inspiring and valuable issue.
Prompt learning provides an effective solution to this
problem, which provides downstream tasks with corresponding textual descriptions based on human prior knowledge and can effectively enhance the zero-shot and few-shot
recognition capability of VL models. Through trainable templates with a small number of task-specific parameters, the
process of constructing templates is further automated via
gradient descent instead of manual constructions (Lester,
Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021). Specifically, existing multimodal prompt tuning methods (Zhou et al. 2022b,a; Khattak
et al. 2022) use the frozen CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) model
and design trainable prompts separately for the textual and
visual encoders. These approaches ensure that VL models
could be better transferred to downstream tasks without any
changes to the VL model’s parameters. However, their approach mainly focuses on the prompt template that is applicable to all categories, overlooking the feature representation of each category.
The <CLASS> token in the text template is crucial in
classifying an image into the proper category. For example,
as depicted in Figure 1, llamas and alpacas are two animals that resemble each other closely. In CLIP, there exists a
propensity to misclassify a llama as an alpaca owing to the
overrepresentation of alpaca data in the pre-training dataset.

Introduction
Building machines to comprehend multi-modal information
in real-world environments is one of the primary goals of
artificial intelligence, where vision and language are the
two crucial modalities (Du et al. 2022). One effective implementation method is to pre-train a foundational visionlanguage (VL) model on a large-scale visual-text dataset and
then transfer it to downstream application scenarios (Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021). Typically, VL models employ two separate encoders to encode image and text features, followed by the design of an appropriate loss function for training. However, finetuning on extensively trained
models is costly and intricate, thus making the question of
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1815

