The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Proportional Aggregation of Preferences for Sequential Decision Making
Nikhil Chandak1 , Shashwat Goel1 , Dominik Peters2
1

IIIT Hyderabad
CNRS, LAMSADE, Université Paris Dauphine - PSL
nikhil.chandak@research.iiit.ac.in, shashwat.goel@research.iiit.ac.in, dominik.peters@lamsade.dauphine.fr
2

Abstract

Following recent work that studies this model under the
name “perpetual voting” (Lackner 2020), we define formal
properties of voting rules that capture the intuition that a
group of α% of the voters should be able to control the
decisions in α% of the rounds. Inspired from work in multiwinner approval voting (Lackner and Skowron 2023), we then
define a number of voting rules that satisfy these properties.
We believe that these rules have promising applications in a
variety of domains. Here are some examples:

We study the problem of fair sequential decision making given
voter preferences. In each round, a decision rule must choose
a decision from a set of alternatives where each voter reports
which of these alternatives they approve. Instead of going with
the most popular choice in each round, we aim for proportional
representation, using axioms inspired by the multi-winner
voting literature. The axioms require that every group of α% of
the voters, if it agrees in every round (i.e., approves a common
alternative), then those voters must approve at least α% of
the decisions. A stronger version of the axioms requires that
every group of α% of the voters that agrees in a β fraction of
rounds must approve β · α% of the decisions. We show that
three attractive voting rules satisfy axioms of this style. One of
them (Sequential Phragmén) makes its decisions online, and
the other two satisfy strengthened versions of the axioms but
make decisions semi-online (Method of Equal Shares) or fully
offline (Proportional Approval Voting). We present empirical
results for these rules based on synthetic data and U.S. political
elections. We also run experiments using the moral machine
dataset about ethical dilemmas. We train preference models
on user responses from different countries and let the models
cast votes. We find that aggregating these votes using our rules
leads to a more equal utility distribution across demographics
than making decisions using a single global preference model.

1

• Hiring decisions: Consider a department that hires new
faculty each year, with existing faculty voting over the
applicants. The department wishes to hire people representing its spectrum of research interests. For example,
if 20% of the department works on one topic and votes
for candidate on that topic, then at least 1 such candidate
should be hired every 5 years.
• Virtual democracy: In cases where a group of people need
to make an extremely large number of decisions, we may
wish to automate this process. An approach known as
virtual democracy does this by initially learning voters’
preferences over a space of potential alternatives (specified by feature vectors) for example based on pairwise
comparisons. Then, each decision is made by letting the
models vote on the decision maker’s behalf by predicting their preferences. This approach has led to proof-ofconcept systems that automate moral decisions faced by
autonomous vehicles (Noothigattu et al. 2018), kidney exchanges (Freedman et al. 2020), collective decision making directly from natural language preferences (Mohsin
et al. 2021) and allocation of food donations (Lee et al.
2019). The approach behind these systems has recently
been criticized as overweighting the opinions of majorities
(Feffer, Heidari, and Lipton 2023). We show preliminary
evidence in our experiments that using proportional voting
methods could avoid this issue.

Introduction

We consider the problem of making a sequence of independent decisions via voting. In each round, we can choose one
alternative from a set of several alternatives, based on voters
who tell us which alternatives they support (or approve). The
set of voters stays the same across rounds, though the set of
alternatives may change. The popular way of making such
decisions is to take the alternative with the most supporters in
each round. A problem with this method is that non-majority
groups of voters may have very little influence on the outcomes. For example, if there is a fixed group of 51% of the
voters who all report the same opinion in every round, then
100% of the decisions will be taken in accordance with the
wishes of that group, with the other 49% of voters ignored
or at most acting as tie-breakers. In many contexts, this is
undesirable due to fairness concerns.

• Policy decisions of coalition governments: In many countries, the government is formed by coalitions of several
parties with different strengths (for example, in Germany
2021–25 it consists of 3 parties who received 26%, 15%,
and 12% of the vote). A coalition needs to agree on a program, consisting of decisions on many issues. Our methods could help to design a program where each party’s
preferences gets a fair representation in the outcome.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9573

