The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NILUT: Conditional Neural Implicit 3D Lookup Tables for Image Enhancement
Marcos V. Conde1 * , Javier Vazquez-Corral2,3 , Michael S. Brown4 , Radu Timofte1
1

Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS, University of Würzburg
2
Computer Vision Center (CVC)
3
Department of Computer Science, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
4
York University

3D LUT

Abstract

Input I

NILUT
...

...

...

...

...

...

3D lookup tables (3D LUTs) are a key component for image
enhancement. Modern image signal processors (ISPs) have
dedicated support for these as part of the camera rendering
pipeline. Cameras typically provide multiple options for picture styles, where each style is usually obtained by applying a
unique handcrafted 3D LUT. Current approaches for learning
and applying 3D LUTs are notably fast, yet not so memoryefficient, as storing multiple 3D LUTs is required. For this
reason and other implementation limitations, their use on mobile devices is less popular. In this work, we propose a Neural
Implicit LUT (NILUT), an implicitly defined continuous 3D
color transformation parameterized by a neural network. We
show that NILUTs are capable of accurately emulating real
3D LUTs. Moreover, a NILUT can be extended to incorporate
multiple styles into a single network with the ability to blend
styles implicitly. Our novel approach is memory-efficient,
controllable and can complement previous methods, including learned ISPs. Code at https://github.com/mv-lab/nilut

Input I′

Figure 1: Top shows a conventional 3D lookup table able to
enhance the color and tone of the image. Bottom shows the
same functionality based on the proposed NILUT.

2018). In addition, there is already an active trend to replace
many conventional ISP components with deep learningbased algorithms, e.g. image denoising (Abdelhamed, Lin,
and Brown 2018), super-resolution (Ignatov et al. 2021b),
and even the entire ISP (Liu et al. 2022b; Liang et al. 2021b).
In particular, methods for image enhancement via tone
manipulation are often based on 3D LUTs (Zeng et al. 2020;
Yang et al. 2022a) due to their runtime efficiency. However,
these methods have not been tested on mobile devices due
to their memory limitations (i.e. storing multiple 3D LUTs
would be too memory exhaustive) and required operations.

Introduction
Image signal processors (ISP) are hardware units used in
cameras to process the RAW sensor images to the final output image (Heide et al. 2014; Schwartz, Giryes, and Bronstein 2018; Karaimer and Brown 2016). The ISP hardware
applies a series of processing steps to render the RAW image to its final photo-finished output. 3D lookup tables (3D
LUTs) are one of the core components used in conventional
ISPs. Specifically, a 3D LUT is a global color operator that
maps an RGB color to a new RGB color. 3D LUTs are commonly used to model a desired stylistic look as shown in
Fig. 1. Most cameras can render the same image to several
different pictures, where each picture style has its own associated 3D LUT to enhance the color and tone (Zeng et al.
2020; Karaimer and Brown 2018).
Modern cameras use conventional ISPs (Delbracio et al.
2021; Karaimer and Brown 2016) and apply further photofinishing deep-learning models (Tseng et al. 2022; Ke et al.
2023). These usually run on dedicated processors e.g. neural processing units (NPUs), with important limitations such
as memory allocation and allowed operations (Ignatov et al.

Contribution We propose NILUT, a novel application
of implicit neural representations (INRs) (Sitzmann et al.
2020) for color manipulation. Our NILUT is an implicitly
defined, continuous 3D color transformation parameterized
by a neural network. NILUTs can accurately mimic existing professional 3D LUTs, as shown in Fig. 1. Moreover,
NILUTs can be extended to encode multiple styles into a
single network. During inference, the NILUT can be conditioned on a particular picture style, and even blend between
multiple styles implicitly. This novel multi-style formulation
allows controllable image enhancement and customization.
We illustrate this in Fig. 2. We believe NILUTs can complement previous methods for image enhancement (Zeng et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2021), including learned ISPs designed
for smartphones. As part of this effort, we provide a dataset
of curated 3D LUTs and images for evaluation.

* Corresponding author: marcos.conde [at] uni-wuerzburg.de
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1371

