The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Ternary Spike: Learning Ternary Spikes for Spiking Neural Networks
Yufei Guo* , Yuanpei Chen∗ , Xiaode Liu, Weihang Peng, Yuhan Zhang, Xuhui Huang, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, China
yfguo@pku.edu.cn, rop477@163.com, mazhe thu@163.com

Abstract
The Spiking Neural Network (SNN), as one of the biologically
inspired neural network infrastructures, has drawn increasing attention recently. It adopts binary spike activations to
transmit information, thus the multiplications of activations
and weights can be substituted by additions, which brings
high energy efficiency. However, in the paper, we theoretically and experimentally prove that the binary spike activation map cannot carry enough information, thus causing
information loss and resulting in accuracy decreasing. To
handle the problem, we propose a ternary spike neuron to
transmit information. The ternary spike neuron can also enjoy
the event-driven and multiplication-free operation advantages
of the binary spike neuron but will boost the information capacity. Furthermore, we also embed a trainable factor in the
ternary spike neuron to learn the suitable spike amplitude, thus
our SNN will adopt different spike amplitudes along layers,
which can better suit the phenomenon that the membrane potential distributions are different along layers. To retain the
efficiency of the vanilla ternary spike, the trainable ternary
spike SNN will be converted to a standard one again via a reparameterization technique in the inference. Extensive experiments with several popular network structures over static and
dynamic datasets show that the ternary spike can consistently
outperform state-of-the-art methods. Our code is open-sourced
at https://github.com/yfguo91/Ternary-Spike.

Introduction
Nowadays, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has been widely
used in many fields, e.g., object recognition (He et al. 2016),
object segmentation (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015),
object tracking (Bewley et al. 2016), etc. However, to achieve
better performance, the network size is evolving to more and
more complex (Huang et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2018). To address this problem, quantization (Gong et al. 2019; Li, Dong,
and Wang 2019), pruning (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017), knowledge distillation (Polino, Pascanu, and Alistarh 2018; Zhang,
Bao, and Ma 2022), spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Li et al.
2021a; Xiao et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Bohnstingl et al.
2022), and so on, have been proposed. Especially, SNNs,
recognized as one of the next-generation neural networks,
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12244

provide a unique way to reduce energy consumption by mimicking the information processing of the brain. SNNs adopt
spikes to transmit information and thus can convert multiplications of weights and activations to additions, enjoying
multiplication-free inference. Furthermore, the event-drivenbased computation manner shows higher energy efficiency
on neuromorphic hardwares (Ma et al. 2017; Akopyan et al.
2015; Davies et al. 2018; Pei et al. 2019).
However, SNN’s binary spike activation maps suffer the
limited information capacity compared to full precious activation maps of the ANN and are unable to carry enough
useful information from membrane potentials in the quantization process of the SNN, thus causing information loss
and resulting in accuracy decreasing. A detailed proof will be
given in Sec. 4.1 in the paper. Meanwhile, we also find that
the membrane potential distributions of different layers of
an SNN are much different. thus quantizing these membrane
potentials to the same spike values is unnatural, which is
ignored by the prior work.
To solve these problems, we first propose the ternary spike
neuron, called Ternary Spike. Different from the current way
using {0, 1} spikes, it utilizes the {−1, 0, 1} spikes to transmit information. A detailed design and a theoretical proof
will be provided in Sec. 4.1 that the Ternary Spike enjoys
the greater information capacity than the binary spike but will
keep the multiplication-addition transform and event-driven
advantages still. Furthermore, we also extend the ternary
spike to a learnable ternary spike form, which is not limited
to {−1, 0, 1}, but {−α, 0, α}, where α is layer-wise learnable value. In this way, different layers’ neurons will fire
different magnitudes of spikes in a learning manner, corresponding to different membrane potential distributions. In the
inference phase, the α factor can be folded into the weights
by a re-parameterization technique, hence will retain the
multiplication-free inference again. The difference between
our ternary spike neuron and the vanilla binary spike neuron
is illustrated in Fig. 1.
In summary, our main contributions are threefold:
• We prove that the binary spike activation map cannot carry
enough information with theoretical justifications and indepth experimental analysis and propose the ternary spike
neuron, a simple yet effective improved spike neuron for
SNNs to increase the information capacity. It still enjoys
the multiplication-free and event-driven advantages of the

