The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Stochastic Graph Generator for Counterfactual Explanations
Mario Alfonso Prado-Romero* 1 , Bardh Prenkaj* 2 , Giovanni Stilo3
1

Gran Sasso Science Institute
Sapienza University of Rome
3
University of L’Aquila
marioalfonso.prado@gssi.it, prenkaj@di.uniroma1.it, giovanni.stilo@univaq.it
2

Abstract

Prenkaj et al. 2021, 2020, 2023a; Verma, Mandal, and Gupta
2022; Wang, Yu, and Miao 2017).
Recently, deep learning (relying on GNNs (Scarselli et al.
2008)) has been beneficial in solving graph-based prediction tasks, such as community detection (Wu et al. 2022),
link prediction (Wei et al. 2022), and session-based recommendations (Wu et al. 2019; Xu, Xi, and Wang 2021). Despite their remarkable performance, GNNs are black boxes,
making them unsuitable for high-impact and high-risk scenarios. The literature has proposed several post-hoc explainability methods to understand what is happening under the
hood of the prediction models. Specifically, counterfactual
explainability is useful to understand how modifications in
the input lead to different outcomes. Similarly, a recent field
in Graph Counterfactual Explainability (GCE) has emerged
(Prado-Romero et al. 2023).
We provide the reader with an example that helps clarify a counterfactual example in graphs. Suppose we have a
social network where a specific user U posts an illicit advertisement, thus violating the Terms of Service (ToS). A counterfactual explanation of U ’s account suspension would be
if the user had refrained from writing the post about selling
illegal goods, her account would not have been banned.
Generally, GCE methods can be search, heuristic, and
learning-based approaches (Prado-Romero et al. 2023).
Search-based approaches find counterfactual examples
within the data distribution. Heuristic-based approaches perturb the original graph G into G′ such that, for a certain prediction model Φ, namely oracle, Φ(G) ̸= Φ(G′ ) without accessing the dataset G. In other words, G′ can be outside the
data distribution of G ′ . Heuristic-based approaches suffer the
need to define the perturbation heuristic (e.g., rules), which
might come after careful examination of the data and involve
domain expertise to express how the input graph should be
perturbed faithfully. For instance, producing valid counterfactuals for molecules requires knowledge about atom valences and chemical bonds. Contrarily, learning-based approaches learn the generative “heuristic” based on the data.
This kind of explainer is trained on samples and thus can be
used to produce counterfactual instances at inference time.
In this work, we propose RSGG-CE, a Robust Stochastic
Graph Generator for Counterfactual Explanations, to produce counterfactual examples from the learned latent space
considering a partially ordered generation sequence. RSGG-

Counterfactual Explanation (CE) techniques have garnered
attention as a means to provide insights to the users engaging with AI systems. While extensively researched in
domains such as medical imaging and autonomous vehicles, Graph Counterfactual Explanation (GCE) methods have
been comparatively under-explored. GCEs generate a new
graph similar to the original one, with a different outcome
grounded on the underlying predictive model. Among these
GCE techniques, those rooted in generative mechanisms have
received relatively limited investigation despite demonstrating impressive accomplishments in other domains, such as
artistic styles and natural language modelling. The preference for generative explainers stems from their capacity to
generate counterfactual instances during inference, leveraging autonomously acquired perturbations of the input graph.
Motivated by the rationales above, our study introduces
RSGG-CE, a novel Robust Stochastic Graph Generator for
Counterfactual Explanations able to produce counterfactual
examples from the learned latent space considering a partially ordered generation sequence. Furthermore, we undertake quantitative and qualitative analyses to compare RSGGCE’s performance against SoA generative explainers, highlighting its increased ability to engendering plausible counterfactual candidates.

Introduction
Explainability is crucial in sensitive domains to enable users
and service providers to make informed and reliable decisions (Guidotti et al. 2018). However, deep neural networks, commonly used for generating predictions, often suffer from a lack of interpretability, widely referred to as the
black-box problem (Petch, Di, and Nelson 2021), hindering
their wide adoption in domains such as healthcare and finance. On the other end of the spectrum of explainability, we
find inherently interpretable white-box prediction models
(Loyola-González 2019), which are preferred for decisionmaking purposes (Verenich et al. 2019). Alas, black-box
models demonstrate superior performance and generalisation capabilities when dealing with high-dimensional data
(Aragona et al. 2021; Ding et al. 2019; Feng, Tang, and Liu
2019; Huang et al. 2020; Madeddu, Stilo, and Velardi 2020;
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21518

