The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

VIXEN: Visual Text Comparison Network for Image Difference Captioning
Alexander Black1 , Jing Shi2 , Yifei Fan2 , Tu Bui1 , John Collomosse1,2
1

CVSSP, University of Surrey
2
Adobe Research
{alex.black|t.v.bui}@surrey.ac.uk, {jingshi|yifan|collomos}@adobe.com

Abstract

be easily scaled up in volume (Tan et al. 2019). To this end,
we make three technical contributions:

We present VIXEN – a technique that succinctly summarizes
in text the visual differences between a pair of images in order
to highlight any content manipulation present. Our proposed
network linearly maps image features in a pairwise manner,
constructing a soft prompt for a pretrained large language
model. We address the challenge of low volume of training
data and lack of manipulation variety in existing image difference captioning (IDC) datasets by training on synthetically
manipulated images from the recent InstructPix2Pix dataset
generated via prompt-to-prompt editing framework. We augment this dataset with change summaries produced via GPT3. We show that VIXEN produces state-of-the-art, comprehensible difference captions for diverse image contents and
edit types, offering a potential mitigation against misinformation disseminated via manipulated image content. Code and
data are available at http://github.com/alexblck/vixen

1. Cross-modal image differencing. We present a novel
image differencing concept comprising a 2-branch GPTJ architecture to embed and compare facts derived from
the image pair using CLIP-based image encoding. The
model generates text conditioned on that comparison to
explain salient changes between the image pair. We show
our textual explanations to be succinct and comprehensible to non-expert users and to be quantitatively closer to
ground-truth edit captions than state-of-the-art captioning methods.
2. Synthetic Edit Training. We propose a synthetic pairwise training framework for our VIXEN leveraging recent prompt2prompt (P2P) and language-based image
editing (LBIE) approaches to supervise fine-tuning on
generative image content, showing good generalization
to unseen content.
3. Augmented IP2P Dataset. We release an augmentation
of the recent InstructPix2Pix (IP2P) dataset with synthetic change captions generated via GPT-3 as a basis for
training and evaluating VIXEN.

Introduction
Image manipulation often forms the basis for fake news and
misinformation. This threat may be countered by tools that
encourage users to reflect upon the provenance and content of images. Given the reactionary nature of sharing, such
tools should be intuitively comprehensible to enable users to
make fast, informed trust decisions (Gregory 2019).
This paper contributes VIXEN – a method for intuitively
summarizing the visual change between a pair of images using a short passage of text. Emerging open standards (e.g.
C2PA (Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity
2023)) describe provenance frameworks that match images
circulating in the wild to a federated database of originals using perceptual hashing methods (Black et al. 2021b; Nguyen
et al. 2021; Black et al. 2021a; Pizzi et al. 2022). VIXEN
presents a comprehensible way to review any image manipulation evidenced by such a matching (Fig. 1).
Image difference captioning (IDC) is typically addressed
by representations that seek to model the spatial-semantic
distribution of concepts present in a scene – for example,
the relative positions of objects in CCTV footage (Jhamtani and Berg-Kirkpatrick 2018), or of primitive geometric
shapes (Johnson et al. 2017). More complex kinds of manipulations require expertise to construct and thus can not

We demonstrate that VIXEN achieves higher performance than prior image difference captioning methods and
is able to generalize to multiple datasets.

Related Work
Image difference captioning (IDC) is closely related to image captioning and visual question answering, both requiring a visual understanding system to model images and a
language understanding system capable of generating syntactically correct captions. The revolution of IDC in recent
years depends heavily on the advent of visual and text modeling approaches, together with cross-domain learning techniques that bridge the representation gap between them.
Early visual content modeling approaches employ global
CNN features such as VGG (Donahue et al. 2015) and
ResNet (Rennie et al. 2017) as input signals to the text generation models, leveraging the semantically rich and compact representations deliverable from these models. To better capture multi-object representations and their relation,
regional modeling methods are developed (Lu et al. 2017;
Gu et al. 2018; Anderson et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019). In

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

846

