The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Reinforcement-Learning-Based
Multiple-Column Selection Strategy for Column Generation
Haofeng Yuan, Lichang Fang, Shiji Song*
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
{yhf22, fanglc22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, shijis@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Restricted Master Problem

Column generation (CG) is one of the most successful approaches for solving large-scale linear programming (LP)
problems. Given an LP with a prohibitively large number of
variables (i.e., columns), the idea of CG is to explicitly consider only a subset of columns and iteratively add potential
columns to improve the objective value. While adding the
column with the most negative reduced cost can guarantee
the convergence of CG, it has been shown that adding multiple columns per iteration rather than a single column can
lead to faster convergence. However, it remains a challenge
to design a multiple-column selection strategy to select the
most promising columns from a large number of candidate
columns. In this paper, we propose a novel reinforcementlearning-based (RL) multiple-column selection strategy. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the first RL-based multiplecolumn selection strategy for CG. The effectiveness of our
approach is evaluated on two sets of problems: the cutting
stock problem and the graph coloring problem. Compared
to several widely used single-column and multiple-column
selection strategies, our RL-based multiple-column selection
strategy leads to faster convergence and achieves remarkable
reductions in the number of CG iterations and runtime.

Selected columns

Dual solution

Column selection

Pricing Problem

Candidate columns

Figure 1: The iterative process of CG.

into the restricted master problem (RMP) and the pricing
problem (PP). CG starts by solving the RMP with a small
subset of columns from the original problem. At each iteration, the RMP is solved using an LP solver (e.g., the simplex algorithm), and the dual solution is used to formulate
the PP. The PP is a “column generator” that generates new
columns (typically with negative reduced costs) to improve
the current RMP solution. If such columns are found, they
are added to the RMP to start a new iteration. Otherwise, it
certifies the optimality of the current RMP solution for the
original problem, and CG terminates.
Typically, the column with the most negative reduced cost
is selected to add to RMP at each iteration, which guarantees
the convergence of CG and the optimality of the final solution (Lübbecke and Desrosiers 2005). However, it often suffers from slow convergence, which limits its efficiency and
usability. Previous research has shown that selecting multiple columns per iteration, including sub-optimal solutions
of PP (even columns with non-negative reduced costs), can
lead to faster convergence (Moungla, Létocart, and Nagih
2010). This allows the RMP approximation to be improved,
the optimal basis to be characterized faster, and hence to reduce the number of iterations. However, selecting multiple
columns per iteration may result in a large fraction of useless columns that do not belong to the final optimal basis and
increase the computation cost of RMP.
In general, the PP can generate a pool of feasible candidate columns, which are sorted according to the reduced
cost, and the top-k of them are greedily selected. In order to improve the selection, Goffin and Vial (2000) suggested that the RMP description can be improved by selecting non-correlated columns. Several diversification-based
multiple-column selection strategies have been developed
and shown to be effective in practice (Vanderbeck 1994;
Moungla, Létocart, and Nagih 2010). However, despite the

Introduction
Column generation (CG) is a widely used approach for solving the linear programming (LP) relaxations of large-scale
optimization problems that have a prohibitively large number of variables to deal with. It exploits the fact that the majority of feasible variables (i.e., columns) will not be part
of an optimal solution. Therefore, CG starts with a subset of columns and gradually adds new columns that have
the potential to improve the current solution, e.g., columns
with a negative reduced cost (assuming a minimization problem), until no such columns exist and the current solution
is proven optimal (Desaulniers, Desrosiers, and Solomon
2006). CG is often combined with the branch-and-bound
method to solve large-scale integer programming problems,
which is called branch-and-price (Barnhart et al. 1998).
Specifically, CG follows an iterative process, as shown in
Figure 1. The original large-scale problem is decomposed
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8209

