The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

F³-Pruning: A Training-Free and Generalized Pruning Strategy
towards Faster and Finer Text-to-Video Synthesis
Sitong Su, Jianzhi Liu* , Lianli Gao, Jingkuan Song†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{sitongsu9796, jingkuan.song}@gmail.com, jianzhi.liu@outlook.com, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

Nevertheless, previous inference acceleration methods for
transformer or diffusion models either incorporate costly retraining or cannot be generally applied to both two models.
Specifically, for transformers-based models, several works
are dedicated towards a more efficient transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Mehta and Rastegari 2021; Meng
et al. 2022). Whereas, these works focus on discriminative tasks without considering synthesis quality. Other works
like (Mao et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2023; Rao et al. 2021) prune
weights or tokens with costly retraining or finetuning. Differently, ToMe merges tokens without training, which however introduces time-consuming manipulation in inference.
For diffusion-based models, traditional diffusion acceleration speeds up the denoising process (Lu et al. 2022), which
is limited by the trade-off between video quality and efficiency. Other methods like knowledge distillation (Ho et al.
2022a) or diffusion model pruning (Fang, Ma, and Wang
2023) also incorporate extra training costs. All of the above
works are specially designed for one specific model, thus
hampering their applicability to different T2V models.
To address the issue, instead of retraining we investigate
the inference process of a classic transformer-based model
CogVideo (Hong et al. 2023) and a typical diffusion-based
model Tune-A-Video (Wu et al. 2022b) to search for the
common points. Regardless of model types, the above two
models both establish attention between text to each frame,
within frames and cross frames to respectively model textvisual alignment, visual quality and temporal coherence as
shown in Figure 2(a). We respectively name these three
modules as Cross-modal Attention(CA), Self Attention(SA)
and Temporal Attention(TA). Note that, CA, SA and TA are
widely adopted in recent T2V models.
Therefore, we statistically analyze the attention values
distribution of the three modules during the inference process as shown in Figure 3. At the bottom of Figure 3, there
are attention maps visualization respectively for CogVideo
and Tune-A-Video. The diagonal line of the map refers to
SA while the other parts represent TA. As observed, TA is
full of values approaching zero, which indicates there exist
plenty of non-contributory and redundant parts getting involved in temporal modeling. The redundancy can also be
verified by visual results in the first row of Figure 1 that the
motion of the lion is restricted. Moreover, the histograms in
Figure 3 demonstrate the relationship between summed at-

Recently Text-to-Video (T2V) synthesis has undergone a
breakthrough by training transformers or diffusion models on
large-scale datasets. Nevertheless, inferring such large models incurs huge costs. Previous inference acceleration works
either require costly retraining or are model-specific. To address this issue, instead of retraining we explore the inference process of two mainstream T2V models using transformers and diffusion models. The exploration reveals the
redundancy in temporal attention modules of both models,
which are commonly utilized to establish temporal relations
among frames. Consequently, we propose a training-free and
generalized pruning strategy called F3 -Pruning to prune redundant temporal attention weights. Specifically, when aggregate temporal attention values are ranked below a certain
ratio, corresponding weights will be pruned. Extensive experiments on three datasets using a classic transformer-based
model CogVideo and a typical diffusion-based model TuneA-Video verify the effectiveness of F3 -Pruning in inference
acceleration, quality assurance and broad applicability.

1

Introduction

Text-to-Video (T2V) synthesis aims to generate high-quality
and temporally coherent videos semantically aligned with
text inputs. In the early stage of T2V, traditional generative
models like GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) are trained on
datasets of limited scale. Hence, the synthesized videos are
restricted by limited semantics and low quality (Li et al.
2018; Pan et al. 2017). To tackle this challenge, recent
T2V models utilize large and powerful generative models transformer or diffusion models to train on large-scale
datasets (Ho et al. 2022b; Wu et al. 2022a). Alternately,
other recent T2V models (Hong et al. 2023; Ho et al. 2022a;
Wu et al. 2022b) build upon large-scale T2I models (Ding
et al. 2021; Saharia et al. 2022a; Rombach et al. 2022a)
by introducing temporal information, which are also based
on transformers or diffusion models. Despite extraordinary
progress in video quality and zero-shot generalization ability, inferring such large models incurs huge costs.
* This author contributes equally to the first author of this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4961

