The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Working Memory Capacity of ChatGPT: An Empirical Study
Dongyu Gong1,2 , Xingchen Wan1 , Dingmin Wang1
1

University of Oxford
2
Yale University
dongyu.gong@yale.edu, xwan@robots.ox.ac.uk, dingmin.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Working memory is a critical aspect of both human intelligence and artificial intelligence, serving as a workspace for
the temporary storage and manipulation of information. In this
paper, we systematically assess the working memory capacity
of ChatGPT, a large language model developed by OpenAI,
by examining its performance in verbal and spatial n-back
tasks under various conditions. Our experiments reveal that
ChatGPT has a working memory capacity limit strikingly
similar to that of humans. Furthermore, we investigate the
impact of different instruction strategies on ChatGPT’s performance and observe that the fundamental patterns of a capacity
limit persist. From our empirical findings, we propose that
n-back tasks may serve as tools for benchmarking the working
memory capacity of large language models and hold potential
for informing future efforts aimed at enhancing AI working
memory.

Introduction
The advent of large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT
and GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023) has propelled the pursuit of artificial general intelligence (Bubeck et al. 2023) and unveiled
human-level emergent abilities (Wei et al. 2022b; Kosinski
2023). Among these abilities is the capacity to retain contextual information while engaging in multi-turn conversations,
suggesting the presence of working memory in these LLMs.
In cognitive science, working memory is usually defined as
the ability to store and manipulate information in mind (Baddeley 1992) temporarily. It is widely regarded as a critical
element of human intelligence, as it underlies various higherorder cognitive processes such as reasoning, problem-solving,
and language comprehension (Conway and Kovacs 2020).
Studies on human participants have revealed a fundamental capacity limit in working memory (Cowan 2001) but there
is no consensus on why working memory capacity is limited (Oberauer et al. 2016; Wilhelm, Hildebrandt, and Oberauer 2013). Among many theories, the executive attention
hypothesis (Engle, Kane, and Tuholski 1999; Engle 2002)
suggests that working memory depends on utilizing attention
to maintain or suppress information, and the restriction on
working memory capacity is not specifically about memory
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10048

storage per se, but more about the capacity for sustained,
regulated attention in the presence of interference.
Supporting evidence of the executive attention hypothesis includes results from the n-back task, which is arguably
the gold-standard measure of working memory capacity in
cognitive science (Kane and Engle 2002). The n-back task,
initially developed by Kirchner (1958), requires participants
to monitor a continuous stream of stimuli and to decide for
each stimulus whether it matches the one n step(s) back in the
stream (see Figure 1). Participants in this task must, therefore,
continuously update their mental representation of the target
items while also dropping now irrelevant items from consideration. So, some executive attention processes are required
in addition to storage. In this task, the level of n at which
a person’s performance drop significantly can be taken as a
measure of their working memory capacity. Typical human
performance drops significantly when n = 3 (Klatzky et al.
2008; Amon and Bertenthal 2018; Jaeggi et al. 2010), which
can be defined as the working memory capacity limit of an
average human. To illustrate this, we plot the data from one
experiment presented in Jaeggi et al. (2010) (see Figure 2).
In humans, working memory capacity has proved to be
closely related to fluid intelligence (Cochrane, Simmering,
and Green 2019; Salthouse and Pink 2008), which refers
to the ability to reason and to solve new problems independently of previously acquired knowledge. Training on
working memory capacity using the n-back task has been
shown to be effective in improving fluid intelligence (Au
et al. 2015; Jaeggi et al. 2008), highlighting the special role
of working memory capacity in human intelligence (Halford,
Cowan, and Andrews 2007). However, in artificial intelligence, there has not been a consensus as to which metrics
should be accepted as an intelligence index when evaluating
and comparing cognitive abilities of LLMs (Mitchell 2023).
In the current study, we define the working memory of LLMs
as an emergent ability to selectively maintain and manipulate
information for ongoing cognitive processes, and hypothesize that LLMs also have limited working memory capacity.
Taking a step further, just as how critical working memory
capacity is to human intelligence, it might also be used as an
index of the intelligence emgerged from LLMs.
To investigate these hypotheses, we use ChatGPT
(gpt-3.5-turbo) as a representative of LLMs and design two categories of n-back tasks to evaluate its working

