The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Evolving Domain Generalization through Dynamic
Latent Representations
Binghui Xie1 , Yongqiang Chen1 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Kaiwen Zhou1 , Bo Han2 , Wei Meng1 , James Cheng1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Hong Kong Baptist University
{bhxie21, yqchen, kwzhou, jqwang23, jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Source Domain

Abstract

1915

1987

2013

Female

1971

...

...

Male

1905

Domain generalization is a critical challenge for machine
learning systems. Prior domain generalization methods focus
on extracting domain-invariant features across several stationary domains to enable generalization to new domains.
However, in non-stationary tasks where new domains evolve
in an underlying continuous structure, such as time, merely
extracting the invariant features is insufficient for generalization to the evolving new domains. Nevertheless, it is nontrivial to learn both evolving and invariant features within
a single model due to their conflicts. To bridge this gap,
we build causal models to characterize the distribution shifts
concerning the two patterns, and propose to learn both dynamic and invariant features via a new framework called Mutual Information-Based Sequential Autoencoders (MISTS).
MISTS adopts information theoretic constraints onto sequential autoencoders to disentangle the dynamic and invariant
features, and leverage a domain adaptive classifier to make
predictions based on both evolving and invariant information.
Our experimental results on both synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that MISTS succeeds in capturing both
evolving and invariant information, and present promising results in evolving domain generalization tasks.

Target Domain

...

...

Figure 1: An example of Evolving Domain Generalization
on Portraits(Ginosar et al. 2015).The dataset consists of historical images of US high school students, and as time progresses, the visual attributes captured in the photos, such as
hair type and clothing style, gradually change.
e.g., income and career types, will also change gradually due
to social developments (i.e., covariate shift). Figure 1 shows
another example of historical images of US high school students. Besides temporal factors, the data collected can also
evolve along with geometry, transformation, and other factors (Qin, Wang, and Li 2022). The task of generalizing under such shifts, known as Evolving Domain Generalization
(EDG), involves training models on examples from sequential source domains to generalize well to evolving unseen
target domains (Wang et al. 2022; Qin, Wang, and Li 2022).
To tackle EDG, a common belief is to inherit the spirit of
domain invariant learning and to learn evolving domain invariant features for generalizing to new domains (GagnonAudet et al. 2022). In contrast, plentiful empirical studies
challenged the position and showed that it is also needed to
additionally learn the dynamic information which is useful
for predicting evolving domain patterns (Wang et al. 2022;
Bai, Ling, and Zhao 2022). These phenomena raise a challenging research question:
What features do we need to learn for successful EDG?
We consider the problem from the feature learning perspective. Specifically, we build Structural Causal Models to
characterize the distribution shifts caused by the underlying
invariant and dynamic factors in EDG. Our causal analysis
shows that it is essential to learn both dynamic and invariant
features for better EDG.
Nevertheless, it is non-trivial to learn both invariant and

Introduction
Domain generalization (DG) is a critical challenge for machine learning systems that requires model to generalize beyond the assumption that training and testing data come
from identical and independent distributions (Bengio et al.
2019). To address the issue, most previous DG methods focus on extracting domain-invariant features across several
stationary source domains (Sun and Saenko 2016; Li et al.
2018; Sagawa et al. 2020; Arjovsky et al. 2019). Nevertheless, domains could also be non-stationary and evolve along
with certain structures (Wang et al. 2022; Qin, Wang, and Li
2022; Yao et al. 2022a; Gagnon-Audet et al. 2022). For instance, banks assess whether a person is likely to default on
a loan by examining factors such as income, career, and marital status. However, as society changes over time, it is desirable to take account of predictable trends along with the time
(Bai, Ling, and Zhao 2022) (i.e., concept shift) when making predictions for new customers. Moreover, these factors,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16040

