The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BeliefFlow: A Framework for Logic-Based Belief Diffusion
via Iterated Belief Change
Nicolas Schwind1 , Katsumi Inoue2,3 , Sébastien Konieczny4 , Pierre Marquis4,5
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
2
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
3
Graduate Institute for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Tokyo, Japan
4
Univ. Artois, CNRS, CRIL, Lens, France
5
Institut Universitaire de France
nicolas-schwind@aist.go.jp, inoue@nii.ac.jp, konieczny@cril.fr, marquis@cril.fr
Abstract

have varying levels of skepticism, differing immediate or delayed responses to conflicting information. Moreover, while
it is possible for friends to communicate with each other,
we do not make the assumption that the order in which each
communication pair occurs is known.

This paper presents BeliefFlow, a novel framework for representing how logical beliefs spread among interacting agents
within a network. In a Belief Flow Network (BFN), agents
communicate asynchronously. The agents’ beliefs are represented using epistemic states, which encompass their current beliefs and conditional beliefs guiding future changes.
When communication occurs between two connected agents,
the receiving agent changes its epistemic state using an improvement operator, a well-known type of rational iterated
belief change operator that generalizes belief revision operators. We show that BFNs satisfy appealing properties, leading
to two significant outcomes. First, in any BFN with strong
network connectivity, the beliefs of all agents converge towards a global consensus. Second, within any BFN, we show
that it is possible to compute an optimal strategy for influencing the global beliefs. This strategy, which involves controlling the beliefs of a least number of agents through bribery,
can be identified from the topology of the network and can be
computed in polynomial time.

In this paper, we introduce a new framework to model
these interactions, named Belief Flow Networks (BFNs). In
a BFN, the communication protocol within a set of agents is
characterized by an acquaintance graph and a stochastic process that is used to trigger communication pairs randomly,
in a sequence of steps. At each step, an agent sends their
currently held beliefs (a propositional formula) to a connected agent, who receives it and modifies their belief state
in light of this new information using an improvement operator (Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2008; Konieczny, Medina
Grespan, and Pino Pérez 2010), a general form of iterated
belief change operator (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985; Gärdenfors 1988; Darwiche and Pearl 1997).
BFNs share similarities with many settings for modelling
the belief dynamics of a group of agents, including Boolean
networks (Kauffman 1969, 1993; Aldana 2003), opinion dynamics (Hegselmann and Krause 2005; Riegler and Douven
2009; Tsang and Larson 2014; Grandi, Lorini, and Perrussel 2015; Novaro et al. 2018, 2019), and many other complex systems. But the most closely related work to our proposal is the framework of Belief Revision Games (BRGs)
(Schwind et al. 2015, 2016), a comparable logical framework involving a network of interacting agents. However,
our approach deviates from BRGs in several significant aspects. The first noteworthy distinction between BFNs and
BRGs is that BRGs adopt a synchronous update scheme.
At each step, every agent receives the beliefs of all their
acquaintances, processes these beliefs using a belief merging operator, and then revises their own beliefs based on
the merged result. In contrast, our BFN approach employs
an asynchronous update scheme, and there is no overseeing
agent dictating the order with which communication pairs
are activated. Another significant difference pertains to the
revision policy employed by each agent in BRGs, that is
characterized by a classical revision operator (Katsuno and
Mendelzon 1991) and a merging operator (Konieczny and
Pino Pérez 2002), both of which align with the principles of
the AGM theory that delineates the behavior of one-step re-

Introduction
Consider the following scenario with three individuals: Alice, Bob and Charles. Each initially holds distinct beliefs.
Alice got a memo about a lockdown happening tomorrow.
Bob lacks any information regarding the impending lockdown, yet he assumes that all aspects of daily life, especially
transportation services, will continue without interruption.
Charles, in contrast to Alice’s viewpoint, does not believe
a lockdown will take place. However, he does hold a conditional belief: if a lockdown were indeed implemented, he
expects that transportation services would stop. Alice, Bob,
and Charles frequently engage in private one-on-one conversations, and they are about to dive into a discussion about the
upcoming lockdown and transportation situation.
Our focus lies in predicting the outcome of their forthcoming discussion. More precisely, we are interested in the
following issue: will the group of agents collectively attain
a stable state of beliefs, thus achieving consensus? This is
a challenging question, given that multiple variable parameters come into play. Each of the three individuals, when
presented with new information from their two friends, may
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10696

