The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Optimal Subsidy Bounds for Envy-Freeable Allocations
Yasushi Kawase1 , Kazuhisa Makino2 , Hanna Sumita3 , Akihisa Tamura4 , Makoto Yokoo5
1

University of Tokyo
2
Kyoto University
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology
4
Keio University
5
Kyushu University
kawase@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, makino@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp, sumita@c.titech.ac.jp, aki-tamura@math.keio.ac.jp,
yokoo@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract

subsidy payments must be provided by an external agent
(e.g., a government or a funding agency), it is desirable that
the total subsidy amount is bounded. Thus, in this paper, we
study the fair division of indivisible items with limited subsidies.
Most of the existing works on the fair division of indivisible items with limited subsidies focus on some special
cases. For example, Maskin (1987) and Klijn (2000) consider the case that the number of agents and the number of
items are equal and each agent can be allocated at most one
item. Halpern and Shah (2019) consider an extended model
where the number of agents and number of items may differ,
and each agent can be allocated more than one item, assuming the valuation of each agent is binary additive. Babaioff,
Ezra, and Feige (2021) and Goko et al. (2022) consider the
case that the valuation of each agent is matroidal (which is
not necessarily additive). Barman et al. (2022) examine a
broader class of valuations in which the marginal valuation
of each item is binary. As far as the authors are aware, the
most general model considered so far is monotone valuations (Brustle et al. 2020), where the marginal contribution
of each item is non-negative.
In this paper, we study the fair division of indivisible items
with limited subsidies when the valuations are not restricted
to be monotone. We assume that the valuations are normalized so that the absolute marginal value of each item is at
most 1 (i.e., between −1 and 1).
For monotone valuations, which are special cases of our
model, Brustle et al. (2020) show that envy-free allocation
always exists with a subsidy of amount at most 2(n − 1) per
agent, and the total amount is 2(n − 1)2 . However, the only
known lower bound on the total subsidy is n − 1 (which can
be obtained using the case with n agents and one item described at the beginning of this section), it remains an open
question whether we can improve on the total subsidy bound
of 2(n − 1)2 for monotone valuations, as mentioned in a recent survey paper (Liu et al. 2023, Open Question 9).

We study the fair division of indivisible items with subsidies
among n agents, where the absolute marginal valuation of
each item is at most one. Under monotone valuations (where
each item is a good), it is known that a maximum subsidy
of 2(n − 1) and a total subsidy of 2(n − 1)2 are sufficient
to guarantee the existence of an envy-freeable allocation. In
this paper, we improve upon these bounds, even in a wider
model. Namely, we show that, given an EF1 allocation, we
can compute in polynomial time an envy-free allocation with
a subsidy of at most n − 1 per agent and a total subsidy of
at most n(n − 1)/2. Moreover, we present further improved
bounds for monotone valuations.

Introduction
We consider the problem of fairly dividing items among
agents. The notion of fairness that has been extensively studied in the literature is envy-freeness (Foley 1967). It requires
that no agent wants to swap her bundle with another agent’s.
When the items to be allocated are divisible, the classical
result ensures the existence of an envy-free allocation (Varian 1974). In contrast, when the items are indivisible, envyfreeness is not a reasonable goal. For instance, consider n
agents with n ≥ 2 and a single item valued at 1 by each
agent. Allocating the only item to an agent results in envy
from the other agents, as they get nothing. Thus, envy-free
allocations may not exist when the items are indivisible.
One way to circumvent this issue is to relax the fairness requirement. For example, envy-freeness up to one item
(EF1) requires that when agent i envies agent j, the envy can
be eliminated by either (i) removing one item from agent j’s
bundle, or (ii) removing one item from agent i’s bundle. It is
known that an EF1 allocation is guaranteed to exist if each
item is either a good or a chore for any agent, i.e., doubly
monotone valuations (Lipton et al. 2004; Bhaskar, Sricharan, and Vaish 2021). Moreover, for general valuations, the
existence of an EF1 allocation is assured when there are only
2 agents (Bérczi et al. 2020).
Another way to circumvent this issue is monetary compensation (subsidy). Since money is divisible, it can be a
powerful tool to achieve envy-freeness. However, since the

Our Results
In this paper, we present improved upper bounds for the
subsidies necessary to achieve envy-freeness. We demonstrate that, given an EF1 allocation, an envy-free allocation with a subsidy can be constructed in polynomial time
where each agent receives a subsidy of at most n − 1 and

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9824

