The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning from Failure: Improving Meeting Summarization without Good Samples
Ke Wang* , Xiutian Zhao* , Wei Peng
Huawei IT Innovation and Research Center
{wangke215, zhaoxiutian, peng.wei1}@huawei.com

Abstract

To produce summaries that align with human preferences,
LLMs almost certainly necessitate fine-tuning on largescale human-annotated data (Brown et al. 2020; Ouyang
et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023). Among various alignment
techniques, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) are two widelyadopted and well-established ones. SFT utilizes human annotated positively-rated data, while RLHF relies on training a reward model from human annotated pairwise positive
(“chosen”) and negative (“rejected”) examples.
However, the specific data either SFT or RLHF requires
could be unobtainable in real-world industrial environments.
In our case of developing a meeting summarization system,
we are constrained in both attainable data and annotation
resources. Facing the absence of training data suitable for
existing tuning methods, we are bound to utilize collectible
yet atypical data. Experimentally, we find that it is acceptable to request simple rating feedback on one given summary each time from actual users. To explore the feasibility
of harnessing such self-augmenting feedback data to continuously improve alignment, we hypothesize that: (1) besides pairs of “chosen” and “rejected” generations, human
feedback in other forms could also provide informative representations. Taking summarization tasks for instance, it is
reasonable to make asynchronous measurements (assigning
a stand-alone rating given one case at a time) across generated summaries on different source transcripts; (2) having
been exposed to quality-wise distinguishable “bad” samples
with corresponding human-rated scores, a language model
could learn the association between numerical scores and
generation quality.
Following this intuition, we take an in-context learning approach akin to Chain of Hindsight (CoH) proposed
by Liu, Sferrazza, and Abbeel (2023). Unlike CoH that
take pairwise comparison feedback, our approach utilizes
asynchronous and numerical human feedback data (hence
named “Score Tuning”). Having formulated data into triplets
of transcripts, summaries and corresponding human feedback scores, we tune the model by simultaneously minimizing the confidence-aware loss (given transcripts and summaries, comparing the differences among model-predicted
and human-assigned scores) and hindsight-score loss (given
transcripts and human-assigned scores, comparing the differences among newly and initially model-generated sum-

Existing methods aligning language models with various
human needs are reliant heavily on high-quality and taskspecific data. However, industrial deployment of task-specific
language models often encounter challenges in the availability of appropriate training samples. Taking meeting summarization for instance, public datasets are scarce, and private corpora are also hard to obtain due to privacy issues or
resource-demanding annotation. To improve meeting summarization in the absence of positively-rated (i.e., “good”) samples, we propose Score Tuning, a cold start tuning framework
that leverages bad samples of distinguishable degrees to incrementally enhance the performance of summary generation
without an initial presence of good samples. Our method utilizes asynchronous and numerical human feedback that measure the quality of generated summaries. Formulating data
into triplets of (transcript, summary, score), our approach instructs a pre-trained model to learn the association between
summary qualities and human-rated scores and hence to generate better summaries corresponding to higher scores. The
experiment results show that our method is effective in improving meeting summarization on both English and Chinese
corpora while requiring less annotated data and training resources compared to existing alignment methods. Additionally, we also preliminarily explore the transferability of our
approach in machine translation tasks and demonstrate its potential for future development and usage in other domains.

Introduction
The widespread use of video-telephony applications and the
surging trend of remote work have contributed to a boom in
online chatting and virtual meetings (Rennard et al. 2023).
As a result, automatic meeting summarization, which condenses long and unorganized meeting transcripts into concise and comprehensible summaries, is of increasingly potential social economic values and thus draws rising attention (Gillick et al. 2009; Shang et al. 2018). The task
aims to liberate people from cumbersome transcript reading
and generate easy-to-digest meeting minutes automatically,
and recent progress of large language models (LLMs) has
yielded promising results tackling this task. (Wu et al. 2023;
Hu et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19153

