The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Provably Accurate Randomized Sampling Algorithm for Logistic Regression
Agniva Chowdhury1 , Pradeep Ramuhalli2
1

Computer Science and Mathematics Divsion, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, USA
2
Nuclear Energy and Fuel Cycle Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, USA
{chowdhurya, ramuhallip}@ornl.gov

Abstract

following

In statistics and machine learning, logistic regression is a
widely-used supervised learning technique primarily employed for binary classification tasks. When the number of
observations greatly exceeds the number of predictor variables, we present a simple, randomized sampling-based algorithm for logistic regression problem that guarantees highquality approximations to both the estimated probabilities
and the overall discrepancy of the model. Our analysis builds
upon two simple structural conditions that boil down to
randomized matrix multiplication, a fundamental and wellunderstood primitive of randomized numerical linear algebra. We analyze the properties of estimated probabilities of
logistic regression when leverage scores are used to sample
observations, and prove that accurate approximations can be
achieved with a sample whose size is much smaller than the
total number of observations. To further validate our theoretical findings, we conduct comprehensive empirical evaluations. Overall, our work sheds light on the potential of using randomized sampling approaches to efficiently approximate the estimated probabilities in logistic regression, offering a practical and computationally efficient solution for
large-scale datasets.

1

P (yi = 1 | Xi∗ ) := pi (β) =

exp (Xi∗ β)
,
1 + exp (Xi∗ β)

(1)

for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Here, yi ∈ {0, 1} is the i-th component
of y, Xi∗ is i-th row (as a row vector) of X, and β ∈ Rd is
the vector of unknown regression coefficients, which is often
estimated by the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) i.e.,
through maximizing the log-likelihood function with respect
to β, which is given by
ℓ(β) =

n
X

yi log pi (β) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − pi (β))



i=1

=

n
X


yi Xi∗ β − log(1 + exp(Xi∗ β)) ,

(2)

i=1

where we get eqn. (2) by using eqn. (1) in the previous
step. The MLE of the coefficients vector β can be written as
β ∗ = argmaxβ ℓ(β) . Equivalently, eqn. (2) can be written
in the following compact form:
ℓ(β) = yT Xβ − 1T g(β)

(3)

where g(β) is an n × 1 vector with the i-th entry gi (β) =
log(1+exp(Xi∗ β)), for i = 1, . . . , n. The MLE β ∗ satisfies
the following condition

Introduction

In statistics and machine learning, logistic regression (Hosmer Jr, Lemeshow, and Sturdivant 2013) is a widely-used
supervised learning technique applied to binary classification tasks. It is a statistical method that predicts one of two
possible outcomes based on the input features. More specifically, the goal is to model the probability of one of the binary outcomes based on the predictor variables. In machine
learning and various scientific applications, logistic regression appears in numerous settings, including online learning
(Zhang et al. 2012), feature selection (Koh, Kim, and Boyd
2007), anomaly detection (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019; Feng et al. 2014), disease classification (Liao
and Chin 2007; Chai et al. 2018), image & signal processing (Dong, Zhu, and Gong 2019; Rosario 2004), probability
calibration (Kull et al. 2019) and many more.
Formally, given the data matrix X ∈ Rn×d and the binary
response vector y ∈ {0, 1}n , logistic regression models the

∂ℓ (β)
= 0 ⇒ XT (y − p(β ∗ )) = 0 .
∂β β=β∗

(4)

Here p(β ∗ ) is an n-dimensional vector of estimated probabilities 1 , with the i-th entry corresponds to pi (β ∗ ), for
i = 1, . . . n. Unfortunately, due to the non-linearity of ℓ(β),
there is no closed-form analytical solution to eqn. (4). As
a result, a variant of Newton’s method, namely, iteratively
reweighted least squares (IRLS) (Green 1984) is commonly
used to find β ∗ from eqn. (4), that maximizes ℓ(β). The
IRLS algorithm iteratively computes the MLE of the parameter vector, by solving a weighted least squares problem at
every iteration. Therefore, the per iteration cost of the algorithm is dominated by the cost of solving the aforementioned
weighted least squares problem at each iteration.
1

The term “predicted probabilities” is used in some literature,
but throughout our paper, we consistently refer to it as the vector
of “estimated probabilities.”

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11597

