The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Constrained Bayesian Optimization under Partial Observations: Balanced
Improvements and Provable Convergence
Shengbo Wang1 , Ke Li2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, EX4 4RN, Exeter, UK
shnbo.wang@foxmail.com, k.li@exeter.ac.uk

Abstract

nated without outputting the performance of a hyperparameter configuration but an error log when there is a memory
overflow or computation timeout (Perrone et al. 2019).
Bayesian optimization (BO) is recognized as an effective
query-efficient framework for black-box optimization (Garnett 2023). Although there have been dedicated efforts on
constraint handling in the context of BO, a.k.a. constrained
Bayesian optimization (CBO), most of them are however
expected to work with complete observations. Considering
missing observations, existing CBO methods may become
inefficient due to the following two issues.

The partially observable constrained optimization problems
(POCOPs) impede data-driven optimization techniques since
an infeasible solution of POCOPs can provide little information about the objective as well as the constraints. We endeavor to design an efficient and provable method for expensive POCOPs under the framework of constrained Bayesian
optimization. Our method consists of two key components.
Firstly, we present an improved design of the acquisition
functions that introduce balanced exploration during optimization. We rigorously study the convergence properties of
this design to demonstrate its effectiveness. Secondly, we propose Gaussian processes embedding different likelihoods as
the surrogate model for partially observable constraints. This
model leads to a more accurate representation of the feasible regions compared to traditional classification-based models. Our proposed method is empirically studied on both synthetic and real-world problems. The results demonstrate the
competitiveness of our method for solving POCOPs.

• First, existing CBO methods risk overly exploiting
known feasible regions in POCOPs. In particular, the
update of an acquisition function such as expected improvement (EI) (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch 1998) stagnates when objective values are unobservable outside χ.
This stagnation may cause cluttered observations in local
feasible regions, resulting in an overconfidence effect in
both surrogate modeling and candidate acquisition. Consequently, the efficiency of BO diminishes.
• Second, POCOPs generate mixed data from both feasible and infeasible solutions, which complicate sufficient
exploitation using conventional surrogate models. When
a probabilistic classifier like Gaussian process classifier (GPC) is employed to distinguish between feasible
and infeasible solutions, the available observations lose
their utility in refining the GPC model. Brockman et al.
leveraged value observations by using regression models
and artificially injecting values into infeasible solutions.
However, this approach potentially introduces erroneous
priors, thereby compromising optimization efficacy.

Introduction
The black-box constrained optimization problem considered
in this paper is formulated as:
minimize f (x)
>

subject to ~g (x) ≤ 0,

(1)

where x = (x1 , · · · , xn ) ∈ Ω denotes the decision varin
n
able, Ω = [xLi , xU
i ]i=1 ⊂ R denotes the search space,
L
U
xi and xi are the lower and upper bounds of xi respectively. The objective function f (x) and m constraint functions ~g (x) = (g1 (x), · · · , gm (x))> are: i) analytically unknown, i.e., we do not have access to f and ~g directly,
but to x to be determined and their observations f (x) and
~g (x) instead; ii) computationally expensive; and iii) partially observable, i.e., the values of f and ~g are not observable/measurable when x is infeasible. We denote the unknown feasible space by χ = {x ∈ Ω|~g (x) ≤ 0}. Partially
observable constrained optimization problems (POCOPs)
are not uncommon in real-life applications. For example, a
robot control task will be suspended when a collision or excessive instantaneous power consumption is detected, where
the feedback is merely a failure message rather than any reward (Marco et al. 2021). An AutoML task will be termi-

Bearing these considerations in mind, this paper proposes
a novel CBO framework for POCOPs. Our main contributions are outlined as follows.
• To address the risk of overly exploiting evaluated local
feasible regions, we propose a novel acquisition function framework. It enhances EI with a balanced constraint handling technique, encapsulated in a general exploration function to enable global search during optimization. We theoretically analyze the convergence properties of this design, and further develop an instance of
the exploration function, effectively enhancing the efficiency of our method for solving POCOPs.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15607

