The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Robustness of Neural-Enhanced Video Streaming against Adversarial
Attacks
Qihua Zhou1 , Jingcai Guo1,2 * , Song Guo3∗ , Ruibin Li1 , Jie Zhang1 , Bingjie Wang1 , Zhenda Xu1
1

2

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{qi-hua.zhou, ruibin.li, bingjie-daniel.wang, jackal.xu}@connect.polyu.hk
{jc-jingcai.guo, jie-comp.zhang}@polyu.edu.hk, songguo@cse.ust.hk
Abstract

compressed video for network transmission in streaming.
On the content receiver side (i.e., the server), the compressed
video is fed into a cheap neural super-resolution (SR) model
for quality enhancement (Yeo et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022;
Nguyen et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022). The final restored
HR video holds adequate visual quality as the original version, and thus can be applied for video analytics in different
downstream tasks. Such a pipeline greatly improves the ratedistortion trade-off, i.e., reducing streaming traffic while not
incurring a quality drop of the restored video, which is the
core objective of NeVS systems.
Recently, optimizing the pipeline of NeVS has become
a hot topic, such as improving the encoder-decoder (i.e.,
codec) efficiency (Du et al. 2022; Dasari et al. 2022), reducing steaming latency (Yeo et al. 2018) and elaborating SR
enhancement (Zhang et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2022). However, its security vulnerability has not been well explored.
Missing by existing work, we reveal that NeVS easily suffers
from a practical threat, where the crucial video codec component can trigger the adversarial attack to greatly destroy
the restored video quality and finally cause the malfunction
of downstream perception tasks.
Nevertheless, launching a successful adversarial attack
on NeVS is not easy. Most existing works either rely on
completely image-level perturbation (Wei et al. 2022; Yue
et al. 2021) or deteriorate the video model accuracy based
on specific vision tasks (Chen et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2021;
Hwang et al. 2021). They fail to NeVS due to the unawareness of video codec. Essentially, the codec handles the video
frames by allocating most bits to low-frequency information
while compressing the high-frequency ones, so as to obtain
the best balance between video size and restoration quality.
However, previous codec-unaware adversarial attacks usually add high-frequency perturbation into frames (Yue et al.
2021; Choi et al. 2022). In this case, the encoding procedure
serves as a noise filter to remove the injected perturbation,
making conventional attacks fail to NeVS. This insight is
also verified by our preliminary experiments (in Figure 3)
and inspires us to build a codec-aware adversarial attack.
This paper is the first work to holistically inspect the
vulnerability of NeVS and we discover a novel adversarial attack, called codec hijacking. Codec hijacking can be
launched by controlling two factors: (1) searching and in-

The explosive growth of video traffic on today’s Internet promotes the rise of Neural-enhanced Video Streaming (NeVS),
which effectively improves the rate-distortion trade-off by
employing a cheap neural super-resolution model for quality enhancement on the receiver side. Missing by existing
work, we reveal that the NeVS pipeline may suffer from a
practical threat, where the crucial codec component (i.e., encoder for compression and decoder for restoration) can trigger adversarial attacks in a man-in-the-middle manner to significantly destroy video recovery performance and finally incurs the malfunction of downstream video perception tasks.
In this paper, we are the first attempt to inspect the vulnerability of NeVS and discover a novel adversarial attack,
called codec hijacking, where the injected invisible perturbation conspires with the malicious encoding matrix by reorganizing the spatial-temporal bit allocation within the bitstream
size budget. Such a zero-day vulnerability makes our attack
hard to defend because there is no visual distortion on the recovered videos until the attack happens. More seriously, this
attack can be extended to diverse enhancement models, thus
exposing a wide range of video perception tasks under threat.
Evaluation based on state-of-the-art video codec benchmark
illustrates that our attack significantly degrades the recovery performance of NeVS over previous attack methods. The
damaged video quality finally leads to obvious malfunction
of downstream tasks with over 75% success rate. We hope to
arouse public attention on codec hijacking and its defence.

Introduction
Driven by the remarkable surge of today’s Internet video
traffic, the Neural-enhanced Video Streaming (NeVS) (Yeo
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021; Dasari et al. 2022) has emerged
as a fundamental infrastructure to accommodate modern
video-centric services across the network, including Zoom
meeting (Zoom 2023), tiktok short-form videos (TikTok
2023) and YouTube live (YouTube 2023). As shown in Figure 1, the NeVS pipeline involves the collaboration between
two sides. On the content delivery side (i.e., the client),
raw data are downscaled from original high-resolution (HR)
frames into low-resolution (LR) ones and encoded into a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17123

