The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Post-training Quantization in LLMs from Comprehensive Study to Low
Rank Compensation
Zhewei Yao* 1 , Xiaoxia Wu∗1 , Cheng Li1 , Stephen Youn1 , Yuxiong He1
1

DeepSpeed of Microsoft

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) has emerged as a promising
technique for mitigating memory consumption and computational costs in large language models (LLMs). However,
a systematic examination of various quantization schemes,
model families, and quantization bit precision has been absent
from the literature. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive
analysis of these factors by investigating the effects of PTQ on
weight-only, activation-only, and weight-and-activation quantization using diverse methods such as round-to-nearest (RTN),
GPTQ, ZeroQuant, and their variants. We apply these methods to two distinct model families with parameters ranging
from 125M to 176B. Our contributions include: (1) a sensitivity analysis revealing that activation quantization is generally
more susceptible to weight quantization, with smaller models often outperforming larger models in terms of activation
quantization; (2) an evaluation and comparison of existing
PTQ methods to optimize model size reduction while minimizing the impact on accuracy, revealing that none of the
current methods can achieve the original model quality for
quantization with either INT4-weight or INT4-weight-andINT8-activation; (3) based on these insights, we propose an
optimized method called Low-Rank Compensation (LoRC),
which employs low-rank matrices to enhance model quality
recovery with a minimal increase in model size.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) like Codex (Copilot 2021)
and ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) have demonstrated breakthrough performance across various benchmarks, such as natural language understanding and generation, and are now integrated into everyday applications. However, efficiently serving LLMs has become a pressing concern due to their significant memory consumption and computational demands. Unlike classification or diffusion models, LLMs present unique
challenges, as they involve two distinct phases: prompt and
generation. The prompt phase is primarily compute-bound,
while the generation phase, with low batch size and KV cache,
is mainly memory-bound (Pope et al. 2022).
As the progression of hardware bandwidth lags behind
that of computational demand (Gholami et al. 2021), the
* Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19377

Figure 1: The model size and quality trade-off of different
quantization methods on models from OPT families. Here
PTQ (with fine-grained quantization) represents the method
from (Yao et al. 2022; Frantar et al. 2022), RTN means the
naive round-to-nearest baseline (with fine-grained quantization as well), and FP16/INT8 is used as the no-accuracy-loss
baseline. LoRC is our proposed method that works seamless
with PTQ. Note that we drop all diverged points for better
visualization.
resource demands of extra-large models such as MT-NLG530B (Smith et al. 2022)—which necessitates the deployment
of multiple nodes for operation—escalate, adding to the complexities of cross-node communication. This has emphasized
the urgency to curtail both the size and computational expense of Large Language Models (LLMs). An increasingly
effective solution to these issues is post-training quantization
(PTQ). This method aids in the reduction of training prerequisites while simultaneously lowering the bit precision of
weights and activations to either INT4 or INT8.
While the effectiveness of post-training quantization (PTQ)
has been underscored in a number of recent studies (Yao et al.
2022; Frantar et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2022; Dettmers and
Zettlemoyer 2022), a comprehensive, systematic investigation into several key dimensions of this technique remains to

