The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decision-Making for Land Conservation: A Derivative-Free Optimization
Framework with Nonlinear Inputs
Cassidy K. Buhler, Hande Y. Benson
Drexel University
cb3452@drexel.edu, hvb22@drexel.edu

Abstract

et al. 2020; Joppa and Pfaff 2009). However, financial support is still vital to the long-term management and efficacy
of a PA (Coad et al. 2019; Rodrigues and Cazalis 2020; Watson et al. 2014; Lawler et al. 2020).
When implemented appropriately, PAs are a necessary investment for our planet (Dudley 2008). With the environment rapidly changing (e.g. climate change increasing habitat fragmentation (Costanza et al. 2020)), it is crucial that
PAs are carefully selected with consideration of future conditions to reduce the risk of extinction (Williams, Rondinini,
and Tilman 2022; Akasaka et al. 2017; Cruz, Santulli-Sanzo,
and Ceballos 2021).

Protected areas (PAs) are designated spaces where human activities are restricted to preserve critical habitats. Decisionmakers are challenged with balancing a trade-off of financial feasibility with ecological benefit when establishing PAs.
Given the long-term ramifications of these decisions and the
constantly shifting environment, it is crucial that PAs are
carefully selected with long-term viability in mind.
Using AI tools like simulation and optimization is common
for designating PAs, but current decision models are primarily linear. In this paper, we propose a derivative-free optimization framework paired with a nonlinear component, population viability analysis (PVA). Formulated as a mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) problem, our model
allows for linear and nonlinear inputs. Connectivity, competition, crowding, and other similar concerns are handled by
the PVA software, rather than expressed as constraints of the
optimization model. In addition, we present numerical results
that serve as a proof of concept, showing our models yield
PAs with similar expected risk to that of preserving every parcel in a habitat, but at a significantly lower cost.
The overall goal is to promote interdisciplinary work by providing a new mathematical programming tool for conservationists that allows for nonlinear inputs and can be paired with
existing ecological software. The code and data are available
at https://github.com/cassiebuhler/conservation-dfo.

Population Viability Analysis
While there are many ways to estimate extinction risk, one
of the more popular tools in conservation biology is population viability analysis (PVA), which predicts the probability
of extinction for a species in a particular habitat (Akçakaya
and Sjögren-Gulve 2000). Scientists use forecasts from PVA
in recovery plans (Runge et al. 2017; Faust et al. 2016)
and management decisions (Lacy and Breininger 2021) for
threatened species.
PVA also provides insight on the persistence of a species
in PAs, ultimately used to inform practitioners on improvements necessary to increase the likelihood of survival (Winton, Bishop, and Larsen 2020; Finnegan et al. 2021). In addition, PVA has been used to advise potential PA locations
based on an unprotected population that is declining (Andersen, Jang, and Borzée 2023).
Researchers have noted that PVA is a valuable risk assessment, yet the necessary data required for PVA can be challenging to obtain, which often limits PVA to single-species
(Rondinini and Chiozza 2010). Moreover, many PVA studies in the literature were found to lack clear documentation
of parameters and assumptions (Doak et al. 2015) making
it impossible to reproduce results (Morrison, Wardle, and
Castley 2016) which ultimately compromises its quality and
reliability (Chaudhary and Oli 2020) as code and data transparency is necessary in conservation decision-making (Morrison, Wardle, and Castley 2016).

Introduction
As a consequence of habitat degradation due to human activities, protected areas (PAs) have been implemented for protecting vulnerable species and preserving valuable ecological processes (World Wildlife Fund 1980). In recent years,
the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework has mandated
that 30% of land and sea be established as protected areas by
2030 (Convention on Biological Diversity 2020; Executive
Order No. 14,008 2021). This initiative, coined “30 × 30”,
has motivated further research on PAs and their decision
frameworks.
Conservationists have cautioned that area-based goals,
such as 30 × 30, have the potential to prioritize quantity over
quality and emphasize the importance of prioritizing ecological value, such as biodiversity, in these decisions (Maxwell

Mathematical Programming
Establishing PAs requires balancing a trade-off of financial
feasibility with ecological benefit. For decades, optimiza-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21932

