The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Harnessing Edge Information for Improved Robustness in Vision Transformers
Yanxi Li, Chengbin Du, Chang Xu
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au, chdu5632@uni.sydney.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

predictions on relevant and robust features that pertain to
shapes and foreground elements within the images.
However, Tsipras et al. (2018) point out that these moderately correlated features, while robust, can adversely affect accurate predictions, making them both robust and nonpredictive. Conversely, the key to improving natural accuracy lies in utilizing weakly correlated and non-robust features, which, despite lacking adversarial robustness, exhibit
predictive capability. Therefore, improving the adversarial
robustness of a DNN without compromising its natural accuracy is challenging.
Based on the aforementioned theorem and the existence of high-accuracy large-scale pretrained models, the
enhancement of adversarial robustness in naturally pretrained models has emerged as a prominent subject. Recently, TORA-ViTs (Li and Xu 2023) leverage the capabilities of a fine-tuning technique known as Adapter (Houlsby
et al. 2019), effectively enhancing adversarial robustness
with an affordable training cost. However, a drawback is also
obvious. Through the incorporation of a fusion module to
balance predictive and robust features, their model requires
tuning a hyper-parameter to manage a trade-off. In certain
scenarios, natural accuracy is compromised to enhance robustness, and vice versa.
In this paper, we present an alternative approach wherein,
rather than directly augmenting parameters to the backbone
network, we introduce a mechanism for integrating specific
information extracted from the original images into the intermediate layers of the backbone network. To be specific,
our novel approach highlights the potential of edge information extracted from images. This edge information holds the
capability to furnish relevant and robust features pertaining
to shapes and foreground elements within the images. These
features, when integrated, assist pretrained DNNs in achieving improved adversarial robustness without compromising
their natural accuracy in classifying clean images.
To achieve this objective, we propose the incorporation
of a side branch named EdgeNet. This lightweight, plugand-play network can seamlessly integrate into existing pretrained deep models, including the state-of-the-art models such as Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020). Our EdgeNet operates by processing edge information extracted from input images. This process yields a set
of robust features that can be strategically injected into the

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable accuracy in vision classification tasks. However, they exhibit vulnerability to additional noises known as adversarial
attacks. Previous studies hypothesize that this vulnerability
might stem from the fact that high-accuracy DNNs heavily
rely on irrelevant and non-robust features, such as textures
and the background. In this work, we reveal that edge information extracted from images can provide relevant and robust
features related to shapes and the foreground. These features
assist pretrained DNNs in achieving improved adversarial robustness without compromising their accuracy on clean images. A lightweight and plug-and-play EdgeNet is proposed,
which can be seamlessly integrated into existing pretrained
DNNs, including Vision Transformers, a recent family of
state-of-the-art models for vision classification. Our EdgeNet
can process edges derived from either clean nature images or
noisy adversarial images, yielding robust features which can
be injected into the intermediate layers of the frozen backbone DNNs. The cost of obtaining such edges using conventional edge detection algorithms (e.g., Canny edge detector)
is marginal, and the cost of training the EdgeNet is equivalent
to that of fine-tuning the backbone network with techniques
such as Adapter.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have attracted significant attention for their impressive performance in vision classification tasks (LeCun et al. 1989, 1995; Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis
2016), demonstrating exceptional accuracy. However, their
vulnerability to adversarial attacks has been a subject of concern (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al.
2017; Hendrycks et al. 2021b,a; Hendrycks and Dietterich
2019). Adversarial attacks targeting classification models involve introducing subtle perturbations into input data, leading to misclassification by the models.
Previous research (Geirhos et al. 2018; Li and Xu 2023)
suggests that the vulnerability of high-accuracy DNNs to
these attacks might be rooted in their heavy reliance on irrelevant and non-robust features such as textures and backgrounds. In contrast, robust DNNs should instead base their
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3252

