The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ReGCL: Rethinking Message Passing in Graph Contrastive Learning
Cheng Ji1,2 , Zixuan Huang2 , Qingyun Sun1,2 , Hao Peng1,2 , Xingcheng Fu3 , Qian Li1,2 , Jianxin Li1,2 *
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
{jicheng,penghao,liqian,lijx}@act.buaa.edu.cn, {huangzx,sunqy}@buaa.edu.cn, fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn

Graph

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has demonstrated remarkable efficacy in graph representation learning. However, previous studies have overlooked the inherent conflict that arises
when employing graph neural networks (GNNs) as encoders
for node-level contrastive learning. This conflict pertains to
the partial incongruity between the feature aggregation mechanism of graph neural networks and the embedding distinction
characteristic of contrastive learning. Theoretically, to investigate the location and extent of the conflict, we analyze the
participation of message-passing from the gradient perspective
of InfoNCE loss. Different from contrastive learning in other
domains, the conflict in GCL arises due to the presence of
certain samples that contribute to both the gradients of positive and negative simultaneously under the manner of message
passing, which are opposite optimization directions. To further
address the conflict issue, we propose a practical framework
called ReGCL, which utilizes theoretical findings of GCL
gradients to effectively improve graph contrastive learning.
Specifically, two gradient-based strategies are devised in terms
of both message passing and loss function to mitigate the
conflict. Firstly, a gradient-guided structure learning method
is proposed in order to acquire a structure that is adapted to
contrastive learning principles. Secondly, a gradient-weighted
InfoNCE loss function is designed to reduce the impact of
false negative samples with high probabilities, specifically
from the standpoint of the graph encoder. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in
comparison to state-of-the-art baselines across various node
classification benchmarks.

1

Encoder

(e.g., GCN)

𝒢 = {𝐀, 𝐗}

(a) Message-Passing Schema

Target Node

Embedding
𝒖, 𝒗

(b) Contrastive Loss Principle

Neighbors & Negatives

Feature Aggregation

CL Loss

(e.g., InfoNCE)

Non-Neighbors & Negatives
Embedding Distinction

Figure 1: Conflict arises between the message-passing mechanism and the contrastive loss function. (a) The feature of
neighbors is aggregated to the target node through a messagepassing schema, resulting in close proximity between them.
On the other hand, (b) the contrastive loss function aims to
push them far apart, including the neighbors.
learning ability of contrastive learning have sparked significant interest in investigating various aspects of GCL, such
as augmentation mechanisms (Yu et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2023), negative sampling techniques (Xia et al. 2022), and
contrastive loss functions (Liu et al. 2022a). Nevertheless,
there is a noticeable gap in the literature that specifically focuses on the core problem of graph encoders in GCL. It has
been observed that GNN and GCL present specific conflict
issues in this paper.
Most existing works in GCL primarily employ graph neural networks as encoders (Zhu et al. 2020, 2021; Tong et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022), similar to semi-supervised node
classification. GNNs employ aggregation operators within
the local neighborhood to collect features from neighboring
nodes, leading to the generation of embeddings that exhibit
higher similarity within the neighbors. (Kipf and Welling
2017). GCL then optimizes the model using noise-contrastive
estimation loss, such as the InfoNCE loss function (Oord,
Li, and Vinyals 2018), which is a noise contrastive estimation (NCE) based objective and identifies each sample by
contrasting the differences between the target node and its
negatives, including its neighbors aggregated by the GNN
encoder (Zhu et al. 2020). The aforementioned approach has

Introduction

Inspired by recent advances in contrastive learning (CL) (Liu
et al. 2021) in the fields of computer vision (CV) (Logeswaran and Lee 2018; He et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020; Chuang et al. 2020) and natural language processing (NLP) (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018), graph contrastive
learning (GCL) has emerged as a powerful self-supervised
learning technique (Wu et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2022b; Ji et al.
2023a; Liang et al. 2022). The combination of expressive
power in graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling
2017; Veličković et al. 2018) and the effective self-supervised
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8544

