The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Privileged Prior Information Distillation for Image Matting
Cheng Lyu1 * , Jiake Xie2 * , Bo Xu3 * † ,
Cheng Lu , Han Huang4 , Xin Huang5 , Ming Wu1 , Chuang Zhang1 , Yong Tang2
3

1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
PicUp.Ai
3
Xpeng
4
AI2 Robotics
5
Towson University
{lvcheng, wuming, zhangchuang}@bupt.edu.cn, {jxie,ty}@road.win, Xhuang@towson.edu
Abstract
Performance of trimap-free image matting methods is limited
when trying to decouple the deterministic and undetermined
regions, especially in the scenes where foregrounds are semantically ambiguous, chromaless, or high transmittance. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework named Privileged
Prior Information Distillation for Image Matting (PPID-IM)
that can effectively transfer privileged prior environmentaware information to improve the performance of trimap-free
students in solving hard foregrounds. The prior information
of trimap regulates only the teacher model during the training
stage, while not being fed into the student network during actual inference. To achieve effective privileged cross-modality
(i.e. trimap and RGB) information distillation, we introduce a Cross-Level Semantic Distillation (CLSD) module
that reinforces the students with more knowledgeable semantic representations and environment-aware information. We
also propose an Attention-Guided Local Distillation module
that efficiently transfers privileged local attributes from the
trimap-based teacher to trimap-free students for the guidance
of local-region optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our PPID on image
matting. The code will be released soon.

1

Figure 1: Given challenging images of chromaless objects
and semantically ambiguous scenes, one SOTA trimap-free
matting approach - LFM (Zhang et al. 2019), fails to decouple the deterministic and undetermined regions. However,
our PPID-guided model can perform more accurate and finegrained region decoupling for these hard foregrounds.
Bi , and alpha matte estimation αi are unknown. According
to the above equation, αi = 1, αi = 0 , and αi ∈ (0, 1)
represent the deterministic foreground, background, and undetermined regions, respectively.
To solve this highly challenging problem, the typical
methods (Xu et al. 2017; Hou and Liu 2019; Lu et al. 2019;
Li and Lu 2020; Liu et al. 2021) utilize trimap as a piece of
environment-aware priori that marks the foreground, background and transition regions to locate the targets and reduce
the solution spaces. Unfortunately, a high-quality trimap can
not be obtained without tedious manual annotation effort
and significant time costs, which limits its practical application in low-cost consumer products. Some trimap-free methods (Zhang et al. 2019; Qiao et al. 2020) are proposed to utilize the typical encoder-to-decoder structures that stem from
segmentation and detection, etc, for alpha prediction without auxiliary cues. Although environmental saliency can be
roughly predicted by borrowing such transitional network
structure and its pre-trained feature, there still remain two
tricky challenges in the trimap-free matting setting. First,
previous trimap-free matting methods may fail to identify
certain attributes when the foreground is semantically ambiguous, chromaless, or with high transmittance. For example in Row 2 of Fig. 1, due to the lack of strong opaqueness and color hue difference, the previous trimap-free net-

Introduction

Image matting is one of the most fundamental computer vision tasks, which aims to separate the foreground objects
from a single image or video stream. It has tremendous
practical value for background replacement task in multimedia applications such as image/video entertainment creation,
special-effect film-making and live video. To accurately estimate the opacity of each pixel inside foreground regions,
the matting is generally formulated as an image/video frame
composite problem, which solves the 7 unknown variables
per pixel from only 3 known values:
Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi , αi ∈ [0, 1]

(1)

where Ii refers to known 3-dimensional RGB color at pixel
i, while foreground RGB color Fi , background RGB color
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Bo Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4044

