The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Layer Attack Unlearning: Fast and Accurate Machine Unlearning via
Layer Level Attack and Knowledge Distillation
Hyunjune Kim1 , Sangyong Lee2 , Simon S. Woo1, 2, 3
1

Department of Applied Data Science, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
hyunjune.kim@g.skku.edu, sang8961@g.skku.edu, swoo@g.skku.edu
2

Abstract

of such regulations is to provide data owners the right to request and erase the personal or copyrighted data they want
if they have not agreed and consented in the first place.
Therefore, companies using personal data should delete
the requested data from the training set. One potential approach for corporations to mitigate the aforementioned concerns involves the exclusion of the required dataset from the
training dataset, followed by a complete retraining process
from scratch. Nevertheless, as models like ChatGPT get bigger and datasets grow, retraining them from scratch requires
excessive computational resources and time.
Machine unlearning has emerged to tackle this challenge, allowing ML models to discard specific data selectively. (Bourtoule et al. 2021) Machine unlearning can be
divided into two primary strategies: instance-wise and classwise unlearning. The former involves forgetting knowledge
related to specific instances from ML models, while the
latter, which we focus on, completely removes particular
classes from ML models. For example, face recognition
and social media classification systems may need to erase
data related to specific religion, nationality, age, disease,
gender, etc., for security and privacy reasons. A few approaches (Chen et al. 2023; Cha et al. 2023) have explored
the adversarial attacks for unlearning by harnessing the forgetting data’s noise to navigate the adjacent latent space.
However, they used the original PGD (Madry et al. 2017)
for unlearning, which can be slow.
In this work, we propose Layer Attack Unlearning, a
fast and novel machine unlearning algorithm to tackle the
class-wise unlearning problem. Our approach first introduces Partial-PGD, which is a new adversarial attack generation strategy to efficiently search the close vicinity of the
data points to delete (See Fig. 1). Our proposed Partial-PGD
is designed only to attack fully connected (classification)
layer for probing the neighboring latent space to shift the
forgetting data. Surprisingly, we do not utilize any feature
layer information while achieving efficiency and accuracy.
As shown in Fig. 1, Partial-PGD is much more efficient than
the original PGD, as it can create adversarial examples only
via the classification layer.
In particular, Hinton (2022)’s Forward-Forward algorithm
has inspired us, and we provide the foundation of the concept of layer-based attack for machine unlearning based on
the Forward-Forward. According to Hinton (2022), each

Recently, serious concerns have been raised about the privacy
issues related to training datasets in machine learning algorithms when including personal data. Various regulations in
different countries, including the GDPR, grant individuals to
have personal data erased, known as ‘the right to be forgotten’
or ‘the right to erasure’. However, there has been less research
on effectively and practically deleting the requested personal
data from the training set while not jeopardizing the overall
machine learning performance. In this work, we propose a
fast and novel machine unlearning paradigm at the layer level
called layer attack unlearning, which is highly accurate and
fast compared to existing machine unlearning algorithms. We
introduce the Partial-PGD algorithm to locate the samples to
forget efficiently. In addition, we only use the last layer of
the model inspired by the Forward-Forward algorithm for unlearning process. Lastly, we use Knowledge Distillation (KD)
to reliably learn the decision boundaries from the teacher using soft label information to improve accuracy performance.
We conducted extensive experiments with SOTA machine unlearning models and demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach for accuracy and end-to-end unlearning performance.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
progress and dramatic performance gains in challenging machine learning tasks in recent years. Among others, large
amounts of available training datasets have been the foundation for enabling the revolution of large-scale models.
However, recently, due to the privacy concerns raised by
ChatGPT (Bourtoule et al. 2021; Burgess 2023), the training dataset would contain personal information or possible information that can leak one’s privacy. For example, many vision-based applications would involve training
one’s face images, which are personally identifiable information (PII). Several nations have implemented some types
of regulations, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Mantelero 2013) and the EU/US Copyright
Law (Kaye 2022; Kublik 2019), in order to address the potential misuse of personal information and further grant individuals the right to have personal data erased, known as
‘the right to be forgotten’ or ‘the right to erasure.’ The goal
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21241

