The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Distinguishability of Class for Graph Neural Networks
Dongxiao He1 , Shuwei Liu1 , Meng Ge2 , Zhizhi Yu1 * , Guangquan Xu1 , Zhiyong Feng1
1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{hedongxiao, liusw, yuzhizhi, losin, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn, gemeng@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

sentations. In order to learn complex representations at different levels of abstraction from larger neighborhoods, many
efforts have been devoted to stacking multiple GNN layers.
However, existing studies have shown that as GNN layers
stack, the performance of GNN models significantly decline
(Li, Han, and Wu 2018; Chen et al. 2020a). This begs the
question, how does the node representations change during
the stacking of GNN layers, leading to a degradation of the
model performance?
Considering that most GNN models (Velickovic et al.
2018; Jin et al. 2018, 2023a) convert the final node representations into a class probability matrix to predict node labels,
we indirectly analyze the changes in node representations
by observing the distribution change of the class probability matrix. To this end, we define two metrics based on the
class probability matrix, that is, Global Distinguishability of
Class (GDC) and Local Distinguishability of Class (LDC),
to measure the average distinguishability of the whole graph
on classes and the distinguishability of each node on classes,
respectively. Specifically, taking Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017), a classic GNN model,
as an example, we first observe the changes in node classification accuracy (ACC) and GDC as GCN layers stack.
As shown in Figure 1a, both ACC and GDC show a decreasing trend with the increase of GCN layers, which indicates a positive correlation between these two metrics. Furthermore, considering many studies attribute the degradation in model performance to over-smoothing issue (Li, Han,
and Wu 2018; Li et al. 2019), we also represent the global
smoothness (GS) by calculating the average distance among
node representations. As shown in Figure 1a, we find that GS
suddenly increases in 8-th layer and then drops sharply. This
indicates that GCN suffers over-smoothing only after a certain layers are reached. In addition, we calculate the pearson
correlation coefficient of 0.9968 between GDC and ACC,
while 0.7877 between GS and ACC. This further proves that
changes in distinguishability of class can be better used to
describe changes in node representations.
For further observing the ability of each node to distinguish different classes in various GCN layers, we analyze the distribution of LDC in the 2-nd, 10-th and 12-th
GCN layers on Cora dataset. As shown in Figure 1b-1d,
the LDC of most nodes gradually transitions from 1.0 to
0.0 with the increase of GCN layers. This is mainly be-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received widespread
attention and applications due to their excellent performance
in graph representation learning. Most existing GNNs can
only aggregate 1-hop neighbors in a GNN layer, so they
usually stack multiple GNN layers to obtain more information from larger neighborhoods. However, many studies
have shown that model performance experiences a significant degradation with the increase of GNN layers. In this
paper, we first introduce the concept of distinguishability of
class to indirectly evaluate the learned node representations,
and verify the positive correlation between distinguishability
of class and model performance. Then, we propose a Graph
Neural Network guided by Distinguishability of class (DiscGNN) to monitor the representation learning, so as to learn
better node representations and improve model performance.
Specifically, we first perform inter-layer filtering and initial compensation based on Local Distinguishability of Class
(LDC) in each layer, so that the learned node representations have the ability to distinguish different classes. Furthermore, we add a regularization term based on Global Distinguishability of Class (GDC) to achieve global optimization
of model performance. Extensive experiments on six realworld datasets have shown that the competitive performance
of Disc-GNN to the state-of-the-art methods on node classification and node clustering tasks.

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous in the real-world, and many scenarios such as protein–protein interactions (Yang et al. 2020),
financial transactions (Lu et al. 2022), and social relationships (Jin et al. 2023b; Yu et al. 2021) can be modeled
as graphs, where nodes denote entities and edges represent relationships between entities. Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), which can make full use of node features and graph
topology to learn node representations on graphs, have been
widely applied in node-level (Jin et al. 2021, 2022a), edgelevel (Jin et al. 2023a; Yu et al. 2023) and graph-level (Zhang
et al. 2018) tasks.
Most GNN models learn node representations in each
layer by aggregating and transforming information from 1hop neighbors, leading to localized learning of node repre* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12349

