The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for Early Diagnosis of Lung Cancer
Yifan Wang1,2 , Qining Zhang1 , Lei Ying1 , Chuan Zhou2
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, USA
2
Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, USA
{wangyfan,qiningz,leiying}@umich.edu, chuan@med.umich.edu

Abstract

screening to participants for up to 4 years (Robbins et al.
2022) according to existing international clinical guidelines
(Larici et al. 2017). A significant limitation associated with
this management framework is the high incidence of false
positives (FP) and an excessive number of follow-up LDCTs
(Mehta, Mohammed, and Jantz 2017). The high rate of FP
will result in considerable clinical and financial costs associated with over-diagnosis such as unnecessary downstream
invasive procedures, while an excessive number of followup exams will lead to missed or delayed diagnosis.

Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related
death worldwide, and early diagnosis of lung cancer is critical
for improving the survival rate of patients. Performing annual
low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screening among
high-risk populations is the primary approach for early diagnosis. However, after each screening, whether to continue
monitoring (with follow-up screenings) or to order a biopsy
for diagnosis remains a challenging decision to make. Continuing with follow-up screenings may lead to delayed diagnosis
but ordering a biopsy without sufficient evidence incurs unnecessary risk and cost. In this paper, we tackle the problem
by an optimal stopping approach. Our proposed algorithm,
called EarlyStop-RL, utilizes the structure of the Snell envelope for optimal stopping, and model-free deep reinforcement
learning for making diagnosis decisions. Through evaluating our algorithm on a commonly used clinical trial dataset
(the National Lung Screening Trial), we demonstrate that
EarlyStop-RL has the potential to greatly enhance risk assessment and early diagnosis of lung cancer, surpassing the
performance of two widely adopted clinical models, namely
the Lung-RADS and the Brock model.

1st year

2nd year

3rd year

Cancer-free (N)

Cancer-free (N)

Introduction
Resulting in estimated 130,180 deaths in 2022, lung cancer has become the leading cause of cancer-related deaths
in the United States (Siegel et al. 2022). The prognosis of
lung cancer patients at different clinical stages is significantly different. The 5-year survival rate of stage IA groups
(early stage) can exceed 90%, while the survival rate of patients with stage IV (the latest stage) is less than 10% (Ning
et al. 2021). Therefore, early diagnosis holds immense significance for individuals with lung cancer.
The primary approach employed in clinical practices to
improve early diagnosis of lung cancer is conducting lung
cancer screenings among high-risk populations using lowdose computed tomography (LDCT) (Team 2011b; Ardila,
Kiraly et al. 2019). After detecting a lung nodule from an
LDCT scan, the primary objective of radiologists is to identify the nodule’s risk and then establish a definitive diagnosis
or ascertain the necessity for subsequent follow-up LDCT
examinations. To date, most lung cancer screening studies and programs worldwide have offered sequential annual

Cancer (P)

Cancer (P)

1-year
follow-up

1-year
follow-up

Figure 1: LDCT screening and diagnosis examples from the
NLST dataset.
Figure 1 presents examples of four lung nodules
on LDCT scans and their diagnosis results from
the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) dataset
(https://cdas.cancer.gov/nlst/) (Team 2011a). In the first
year, each of the four cases exhibited considerable suspicion

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22410

