The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Covariate Gait Recognition: A Benchmark
1

2,3

1

Shinan Zou , Chao Fan , Jianbo Xiong , Chuanfu Shen

2, 4

2,3

, Shiqi Yu , Jin Tang

1*

1

School of Automation, Central South University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous System, Southern University of Science and Technology
4
The University of Hong Kong
{zoushinan, jianbo x, tjin}@csu.edu.cn, {12131100, 11950016}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, yusq@sustech.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Gait datasets are essential for gait research. However, this paper observes that present benchmarks, whether conventional
constrained or emerging real-world datasets, fall short regarding covariate diversity. To bridge this gap, we undertake an arduous 20-month effort to collect a cross-covariate gait recognition (CCGR) dataset. The CCGR dataset has 970 subjects
and about 1.6 million sequences; almost every subject has
33 views and 53 different covariates. Compared to existing
datasets, CCGR has both population and individual-level diversity. In addition, the views and covariates are well labeled,
enabling the analysis of the effects of different factors. CCGR
provides multiple types of gait data, including RGB, parsing,
silhouette, and pose, offering researchers a comprehensive resource for exploration. In order to delve deeper into addressing cross-covariate gait recognition, we propose parsingbased gait recognition (ParsingGait) by utilizing the newly
proposed parsing data. We have conducted extensive experiments. Our main results show: 1) Cross-covariate emerges
as a pivotal challenge for practical applications of gait recognition. 2) ParsingGait demonstrates remarkable potential for
further advancement. 3) Alarmingly, existing SOTA methods achieve less than 43% accuracy on the CCGR, highlighting the urgency of exploring cross-covariate gait recognition.
Link: https://github.com/ShinanZou/CCGR.

Figure 1: Differences between CCGR and other datasets.
Population-level diversity is roughly quantified by the count
of covariate categories present within the whole dataset.
Correspondingly, individual-level diversity is measured by
the count of covariate categories for each subject. Here, the
population-level diversity of Gait3D and GREW is rich, but
the exact amount is unknown due to the wild scenarios.

Introduction
Gait recognition aims to use physiological and behavioral
characteristics extracted from walking videos to certify individuals’ identities. Compared to other biometric modalities,
such as face, fingerprints, and iris, gait patterns have the distinct advantage of being extracted from a distance in uncontrolled environments. These strengths place gait recognition
as an effective solution for security applications.
In the latest literature, the research on gait recognition
is developing rapidly, with the evaluation benchmark developing from early indoor to outdoor environments. During this remarkable journey, most representative gait models (Chao et al. 2019; Lin, Zhang, and Yu 2021) boasting
historical progress have unexpectedly performed unsatisfactory results when faced with emerging challenges posed by
real-world gait datasets such as GREW (Zhu et al. 2021)

and Gait3D (Zheng et al. 2022). Surprisingly, successive
works (Fan et al. 2023b,a) quickly address this performance
gap to a large extent, rekindling the promise of gait recognition for practical applications, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
However, this paper argues that the gait recognition task is
much more challenging than these datasets have defined.
In general, previous indoor gait datasets often require subjects repeatedly walk along fixed paths while introducing
variations in clothing and carrying. This approach yields
controllable and well-annotated data, facilitating the early
exploration of key covariates influencing recognition accuracy. However, as shown in Fig. 1(b), these datasets fall short
regarding population-level diversity, as subjects of them
contain the same limited group of covariates. Conversely,
the emergence of outdoor datasets effectively addresses this

*

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7855

