The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Electron Microscopy Images as Set of Fragments for Mitochondrial Segmentation
Naisong Luo1 * , Rui Sun1 * , Yuwen Pan1 * , Tianzhu Zhang1, 2† , Feng Wu1, 2
1

Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{lns6, issunrui, panyw}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Limited Rceptive
Field

Abstract
Automatic mitochondrial segmentation enjoys great popularity with the development of deep learning. However, the
coarse prediction raised by the presence of regular 3D grids in
previous methods regardless of 3D CNN or the vision transformers suggest a possibly sub-optimal feature arrangement.
To mitigate this limitation, we attempt to interpret the 3D EM
image stacks as a set of interrelated 3D fragments for a better
solution. However, it is non-trivial to model the 3D fragments
without introducing excessive computational overhead. In
this paper, we design a coherent fragment vision transformer
(FragViT) combined with affinity learning to manipulate features on 3D fragments yet explore mutual relationships to
model fragment-wise context, enjoying locality prior without
sacrificing global reception. The proposed FragViT includes
a fragment encoder and a hierarchical fragment aggregation
module. The fragment encoder is equipped with affinity heads
to transform the tokens into fragments with homogeneous semantics, and the multi-layer self-attention is used to explicitly
learn inter-fragment relations with long-range dependencies.
The hierarchical fragment aggregation module is responsible
for hierarchically aggregating fragment-wise prediction back
to the final voxel-wise prediction in a progressive manner.
Extensive experimental results on the challenging MitoEM,
Lucchi, and AC3/AC4 benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

(a) CNN-based Model

Attention
Mechanism
Grid Tokens
(b) Transformer-based Model
Aggregation by
Affinity

3D Fragments

(c) Our FragViT

Figure 1: Compared to regular 3D-grid features or tokens of
the CNN-based and transformer-based models, our FragViT
model irregularly shaped fragments which contain more homogeneous semantics, resulting in finer segmentation.

Introduction
Mitochondria, as one of the crucial organelles, are the primary energy providers for cell activities and are indispensable for metabolism. Quantification of mitochondrial morphology is a fundamental task which can not only promote basic scientific research (e.g., electrophysiology (Ascoli 2002), cellular physiology (Donohue and Ascoli 2011) )
but also provide new insight for clinical diagnosis (e.g., diabetes and neurodegenerative diseases (Martin 2012) ). Electron microscopy (EM) is the only available imaging instrument with sufficient resolution to reveal mitochondrial detailed 3D geometry and perform dense segmentation without ambiguity. However, at this resolution, even moderately
small 3D EM image stacks yield numerous mitochondrial

numbers (e.g., typically hundreds to thousands of mitochondrial instances in a single megapixel image (Wei et al. 2020))
that are prohibitively laborious for human manual annotation. Recently, with the development of deep learning, considerable works (Wei et al. 2020; Nightingale et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2021a) have turned their attention to deep neural
networks in pursuit of automatic mitochondria segmentation. Since all mitochondrial instances are of the same type
(i.e., biological organelle), with intricate morphology and
densely intertwined branches, how to fully probe discriminative information to perform accurate segmentation is thus
extremely challenging.
To tackle the mitochondria segmentation problem, existing methods can be roughly categorized as 3D convolutional neural networks (CNN) and the vision transformer
(ViT) paradigms. On the one hand, 3D CNN paradigms such
as 3D U-Net (Wei et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021a) dominate

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3981

