The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Keypoint Fusion for RGB-D Based 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Xingyu Liu* , Pengfei Ren* , Yuanyuan Gao, Jingyu Wang† , Haifeng Sun† , Qi Qi, Zirui Zhuang,
Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{liuxingyu, rpf, gaoyuanyuan, wangjingyu, hfsun, qiqi8266, zhuangzirui, liaojx}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous 3D hand pose estimation methods primarily rely on
a single modality, either RGB or depth, and the comprehensive utilization of the dual modalities has not been extensively
explored. RGB and depth data provide complementary information and thus can be fused to enhance the robustness of
3D hand pose estimation. However, there exist two problems
for applying existing fusion methods in 3D hand pose estimation: redundancy of dense feature fusion and ambiguity
of visual features. First, pixel-wise feature interactions introduce high computational costs and ineffective calculations of
invalid pixels. Second, visual features suffer from ambiguity
due to color and texture similarities, as well as depth holes
and noise caused by frequent hand movements, which interferes with modeling cross-modal correlations. In this paper,
we propose Keypoint-Fusion for RGB-D based 3D hand pose
estimation, which leverages the unique advantages of dual
modalities to mutually eliminate the feature ambiguity, and
performs cross-modal feature fusion in a more efficient way.
Specifically, we focus cross-modal fusion on sparse yet informative spatial regions (i.e. keypoints). Meanwhile, by explicitly extracting relatively more reliable information as disambiguation evidence, depth modality provides 3D geometric
information for RGB feature pixels, and RGB modality complements the precise edge information lost due to the depth
noise. Keypoint-Fusion achieves state-of-the-art performance
on two challenging hand datasets, significantly decreasing the
error compared with previous single-modal methods.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: In the 3D hand pose estimation task, depth maps
are prone to (a) noise and depth holes at the edges of hands
and objects, especially during (b) motion.
Chen et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2020b,c), they encounter challenges due to the inherent defects of their respective modalities. RGB-based methods are prone to color similarity and
lack local geometric information, while depth-based methods suffer from noise and depth holes at the edges of hands
and objects, especially during motion, as shown in Fig. 1.
Fortunately, there exist many complementary properties
between RGB and depth modalities. For example, RGB
data can provide rich texture and accurate edge information,
while depth data contains detailed geometric structure features. By fusing their complementary advantages, the impact of individual modality defects on the performance of
3D hand pose estimation can be alleviated.
Multi-sensor modality fusion has emerged as a significant
trend in visual perception technology. Although not widely
explored in 3D hand pose estimation, multimodal fusion
has been extensively studied in many other computer vision
tasks, such as LiDAR-camera 3D object detection and RGBD semantic segmentation. Early works (Hu et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2020; Seichter et al. 2021) perform weighted aggregation of cross-modal features through the channel and spatial attention mechanism (Woo et al. 2018). Recently, with
the extensive research of vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021b; Vaswani et al. 2017), several
methods utilize the attention mechanism for interactions between cross-modal features. For instance, TransFusion (Bai
et al. 2022) uses object queries to obtain initial 3D bounding

Introduction
3D hand pose estimation is a critical technology for interactive media and human-computer interaction applications,
many of which present more challenging scenarios and demand higher accuracy in 3D hand pose estimation. For instance, augmented reality applications involve hand-object
interactions with frequent movements and occlusions; and
more accurate poses are essential to enhance interactive realism and user experience when manipulating objects. Despite recent advancements in single RGB or depth-based approaches (Kulon et al. 2020; Ge et al. 2019; Park et al. 2022;
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3756

