The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

S2 CycleDiff: Spatial-Spectral-Bilateral Cycle-Diffusion Framework
for Hyperspectral Image Super-resolution
Jiahui Qu* , Jie He* , Wenqian Dong† , Jingyu Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Network, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
jhqu@xidian.edu.cn, jiehe@stu.xidian.edu.cn, wqdong@xidian.edu.cn, jingyuzhao@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

spectral resolution at the expense of spatial resolution. The
lack of spatial information limits the application of HSI in
downstream tasks, making it imperative to acquire images
that possess both high spectral and spatial resolution.
The fusion-based hyperspectral image super-resolution
(HISR) has become a crucial approach for improving the
spatial resolution of HSI, which aims to fuse HSI and multispectral (MSI) to generate the HSI with high spatial resolution. In recent years, lots of HISR methods have been
introduced, which can be roughly divided into two main
categories, i.e., traditional methods and deep learning-based
methods.
The traditional methods for HISR mainly include component substitution (CS), multiresolution analysis (MRA),
Bayesian approaches and matrix factorization (Loncan et al.
2015). These methods require some prior knowledge to design reasonable strategies to integrate spatial information
from MSI into HSI. However, the traditional methods often
heavily rely on manually designed feature extractor, which
makes it difficult to effectively capture complex features
when dealing with high-dimensional data. In recent years,
deep learning (DL) has achieved significant advancements,
which has been widely used in HISR (Scarpa, Vitale, and
Cozzolino 2018; Xu et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2022; Yao et al.
2020). Initially, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were
employed as a power tool for HISR and were trained under the guidance of MSI to learn the nonlinear mapping
from low-resolution to high-resolution HSI (HrHSI). Furthermore, deep generative models have shown remarkable
success in HISR due to their capability to approximate data
distribution. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and
Welling 2022) learn latent data distribution by probability encoding and decoding. Generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) leverage adversarial training between a generator and a discriminator to generate
visually realistic samples. Recently, Diffusion Probabilistic
Model (DPM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) has shown great
potential in the field of computer vision (CV). The DPM refines the process of image reconstruction into multiple steps,
gradually obtaining high-quality images. In contrast to other
Generative models, the training process of the DPM exhibits
improved stability and efficiency, eliminating the need for
intricate adversarial training like GANs.
Although existing methods have made some achieve-

Hyperspectral image super-resolution (HISR) is a technique
that can break through the limitation of imaging mechanism
to obtain the hyperspectral image (HSI) with high spatial resolution. Although some progress has been achieved by existing methods, most of them directly learn the spatial-spectral
joint mapping between the observed images and the target
high-resolution HSI (HrHSI), failing to fully preserve the
spectral distribution of low-resolution HSI (LrHSI) and the
spatial distribution of high-resolution multispectral imagery
(HrMSI). To this end, we propose a spatial-spectral-bilateral
cycle-diffusion framework (S2 CycleDiff) for HISR, which
can step-wise generate the HrHSI with high spatial-spectral
fidelity by learning the conditional distribution of spatial
and spectral super-resolution processes bilaterally. Specifically, a customized conditional cycle-diffusion framework
is designed as the backbone to achieve the spatial-spectralbilateral super-resolution by repeated refinement, wherein the
spatial/spectral guided pyramid denoising (SGPD) module
seperately takes HrMSI and LrHSI as the guiding factors
to achieve the spatial details injection and spectral correction. The outputs of the conditional cycle-diffusion framework are fed into a complementary fusion block to integrate the spatial and spectral details to generate the desired
HrHSI. Experiments have been conducted on three widely
used datasets to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
method over state-of-the-art HISR methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/Jiahuiqu/S2CycleDiff.

Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) is a data cube that contains hundreds of spectral bands. Compared with other remote sensing images, HSI can provide more detailed spectral information that reflects the properties of objects (Dong et al. 2023).
This unique characteristic of HSI enables a diverse range
of applications, including natural disaster monitoring (Liu
et al. 2017), urban planning (Huang et al. 2017; Qu et al.
2023), and water resource management (Khan et al. 2018).
However, due to the limitation of the imaging mechanism,
there is a trade-off between spatial and spectral resolution in
HSI. This means that a sensor capturing images with high
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4623

