The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CatFormer: Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation with Transformer
Sheng Yu1 , Di-Hua Zhai1,2∗ , Yuanqing Xia1
1

2

School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing, China
yusheng@bit.edu.cn, zhaidih@bit.edu.cn, xia yuanqing@bit.edu.cn.

Abstract

RGB
Patch

Although there has been significant progress in category-level
object pose estimation in recent years, there is still considerable room for improvement. In this paper, we propose a
novel transformer-based category-level 6D pose estimation
method called CatFormer to enhance the accuracy pose estimation. CatFormer comprises three main parts: a coarse deformation part, a fine deformation part, and a recurrent refinement part. In the coarse and fine deformation sections,
we introduce a transformer-based deformation module that
performs point cloud deformation and completion in the feature space. Additionally, after each deformation, we incorporate a transformer-based graph module to adjust fused features and establish geometric and topological relationships
between points based on these features. Furthermore, we
present an end-to-end recurrent refinement module that enables the prior point cloud to deform multiple times according
to real scene features. We evaluate CatFormer’s performance
by training and testing it on CAMERA25 and REAL275
datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that CatFormer
surpasses state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, we extend the
usage of CatFormer to instance-level object pose estimation
on the LINEMOD dataset, as well as object pose estimation in real-world scenarios. The experimental results validate the effectiveness and generalization capabilities of CatFormer. Our code and the supplemental materials are avaliable at https://github.com/BIT-robot-group/CatFormer.

1

 Coarse Deformation Part
Coarse
Point
Cloud
Coarse
Deformation
Graph
Module

Point Cloud

Fine
Deformation

Graph
Module

Recurrent
Refinement
NOCS

6D Pose

 Fine Deformation Part
Prior Point Cloud

Final Point
Cloud

Fine Point
Cloud
 Recurrent Refinement Part
Repeat

Figure 1: CateFormer mainly consists of three parts: coarse
deformation, fine deformation, and recurrent refinement.
The coarse deformation part is used to coarse deform and
complement the point cloud. The fine deformation part is
used to fine deform the prior point cloud. The recurrent refinement is used to recurrent refine the point cloud from the
fine deformation part.

To solve this problem, researchers propose several modelindependent methods for category-level object 6D pose estimation (Wang et al. 2019b; Tian, Ang, and Lee 2020; Chen
et al. 2021, 2020a; Di et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022a). Estimating the pose at the category level is more challenging
than instance-level methods due to the lack of 3D models
for objects. Some approaches, like (Wang et al. 2019b; Chen
and Dou 2021), address this issue by introducing a “Normalized Object Coordinate Space” (NOCS) where they predict
the 3D model of the object. Additionally, most methods rely
on point clouds to capture the object’s geometric structure.
Recognizing the similarity in geometry among objects in the
same category, certain methods, such as (Tian, Ang, and Lee
2020; Chen and Dou 2021; Lin et al. 2022a), utilize an average point cloud as prior knowledge, enabling rough estimation of the geometric information in the scene.
However, investigating how to handle intra-class object
variety and accurately model objects based on prior point
clouds is an important problem. Firstly, in real scenes, the
camera’s view can be disrupted, resulting in fragmented
point cloud information. The key challenge is how to com-

Introduction

6D object pose estimation is a crucial task in computer vision, with applications ranging from robotic grasping (Tremblay et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019a) to 3D scene understanding (Chen et al. 2019) and augmented reality (Su et al. 2019).
While previous methods have primarily focused on instancelevel pose estimation, such as (Xiang et al. 2018; Kehl et al.
2017; Peng et al. 2019; He et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2022b;
Rad and Lepetit 2017), these approaches heavily rely on the
availability of a 3D model for accurate estimation. Consequently, when faced with an unknown object, it becomes
challenging to accurately estimate its 6D pose, which significantly affects pose estimation in real-world scenes.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6808

