The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fair Participation via Sequential Policies
Reilly Raab1 , Ross Boczar2 , Maryam Fazel2 , Yang Liu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington
reilly@ucsc.edu, rjboczar@uw.edu, mfazel@uw.edu, yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract

of human populations to novel policies. Without robust models or existing data, policies that elicit a population response
must be deployed sequentially and learned online, i.e., based
on information local to the currently deployed policy.
In this paper, we consider long-term fairness as a constrained, generally nonconvex optimization problem that
must be solved by using sequential policies. In particular,
we study the setting in which each policy induces the distribution of individuals it serves. That is, in terms of policy
(which we denote by its parameters θ), an objective L, and
a disparity measure H, we consider the problem

Leading approaches to algorithmic fairness and policyinduced distribution shift are often misaligned with longterm objectives in sequential settings. We aim to correct these
shortcomings by ensuring that both the objective and fairness constraints account for policy-induced distribution shift.
First, we motivate this problem using an example in which
individuals subject to algorithmic predictions modulate their
willingness to participate with the policy maker. Fairness in
this example is measured by the variance of group participation rates. Next, we develop a method for solving the resulting constrained, non-linear optimization problem and prove
that this method converges to a fair, locally optimal policy
given first-order information. Finally, we experimentally validate our claims in a semi-synthetic setting.

minimize

L(θ, D(θ))

subject to

H(θ, D(θ)) ≤ 0 .

θ

(1)

Critically, we assume that the data distribution D describing
the population is an (a priori unknown) function of the policy
θ. Treating the distribution as a function of policy in this way
is the key assumption of “performative prediction” as a setting (Perdomo et al. 2021) for a single learner (and extended
to multiple learners in (Narang et al. 2022)), to which we add
fairness constraints. We additionally add convex constraints
to the decision variable θ in Fair Participation.
To solve Problem 1 using an iterative algorithm (that generates a sequence of policies), we adapt tools from nonlinear optimization that guarantee convergence to a fair, local optimum (Theorem 1). Our strategy is to rely on firstorder information regarding currently deployed policy (Assumption 1) and to assume that H may be appropriately chosen without affecting the feasible set of policies (Assumption 2). We contrast our algorithm, both conceptually (See
Algorithm and Asymptotic Convergence) and through experiments (See Experiments), to alternative sequential policies
featured in prior literature.
Importantly, because H accounts for distribution shift via
D(θ), our formulation is inclusive of disparity measures H
that are intrinsic to the distribution (i.e., defined independently of the policy). That is, we can choose forms of H for
Problem 1 that depend only on the second argument. For example, we are free to choose H representing the fraction of
individuals that choose to use an algorithmic service, which
would be independent of policy in a myopic formulation,
which assumes static distributions. We explore this difference more carefully in A Failure Mode of Myopia.

Introduction
Organizations using historical data to optimize a policy
which impacts human populations encounter two significant
risks: bias and distribution shift. These hazards can interact to amplify social disparity over time as the policy-maker
and population mutually adapt to each other. As organizations adopt data-driven methods for socially consequential tasks, such dynamics threaten equitable access to health
care, justice, employment, housing, public services, education, credit, and privacy (Crawford and Calo 2016; Chaney,
Stewart, and Engelhardt 2018; Ensign et al. 2018; Fuster
et al. 2018; Hao 2020; Metz and Satariano 2020; Newton
2021; Schwartz et al. 2022).
Recent research on long-term fairness has highlighted
the need to account for policy-induced distribution shift
when seeking to mitigate disparity (Coate and Loury 1993;
Heidari, Nanda, and Gummadi 2019; Wen, Bastani, and
Topcu 2019; Mouzannar, Ohannessian, and Srebro 2019;
D’Amour et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020;
Morik et al. 2020; Raab and Liu 2021; Ge et al. 2021). In
particular, it is now well-established that strategies that fail
to account for policy-induced distribution shift can actively
increase disparity and loss over time (Figure 1).
Despite this growing recognition, it is generally difficult
to model or predict distribution shift caused by the reaction
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14758

