The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Communication Efficient Distributed Newton Method over Unreliable Networks
Ming Wen1 , Chengchang Liu2 , Yuedong Xu1
1

Fudan University,
The Chinese University of HongKong
mwen23@m.fudan.edu.cn, ccliu22@cse.cuhk.hk, ydxu@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

et al. 2017; Mitra et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020;
Ding et al. 2022; Mishchenko et al. 2022). However, the
main drawback of the first-order distributed methods is their
slow convergence rate which leads to large amount of communication rounds. Compared to this, the second-order algorithms, by computing the local curvature of the objective
function, always outperform first-order methods in terms
of convergence rate (Nesterov and Polyak 2006; Nesterov
2007) and have been adapted to operate within a distributed
framework to speed up the training process.
Implementing the Newton method within a distributed architecture encounters two primary obstacles as following:

Distributed optimization in resource constrained devices demands both communication efficiency and fast convergence
rates. Newton-type methods are getting preferable due to
their superior convergence rates compared to the first-order
methods. In this paper, we study a new problem in regard
to the second-order distributed optimization over unreliable
networks. The working devices are power-limited or operate
in unfavorable wireless channels, experiencing packet losses
during their uplink transmission to the server. Our scenario is
very common in real-world and leads to instability of classical distributed optimization methods especially the secondorder methods because of their sensitivity to the imprecision of local Hessian matrices. To achieve robustness to high
packet loss, communication efficiency and fast convergence
rates, we propose a novel distributed second-order method,
called RED-New (Packet loss Resilient Distributed Approximate Newton). Each iteration of RED-New comprises two
rounds of light-weight and lossy transmissions, in which the
server aggregates the local information with a new developed
scaling strategy. We prove the linear-quadratic convergence
rate of RED-New. Experimental results demonstrate its advantage over first-order and second-order baselines, and its
tolerance to packet loss rate ranging from 5% to 40%.

• Insufficient algorithm robustness: The Newton method
requires calculating the inverse of the Hessian. When
dealing with an ill-conditioned Hessian matrix, even minor errors in the calculation or transmission of the Hessian matrix can lead to large deviation in the inverse,
thereby impacting the convergence of the distributed algorithm.
• Inefficient communication per-round: In each round
of the distributed Newton method, local Hessian matrix
needs to be transmitted with the data volume of O(d2 ),
which may offset the communication efficiency brought
by fast convergence.

Introduction
Distributed optimization has gained prominence in machine
learning due to its significant role in improving the efficiency
of model training (Boyd 2011; Li et al. 2014; McMahan
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020). A typical distributed optimization
(interchangeable with distributed machine learning (DML))
problem is expressed in the form

Previous literature on distributed second-order Newton
methods primarily focus on addressing the second challenge (Shamir, Srebro, and Zhang 2014; Smith et al. 2018;
Islamov, Qian, and Richtarik 2021; Elgabli et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023). However, a critical aspect often overlooked is
the assumption that the distributed training system operates
within a reliable and stable network environment. In crossdevice distributed scenarios, participants in the training can
range from mobile phones to IoT (Internet of Things) nodes.
These devices, susceptible to signal changes or power issues, often face unreliable parameter transmission, leading
to parameter loss or misdirection (Chen et al. 2018). In distributed algorithms, packet loss due to unreliable networks
can divert the algorithm’s iterative direction from the theoretical descent path. In severe cases, it can prevent the algorithm from convergence altogether (Peris, Marquina, and
Candela 2011; Peters and Wilkinson 1979). Given upon this,
it is a natural and crucial question to us: Can we design a distributed Newton method which is robust and communication

m

min f (w) :=

w∈Rd

1 X
fi (w),
m i=1

(1)

where d denotes the dimension of the model w, m is the
number of distributed nodes, fi (w) is the local smooth loss
function related to i-th client, and f (w) is the global empirical risk to minimize.
A range of optimization algorithms are available to solve
a DML problem. Among them, first-order methods and
second-order methods are prevalently utilized (Konečný
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15832

