The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

WikiSQE: A Large-Scale Dataset for Sentence Quality Estimation in Wikipedia
Kenichiro Ando1 , Satoshi Sekine1 , Mamoru Komachi2
1

RIKEN AIP
Hitotsubashi University
kenichiro.ando@riken.jp
2

Abstract

are targeted at naive and superficial errors, while the remaining more multi-dimensional and in-depth evaluations
are marked up by humans. Other work includes attempting
to automatically detect specific labels given by editors (Ganter and Strube 2009; Redi et al. 2019; Bertsch and Bethard
2021). The former is unable to make fine-grained evaluations of each sentence, while the latter focuses only on one
particular poor-quality aspect.

Wikipedia can be edited by anyone and thus contains various
quality sentences. Therefore, Wikipedia includes some poorquality edits, which are often marked up by other editors.
While editors’ reviews enhance the credibility of Wikipedia,
it is hard to check all edited text. Assisting in this process
is very important, but a large and comprehensive dataset for
studying it does not currently exist. Here, we propose WikiSQE, the first large-scale dataset for sentence quality estimation in Wikipedia. Each sentence is extracted from the entire
revision history of English Wikipedia, and the target quality
labels were carefully investigated and selected. WikiSQE has
about 3.4 M sentences with 153 quality labels. In the experiment with automatic classification using competitive machine
learning models, sentences that had problems with citation,
syntax/semantics, or propositions were found to be more difficult to detect. In addition, by performing human annotation,
we found that the model we developed performed better than
the crowdsourced workers. WikiSQE is expected to be a valuable resource for other tasks in NLP.

Hence, we built WikiSQE, a dataset to estimate the quality of sentences in fine-grained and various aspects. WikiSQE enables the evaluation of various quality aspects that
could not be assessed before, including grammatical errors,
semantic weirdness, the need for additional information, and
many other aspects. Sentences were acquired from the entire revision history of English Wikipedia. They are assigned
Wikipedia’s inline template labels 2 by the Wikipedia editors
as sentence quality. We carefully selected the target labels
manually and filtered out noisy sentences, resulting in a total of 153 quality labels and about 3.4 M sentences. The 153
quality labels were further organized into five categories that
we have defined.

Introduction

The experiments with automatic classification using competitive machine learning models found that statements requiring additional information are classified with high accuracy, but that sentences requiring resolving citation, syntactic or semantic revision, or propositional problems are difficult to detect. In the human annotation experiment using
crowdsourcing, we found that machine learning models we
developed performed better than the crowdsourced workers.

Wikipedia is a huge online encyclopedia that is famously
editable by any user. It contains various topics and continues to improve its quality through repeated editing by users.
However, the quality of Wikipedia has long been a matter of
dispute (Giles 2005; Britannica 2006; Editors 2006; Chesney 2006) and is a very important issue for natural language
processing (NLP). Due to Wikipedia texts being widely used
in NLP datasets and being a major source (Rajpurkar et al.
2016; Thorne et al. 2018a; Koupaee and Wang 2018; Bañón
et al. 2020), the impact of Wikipedia quality on NLP is significant.
In fact, some poor edits exist caused by abuse, etc., which
are often corrected by other editors. However, checking and
revising all poor edits is unrealistic, and there have been several previous attempts to support this problem by machine.
A typical one is Wikipedia’s Bot 1 , which automatically corrects errant markup formats, substitutes deprecated features,
and, in particular, reverts vandalistic edits. However, they

Besides, our dataset is expected to be a valuable resource
for other tasks in NLP. The editor’s quality-checking process
can be seen as also a professional annotation. They have experience in the verification of many expressions and left the
results of their sentence quality assessments on Wikipedia’s
labels. In particular, given the growing importance of corpus
filtering in training large language models to improve the
quality of the corpus used, this dataset is very valuable. The
dataset and codes used in this work are publicly available 3 .

2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject\ Inline\
Templates
3
https://github.com/ken-ando/WikiSQE

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Bots

17656

