The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Geometric-Facilitated Denoising Diffusion Model for 3D Molecule Generation
Can Xu1,2 * † , Haosen Wang3,2 * , Weigang Wang1† , Pengfei Zheng2 , Hongyang Chen2‡
1

Zhejiang Gongshang University
2
Zhejiang Lab
3
Southeast University
leoxc1571@163.com, haosenwang@seu.edu.cn, wangweigang@zjgsu.edu.cn, zpf2021@zhejianglab.com, dr.h.chen@ieee.org

Abstract

two major challenges in 3D molecule generation. The first
one involves predicting accurate and stable molecule conformations while the other entails fully utilizing geometric information to facilitate the generation of discrete graph
structures. In this paper, we propose Geometric-Facilitated
Molecular Diffusion (GFMDiff), a de novo 3D molecule
generative method that addresses the aforementioned challenges. GFMDiff is capable of generating accurate 3D geometries while tackling the dicrete nature of graphs.
De novo molecule generation involves generating valid,
novel, and stable molecules. To address the quest for equivariance of generated 3D conformations, several diffusionbased methods (Hoogeboom et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023)
model molecules indirectly through atomic distances, which
directly reflet the strength of interatomic forces. However,
earlier methods (Hoogeboom et al. 2022) did not address the
complex interatomic relationships among multiple atoms.
While the others (Huang et al. 2023) simply use a threshold
to distinguish the influence caused by chemical bonds and
interatomic forces, regradlesss of specific atom and bond
types. However, apart from few atoms like fluorine, chlorine, and bromine, majority heavy atoms in molecules allows connecting to other atoms through single bonds. Therefore, we consider simply using pair-wise distances to model
molecule geometries is far from sufficient. Recent research
(Yuan et al. 2023) also indicates that the contribution of bond
angles on molecular learning is equivalent to pair-wise distances. Only a limited number of methods make full use
of spatial information. Additionally, since molecular diffusion methods only act on points cloud, traditional graph
convolutions are unable to discriminate the importance of
different atoms. In light of these challenges, we design a
novel dual track molecular learning framework named DualTrack Transformer Network (DTN). By integrating global
transformer architecture, DTN serves as the denoising kernel
to comprehensively capture spatial geometric information.
Given the excellent performance of diffusion models on
continuous data, majority of the models for molecule graph
generation adopt the diffusion and denoising approach on
Cartesian coordinates and features, followed by graph generation based on predefined rules instead of directly predicting
the existence of bonds. The manner in which graphs are generated indirectly can potentially lead to degradation in stabilities and validity of generated samples. To make diffusion

Denoising diffusion models have shown great potential in
multiple research areas. Existing diffusion-based generative
methods on de novo 3D molecule generation face two major
challenges. Since majority heavy atoms in molecules allow
connections to multiple atoms through single bonds, solely
using pair-wise distance to model molecule geometries is insufficient. Therefore, the first one involves proposing an effective neural network as the denoising kernel that is capable to capture complex multi-body interatomic relationships
and learn high-quality features. Due to the discrete nature of
graphs, mainstream diffusion-based methods for molecules
heavily rely on predefined rules and generate edges in an indirect manner. The second challenge involves accommodating
molecule generation to diffusion and accurately predicting
the existence of bonds. In our research, we view the iterative
way of updating molecule conformations in diffusion process
is consistent with molecular dynamics and introduce a novel
molecule generation method named Geometric-Facilitated
Molecular Diffusion (GFMDiff). For the first challenge, we
introduce a Dual-Track Transformer Network (DTN) to fully
excevate global spatial relationships and learn high quality
representations which contribute to accurate predictions of
features and geometries. As for the second challenge, we design Geometric-Facilitated Loss (GFLoss) which intervenes
the formation of bonds during the training period, instead of
directly embedding edges into the latent space. Comprehensive experiments on current benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of GFMDiff.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep generative methods, especially
diffusion-based methods (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song
and Ermon 2019; Song et al. 2021), have greatly propelled
research in generative artificial intelligence across various
domains. In line with the development trend of generative
methods, mainstream approches in the field of molecule discovery have undergone a transformation from previous generative methods to diffusion-based methods, and from designing 2D graphs to 3D conformations. However, there are
* This work is done during internship at Zhejiang Lab.
†

Equal contribution, co-first author.
Correspond to Hongyang Chen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

338

