The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CEGAR-Based Approach for Solving Combinatorial Optimization Modulo
Quantified Linear Arithmetics Problems
Kerian Thuillier1 , Anne Siegel1 , Loı̈c Paulevé2
1

2

Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, UMR6074, F-35000 Rennes, France
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, LaBRI, UMR5800, F-33400 Talence, France
kerian.thuillier@irisa.fr, anne.siegel@irisa.fr, loic.pauleve@labri.fr

Abstract

2003), have been developed. They take advantage of the
ability of modern ASP solvers, like Clingo (Gebser et al.
2017), to support various reasoning modes, Boolean optimization, and model enumeration.
A recent evolution in life-sciences is the emergence of
hybrid optimization problems combining Boolean logic and
linear constraints (Frioux et al. 2019; Mahout, Carlson, and
Peres 2020). ASP solvers handling quantifier-free linear
constraints, like Clingo[lpx] (Janhunen et al. 2017), have
been developed to solve such hybrid optimization problems,
by extending ASP solver with a DPLL-adapted simplex algorithm (Dutertre and De Moura 2006) used by modern
Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers. A new class
of complexity appeared recently with the problem of inferring metabolic regulatory rules, which is formulated as a hybrid optimization problem with one level of quantified linear
constraints (Thuillier et al. 2022) and associated with realworld benchmarks. The goal of this paper is to investigate
efficient solutions to solve this new class of hybrid optimization problems, which we denote as OPT+qLP.
The state-of-the-art strategy to solve OPT+qLP problems
is to rely on quantifier elimination to get back to quantifierfree hybrid optimization problems. There is an equivalence
between universally quantified linear constraints and constraints on the optimum of LP problems. Hence, based on
the strong duality theorem, universally quantified linear constraints can be converted into equi-satisfiable quantifier-free
linear constraints through a dual transformation. This allows tackling OPT+qLP problems with standard hybrid approaches, as offered by Clingo[lpx] and SMT solvers.
An alternative lies in the Counter-Example-Guided Abstraction Refinement (CEGAR) method (Clarke et al.
2003). While sharing similarities with the DPLL algorithm
(Nieuwenhuis, Oliveras, and Tinelli 2006) used in modern
SMT solvers, the CEGAR approach enables to easily compose solvers for different tasks, including for Boolean optimization and enumeration problems. The strength of the
CEGAR approach therefore lies in its generic and solverindependent nature, which allows for taking advantage of
the structure of linear problems. It has been widely applied
for the solving of quantified Boolean formula (Janota et al.
2016), and SMT problems (Brummayer and Biere 2008;
Barrett and Tinelli 2018). However, CEGAR approaches
have not been applied so far to OPT+qLP problems.

Bioinformatics has always been a prolific domain for generating complex satisfiability and optimization problems. For
instance, the synthesis of multi-scale models of biological
networks has recently been associated with the resolution
of optimization problems mixing Boolean logic and universally quantified linear constraints (OPT+qLP), which can be
benchmarked on real-world models. In this paper, we introduce a Counter-Example-Guided Abstraction Refinement
(CEGAR) to solve such problems efficiently. Our CEGAR
exploits monotone properties inherent to linear optimization
in order to generalize counter-examples of Boolean relaxations. We implemented our approach by extending Answer
Set Programming (ASP) solver C LINGO with a quantified linear constraints propagator. Our prototype enables exploiting
independence of sub-formulas to further exploit the generalization of counter-examples. We evaluate the impact of refinement and partitioning on two sets of OPT+qLP problems inspired by system biology. Additionally, we conducted a comparison with the state-of-the-art ASP solver Clingo[lpx] that
handles non-quantified linear constraints, showing the advantage of our CEGAR approach for solving large problems.

Introduction
Satisfiability (SAT) solving has proven to be highly successful in addressing a wide range of real-world combinatorial satisfiability problems across various fields. In the last
decades, many applications in bioinformatics have been formulated as complex combinatorial satisfiability and optimization problems according to biological knowledge and
data. For decision-aided tasks, life-scientists then take advantage of sampling the full space of solutions in order to
prioritize future experiments. Therefore, challenges reside
both in solving such complex combinatorial problems on
large-scale and real-world instances but also in enumerating
part, if not all, the set of solutions.
Traditionally, the problems addressed in life-sciences
were either linear programming and optimization (LP) problems (Orth, Thiele, and Palsson 2010; von Kamp and Klamt
2014) or Boolean optimization problems (Videla et al. 2017;
Chevalier et al. 2019). In this case, efficient approaches
based on Answer Set Programming (ASP), a logic programming framework for symbolic satisfiability problems (Baral
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8146

