The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Sub-graph Distillation for Robust Semi-supervised Continual Learning
Yan Fan, Yu Wang* , Pengfei Zhu, Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation, China
fyan 0411@tju.edu.cn, wangyu @tju.edu.cn, zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn, huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Labeled data Unlabeled data

Abstract

(

Continual learning (CL) has shown promising results and
comparable performance to learning at once in a fully supervised manner. However, CL strategies typically require
a large number of labeled samples, making their real-life
deployment challenging. In this work, we focus on semisupervised continual learning (SSCL), where the model progressively learns from partially labeled data with unknown
categories. We provide a comprehensive analysis of SSCL
and demonstrate that unreliable distributions of unlabeled
data lead to unstable training and refinement of the progressing stages. This problem severely impacts the performance
of SSCL. To address the limitations, we propose a novel
approach called Dynamic Sub-Graph Distillation (DSGD)
for semi-supervised continual learning, which leverages both
semantic and structural information to achieve more stable
knowledge distillation on unlabeled data and exhibit robustness against distribution bias. Firstly, we formalize a general
model of structural distillation and design a dynamic graph
construction for the continual learning progress. Next, we define a structure distillation vector and design a dynamic subgraph distillation algorithm, which enables end-to-end training and adaptability to scale up tasks. The entire proposed
method is adaptable to various CL methods and supervision
settings. Finally, experiments conducted on three datasets CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet-100, with varying supervision ratios, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach in mitigating the catastrophic forgetting problem
in semi-supervised continual learning scenarios. Our code is
available: https://github.com/fanyan0411/DSGD.

, yj,1)

D1

eagle, ...
...

Labeled data Unlabeled data

(

, yk,t )
owl, ...

(a) Semi-supervised
continual learning

Dt

105

Accuracy (%)

1

95
85
75
65

CIFAR100-20

Labeled_set
Unlabeled_set
Test_set

55

45
35

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Number of Classes

(b) Catastrophic Forgetting
of unlabeled data

Figure 1: Challenge analysis of semi-supervised continual
learning. (a) Illustration of semi-supervised continual learning. (b) The accuracy tendency of the testing set and unlabeled training set shows a significant positive correlation.

For the purpose of reducing reliance on annotations, semisupervised continual learning (SSCL) is proposed and developed by exploiting massive unlabeled data to enhance the
performance. An illustration of SSCL is provided in Figure
1(a). Nevertheless, as demonstrated in Figure 1(b), when all
labeled samples are retrained in the subsequent tasks without any replay of unlabeled data, the decline in performance
correlates with a decrease in accuracy of unlabeled training
data, indicating the forgetting of unlabeled data contributes
to catastrophic forgetting of the SSCL.
To deal with the forgetting problem in SSCL, some methods employ the semi-supervised learning strategy on SSCL,
such as distilling pseudo-label on unlabeled samples (Smith
et al. 2021) or applying consistency loss to enhance the
model discriminability (Boschini et al. 2022). Additionally,
the online sample replaying method is utilized through training data sampled from a learned conditional generator in an
online manner (Wang et al. 2021).
However, most of these strategies have paid more attention to leveraging the learned representations of unlabeled
data, while unreliable distributions will have a detrimental
impact on the training stability and refinement (Chen et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2021). We provide a visualization of the
negative effect of distribution bias and pseudo label errors
on performance and training stability in Figure 2. This encourages us to investigate into a more robust strategy for

Introduction
Continual learning (CL) has been commonly investigated
to model the realistic learning progress in evolving environments by learning new knowledge and reinforcing existing cognition. Numerous efforts have been made to alleviate
the issue of catastrophic forgetting of learned models when
new tasks are involved (De Lange et al. 2021). However,
these methods heavily rely on labeled data, which poses limitations in insufficient supervision scenarios, such as face
recognition and video recognition (Wang et al. 2021).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11927

