The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Trade-Offs in Fine-Tuned Diffusion Models between Accuracy and
Interpretability
Mischa Dombrowski1 , Hadrien Reynaud2 , Johanna P. Müller1 , Matthew Baugh2 ,
Bernhard Kainz1,2
1

Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, DE
2
Imperial College London, UK
mischa.dombrowski@fau.de

Abstract

certain tokens or words of the input prompt with regions
in the image. Due to recent advances in diffusion models,
there has been an increased focus on generative approaches
to solve common problems, such as categorical data imbalances and counterfactual image generation. Additionally,
since their recent popularization by Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
(2020), diffusion models have propelled the performance
of generative models (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Saharia
et al. 2021, 2022). These advances have also been adopted
in the medical domain, where most studies thus far have focused on improving generative capabilities, such as generating large corpora of MRI scans (Pinaya et al. 2022b) or 4D
data (Kim and Ye 2022). Current approaches have reached a
level of performance where the models can generate videos
of such high quality that clinicians cannot visually distinguish them from real videos (Reynaud et al. 2023). These
successes also led to advances in discriminative tasks such as
anomaly detection (Pinaya et al. 2022a; Wolleb et al. 2022).
One common approach is to use pre-trained diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022) and fine-tune them to generate, for
example, Chest X-ray (CXR) images. The resulting image
quality is better compared to training diffusion models from
scratch, as demonstrated in (Chambon et al. 2022). These
approaches have in common that they do not interpret the
results given by the diffusion models, which have recently
demonstrated, particularly, interpretable latent spaces (Dombrowski et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2022; Hertz et al. 2022).
Interpreting the latent space of diffusion models is of great
importance because generative models have to properly represent what the tokens mean in order to generate correctly
matching images from them. Even if we validate the generated samples on pre-trained classifiers (Chambon et al.
2022), the results can be deceiving. Many models have not
been evaluated on robustness towards unrealistic artefacts
introduced by generative models. Furthermore, if classifiers
are already able to clearly label images as belonging to a
class, it is unclear whether this sample is useful for applications such as data augmentation.

Recent advancements in diffusion models have significantly
impacted the trajectory of generative machine learning research, with many adopting the strategy of fine-tuning pretrained models using domain-specific text-to-image datasets.
Notably, this method has been readily employed for medical applications, such as X-ray image synthesis, leveraging
the plethora of associated radiology reports. Yet, a prevailing concern is the lack of assurance on whether these models genuinely comprehend their generated content. With the
evolution of text-conditional image generation, these models have grown potent enough to facilitate object localization scrutiny. Our research underscores this advancement in
the critical realm of medical imaging, emphasizing the crucial role of interpretability. We further unravel a consequential trade-off between image fidelity – as gauged by conventional metrics – and model interpretability in generative diffusion models. Specifically, the adoption of learnable
text encoders when fine-tuning results in diminished interpretability. Our in-depth exploration uncovers the underlying factors responsible for this divergence. Consequently, we
present a set of design principles for the development of
truly interpretable generative models. Code is available at
https://github.com/MischaD/chest-distillation.

Introduction
Automatic detection and localisation of diseases in medical
images have great potential to be applied at scale because
of the considerable amount of available data that connects
images to radiology reports. Recently, multi-modal models
have come into focus because of their ability to capture both,
textual and visual information and combine them to improve
the performance of the model (Li et al. 2022) and its interpretability (Huang et al. 2021). Additionally, (Boecking
et al. 2022) showed how vision-language models can greatly
benefit from prompt engineering because of the meaningful
representations learned by large language models such as
(Devlin et al. 2018; Yan et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2020). Furthermore, these cross-modality abilities can also provide interpretable outputs, for example, by using contrastive learning approaches (Zhang et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2021; Gupta
et al. 2020) to perform phrase grounding, which associates

In this paper, we show that the state-of-the-art methods
for fine-tuning diffusion models on radiology reports produce models which are no longer interpretable. We do this
by analyzing the influence of jointly learning language embedding and image generation. Our experiments show that
diffusion models trained for high image quality have no se-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21037

