The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Representation of Spiking Neural Networks via Similarity-Sensitive
Contrastive Learning
Yuhan Zhang* , Xiaode Liu* , Yuanpei Chen, Weihang Peng, Yufei Guo† ,
Xuhui Huang, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, Beijing, 100144, China
yfguo@pku.edu.cn, mazhe thu@163.com

Abstract

the SNN’s activation and weight can be replaced by the addition. Thanks to such an information processing paradigm,
SNNs are more power-efficiency compared with their fullprecision DNN counterparts. Moreover, the SNN could be
implemented more efficiently on some specialized neuromorphic hardwares (Akopyan et al. 2015; Davies et al. 2018)
in an event-driven manner, where only there is a spike coming, the SNN will be activated, otherwise, be silent.
Despite the unique binary spike information processing
mode endows SNN with the characteristics of energy saving, it also limits SNN representative ability to some extent. Compared with the full-precision feature representation of the ANNs, the binary spike feature representation
of the SNNs leads to limited information capacity and then
severe accuracy degradation (Guo et al. 2022c, 2023a). To
improve the representative capability of SNN, some previous works advocated using the ANN to guide the training of high-precision SNN based on knowledge distillation (Takuya et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023c).
These works enhance the training of SNN either by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) (Takuya et al.
2021) or distance (Xu et al. 2023) of the features or outputs
of ANN and SNN. We note that these methods all only use
the samples from the joint distribution of the features or outputs of the ANN and the SNN to assist in the training of
SNN. Taking KLD for example,
X
PS (s)
DKL (PS || PA ) =
PS (s) log
,
(1)
PA (a)

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have attracted intensive attention as a promising energy-efficient alternative to conventional artificial neural networks (ANNs) recently, which
could transmit information in the form of binary spikes rather
than continuous activations thus the multiplication of activation and weight could be replaced by addition to save energy. However, the binary spike representation form will sacrifice the expression performance of SNNs and lead to accuracy degradation compared with ANNs. Considering improving feature representation is beneficial to training an accurate
SNN model, this paper focuses on enhancing the feature representation of the SNN. To this end, we establish a similaritysensitive contrastive learning framework, where SNN could
capture significantly more information from its ANN counterpart to improve representation by Mutual Information (MI)
maximization with layer-wise sensitivity to similarity. In specific, it enriches the SNN’s feature representation by pulling
the positive pairs of SNN’s and ANN’s feature representation
of each layer from the same input samples closer together
while pushing the negative pairs from different samples further apart. Experimental results show that our method consistently outperforms the current state-of-the-art algorithms on
both popular non-spiking static and neuromorphic datasets.

Introduction
Recent developments in deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved great success in a variety of computer vision
tasks including pattern recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), semantic image segmentation
(Chen et al. 2018), object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren
et al. 2015), and so on. However, the increasing complexity of these full-precision DNN models brings high energy
consumption, which makes them difficult to deploy in realworld resource-constrained environments. The spiking neural network (SNN), inspired by how the brain represents
and processes information, has become one of the energyefficient alternatives of conventional DNNs in some specific
scenarios (Ren et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023b,d). It transmits information via 0/1 spikes thus the multiplication of

where s = fSNN (xi ), a = fANN (xi ), and (s, a) ∈
PSA (s, a), PSA (s, a) denotes the joint distribution. The loss
function is obtained by the output features of ANN and SNN
based on the same sample input. However, there is also rich
information existing between the ANN’s and SNN’s features obtained by independent sample inputs. More specifically, the product of the respective marginal distributions
of ANN’s and SNN’s representation PS (s)PA (a) can also
be important for the construction of the loss function. Consequently, we advocate maximizing mutual information between SNN’s and ANN’s features, through the KLD of joint
distribution and the product of marginal distributions, to
guide the learning of the SNN. Concretely, the representation ability of SNN will be strengthened not only via pulling
SNN’s and ANN’s features from the same input samples but

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16926

