The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task-Free Dynamic Sparse Vision Transformer for Continual Learning
Fei Ye1,2 and Adrian G. Bors1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract

Split

Vision Transformers (ViTs) represent self-attention-based
network backbones shown to be efficient in many individual
tasks, but which have not been explored in Task-Free Continual Learning (TFCL) so far. Most existing ViT-based approaches for Continual Learning (CL) are relying on task information. In this study, we explore the advantages of the ViT
in a more challenging CL scenario where the task boundaries are unavailable during training. To address this learning paradigm, we propose the Task-Free Dynamic Sparse Vision Transformer (TFDSViT), which can dynamically build
new sparse experts, where each expert leverages sparsity to
allocate the model’s capacity for capturing different information categories over time. To avoid forgetting and ensure efficiency in reusing the previously learned knowledge
in subsequent learning, we propose a new dynamic dual attention mechanism consisting of the Sparse Attention (SA’)
and Knowledge Transfer Attention (KTA) modules. The SA’
refrains from updating some previously learned attention
blocks for preserving prior knowledge. The KTA uses and
regulates the information flow of all previously learned experts for learning new patterns. The proposed dual attention
mechanism can simultaneously relieve forgetting and promote knowledge transfer for a dynamic expansion model in a
task-free manner. We also propose an energy-based dynamic
expansion mechanism using the energy as a measure of novelty for the incoming samples which provides appropriate expansion signals leading to a compact network architecture for
TFDSViT. Extensive empirical studies demonstrate the effectiveness of TFDSViT. The code and supplementary material
are available at https://github.com/dtuzi123/TFDSViT.

Image patches

Input
Sparse
attention

KTA

Expert k
Multi-head attention

SA 1

MLP u

Sub-Cu

SA m
Expert 1

Expert 2

SAs

SAs

Expert k-1

SAs

Figure 1: The proposed dynamic dual attention mechanism
consists of a Sparse Attention (SA’) and a Knowledge Transfer Attention (KTA) module. We assume that TFDSViT has
already trained k experts. When learning the u-th submodel
consisting of an MLP layer (‘MLP u’) and a sub-classifier
(‘Sub-Cu’), the sparse attention generates binary masks for
each self-attention block (‘SA 1’, · · · ,‘SA m’) to avoid forgetting. The KTA generates attention masks to regulate each
self-attention block of all previously trained experts incorporating them into the learning process of the u-th submodel.
We omit the embedding layer for the sake of simplification.

Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many popular vision tasks, including image classification (He et al. 2022), image generation (Goodfellow
et al. 2014; Liu, Gu, and Samaras 2019), object detection
(Ren et al. 2015) and reconstruction (Kingma and Welling
2013). However, when applying these advanced models for
continuously learning a series of tasks, their performance
on past tasks would sharply degenerate and eventually they
would fail. Learning successively multiple tasks paradigm
is called Continual Learning (CL). Classical models tend to

rewrite their previously learnt parameters to adapt to new
tasks, leading to catastrophic forgetting (Parisi et al. 2019).
Existing approaches to continual learning can be broadly
divided into three categories : memory-based (Bang et al.
2021, 2022), regularisation-based (Kemker et al. 2018;
Martens and Grosse 2015) and dynamic extension models
(Hung et al. 2019; Ye and Bors 2020b, 2022b). Memorybased methods store some past examples in a memory
buffer, while a classifier is trained on both new and stored
examples to relieve forgetting (Bang et al. 2021). Another
memory-based approach trains a generator to remember past
data and replay generative samples while also learning new

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16442

