The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Deformable Hypothesis Sampling for Accurate PatchMatch
Multi-View Stereo
Hongjie Li * , Yao Guo * , Xianwei Zheng † , Hanjiang Xiong
The State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University, China
{lihongjie,guoyao gy,zhengxw,xionghanjiang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

3D forms of both cost volume and CNN are undoubtedly
restricted by limited resources. To overcome these limitations, many efforts have been made to reduce the cost volume size (Gu et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2020) and modify
the regularization techniques (Yao et al. 2019; Yan et al.
2020). Recently, a promising solution has emerged, which
forgoes the common learning paradigm and re-evolves the
traditional PatchMatch MVS into an end-to-end framework,
like PatchMatchNet (Wang et al. 2021) and PatchMatch-RL
(Lee et al. 2021). These methods follow the idea of patchbased searching and achieve improved results in efficiency
and quality. However, we observe that they only transform
the traditional pipeline into a trainable one, without adequately considering the implicit depth distribution within
scenes for guiding depth hypothesis sampling during depth
propagation and perturbation. This flaw directly degenerates
the depth estimation performance, as shown in Figure1(d).
Although PatchMatchNet introduces variability to sampling
with CNNs, it remains insensitive to the underlying depth
distribution. This will hamper the sampling of optimal hypotheses, thereby imposing additional burden on the subsequent learning modules. Therefore, our study raises two
crucial questions for hypothesis sampling: (i) What implicit
depth distributions should be learned? (ii) How the learned
distribution be leveraged to guide hypothesis sampling?
At the propagation stage, hypotheses of neighboring pixels are sampled to generate a collection for enhancing each
pixel’s hypothesis space. An implicit piece-wise smooth
depth distribution is contained in the depth map due to the
scene regularity in the real world. In other words, the depth
distribution tends to be smooth within coherent surfaces but
can have abrupt shifts between distinct objects or scene elements. However, a preset sampling template is vulnerable
when dealing with this implicit distribution (Lee et al. 2021;
Duggal et al. 2019). This unreasonable hypothesis sampling
results in a lot of noises with significant hypothesis differences in the collection, thereby causing unstable hypothesis
evaluation, as revealed by Figure 1(b). Thus, a well-designed
sampling scheme is required to select hypotheses from pixels that align more closely with the object’s surface.
At the perturbation stage, fine-grained hypotheses over
the scene depth range are expected to be sampled for refining the previously estimated depths. The optimization at this
stage has received little attention in recent works. Gipuma

This paper introduces a learnable Deformable Hypothesis
Sampler (DeformSampler) to address the challenging issue of
noisy depth estimation for accurate PatchMatch Multi-View
Stereo (MVS). We observe that the heuristic depth hypothesis sampling modes employed by PatchMatch MVS solvers
are insensitive to (i) the piece-wise smooth distribution of
depths across the object surface, and (ii) the implicit multimodal distribution of depth prediction probabilities along the
ray direction on the surface points. Accordingly, we develop
DeformSampler to learn distribution-sensitive sample spaces
to (i) propagate depths consistent with the scene’s geometry across the object surface, and (ii) fit a Laplace Mixture
model that approaches the point-wise probabilities distribution of the actual depths along the ray direction. We integrate
DeformSampler into a learnable PatchMatch MVS system to
enhance depth estimation in challenging areas, such as piecewise discontinuous surface boundaries and weakly-textured
regions. Experimental results on DTU and Tanks & Temples
datasets demonstrate its superior performance and generalization capabilities compared to state-of-the-art competitors.
Code is available at https://github.com/Geo-Tell/DS-PMNet.

Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct dense 3D
scene geometry from image sequences with known cameras,
which has been widely used in robot perception, 3D reconstruction, and virtual reality. MVS is typically treated as a
dense correspondence search problem (Galliani, Lasinger,
and Schindler 2015), but many traditional methods have difficulty in achieving reliable matching within the low-texture,
specular, and reflective regions. Learning-based MVS has
recently attracted interest in solving this problem by introducing global semantic information for robust matching
(Yao et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2023b). Although achievements have been made, they still face the challenge of bridging the gap between accuracy and efficiency.
Learning-based methods commonly involve building a 3D
cost volume, followed by a regularization using the 3D CNN
for depth regression (Yao et al. 2018). Consequently, the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3082

