The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Input Margins Can Predict Generalization Too
Coenraad Mouton1,2,3 , Marthinus Wilhelmus Theunissen 1,2 , Marelie H Davel1,2,4
1

Faculty of Engineering, North-West University, South Africa
2
Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, South Africa
3
South African National Space Agency
4
National Institute for Theoretical and Computational Sciences, South Africa
{moutoncoenraad, tiantheunissen, marelie.davel}@gmail.com
Abstract

where a complexity measure is a scalar-valued function that
relates a model’s training data and parameters to its expected
performance on unseen data. Such a predictive complexity
measure would not only be practically useful but could lead
to new insights into how DNNs generalize.

Understanding generalization in deep neural networks is an
active area of research. A promising avenue of exploration
has been that of margin measurements: the shortest distance
to the decision boundary for a given sample or its representation internal to the network. While margins have been shown
to be correlated with the generalization ability of a model
when measured at its hidden representations (hidden margins), no such link between large margins and generalization
has been established for input margins. We show that while
input margins are not generally predictive of generalization,
they can be if the search space is appropriately constrained.
We develop such a measure based on input margins, which we
refer to as ‘constrained margins’. The predictive power of this
new measure is demonstrated on the ‘Predicting Generalization in Deep Learning’ (PGDL) dataset and contrasted with
hidden representation margins. We find that constrained margins achieve highly competitive scores and outperform other
margin measurements in general. This provides a novel insight on the relationship between generalization and classification margins, and highlights the importance of considering the data manifold for investigations of generalization in
DNNs.

1

In this work, we focus on classification margins in deep
neural classifiers. It is important to note that the term ‘margin’ is, often confusingly, used to refer to 1) output margins (Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky 2017), 2) input margins (Sokolić et al. 2017), and 3) hidden margins (Jiang et al.
2018), interchangeably. Here (1) is a measure of the difference in class output values, while (2) or (3) is concerned with
measuring the distance from a sample to its nearest decision
boundary in either input or hidden representation space, respectively. We limit our focus to input and hidden margins.
While margins measured at the hidden representations of
deep neural classifiers have been shown to be predictive of a
model’s generalization, this link has not been established for
input space margins. We show that, in several circumstances,
the classical definition of input margin does not predict generalization, but a direction-constrained version of this metric
does: a quantity we refer to as constrained margins. By measuring margins in directions of ‘high utility’, that is, directions that are expected to be more useful to the classification
task, we are able to better capture the generalization ability
of a trained DNN.

Introduction

Our understanding of the generalization ability of deep neural networks (DNNs) remains incomplete. Various bounds
on the generalization error for classical machine learning
models have been proposed based on the complexity of the
hypothesis space (Vapnik 1999; Koltchinskii and Panchenko
2002). However, this approach paints an unfinished picture
when considering modern DNNs (Zhang et al. 2021). Generalization in DNNs is an active field of study and updated
bounds are proposed on an ongoing basis (Arora et al. 2018;
Kawaguchi, Kaelbling, and Bengio 2022; Chuang et al.
2021; Lotfi et al. 2022).
A complementary approach to developing theoretical
bounds is to develop empirical techniques that are able to
predict the generalization ability of certain families of DNN
models. The ‘Predicting Generalization in Deep Learning’
(PGDL) challenge, exemplifies such an approach. The challenge was held at NeurIPS 2020 (Jiang et al. 2020) and provides a useful test bed for evaluating complexity measures,

We make several contributions:
1. Demonstrate the first link between large input margins
and generalisation performance, by developing a new
input margin-based complexity measure that achieves
highly competitive performance on the PGDL benchmark and outperforms several contemporary complexity
measures.
2. Show that margins do not necessarily need to be measured at multiple hidden layers to be predictive of generalization, as suggested in (Jiang et al. 2018).
3. Provide a new perspective on margin analysis and how
it applies to DNNs, that of finding high utility directions
along which to measure the distance to the boundary instead of focusing on finding the shortest distance.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14379

