The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Redefining ABA+ Semantics via Abstract Set-to-Set Attacks
Yannis Dimopoulos1 , Wolfgang Dvořák2 , Matthias König2 , Anna Rapberger3 , Markus Ulbricht4 ,
Stefan Woltran2
1

University of Cyprus, Department of Computer Science
2
TU Wien, Institute of Logic and Computation
3
Imperial College London, Department of Computing
4
Leipzig University, Department of Computer Science
yannis@cs.ucy.ac.cy, mulbricht@informatik.uni-leipzig.de, a.rapberger@imperial.ac.uk
{wolfgang.dvorak, matthias.koenig, stefan.woltran}@tuwien.ac.at
Abstract

assumptions is evaluated by employing so-called argumentation semantics. Graph-based representations, on the other
hand, offer an intuitive and easy-to-understand model of
argumentative scenarios. One of the most popular models
are abstract Argumentation Frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995)
which are directed graphs where nodes correspond to arguments and the arcs encode attacks (directed conflicts) between them. In recent years, researchers have proposed and
further developed numerous generalizations. A notable one
are AFs with collective attacks (SETAFs) due to Nielsen and
Parsons (2006). SETAFs allow for situations where sets of
arguments jointly attack a single argument.
The instantiation of knowledge bases in terms of abstract
frameworks yields access to the visual advantages of graphbased models and allows the application of well-developed
algorithms, tailored to abstract frameworks.

Assumption-based argumentation (ABA) is a powerful defeasible reasoning formalism which is based on the interplay of
assumptions, their contraries, and inference rules. ABA with
preferences (ABA+ ) generalizes the basic model by allowing
a qualitative comparison of assumptions. The integration of
preferences however comes with a cost. In ABA+ , the evaluation under two central and well-established semantics—
grounded and complete semantics—is not guaranteed to yield
an outcome. Moreover, while ABA frameworks without preferences allow for a graph-based representation in Dung-style
frameworks, an according instantiation for general ABA+
frameworks has not been established so far. In this work, we
tackle both issues: First, we develop a novel abstract argumentation formalism based on set-to-set attacks. We show
that our so-called Hyper Argumentation Frameworks (HYPAFs) capture ABA+ . Second, we propose relaxed variants of
complete and grounded semantics for HYPAFs that yield an
extension for all frameworks by design, while still faithfully
generalizing the established semantics of Dung-style Argumentation Frameworks. We exploit the newly established correspondence between ABA+ and HYPAFs to obtain variants
for grounded and complete ABA+ semantics that are guaranteed to yield an outcome. Finally, we discuss basic properties
and provide a complexity analysis. Along the way, we settle
the computational complexity of several ABA+ semantics.

1

Example 1. Alice wants to go on vacation to Tokyo. Ideally,
she would like to visit for two weeks and stay in a 5-star hotel; however, such a long stay in a luxurious hotel is too expensive for her. We can formalize this as an ABA framework
with assumptions t (“Alice travels to Tokyo”), w (“Alice visits for two weeks”), and h (“Alice stays in a 5-star hotel”)
and their contraries t, w, and h, expressing the negation of
the respective assumptions. The rule r : (t ← w, h) formalizes that two weeks in a 5-star hotel implies that Alice
cannot travel to Tokyo. An intuitive representation of conflicts in this framework can be obtained via the following
simple SETAF (König, Rapberger, and Ulbricht 2022):

Introduction

Formal argumentation is a major research area in knowledge
representation and reasoning, with applications in various
fields in the realm of Artificial Intelligence (Bench-Capon,
Prakken, and Sartor 2009; Baroni et al. 2018). The close interplay between rule-based systems and graph-based methods is thereby key to exploit the full potential of argumentative methods. Rule-based formalisms are crucial to understand and evaluate complex dependencies between defeasible elements of a knowledge base. Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA) (Cyras et al. 2018) is one of the leading
rule-based argumentation formalisms. Key elements are assumptions, their contraries, and inference rules; they form
the building blocks to construct arguments and to identify
conflicts in the given knowledge base. Acceptability of the

w

h

t

The arrow from the set containing w and h to t indicates
the joint attack. The set {w, h} can be accepted since they
are unattacked whereas t is defeated by them. Hence, Alice
won’t be able to go to Tokyo, given her trip specifications.
Suppose we also want to model different preferences of
Alice, e.g. she might think that it would be better to have
a short stay in Tokyo than none at all, i.e., she prefers going to Tokyo over staying for two weeks. There is a variety of approaches to handle preferences in different argumentation formalisms (Modgil and Prakken 2014; Besnard
and Hunter 2014; Amgoud and Vesic 2014). ABA with preferences (ABA+ ) (Cyras and Toni 2016) generalizes ABA

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10493

