The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semi-supervised Learning of Dynamical Systems with Neural Ordinary
Differential Equations: A Teacher-Student Model Approach
Yu Wang1 , Yuxuan Yin1 , Karthik Somayaji NS1 , Ján Drgoňa2 , Malachi Schram4 , Mahantesh
Halappanavar2 , Frank Liu5 , Peng Li1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara
2
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
4
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
5
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
{yu95, karthi, y yin, lip}@ucsb.edu, jan.drgona@pnnl.gov, schram@jlab.org, hala@pnnl.gov, liufy@ornl.gov
Abstract

dynamical systems, providing a data-efficient and probabilistic method for learning in the presence of uncertainty
and noise. Other studies, such as (Lusch, Kutz, and Brunton
2018; Peitz and Klus 2019), utilize deep neural networks
to learn the Koopman operator, which represents a linear
embedding of non-linear dynamical systems. Furthermore,
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODE)(Chen et al.
2018) leverages a black-box neural network to model dynamics as an ordinary differential equation (ODE), demonstrating significant potential in modeling unknown dynamical systems.
However, one significant obstacle for data-driven methods stems from the practical difficulty in acquiring sufficient data for modeling dynamical systems. The data collection process can be expensive, time-consuming, and in
some cases, even infeasible due to physical constraints or
safety considerations. The shortage of data results in limited
coverage of the state space, leading to gaps in the model’s
understanding and poor prediction ability.
Semi-supervised learning methods have emerged as a
promising solution to the problem of limited labeled data
in classification and regression tasks. These approaches effectively leverage a large amount of unlabeled data along
with some labeled data. Unlabeled data can be either obtained directly from observations with unknown or uncollected labels or generated through various data augmentation techniques (Chen et al. 2020; Cubuk et al. 2019, 2020).
Semi-supervised methods typically assume that unlabeled
data share the same structural information as labeled data
and often utilize them in different ways, such as self-training
(Pham et al. 2021), multi-view training (Chen et al. 2020;
Wang and Isola 2020), or based on graph methods (Kipf and
Welling 2016; Iscen et al. 2019). These approaches promote
the model to produce similar outputs for similar instances or
preserve the structure of the data in the learned representation.
Thus, it is logical to consider the integration of semisupervised learning into the modeling of dynamical systems with neural ODEs, a concept yet to be explored by
the research community. However, the adaptation of semisupervised learning strategies to the problem is not straightforward and presents several challenges: the definition, generation and utilization of unlabeled data in dynamical sys-

Modeling dynamical systems is crucial for a wide range of
tasks, but it remains challenging due to complex nonlinear
dynamics, limited observations, or lack of prior knowledge.
Recently, data-driven approaches such as Neural Ordinary
Differential Equations (NODE) have shown promising results by leveraging the expressive power of neural networks
to model unknown dynamics. However, these approaches often suffer from limited labeled training data, leading to poor
generalization and suboptimal predictions. On the other hand,
semi-supervised algorithms can utilize abundant unlabeled
data and have demonstrated good performance in classification and regression tasks. We propose TS-NODE, the first
semi-supervised approach to modeling dynamical systems
with NODE. TS-NODE explores cheaply generated synthetic
pseudo rollouts to broaden exploration in the state space and
to tackle the challenges brought by lack of ground-truth system data under a teacher-student model. TS-NODE employs
a unified optimization framework that corrects the teacher
model based on the student’s feedback while mitigating the
potential false system dynamics present in pseudo rollouts.
TS-NODE demonstrates significant performance improvements over a baseline Neural ODE model on multiple dynamical system modeling tasks.

Introduction
Precise modeling of system dynamics plays a pivotal
role across multiple domains, including system identification, model predictive control, and reinforcement learning. Nonetheless, real-world systems frequently exhibit a
high degree of non-linearity within a high-dimensional state
space, posing considerable challenges in modeling dynamics without adequate prior knowledge.
Recent advancements in machine learning enable the use
of data-driven methods to directly model system dynamics from observations (Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski
2019; Deisenroth, Fox, and Rasmussen 2015; Lusch, Kutz,
and Brunton 2018; Chen et al. 2018), effectively circumventing the challenges associated with making appropriate
prior model assumptions. For instance, (Deisenroth, Fox,
and Rasmussen 2015) employs a Gaussian Process to model
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15698

