The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CFR-ICL: Cascade-Forward Refinement with Iterative Click Loss for Interactive
Image Segmentation
Shoukun Sun1 , Min Xian1 , Fei Xu2 , Luca Capriotti2 , Tiankai Yao2
1

Machine Intelligence and Data Analytics Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Idaho
2
Idaho National Laboratory
{ssun,mxian}@uidaho.edu, {fei.xu,luca.capriotti,tiankai.yao}@inl.gov

Abstract

2016a). However, subsequent advancements in the field led
to the development of deep learning-based methods, beginning with (Xu et al. 2016), which resulted in significant improvements in segmentation performance. Recently, more
deep learning-based methods have been introduced, including (Jang and Kim 2019; Sofiiuk et al. 2020; Sofiiuk, Petrov,
and Konushin 2022; Chen et al. 2022), which have further
improved the efficiency of interactive segmentation.
Many interactive segmentation methods (Jang and Kim
2019; Sofiiuk et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022; Sofiiuk, Petrov,
and Konushin 2022; Liu et al. 2023) define the loss functions
based on the difference between the predicted segmentation
masks and ground truths, and have no explicit way to optimize the number of user clicks. Some studies (?Chen et al.
2022) use a refinement of initial predictions to enhance the
quality of outputs. These techniques necessitate additional
trainable network modules to identify and fine-grind the local areas in the predicted masks, which increases the difficulty of training. In this paper, we put forward an Iterative
Click Loss (ICL) that imposes penalties on instances with
a large number of clicks. We present a novel strategy for
refinement during inference time, named Cascade-Forward
Refinement (CFR). The CFR is designed to improve segmentation details during the inference process, without the
need for an additional network. Also, we disclose an effective image augmentation technique - SUEM Copy-Paste
(C&P). This technique is an extension of the Simple CopyPaste (Ghiasi et al. 2021) method, specifically designed for
interactive image segmentation tasks. The contributions of
this work are summarized below.

The click-based interactive segmentation aims to extract the
object of interest from an image with the guidance of user
clicks. Recent work has achieved great overall performance
by employing feedback from the output. However, in most
state-of-the-art approaches, 1) the inference stage involves
inflexible heuristic rules and requires a separate refinement
model, and 2) the number of user clicks and model performance cannot be balanced. To address the challenges,
we propose a click-based and mask-guided interactive image segmentation framework containing three novel components: Cascade-Forward Refinement (CFR), Iterative Click
Loss (ICL), and SUEM image augmentation. The CFR offers a unified inference framework to generate segmentation
results in a coarse-to-fine manner. The proposed ICL allows
model training to improve segmentation and reduce user interactions simultaneously. The proposed SUEM augmentation is a comprehensive way to create large and diverse training sets for interactive image segmentation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of the
proposed approach on five public datasets. Remarkably, our
model reduces by 33.2%, and 15.5% the number of clicks required to surpass an IoU of 0.95 in the previous state-of-theart approach on the Berkeley and DAVIS sets, respectively.

Introduction
Interactive image segmentation extracts object(s) of interest from images with user input. It is essential for enabling
the broader application of deep learning-based solutions in
real-world scenarios. Deep neural networks (DNNs) often
require extensive annotated data, which could be extremely
expensive and time-consuming to create due to high labor
costs. Interactive segmentation offers a more cost-effective
solution for generating large-scale labeled datasets.
Interactions in interactive segmentation include scribbles
(Xian et al. 2016b), boxes (Lempitsky et al. 2009), and
clicks (Xian et al. 2016a). This work focuses on the clickbased approach, whereby the user provides positive and negative clicks on the image to identify foreground and background regions, respectively. Earlier click-based methods
were developed using image processing techniques, such as
the connectedness-based approach described in (Xian et al.

• To the best of our knowledge, the proposed Iterative
Click Loss is the first loss that encodes the number of
clicks to train a model for interactive segmentation; and
it offers a novel approach to define preference on models
with fewer user clicks.
• The proposed Cascade-Forward Refinement enhances
the segmentation quality during inference in a simple and
unified framework and can be applied to other iterative
mask-guided interactive segmentation models.
• In the proposed SUEM augmentation, we propose a set
of four copy-paste augmentation approaches that greatly
improve the diversity and increase the size of training sets
in practical settings.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5017

