The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhance Sketch Recognition’s Explainability via Semantic Component-Level
Parsing
Guangming Zhu1,2,3 , Siyuan Wang1 , Tianci Wu1 , Liang Zhang1,2,3,∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
Key Laboratory of Smart Human-Computer Interaction and Wearable Technology of Shaanxi Province
3
Xi’an Key Laboratory of Intelligent Software Engineering
gmzhu@xidian.edu.cn, siyuanwang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, 22031212495@stu.xidian.edu.cn, liangzhang@xidian.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has become a
hot research topic to explain models’ decision (Ramaswamy
et al. 2020; Shitole et al. 2021; Garau et al. 2022). Visualizing the activation maps of deep neural networks is widely
used in computer vision. However, sketch images composed
of stroke lines without textures, are different from natural
images. This means that the existing XAI methods cannot be applied directly in the sketch research field. A first
look at explainability for human sketches was achieved by
SketchXAI using the counterfactual explanation (Qu et al.
2023). The stroke location inversion module in SketchXAI
offers an explainability angle to sketch in terms of asking a
network how well it can recover stroke locations of an unseen sketch. Liu et al. developed an image classifier explanation model using the counterfactual maps, in which the
counterfactual map generator module is used to identify the
critical structures for the specific category (Liu et al. 2023).
Counterfactual explanation (CE), as a post-hoc explainability method, aims to identify what are the minimal input changes for a model to make a different visual decision (Van Looveren and Klaise 2021). SketchXAI (Qu et al.
2023) used CE to relocate reshuffled strokes to construct a
sketch given a category, while Liu et al. designed a counterfactual map generator to discover the stroke-level principal
components for a specific category (Liu et al. 2023). The
above two methods try to explain the question of “why the
sketch is classified as X” by providing positive and negative
semantic explanation evidences. However, we believe that
the concurrence and layout of the intrinsic semantic components of a category can be a crucial evidence to explain
the question from another perspective. For example, taking
into consideration the common knowledge that an airplane
should at least have a fuselage and wings, if a sketch is composed of strokes which can be semantically grouped into a
fuselage and wings, it probably is an airplane. As to the analysis above, we propose to enhance sketch recognition’s explainability via semantic component-level parsing.
Specifically, a Semantic Component-level Memory
(SCM) module is constructed, whose memory keys represent the semantic components of different sketch categories. The SCM module is embedded in a Structured
Sketch Recognition (SSR) network, and evolves the stroke
features based on the similarity with the learnable features
of memory keys. The fused stroke-level or component-level

Free-hand sketches are appealing for humans as a universal
tool to depict the visual world. Humans can recognize varied
sketches of a category easily by identifying the concurrence
and layout of the intrinsic semantic components of the category, since humans draw free-hand sketches based a common
consensus that which types of semantic components constitute each sketch category. For example, an airplane should at
least have a fuselage and wings. Based on this analysis, a semantic component-level memory module is constructed and
embedded in the proposed structured sketch recognition network in this paper. The memory keys representing semantic
components of each sketch category can be self-learned and
enhance the recognition network’s explainability. Our proposed networks can deal with different situations of sketch
recognition, i.e., with or without semantic components labels
of strokes. Experiments on the SPG and SketchIME datasets
demonstrate the memory module’s flexibility and the recognition network’s explainability. The code and data are available
at https://github.com/GuangmingZhu/SketchESC.

Introduction
Free-hand sketch is a universal tool to depict the visual
world, and it is not bound by age, race, language, geography,
or national boundaries. Sketch images are highly sparse, abstract and lack of background. Sketch can be regarded as
an expression of the human brain’s internal representation
of the visual world (Xu et al. 2022). Humans can recognize
sketches and identify the intrinsic semantic components easily, even sketches of the same category drawn by different
persons may be very different in appearance.
Sketch can be represented as an image in the static pixel
space, as a time series in the dynamic stroke coordinate
space, or as a graph in the geometric graph space. This results in various Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), and Graph Neural Network
(GNN) based methods for sketch recognition (Zhang et al.
2019; Xu et al. 2022). These methods usually take image- or
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG)- format data as input, and
predict the category label for a given sketch sample. However, there is lacking of work on interpreting the reason of
giving such predictions.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7731

