The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RRL: Recommendation Reverse Learning
Xiaoyu You, Jianwei Xu, Mi Zhang* , Zechen Gao, Min Yang*
Fudan University
17212010047@fudan.edu.cn, 21210240379@m.fudan.edu.cn, mi zhang@fudan.edu.cn,
22210240151@m.fudan.edu.cn, m yang@fudan.edu.cn,

Abstract
As societies become increasingly aware of data privacy, regulations require that private information about users must
be removed from both database and ML models, which is
more colloquially called ‘the right to be forgotten‘. Such privacy problems of recommendation systems, which hold large
amounts of private data, are drawing increasing attention. Recent research suggests dividing the preference data into multiple shards and training submodels with these shards and
forgetting users’ personal preference data by retraining the
submodels of marked shards. Despite the computational efficiency development compared with retraining from scratch,
the overall recommendation performance deteriorates after
dividing the shards because the collaborative information
contained in the training data is broken. In this paper, we
aim to propose a forgetting framework for recommendation
models that neither separate the training data nor jeopardizes
the recommendation performance, named Recommendation
Reverse Learning (RRL). Given the trained recommendation
model and marked preference data, we devise Reverse BPR
Objective (RPR Objective) to fine-tune the recommendation
model to force it to forget the marked data. As the recommendation model encodes the complex collaborative information
among users, we propose to utilize Fisher Information Matrix
(FIM) to estimate the influence of reverse learning on other
users’ collaborative information and guide the updates of representations. We conduct experiments on two representative
recommendation models and three public benchmark datasets
to verify the efficiency of RRL. For the forgetting completeness, we use RRL to make the recommendation model poisoned by shilling attacks forget malicious users.

Figure 1: Overview of existing two types of forgetting

marked interactions (1) Retrain-based approaches and
(2) Reverse Learning.

Recommender systems play an essential role in a variety
of real-world applications such as social media (Song et al.
2021; Wu et al. 2022), e-market (He et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2019; Wu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020) and etc. Recommender systems are composed of collected interactions (e.g.,
clicks, likes, and buys) and recommendation models, where
the personalized recommendation services are the prediction results of recommendation models learned from the historical interactions (He et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019). To

provide accurate recommendation services, existing recommendation models rely on collaborative filtering to reconstruct the historical interactions based on the embeddings
of users and items. In the face of demands for privacy, data
protection regulations2 require systems gleaning private data
like recommendation systems must allow users to eliminate
their private data from not only the database but also the
recommendation model, which is termed recommendation
unlearning (Chen et al. 2022a).
Recently, recommendation unlearning approaches, which
aim to eliminate the influence of marked interactions from
recommendation models, become a popular research topic
(Chen et al. 2022a; Bourtoule et al. 2021). The naive way
to achieve this is to remove the marked interactions from
the historical interactions and retrain the recommendation
model from scratch, which is computationally expensive Recently, some studies propose to split the historical interactions into several shards and train a submodel on each shard
(Chen et al. 2022a; Bourtoule et al. 2021). When the deletion requirement comes, the corresponding submodel will
be retrained from scratch. Finally, the predictions of all
submodels will be aggregated to provide the recommendation services. We refer to this kind of unlearning approach
as retrain-based unlearning. Despite that retrain-based approaches guarantee the enforcement of deletion and unlearning efficiency, the recommendation performance dete-

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2
CCPA in California, GDPR in Europe, PIPEDA in Canada,
LGPD in Brazil, and NDBS in Australia.

Introduction

9296

