The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Learning on Graphs: A Data-Centric Exploration
Wei Jin
Emory University
wei.jin@emory.edu

As powerful deep learning tools for graph data, graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in various applications. Despite the significant accomplishments of GNNs, recent studies have highlighted
that their efficiency and effectiveness face significant challenges, which are fundamentally linked to data. To address
the data-related issues, I developed a set of techniques to
optimize the graph datasets for training GNNs. My research
contributions can be summarized as follows.
Securing GNNs from a Data-Centric View. Despite the
prosperity of GNNs, they have also exposed critical vulnerabilities as summarized in my survey paper (Jin et al. 2021).
Concretely, an attacker can inject a small perturbation to
the input graph, which is referred to as adversarial attack,
and mislead the GNN model into giving wrong predictions.
The lack of robustness can lead to severe consequences
for safety-critical applications such as financial systems and
risk management. I proposed ProGNN (Jin et al. 2020) for
learning to optimize the graph to counteract adversarial attacks, which iteratively optimizes the noisy graph by restoring the violated graph properties. Different from ProGNN
which targets defending training-time attacks, I proposed
GTrans (Jin et al. 2023) to counteract test-time attacks by
transforming the graph structure as well as node features
to remove adversarial patterns. To deepen our understanding and immensely foster the research field of robust graph
representation learning, I developed DeepRobust (Li et al.
2021), a comprehensive Python toolkit for generating adversarial attacks and building robust models. My other research
works (Dai et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021) in this direction have
also tremendously promoted the reliability of GNNs and facilitated safety-critical applications.
Scaling up GNNs from a Data-Centric View. As largescale graphs are prevalent in real-world scenarios (often on
the scale of millions of nodes and edges), it poses significant challenges in storing datasets and training GNNs on
them. To tackle these issues, I proposed GCond (Jin et al.
2022b), the first approach for synthesizing a small but informative graph with which we can train machine learning models sufficiently and efficiently. Remarkably, we are
able to reduce the graph size by 99.9% while approximating
the original test accuracy by 99.8%. However, its conden-

sation process in GCond is computationally expensive as it
requires multiple steps of gradient matching. Further, I proposed DosCond (Jin et al. 2022a) to address this limitation
and facilitate graph condensation in large datasets by performing gradient matching for one single step.
GNNs for Interdisciplinary Research. I have integrated
data-centric approaches with model-centric approaches to
benefit interdisciplinary research, where I constructed graph
data from the raw data in other fields and carefully designed
graph ML models for them, including single-cell analysis (Wen et al. 2022), traffic forecasting (Wang et al. 2020),
and e-commerce platform (Fan et al. 2022).

References
Dai, E.; Jin, W.; Liu, H.; and Wang, S. 2022. Towards robust
graph neural networks for noisy graphs with sparse labels.
In WSDM.
Fan, W.; Liu, X.; Jin, W.; Zhao, X.; Tang, J.; and Li, Q. 2022.
Graph Trend Filtering Networks for Recommendation. In
SIGIR.
Jin, W.; Li, Y.; Xu, H.; Wang, Y.; Ji, S.; Aggarwal, C.; and
Tang, J. 2021. Adversarial attacks and defenses on graphs.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, (2).
Jin, W.; Ma, Y.; Liu, X.; Tang, X.; Wang, S.; and Tang, J.
2020. Graph Structure Learning for Robust Graph Neural
Networks. In KDD.
Jin, W.; Tang, X.; Jiang, H.; Li, Z.; Zhang, D.; Tang, J.; and
Yin, B. 2022a. Condensing graphs via one-step gradient
matching. In KDD.
Jin, W.; Zhao, L.; Zhang, S.; Liu, Y.; Tang, J.; and Shah, N.
2022b. Graph Condensation for Graph Neural Networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Jin, W.; Zhao, T.; Ding, J.; Liu, Y.; Tang, J.; and Shah, N.
2023. Empowering Graph Representation Learning with
Test-Time Graph Transformation. In ICLR.
Li, Y.; Jin, W.; Xu, H.; and Tang, J. 2021. Deeprobust: a
platform for adversarial attacks and defenses. In AAAI.
Liu, X.; Jin, W.; Ma, Y.; Li, Y.; Liu, H.; Wang, Y.; Yan, M.;
and Tang, J. 2021. Elastic Graph Neural Networks. In ICML.
Wang, X.; Ma, Y.; Wang, Y.; Jin, W.; Wang, X.; Tang, J.;
Jia, C.; and Yu, J. 2020. Traffic Flow Prediction via Spatial
Temporal Graph Neural Network. In WWW.
Wen, H.; Ding, J.; Jin, W.; Wang, Y.; Xie, Y.; and Tang, J.
2022. Graph neural networks for multimodal single-cell data
integration. In KDD.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22671

