The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Monocular 3D Hand Mesh Recovery via Dual Noise Estimation
Hanhui Li1 , Xiaojian Lin1 , Xuan Huang1 , Zejun Yang2 , Zhisheng Wang2 , Xiaodan Liang1, 3 *
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent, Shenzhen, China
3
DarkMatter AI Research, Guangzhou, China
lihh77@sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract

Non-parametric hand models (Lin, Wang, and Liu
2021a,b; Lin et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2023) seem to be a possible solution for the above issues. With the powerful representation learning ability (Tian et al. 2023), current nonparametric methods can predict mesh vertices directly. This
provides great flexibility and in practice methods of this type
usually yield better performance, compared with parametric models. However, without leveraging the hand structural
prior, these methods are prone to producing severe artifacts
and broken meshes.
It is natural to consider combining parametric models and
non-parametric models to leverage the structural advantages
of the former and the flexibility of the latter. Methods belonging to this paradigm (Tang, Wang, and Fu 2021; Li
et al. 2022a; Ren et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023b; Moon 2023)
have been proposed recently. However, as far as we are concerned, most current methods seek a deterministic manner,
such as predicting the deviations of vertices and parameters
(Tang, Wang, and Fu 2021). This makes them hard to explore the solution space thoroughly. Note that recovering 3D
hand meshes from monocular images is an ill-posed problem, which means multiple meshes can be associated with
the same 2D observation. Therefore, a deterministic model
may be ineffective to tackle this task.
To tackle the above issues, we propose to tackle monocular hand mesh recovery in a probabilistic framework. Particularly, given a monocular input image, we adopt an offthe-shelf parametric model as the baseline to obtain the
coarse hand meshes. We then refine the coarse hand meshes
by jointly estimating the noise of vertices and their imageplane projections, since they are highly related. We design
a progressive framework to do so, in which image-aligned
features are leveraged to estimate the parameters governing the noise distributions. With the estimated distributions,
we adopt the reparameterization trick to generate multiple
samples and estimate their confidence. In this way, we can
leverage the sample with the highest confidence to optimize
the hand vertices and their projections. Moreover, given the
refined vertices and their 2D coordinates, we also propose
a closed-form solution to refine camera parameters. Consequently, our method can generate hand meshes that are
aligned with images well. Our experiments on the Interhand2.6M dataset show that the proposed method can boost
the quality of the coarse meshes significantly, and achieve

Current parametric models have made notable progress in
3D hand pose and shape estimation. However, due to the
fixed hand topology and complex hand poses, current models are hard to generate meshes that are aligned with the
image well. To tackle this issue, we introduce a dual noise
estimation method in this paper. Given a single-view image
as input, we first adopt a baseline parametric regressor to
obtain the coarse hand meshes. We assume the mesh vertices and their image-plane projections are noisy, and can
be associated in a unified probabilistic model. We then learn
the distributions of noise to refine mesh vertices and their
projections. The refined vertices are further utilized to refine camera parameters in a closed-form manner. Consequently, our method obtains well-aligned and high-quality 3D
hand meshes. Extensive experiments on the large-scale Interhand2.6M dataset demonstrate that the proposed method not
only improves the performance of its baseline by more than
10% but also achieves state-of-the-art performance. Project
page: https://github.com/hanhuili/DNE4Hand.

Introduction
Recent advances in parametric human models (Pavlakos
et al. 2019) have facilitated human-centric applications, such
as artificial intelligence generated content, human avatars,
and virtual talking heads. With parametric models like
(Romero, Tzionas, and Black 2017), reconstructing 3D hand
meshes from images becomes plausible and convenient.
This attracts considerable attention and extensive research
has been conducted to improve the accuracy and speed of
the parametric model fitting process (Zhang et al. 2021; Yu
et al. 2023a; Meng et al. 2022; Moon 2023; Li et al. 2022b;
Chen et al. 2022a).
Nevertheless, reconstructing well-aligned hand meshes
from single-view images is still challenging because of the
following two reasons: (i) Challenging factors like depth
ambiguity, self/inter-hand occlusions, and complicated hand
motions hinder estimation accuracy. (ii) Even worse, the predefined hand topology in parametric models further restricts
hand mesh deformations, and consequently the parametric
models are not flexible enough to represent various hands.
* Xiaodan Liang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3046

