The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MindMap: Constructing Evidence Chains for Multi-Step Reasoning in Large
Language Models
Yangyu Wu1 , Xu Han1 * , Wei Song1 , Miaomiao Cheng1 , Fei Li2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Electronic System Reliability Technology,
College of Information Engineering, Capital Normal University, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{wu, hanxu, wsong, miaomiao}@cnu.edu.cn
lifei csnlp@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

Mary

John

Daniel

Fact 0

Fact 1

Fact 2

Facts:
Fact 3
Fact 4
Fact 5
t=0 Mary took the football there.
Fact 6
Fact 7
Fact 8
t=1 John travelled to the office.
t=2 Mary travelled to the hallway.
t=3 Daniel moved to the hallway.
Evidence Chain Construction
t=4 Daniel went to the office.
t=5 John went to the hallway.
Fact 0
Fact 1
Fact 3
t=6 John discarded the apple.
t=7 Mary went back to the garden.
Fact 2
Fact 5
Fact 4
t=8 Daniel went to the bedroom.
Fact 7
Fact 8
Fact 6
Question:
Where was the football before the
Evidence Chain Summarization
garden?
Ground Truth:
hallway
Chain 0 Chain 1 Chain 2
Chains:
chain-0: Mary passed through
Evidence Chain Utilization
the hallway(t=2), garden(t=7) in
Reasoning
sequence with football.
Question
framework Select
chain-1: John passed through
(CoT,SI,...)
the office(t=1), hallway(t=5) in
sequence with apple.
Chain 0
chain-2: Daniel passed through
the hallway(t=3), office(t=4),
Answer: hallway
bedroom(t=8) in sequence.

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, they encounter significant challenges in automated reasoning, especially in multi-step reasoning scenarios. In order to solve complex reasoning problems, LLMs need to perform faithful multi-step reasoning
based on a given set of facts and rules. A lot of work has
focused on guiding LLMs to think logically by generating
reasoning paths, but ignores the relationship among available
facts. In this paper, we introduce MindMap, a straightforward yet powerful approach for constructing evidence chains
to support reasoning in LLMs. An evidence chain refers to
a set of facts that are associated with the same subject. In
this way, we can organize related facts together to avoid
missing relevant information. MindMap can seamlessly integrate with existing reasoning frameworks, such as Chain-ofThought (CoT) and Selection-Inference (SI), by enabling the
model to generate and select relevant evidence chains from
independent facts. The experimental results on the bAbI and
ProofWriterOWA datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
MindMap. Our approach can significantly enhance the performance of CoT and SI, particularly in multi-step reasoning
tasks.

Introduction

Figure 1: Illustrating the working flow of the proposed
MindMap approach based on an example from the bAbI
dataset.

The pursuit of general artificial intelligence has remained a
central objective within the realm of artificial intelligence
research (Silver et al. 2021; Goertzel and Pennachin 2007).
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advancements in
Natural Language Processing (NLP), largely attributing to
the emergence of large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang
et al. 2022). These models have exhibited exceptional efficacy across diverse tasks including machine translation,
question answering, and reading comprehension (Yang et al.
2023; Bang et al. 2023). The strategic expansion of language model scale yields tangible improvements across various problem domains, with task performance exhibiting positive correlations with model size (Creswell, Shanahan, and
Higgins 2023). However, a study pointed that the benefits of
scaling up are significantly reduced when dealing with complex problems (Rae et al. 2021). Particularly, the enhanced

advantages of these models in tasks that involve sophisticated logical reasoning are less evident compared to other
tasks (Wei et al. 2022).
Logical reasoning is essential for advancing various scientific fields (Liu et al. 2020). It involves deducing new conclusions from existing facts and rules. For instance, with
facts like “David picked up the apple” and “David went to
the bedroom,”, deducing the apple’s location being in the
bedroom is a logical process. Such reasoning challenges
often require multiple steps to be executed effectively to
complete the reasoning process (Saparov and He 2023).
Although LLMs shows good ability in learning from instructions and demonstrations in context to answer questions (Brown et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2023; Min et al.
2022), they struggle with complex logical reasoning, espe-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19270

