The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reinforced Adaptive Knowledge Learning for Multimodal Fake News Detection
Litian Zhang1 * , Xiaoming Zhang1† , Ziyi Zhou1 , Feiran Huang2 , Chaozhuo Li3 *
1

Beihang University,
2
Jinan University,
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{litianzhang, yolixs, hanlinfeng, ziyizhou}@buaa.edu.cn, huangfr@jnu.edu.cn, lichaozhuobupt@163.com

Donald Trump’s defamation
lawsuit dismissed in Florida.

Abstract
Nowadays, detecting multimodal fake news has emerged as
a foremost concern since the widespread dissemination of
fake news may incur adverse societal impact. Conventional
methods generally focus on capturing the linguistic and visual
semantics within the multimodal content, which fall short
in effectively distinguishing the heightened level of meticulous fabrications. Recently, external knowledge is introduced
to provide valuable background facts as complementary to
facilitate news detection. Nevertheless, existing knowledgeenhanced endeavors directly incorporate all knowledge contexts through static entity embeddings, resulting in the potential noisy and content-irrelevant knowledge. Moreover, the integration of knowledge entities makes it intractable to model
the sophisticated correlations between multimodal semantics
and knowledge entities. In light of these limitations, we propose a novel Adaptive Knowledge-Aware Fake News Detection model, dubbed AKA-Fake. For each news, AKA-Fake
learns a compact knowledge subgraph under a reinforcement
learning paradigm, which consists of a subset of entities and
contextual neighbors in the knowledge graph, restoring the
most informative knowledge facts. A novel heterogeneous
graph learning module is further proposed to capture the reliable cross-modality correlations via topology refinement and
modality-attentive pooling. Our proposal is extensively evaluated over three popular datasets, and experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of AKA-Fake.

1

…

Entity
Link

REAL

Trump claimed that the
network's referring to
his efforts to U.S.
president election in
2020 as “The Big Lie”.
…

U.S. President Donald Trump FAKE
signed the Paris Agreement.

U.S.
President Position

Donald Trump, along with
more than 170 leaders,
signed the Paris Agreement,
promising to rein in global
temperature increases.
Entity
Link

Joe
Agreement on
Biden
Climate Change
Previous Position
Sign Description
US 2020
U.S. News
election
…
Channel Report
Candidacy
in
Paris
Report
Abort Agreement
Author
Lawsuit
Event

CNN

Founder

Ted
Turner

…

…

Donald
Trump

Residence
Place of Birth
Date of Birth
Trump
Tower
New
1946
York

…

…

Location
Paris

United
Nations
…

Figure 1: Adaptive knowledge for fake news detection.
Existing detection methods generally focus on capturing the semantics within the news content. Traditional textbased models (Jin et al. 2016; Liu and Wu 2018; Ma, Gao,
and Wong 2019) solely rely on modeling the textual linguistic features to make decisions. Multimodal learning models
(Chen et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2022; Tseng et al. 2022) are further introduced to capture both linguistic and visual features,
achieving promising advancements by integrating multiple
modalities. In order to evade identification from advanced
detection models, recent fake news is commonly characterized by a heightened level of meticulous fabrication, rendering it indistinguishable from real news in terms of content
patterns (e.g., writing style) (Hu et al. 2021). In response to
these emerging challenges, external knowledge is introduced
as the complementary, offering reliable factual signals. For
example, as shown in the Fig. 1, it is intractable to filter the
fake news without the external knowledge “Trump aborted
the Pairs Agreement”. In a nutshell, both external common
knowledge and multimodal news content are indispensable
for the successful detection of fake news.
Existing knowledge-enhanced detection methods generally follow the static knowledge-context modeling paradigm
(Dun et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2021; Tseng et al. 2022). Entities
within the external knowledge graph (KG) (e.g., WikiData)
are first encoded into low-dimensional static embeddings via
knowledge graph embedding (KGE) (e.g., TransE (Bordes
et al. 2013)). For each input news, the entities mentioned
in the news are linked to their corresponding entities in the
knowledge graph, and the learned entity embeddings are further incorporated as the complementary features. Nonethe-

Introduction

The rapid development of social media has facilitated news
to be easily accessible, cost-effective, and quickly disseminated in a multimodal form (Khattar et al. 2019). Compared with traditional textual news, multimodal news integrating with images or videos is capable of providing more
compelling and enhanced reading experiences (Wang et al.
2018). On the other side of the coin, multimodal contents
are more vulnerable to malicious fabrications (e.g., misrepresented or forged images), leading to the rapid dissemination of fake news (Khattar et al. 2019). Therefore, it is urgent
to automatically identify the credibility of news to alleviate
the risk caused by spreading fake news.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Xiaoming Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16777

