The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hardness of Random Reordered Encodings of Parity for Resolution and CDCL
Leroy Chew1 , Alexis de Colnet1 , Friedrich Slivovsky2 , Stefan Szeider1
1

2

Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
{lchew,decolnet,sz}@ac.tuwien.ac.at, f.slivovsky@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract

also every resolution refutation can be followed completely
by a CDCL algorithm (with a few non-deterministic choices)
to return UNSAT (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2011). Lower
bounds on the length of resolution proof of unsatisfiability have been shown for pure XOR problems structured by
graphs and represented in CNF formulas called Tseitin formulas (Tseitin 1983; Urquhart 1987). Finding a complete
characterization of hard Tseitin formulas for resolution is
still an open problem. However, exponential lower bounds
for resolution are known under the suitable condition: that
their underlying graphs have high linear treewidth (a graph
invariant that measures how close a graph is to being a tree).
The relationship between treewidth and proof length has
been extensively studied for Tseitin formulas already (BenSasson and Wigderson 2001; Galesi, Talebanfard, and Torán
2020; Itsykson, Riazanov, and Smirnov 2022).
Here, we look at some XOR-constraint problems that are
strikingly simple to define and whose hardness for resolution
was observed empirically but yet to be understood theoretically (Chew and Heule 2020). We prove that they are, in
fact, families of Tseitin formulas and that linear treewidth
emerges for almost all of them, thus showing asymptotic exponential lower bounds for resolution. Furthermore, our experiments suggest that this is not just theoretical and asymptotic for proof systems; treewidth indeed correlates to the
solving time of CDCL solvers on these families. In the rest
of this section, we present the problems and our results.

Parity reasoning is challenging for Conflict-Driven Clause
Learning (CDCL) SAT solvers. This has been observed even
for simple formulas encoding two contradictory parity constraints with different variable orders (Chew and Heule 2020).
We provide an analytical explanation for their hardness by
showing that they require exponential resolution refutations
with high probability when the variable order is chosen at
random. We obtain this result by proving that these formulas,
which are known to be Tseitin formulas, have Tseitin graphs
of linear treewidth with high probability. Since such Tseitin
formulas require exponential resolution proofs, our result follows. We generalize this argument to a new class of formulas that capture a basic form of parity reasoning involving a
sum of two random parity constraints with random orders.
Even when the variable order for the sum is chosen favorably, these formulas remain hard for resolution. In contrast,
we prove that they have short DRAT refutations. We show
experimentally that the running time of CDCL SAT solvers
on both classes of formulas grows exponentially with their
treewidth.

Introduction
SAT solvers, including Conflict-Driven Clause-Learning
(CDCL) solvers, can solve practical problems with millions
of variables (Marques-Silva, Lynce, and Malik 2009; Fichte
et al. 2023), but on the other hand, can struggle with basic mathematical principles. The Handbook of Satisfiability (Biere et al. 2021, Section 9.6.1) lists one such example: the problem of XOR (exclusive-or) constraints, which
is equivalent to the parity problem of summation modulo 2. XOR-constraints serve practical purposes, particularly
around modern cryptographical and cryptonanalytical problems. Provably hard XOR problems are usually constructed
over complex structures such as expander graphs (Urquhart
1987; Ben-Sasson and Wigderson 2001), but much simpler
problems involving only two constraints were found experimentally hard for CDCL (Chew and Heule 2020) and, up until this paper, were not matched with a corresponding lower
bound in resolution.
Resolution is particularly important here because the relationship with CDCL solving is two-way; CDCL runs of unsatisfiable instances can be output as resolution proofs, but

Problem 1: Reordered Parity
The standard linear CNF encoding of an XOR-constraint
over n propositional variables splits the constraint into a
sequence of XORs of size 3 according to an ordering of
its variables (Biere et al. 2021, Section 2.2.5). The encoding uses one auxiliary variable for every k < n to store
the parity of the first k variables. The simplest form of
the XOR-constraint problem starts with two opposite XORconstraints and their standard linear CNF encodings where
the n variables appear in a different order given by the permutation σ. The two CNF are saying the sum of the n variables is both odd and even, so their conjunction—denoted by
rPar(n, σ)—is a contradiction a SAT solver should be able
to recognize.
Chew and Heule (2020) showed that these problems could
be proven false by O(n log n)-size DRAT proofs even with-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7978

