The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Gate MLP with Protein Complex Invariant Embedding Is a One-Shot
Antibody Designer
Cheng Tan1,2 * , Zhangyang Gao1,2 * , Lirong Wu1,2 , Jun Xia1,2 , Jiangbin Zheng1,2 , Xihong Yang3 ,
Yue Liu3 , Bozhen Hu1,2 , Stan Z. Li2†
2

1
Zhejiang University
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
3
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
tancheng@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

and protection against future exposure to the same antigen (Maynard and Georgiou 2000; Akbar et al. 2022a). The
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) are parts of
the variable domains of the antibody chains that vary and
form the antigen-binding site that defines the specificity of
the antibody (Kuroda et al. 2012). CDRs play a critical
role in the recognition and binding of antigens by antibodies (Tiller and Tessier 2015).
Early works on antibody design focus on generating
the sequences of CDRs without the corresponding structures (Saka et al. 2021; Alley et al. 2019; Shin et al. 2021),
while a recent work (Jin et al. 2022) proposes a novel approach called RefineGNN, which enables the co-design of
both the sequences and structures of antibody CDRs. DiffAb (Luo et al. 2022) proposes generating antibodies with
high affinity to given antigen structures. MEAN (Kong,
Huang, and Liu 2023a) further involves the light chain context information as a conditional input to generate CDRs.
However, as more conditional contexts are introduced, designed models struggle to adequately capture the complex
interactions between complementarity-determining regions
(CDRs) and context information. This is due to an insufficient geometric modeling approach, which relies solely on
considering the Cα atoms or orientations in each residue.

Antibodies are crucial proteins produced by the immune system in response to foreign substances or antigens. The specificity of an antibody is determined by its complementaritydetermining regions (CDRs), which are located in the variable domains of the antibody chains and form the antigenbinding site. Previous studies have utilized complex techniques to generate CDRs, but they suffer from inadequate
geometric modeling. Moreover, the common iterative refinement strategies lead to an inefficient inference. In this paper,
we propose a simple yet effective model that can co-design 1D
sequences and 3D structures of CDRs in a one-shot manner.
To achieve this, we decouple the antibody CDR design problem into two stages: (i) geometric modeling of protein complex structures and (ii) sequence-structure co-learning. We
develop a novel macromolecular structure invariant embedding, typically for protein complexes, that captures both intraand inter-component interactions among the backbone atoms,
including Cα, N, C, and O atoms, to achieve comprehensive
geometric modeling. Then, we introduce a simple cross-gate
MLP for sequence-structure co-learning, allowing sequence
and structure representations to implicitly refine each other.
This enables our model to design desired sequences and structures in a one-shot manner. Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate our results at both the sequence and structure levels, which demonstrate that our model achieves superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art antibody
CDR design methods.

Backbone with C𝛼 atoms only
Antibody-heavy chain
Antibody-light chain
Antigen

Introduction
Antibodies are essential proteins that the immune system
makes to fight foreign substances, or antigens (Raybould
et al. 2019; Kong, Huang, and Liu 2023b; Shi et al. 2022).
They have a Y-shape with two arms that can attach to specific antigens, such as bacteria. Once an antibody binds to
an antigen, it marks the antigen for destruction by other
cells in the immune system (Basu et al. 2019). The ability of antibodies to recognize and bind to antigens is crucial for the immune system’s defense against infections

Backbone with full atoms

* These authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: The backbone comprised solely of Cα atoms provides a reduced amount of information compared to the
backbone consisting of all atoms.

†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15222

