The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fusing Conditional Submodular GAN and Programmatic Weak Supervision
Kumar Shubham, Pranav Sastry, Prathosh AP
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
shubhamkuma3@iisc.ac.in, pranavsastry@iisc.ac.in, prathosh@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

generate inexpensive but potentially noisy class labels for
downstream tasks. These methods use an alternative source
of information to assign labels to the training data and thus
avoid the need for extensive manual annotation. However,
the pseudo labels generated by such methods are often noisy
in nature and can have a detrimental impact on downstream
performance.
Programmatic weak supervision (Zhang et al. 2022a; Ratner et al. 2016, 2020) addresses this issue by combining
the prediction of multiple such noisy sources of labels often known as label functions (LFs) systematically. In PWS,
a label model is trained to combine the prediction of these
label functions to estimate the unobserved ground truth label for a given training sample. The generated pseudo label
is then used for downstream training. For a given set of label functions, the quality of the pseudo label is often determined by the performance of the label model. Various approaches have been suggested to effectively train the label
model (Zhang et al. 2022a) without knowing the underlying ground truth class labels. While approaches like (Ratner
et al. 2016, 2020, 2019; Fu et al. 2020) use only the prediction of label functions to estimate the pseudo label, encoderbased label models also consider data features to estimate
pseudo labels (Cachay et al. 2021; Boecking et al. 2023).
Recently, Boecking et al. (2023) proposed WSGAN, a
novel training strategy to efficiently generate pseudo labels
for a given image dataset. Their approach combines InfoGAN with an encoder-based label model (Cachay et al.
2021). The key idea is to train both InfoGAN (Chen et al.
2016) and label model simultaneously and leverage the disentangled latent factors learned by InfoGAN to align the label model’s predictions. This training process offers several
advantages. The synchronized training of the label model
and InfoGAN allows the efficient utilization of the disentangled latent factors of InfoGAN for the training of the label model. Simultaneously, the pseudo labels generated by
the label model facilitate the generation of class-conditioned
images, which can benefit downstream tasks as an additional
form of data augmentation.
Nevertheless, the implementation of such a training process presents several challenges. The disentangled latent
representation of InfoGAN is learned by maximizing the
mutual information between the discrete conditional input and the generated images. However, the representations

Programmatic Weak Supervision (PWS) and generative models serve as crucial tools that enable researchers to maximize
the utility of existing datasets without resorting to laborious
data gathering and manual annotation processes. PWS uses
various weak supervision techniques to estimate the underlying class labels of data, while generative models primarily
concentrate on sampling from the underlying distribution of
the given dataset. Although these methods have the potential to complement each other, they have mostly been studied
independently. Recently, WSGAN proposed a mechanism to
fuse these two models. Their approach utilizes the discrete
latent factors of InfoGAN to train the label model and leverages the class-dependent information of the label model to
generate images of specific classes. However, the disentangled latent factors learned by InfoGAN might not necessarily
be class-specific and could potentially affect the label model’s
accuracy. Moreover, prediction made by the label model is often noisy in nature and can have a detrimental impact on the
quality of images generated by GAN. In our work, we address
these challenges by (i) implementing a noise-aware classifier
using the pseudo labels generated by the label model (ii) utilizing the noise-aware classifier’s prediction to train the label
model and generate class-conditional images. Additionally,
we also investigate the effect of training the classifier with a
subset of the dataset within a defined uncertainty budget on
pseudo labels. We accomplish this by formalizing the subset
selection problem as a submodular maximization objective
with a knapsack constraint on the entropy of pseudo labels.
We conduct experiments on multiple datasets and demonstrate the efficacy of our methods on several tasks vis-a-vis
the current state-of-the-art methods. Our implementation is
available at https://github.com/kyrs/subpws-gan

Introduction
The success of many deep learning methods is often credited
to the availability of large amounts of labeled data (Deng
et al. 2009; Cao et al. 2018). However, labeling necessitates
manual annotation, which is a time-consuming and laborintensive process. Distant supervision or weak supervision
methods address this issue by using an external knowledge
base (Hoffmann et al. 2011), pre-trained models (Bach et al.
2019), and heuristics approaches (Awasthi et al. 2020) to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15020

