The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Complexity of Optimizing Atomic Congestion
Cornelius Brand1 , Robert Ganian2 , Subrahmanyam Kalyanasundaram3 , Fionn Mc Inerney2
1

Algorithms & Complexity Theory Group, Regensburg University, Germany
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Hyderabad, India
cornelius.brand@ur.de, rganian@gmail.com, subruk@cse.iith.ac.in, fmcinern@gmail.com

Abstract

time or resources required. The eponymous congestion enters the scene as follows: the cost accrued by a single agent
when traversing a link in the network depends on the number
of agents using that link, as described by the link’s latency
function. In essence, the latency function captures how the
cost of using each link changes depending on the number of
agents using it; depending on the context, more agents using a link could lead to each of them paying a greater cost
(e.g., when dealing with traffic congestion) or a lower cost
(e.g., when dealing with logistical supply chains), up to a
maximum capacity for that link.
It is well-known that selfish strategies in congestion
games may not lead to optimal outcomes for all agents, let
alone a system-optimal outcome1 (that is, one achieving the
minimum average cost) (Sharon et al. 2018). In fact, the
existence of Nash equilibria for these games was the seminal question investigated by Rosenthal (1973), and is still
of interest in economics and game theory today. Notably,
the price of anarchy for these games has by now been determined (Christodoulou and Koutsoupias 2005; Awerbuch,
Azar, and Epstein 2005). The price of anarchy in this context
is defined as the ratio
cost(S)
supS
,
(PoA)
cost(Ssys )

Atomic congestion games are a classic topic in network design, routing, and algorithmic game theory, and are capable of
modeling congestion and flow optimization tasks in various
application areas. While both the price of anarchy for such
games as well as the computational complexity of computing
their Nash equilibria are by now well-understood, the computational complexity of computing a system-optimal set of
strategies—that is, a centrally planned routing that minimizes
the average cost of agents—is severely understudied in the
literature. We close this gap by identifying the exact boundaries of tractability for the problem through the lens of the
parameterized complexity paradigm. After showing that the
problem remains highly intractable even on extremely simple
networks, we obtain a set of results which demonstrate that
the structural parameters which control the computational
(in)tractability of the problem are not vertex-separator based
in nature (such as, e.g., treewidth), but rather based on edge
separators. We conclude by extending our analysis towards
the (even more challenging) min-max variant of the problem.

1

Introduction

Congestion games are a by-now classic and widely studied
model of network resource sharing. Introduced by Rosenthal (1973), congestion games and their innumerable variants and extensions have been the focus of a vast body
of literature, spanning fields from algorithmic game theory (Cominetti et al. 2019) over routing (Kunniyur and
Srikant 2003) and network design (Anshelevich et al. 2004),
to diverse contexts within artificial intelligence (Ashlagi,
Monderer, and Tennenholtz 2007; Meir et al. 2012; Marchesi, Castiglioni, and Gatti 2019; Harks et al. 2022), both applied and theoretical.
The basic setup of congestion games comprises a
network—modeled as a directed graph—and a set of agents
that each have an origin and a destination (the setting where
there is an infinite number of agents and single agents are infinitesimally small is called non-atomic while here we focus
on the classic, atomic case, where agents are individual entities). The agents need to decide which routes to take in order
to reach their destination in a way that minimizes the cost of
their route, where the cost can capture, e.g., the amount of

where the supremum ranges over all Nash equilibria,
cost(S) is the cost of a set of strategies S for the agents,
and Ssys is a system optimum, minimizing the average cost
over all agents. In addition, the computational complexity of
computing Nash equilibria is equally well-studied (Ackermann, Röglin, and Vöcking 2006; Fabrikant, Papadimitriou,
and Talwar 2004); see also the many recent works on the
problem (Harks et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022).
While the price of anarchy defined in (PoA) as well as the
cost of Nash equilibria cost(S) (i.e., the numerator in (PoA))
have been extensively treated in the literature on congestion games, it may come as a surprise that, to the best of
our knowledge, almost nothing is known about the computational complexity of computing the denominator cost(Ssys )
of (PoA), that is, determining a system-optimal set of strategies for the players. Far from just an intellectual curiosity, applications, e.g., in road or internet traffic routing and

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In the literature, such outcomes are sometimes called the (social or collective) optimum.

20044

