The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RedCore: Relative Advantage Aware Cross-Modal Representation Learning
for Missing Modalities with Imbalanced Missing Rates
Jun Sun1 , Xinxin Zhang2 , Shoukang Han1 , Yu-Ping Ruan1 , Taihao Li1
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China
sunjun16sj@gmail.com, zhangxinxin221@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {hanshoukang, ypruan, lith}@zhejianglab.com
2

Abstract

phase, and thus suffers from considerable performance deterioration in practical scenarios where some modalities are
unavailable. In order to guarantee the reliability and safety
in practice, to develop multimodal models robust against
modality missing has raised widespread interest from industry and research communities (Tang and Liu 2022).
In the presence of missing modalities, popular studies
usually first conduct missing modality imputation before
further computations. Naive zero or mean value (Wen et al.
2021; Hu and Chen 2018) padding is of minimal exertion,
yet can be quite inaccurate. More advanced statistical techniques primarily rely on the nonparametric Bayesian approach (Manrique-Vallier and Reiter 2017), k-nearest neighbors (Jadhav, Pramod, and Ramanathan 2019), Gaussian
processes (Jafrasteh et al. 2023). Current prevalent models
building upon deep learning are more capable of exploring the correlation between modalities to impute the missing
ones. It is straightforward that generative methods like generative adversarial network (Yoon and Sull 2020) and variational autoencoder (Rezaei-Shoshtari et al. 2021), can be
applied to the reconstruction of missing modalities. Besides,
knowledge distillation can also be employed to predict the
information of missing modalities from a large model pretrained with large corpora of modality-complete data (Wang
et al. 2020; Wei, Luo, and Luo 2023).
According to whether all collected data is utilized for
training, current schemes can be categorized into two
regimes: 1) perfect data training (PDT) (Zhao, Li, and Jin
2021; Woo et al. 2023), where samples with missing modalities are discarded, and only the complete samples are used
for model training; and 2) imperfect data training (IDT)(Ma
et al. 2021), where samples with missing modalities are retained for training together with complete samples. In PDT,
some modalities of the training samples are masked to simulate the absence of modalities, which enforces the model
to be aware of the situation of modality missing; although
the masked modalities do not contribute directly to the forward feature extraction, they play a role in supervising the
learning procedure, as illustrated in Figure 1. In IDT, albeit
the missing modalities of imperfect samples are absolutely
inaccessible, their available modalities carrying useful information can facilitate the model training. In comparison, the
obvious merit of IDT lies in that it is more data-efficient
than PDT, as all collected data is fully exploited. However,

Multimodal learning is susceptible to modality missing,
which poses a major obstacle for its practical applications
and, thus, invigorates increasing research interest. In this
paper, we investigate two challenging problems: 1) when
modality missing exists in the training data, how to exploit the
incomplete samples while guaranteeing that they are properly
supervised? 2) when the missing rates of different modalities
vary, causing or exacerbating the imbalance among modalities, how to address the imbalance and ensure all modalities
are well-trained? To tackle these two challenges, we first introduce the variational information bottleneck (VIB) method
for the cross-modal representation learning of missing modalities, which capitalizes on the available modalities and the
labels as supervision. Then, accounting for the imbalanced
missing rates, we define relative advantage to quantify the advantage of each modality over others. Accordingly, a bi-level
optimization problem is formulated to adaptively regulate the
supervision of all modalities during training. As a whole, the
proposed approach features Relative advantage aware Crossmodal representation learning (abbreviated as RedCore) for
missing modalities with imbalanced missing rates. Extensive empirical results demonstrate that RedCore outperforms
competing models in that it exhibits superior robustness
against either large or imbalanced missing rates. The code
is available at: https://github.com/sunjunaimer/RedCore.

Introduction
Multimodal learning leverages heterogeneous and comprehensive signals, such as acoustic, visual, lexical information
to perform typical machine learning tasks, for instance, clustering, regression, classification, and retrieval (Sun, Dong,
and Liu 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Han et al. 2022). Relative
to its unimodal counterpart, multimodal learning has demonstrated great success in numerous applications, including
but not limited to medical analysis (Liu et al. 2023), action recognition (Woo et al. 2023), affective computing(Sun
et al. 2023). Nevertheless, multimodal learning is inevitably
faced with the modality missing issue due to malfunctioning sensors, high data acquisition costs, privacy concerns,
etc. In this circumstance, a model trained with full modalities can be highly sensitive to modality missing in inference
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15173

