The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Evaluate the Generalization of Detection? A Benchmark for
Comprehensive Open-Vocabulary Detection
Yiyang Yao1 , Peng Liu2 , Tiancheng Zhao3 , Qianqian Zhang2 , Jiajia Liao3 , Chunxin Fang3 ,
Kyusong Lee3 , Qing Wang1
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University
Linker Technology Research Co. Ltd
3
Binjiang Institute of Zhejiang University
yaoyiyang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {liu peng,zhang qianqian}@hzlh.com,
{tianchez,liaojiajia,fangchunxin,kyusongl}@zju-bj.com, qwang@nwpu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

COCO (Lin et al. 2014), even surpassing the performance
of some of the supervised methods (Liu et al. 2023). Users
can simply use natural language to specify the desired targets and OVD models can detect the described targets on
the fly, which opens doors for many new applications such
as interactive image-editing (Shen et al. 2023), Augmented
Reality (Li et al. 2023) and robotics (Shah et al. 2023).
Meanwhile, current common approaches to evaluate OVD
models include zero-shot/few-shot testing on OD dataset
with common objects like COCO (Lin et al. 2014), OD
dataset with long-tail objects like LVIS (Gupta, Dollar, and
Girshick 2019), grounding such as Flickr30K (Plummer
et al. 2015) and referral expression comprehension (REC)
such as RefCOCO (Yu et al. 2016). These datasets were
challenging for traditional OD research, but no longer serve
as a challenging enough benchmark for future OVD methods for the following reasons:
• Lack of systematic probing of model’s generalization
ability: An ideal OVD model should be able to understand the fine-grained semantics in the language prompt
and align the language with visual features. Thus, it is
required to probe the OVD model from various linguistic
aspects such as object type, visual attributes, object relationship, etc., to quantify an OVD model’s generalization
to various degrees of prompt complexity.
• Lack of hard negative for real-world usage: Existing
grounding and REC data assume the text prompt is paired
with the image. The OVD model is only required to localize the entities mentioned in the caption without the
need to discriminate against hard negatives. However,
real-world usages command an OVD model to detect described object without knowing if the caption is related
to the image at all.
To address the above issues, this paper introduces OVDEval to provide a comprehensive evaluation of OVD models
and test their robustness against hard negatives. OVDEval
is inspired by behavioral testing (Ribeiro et al. 2020; Zhao
et al. 2022b), and consists of 9 large datasets that cover 6 linguistic aspects: object, proper noun, attribute, position, relationship, and negation. All of the data annotations are carefully annotated by human experts to guarantee data quality.
Additionally, these sub-datasets are meticulously crafted to
ensure that all negative labels are hard. As a result, OVDE-

Object detection (OD) in computer vision has made significant progress in recent years, transitioning from closed-set
labels to open-vocabulary detection (OVD) based on largescale vision-language pre-training (VLP). However, current
evaluation methods and datasets are limited to testing generalization over object types and referral expressions, which do
not provide a systematic, fine-grained, and accurate benchmark of OVD models’ abilities. In this paper, we propose
a new benchmark named OVDEval, which includes 9 subtasks and introduces evaluations on commonsense knowledge, attribute understanding, position understanding, object
relation comprehension, and more. The dataset is meticulously created to provide hard negatives that challenge models’ true understanding of visual and linguistic input. Additionally, we identify a problem with the popular Average
Precision (AP) metric when benchmarking models on these
fine-grained label datasets and propose a new metric called
Non-Maximum Suppression Average Precision (NMS-AP) to
address this issue. Extensive experimental results show that
existing top OVD models all fail on the new tasks except
for simple object types, demonstrating the value of the proposed dataset in pinpointing the weakness of current OVD
models and guiding future research. Furthermore, the proposed NMS-AP metric is verified by experiments to provide a
much more truthful evaluation of OVD models, whereas traditional AP metrics yield deceptive results. Data is available
at https://github.com/om-ai-lab/OVDEval

Introduction
Open vocabulary detection (OVD) models have experienced
rapid development in recent years, with numerous innovative techniques being introduced to the field. Novel models such as GLIP (Li et al. 2022b), Grounding DINO (Liu
et al. 2023) and OmDet (Zhao et al. 2022a) have introduced
new vision-language learning methods such as modeling detection as visual grounding (Kamath et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022b), pre-training with coarse image-text pairs (Dou et al.
2022), and multi-task learning with a variety of detection
tasks (Zhao et al. 2022a).
As a result, for the first time, we can achieve strong
zero-shot object detection (OD) on popular datasets such as
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6630

