The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MmAP : Multi-Modal Alignment Prompt for Cross-Domain Multi-Task Learning
Yi Xin1,2 * , Junlong Du2 * , Qiang Wang2 , Ke Yan2† , Shouhong Ding2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
xinyi@smail.nju.edu.cn, {jeffdu, albertqwang, kerwinyan, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
88

1

Average Accuracy (%) of Four Tasks

Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is designed to train multiple correlated tasks simultaneously, thereby enhancing the performance of individual tasks. Typically, a multi-task network
structure consists of a shared backbone and task-specific decoders. However, the complexity of the decoders increases
with the number of tasks. To tackle this challenge, we integrate the decoder-free vision-language model CLIP, which
exhibits robust zero-shot generalization capability. Recently,
parameter-efficient transfer learning methods have been extensively explored with CLIP for adapting to downstream
tasks, where prompt tuning showcases strong potential. Nevertheless, these methods solely fine-tune a single modality
(text or visual), disrupting the modality structure of CLIP. In
this paper, we first propose Multi-modal Alignment Prompt
(MmAP) for CLIP, which aligns text and visual modalities
during fine-tuning process. Building upon MmAP, we develop an innovative multi-task prompt learning framework.
On the one hand, to maximize the complementarity of tasks
with high similarity, we utilize a gradient-driven task grouping method that partitions tasks into several disjoint groups
and assign a group-shared MmAP to each group. On the other
hand, to preserve the unique characteristics of each task, we
assign an task-specific MmAP to each task. Comprehensive
experiments on two large multi-task learning datasets demonstrate that our method achieves significant performance improvements compared to full fine-tuning while only utilizing
approximately ∼ 0.09% of trainable parameters.

MmAP-MT (Ours)
MaPLe-MT
86
CoOp-MT
MT Full Fine-Tune

84
VPT-MT

CLIP-Adapter

82

80
BitFit
78
10 4

10 5

10 6

10 7

10 8

10 9

Number of Trainable Parameters

Figure 1: The trade-off between average accuracy over four
tasks on Office-Home (Venkateswara et al. 2017) dataset and
the number of trainable parameters. The radius of each circle
represents the relative amount of trainable parameters.

Introduction
Moreover, training a unified model for multiple tasks is generally more parameter-efficient than training several singletask models. Consequently, MTL has garnered considerable
interest in various fields, including Computer Vision (Shen
et al. 2021; Ye and Xu 2023; Xin et al. 2023), Natural Language Processing (He et al. 2022), etc.
In this work, we mainly focus on vision multi-task learning. Prior research has predominantly concentrated on the
design of multi-task model training framework, encompassing encoder-based methods (Gao et al. 2019) and decoderbased methods (Xu, Yang, and Zhang 2023). However, with
the growing prowess of vision pre-trained models (e.g.,
ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), SwinTransformer (Liu et al.
2021)), directly fine-tuning these models for downstream
multi-task leads to substantial performance enhancements

Multi-Task Learning (MTL) has surfaced as a potent approach in deep learning that allows for joint training of multiple correlated tasks within a unified network architecture,
resulting in enhanced model performance in comparison to
Single-Task Learning (STL). The core of MTL lies in learning both the task-shared and the task-specific representations. By capitalizing on shared representations and knowledge across tasks, MTL enhances generalization and mitigates overfitting. Utilizing specific representations allows
MTL to preserve the distinct characteristics of each task.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16076

