The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DI-V2X: Learning Domain-Invariant Representation for Vehicle-Infrastructure
Collaborative 3D Object Detection
Xiang Li1 * , Junbo Yin1* , Wei Li2 , Chengzhong Xu3 , Ruigang Yang2 , Jianbing Shen3†
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Inceptio
3
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
{lixianggoing, yinjunbocn}@gmail.com

Abstract
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) collaborative perception has recently gained significant attention due to its capability to enhance scene understanding by integrating information from
various agents, e.g., vehicles, and infrastructure. However,
current works often treat the information from each agent
equally, ignoring the inherent domain gap caused by the utilization of different LiDAR sensors of each agent, thus leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper, we propose
DI-V2X, that aims to learn Domain-Invariant representations
through a new distillation framework to mitigate the domain discrepancy in the context of V2X 3D object detection.
DI-V2X comprises three essential components: a domainmixing instance augmentation (DMA) module, a progressive
domain-invariant distillation (PDD) module, and a domainadaptive fusion (DAF) module. Specifically, DMA builds a
domain-mixing 3D instance bank for the teacher and student
models during training, resulting in aligned data representation. Next, PDD encourages the student models from different domains to gradually learn a domain-invariant feature
representation towards the teacher, where the overlapping regions between agents are employed as guidance to facilitate the distillation process. Furthermore, DAF closes the domain gap between the students by incorporating calibrationaware domain-adaptive attention. Extensive experiments on
the challenging DAIR-V2X and V2XSet benchmark datasets
demonstrate DI-V2X achieves remarkable performance, outperforming all the previous V2X models. Code is available at
https://github.com/Serenos/DI-V2X.

1

（a）

BEV AP0.7(%)

80
70

64.10
60
50

52.67

53.91

PP-IF

PP-KD

66.16

55.90

45.33

40
PP-LF

PP-CDT

PP-EF

DI-V2X(Ours)

（b）

Figure 1: (a) Examples to show the data-level domain gap
caused by the different types of LiDAR sensors from the vehicle side (40-beam mechanical LiDAR colored in black)
and the infrastructure side (300-beam solid-state LiDAR
colored in red). (b) Performance comparison of different solutions to mitigate the domain discrepancy, where our model
attains superior performance.

crucial redundancy due to their distinct viewpoints. This collaboration essentially broadens the perception range and reduces occurrences of blind spots, enhancing the overall perception capability in contrast to previous single-vehicle autonomous driving systems.
To effectively fuse the information from various agents,
leading V2X approaches tend to employ feature-based intermediate collaboration, which is referred to as intermediate fusion (Wang et al. 2020). This approach retains essential information from each agent at the feature level, which
can then be compressed for efficiency. Therefore, intermediate fusion ensures a performance-bandwidth trade-off that is
superior to the early fusion or late fusion approaches, where
the former needs to transmit raw point cloud data between
agents while the latter is vulnerable to incomplete results
produced by each model.

Introduction

Vehicle-infrastructure collaborative perception (Hu et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2023b; Lu et al. 2023), also known as
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication, has recently
emerged as a promising approach to achieve full automation. It adequately leverages the sensor data collected from
diverse agents, i.e., the vehicles and road-side infrastructures, to precisely perceive the complex driving scene. For
instance, in situations where a vehicle’s line of sight might
be obstructed, information from infrastructures can serve as
* Equal Contribution. Work done during internship at Inceptio.
†

Corresponding author. Email:jianbingshen@um.edu.mo.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3208

