The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task-Agnostic Privacy-Preserving Representation Learning for Federated
Learning against Attribute Inference Attacks
Caridad Arroyo Arevalo1 , Sayedeh Leila Noorbakhsh1 , Yun Dong2 , Yuan Hong3 , Binghui Wang1
1

Illinois Institute or Technology
2
Benedictine University
3
University of Connecticut
carroyoarevalo@hawk.iit.edu, snoorbakhsh@hawk.iit.edu, ydong@ben.edu, yuan.hong@uconn.edu, bwang70@iit.edu
Abstract

ibaba (Alibaba Federated Learning 2023), and applied in
various privacy-sensitive applications, including on-device
item ranking (McMahan et al. 2017a), content suggestions
for on-device keyboards (Bonawitz et al. 2019), next word
prediction (Li et al. 2020b), health monitoring (Rieke et al.
2020), and medical imaging (Kaissis et al. 2020). However,
recent works show, though only sharing device models, it
is still possible for an adversary (e.g., an honest-but-curious
server) to perform the attribute inference attack (Jia et al.
2017; Aono et al. 2017; Ganju et al. 2018; Melis et al. 2019;
Dang et al. 2021; Wainakh et al. 2022)—i.e., inferring the
private/sensitive information (e.g., a person’s gender, race,
sexual orientation, income) of device’s data. Hence, designing privacy-preserving FL mechanisms to defend against the
attribute inference attack is important and necessary.
To mitigate the issue, various existing privacy-preserving
FL methods can be adopted/adapted, including multi-party
computation (MPC) (Danner and Jelasity 2015; Mohassel
and Zhang 2017; Bonawitz et al. 2017; Melis et al. 2019),
adversarial training (AT) (Madras et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020a; Oh, Fritz, and Schiele 2017; Kim et al.
2019), model compression (MC) (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019),
and differential privacy (DP) (Pathak, Rane, and Raj 2010;
Shokri and Shmatikov 2015; Hamm, Cao, and Belkin 2016;
McMahan et al. 2018; Geyer, Klein, and Nabi 2017). However, these existing methods have key limitations, thus narrowing their applicability (see Table 1). Specifically, MPC
and AT methods know the FL task in advance. However,
this cannot be achieved in real-world unsupervised learning
applications. MPC methods also have intolerable computational overheads and AT methods do not have provable privacy guarantees. MC and DP methods are task-agnostic, but
both of them result in high utility losses (see Figure 3).
In this paper, we aim to design a privacy-preserving
FL mechanism against attribute inference attacks (termed
TAPPFL) that is task-agnostic, efficient, accurate, and have
privacy guarantees as well. Our main idea is to learn federated privacy-preserving representations based on information theory. Specifically, we formulate TAPPFL via two mutual information (MI) goals, where one MI goal learns lowdimensional representations for device data that contain the
least information about the private attribute in each device’s
data—thus protecting attribute privacy, and the other MI
goal ensures the learnt representations include as much in-

Federated learning (FL) has been widely studied recently due
to its property to collaboratively train data from different devices without sharing the raw data. Nevertheless, recent studies show that an adversary can still be possible to infer private
information about devices’ data, e.g., sensitive attributes such
as income, race, and sexual orientation. To mitigate the attribute inference attacks, various existing privacy-preserving
FL methods can be adopted/adapted. However, all these existing methods have key limitations: they need to know the FL
task in advance, or have intolerable computational overheads
or utility losses, or do not have provable privacy guarantees.
We address these issues and design a task-agnostic privacypreserving presentation learning method for FL (TAPPFL)
against attribute inference attacks. TAPPFL is formulated via
information theory. Specifically, TAPPFL has two mutual information goals, where one goal learns task-agnostic data representations that contain the least information about the private attribute in each device’s data, and the other goal ensures
the learnt data representations include as much information
as possible about the device data to maintain FL utility. We
also derive privacy guarantees of TAPPFL against worst-case
attribute inference attacks, as well as the inherent tradeoff between utility preservation and privacy protection. Extensive
results on multiple datasets and applications validate the effectiveness of TAPPFL to protect data privacy, maintain the
FL utility, and be efficient as well. Experimental results also
show that TAPPFL outperforms the existing defenses.

Introduction
The emerging collaborative data analysis using federated
learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017a) aims to address the
data insufficiency problem, and has a great potential to protect data privacy as well. In FL, the participating devices
train their data locally, and only share the trained models,
instead of the raw data, with a center server (e.g., cloud).
The server updates its global model by aggregating the received device models, and broadcasts the updated global
model to all participating devices such that all devices indirectly use all data from other devices. FL has been deployed by many companies such as Google (Google Federated Learning 2022), Microsoft (Microsoft Federated Learning 2022), IBM (IBM Federated Learning 2022), and AlCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10909

