The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Concealing Sensitive Samples against Gradient Leakage in Federated Learning
Jing Wu1 , Munawar Hayat2 , Mingyi Zhou3 , Mehrtash Harandi1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University
2
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University
3
Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity, Monash University
{jing.wu1, munawar.hayat, mingyi.zhou, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu

Abstract

Recent model inversion attacks (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019;
Geiping et al. 2020; Balunović et al. 2022; Fowl et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022) have shown that the users’ private data can
be reconstructed from the gradients shared during the learning process. This alarming finding has led to the exploration of various defense schemes to mitigate privacy leakage. Zhu et al. (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019) employed a strategy
that adds noise to gradients, guided by Differential Privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al. 2006; Abadi et al. 2016; Song, Chaudhuri, and Sarwate 2013; McMahan et al. 2017b), a concept originally designed to constrain information disclosure.
They also utilized gradient compression (Lin et al. 2017),
which prunes gradients below a threshold magnitude, as a
protective measure. Latest techniques have further advanced
the field, with developments such as Automatic Transformation Search (ATS) (Gao et al. 2021) (augmenting data to hide
sensitive information), PRivacy EnhanCing mODulE (PRECODE) (Scheliga, Mäder, and Seeland 2022) (use of bottleneck to hide the sensitive data), and Soteria (Sun et al. 2021)
(pruning gradients in a single layer).
However, as defense techniques improve, attacks evolve
as well. New findings, as highlighted by Balunović et al.
(2022) and Li et al. (2022), indicate that modern defenses
may be ineffective against more sophisticated attacks. For
example, Balunović et al. (2022) show that an adversary
can disregard the gradients pruned by Soteria and still reconstruct inputs, even without knowledge of the specific
layers where pruning is applied. The vulnerability also extends to other defenses; data can be readily reconstructed
in the initial communication rounds against the defense
ATS (Balunović et al. 2022). In the case of the defense
PRECODE, the mere presence of a single non-zero entry
in the bias term can enable perfect reconstruction by adversaries (Balunović et al. 2022).
Most current defenses seek to protect all data equally,
even if this results in a poor privacy-performance trade-off.
In this work, we argue for a more realistic and practical setup
where the focus should be given to the sensitive data (e.g.,
personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, and religious beliefs as mentioned in European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation (Voigt and Von dem
Bussche 2017)). Consider a malignant skin lesion recognition system as an example. Skin images with tattoos that
contain personal information demand extra attention than

Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning paradigm
that enhances users’ privacy by eliminating the need for
clients to share raw, private data with the server. Despite
the success, recent studies expose the vulnerability of FL to
model inversion attacks, where adversaries reconstruct users’
private data via eavesdropping on the shared gradient information. We hypothesize that a key factor in the success of
such attacks is the low entanglement among gradients per
data within the batch during stochastic optimization. This
creates a vulnerability that an adversary can exploit to reconstruct the sensitive data. Building upon this insight, we
present a simple, yet effective defense strategy that obfuscates
the gradients of the sensitive data with concealed samples. To
achieve this, we propose synthesizing concealed samples to
mimic the sensitive data at the gradient level while ensuring
their visual dissimilarity from the actual sensitive data. Compared to the previous art, our empirical evaluations suggest
that the proposed technique provides the strongest protection
while simultaneously maintaining the FL performance. Code
is located at https://github.com/JingWu321/DCS-2.

Introduction
Consider an Artificial Intelligence (AI) service that aids in
disease diagnosis. Multiple hospitals train a model for this
service in collaboration. Publishing such a service could
benefit a large number of doctors and patients, but it is
critical to ensure that private medical data is secure and
the utility of the service is normal. Federated Learning
(FL) (McMahan et al. 2017a) is an essential technology for
such critical applications where the confidentiality of private data is important. FL provides a distributed learning
paradigm that enables multiple clients (e.g., hospitals, businesses, or even mobile devices) to train a unified model
jointly under the orchestration of a central server. A key advantage of FL lies in its promise of privacy for participating
clients. With data decentralized and users’ information kept
solely with the client, only model updates (e.g., gradients)
are transmitted to the central server. Since the model’s updates are specifically tailored to the learning task, they may
create a false sense of security for FL clients, leading them
to believe that the shared updates contain no information on
their private training data (Kairouz et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21717

