The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Real-World Image De-weathering with Imperfect Supervision
Xiaohui Liu1 , Zhilu Zhang1 , Xiaohe Wu1 * , Chaoyu Feng2 , Xiaotao Wang2 , Lei Lei2 ,
Wangmeng Zuo1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Independent Researcher
lxh720199@gmail.com, cszlzhang@outlook.com, xhwu.cpsl.hit@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

vised learning. However, synthesized degraded images have
limited realism in modeling complex and variable weather
characteristics (e.g. raindrop shapes and fog concentration).
Consequently, models trained using synthetic pairs typically
face challenges in effectively generalizing to realistic severe
weather scenarios, even leading to artifacts and the loss of
original details. Other methods (Wu et al. 2021; Wei et al.
2021) address the lack of real-world pairs by employing
semi-supervised or unsupervised manners. While some of
these methods (Rai et al. 2022; Huang, Yu, and He 2021)
have demonstrated promising results, challenges remain in
separating intricate overlaps of foreground and background
information in real-world degraded images (Li et al. 2022).
Recognizing the aforementioned limitations, the recent
works (Ba et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) pin their hopes
on acquiring real-world image pairs. They relax the strict
requirement for simultaneous acquisition of ideal pairs and
instead retrieve degraded and clean images from live streams
of landscape scenes on YouTube within the shortest possible
time window. And the conclusion shows that such a manner indeed bridges the domain gap better than synthetic (Hu
et al. 2019; Li, Cheong, and Tan 2019) and semi-real (Wang
et al. 2019) datasets. It is worth noting that, despite the adoption of strict filtering conditions during dataset collection to
ensure spatial position and illumination consistency between
the ground-truth (GT) and degraded images, certain inconsistencies persist, which will have a detrimental impact on
the learning process of the de-weathering model.
Actually, the inconsistencies also occur in some other
low-level vision (e.g. super-resolution (Zhang et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2023), deblurring (Li et al. 2023), learnable
ISP (Zhang et al. 2021b), and etc (Feng et al. 2023)) tasks.
And their works usually utilize optical flow estimation and
color correction approaches (He, Sun, and Tang 2012) for
aligning the network output and GT in position and color, respectively. However, these solutions are less effective when
being applied to de-weathering due to the complexity and
diversity of inconsistent types (see Fig. 1).
In this work, we suggest a novel perspective to alleviate the adverse impact of imperfect supervision in realworld de-weathering datasets, and propose a unified solution for a variety of inconsistencies. The main motivation is
from the information bottleneck (IB) theory (Tishby and Zaslavsky 2015). Therein, during network training, it has been

Real-world image de-weathering aims at removing various
undesirable weather-related artifacts. Owing to the impossibility of capturing image pairs concurrently, existing realworld de-weathering datasets often exhibit inconsistent illumination, position, and textures between the ground-truth images and the input degraded images, resulting in imperfect
supervision. Such non-ideal supervision negatively affects
the training process of learning-based de-weathering methods. In this work, we attempt to address the problem with a
unified solution for various inconsistencies. Specifically, inspired by information bottleneck theory, we first develop a
Consistent Label Constructor (CLC) to generate a pseudolabel as consistent as possible with the input degraded image
while removing most weather-related degradation. In particular, multiple adjacent frames of the current input are also
fed into CLC to enhance the pseudo-label. Then we combine the original imperfect labels and pseudo-labels to jointly
supervise the de-weathering model by the proposed Information Allocation Strategy (IAS). During testing, only the
de-weathering model is used for inference. Experiments on
two real-world de-weathering datasets show that our method
helps existing de-weathering models achieve better performance. Code is available at https://github.com/1180300419/
imperfect-deweathering.

Introduction
The effectiveness of outdoor computer vision systems e.g.
monitoring systems and autonomous driving is inevitably
impacted by weather conditions. Image de-weathering,
which aims at removing undesirable image degradation
caused by adverse weather, e.g. rain, fog, and snow, is significant in improving the performance of the subsequent tasks.
Recently, data-driven learning-based de-weathering methods have experienced notable progress. However, capturing
ideal real-world pairs for training neural networks is nearly
impossible since it is not feasible to capture a scene simultaneously with and without weather-related artifacts.
To circumvent this problem, some existing de-weathering
methods (Valanarasu, Yasarla, and Patel 2022; Wang, Ma,
and Liu 2023) initially construct paired data by simulating weather degradation and subsequently undergo super* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3738

