The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Pre-convolved Representation for Plug-and-Play Neural Illumination Fields
Yiyu Zhuang1 * Qi Zhang2 * , Xuan Wang3 , Hao Zhu1 ,
Ying Feng2 , Xiaoyu Li2 , Ying Shan2 , Xun Cao1
1

Najing University, Nanjing, China
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
yiyu.zhuang@smail.nju.edu.cn, nwpuqzhang@gmail.com, xwang.cv@gmail.com, zh@nju.edu.cn,
yfeng.von@gmail.com, xliea@connect.ust.hk, yingsshan@tencent.com, caoxun@nju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

between environment illumination and the object and reduce
computational expense. Unfortunately, the assumption used
in doing so is that the environment illumination of the scene
is infinitely far away. Neither the environment map nor SG
models take the position of 3D illumination into account so
they are unable to handle environment occlusion and directional lighting practically. To address this problem, NeILF
(Yao et al. 2022) models an incident illumination map for
each surface point to handle environment occlusion, indirect
light and directional light. However, the constraint of spatial information in lighting is ignored, which is leading to
worse material-lighting ambiguity under complex 3D environments. A common follow-up question to ask is: can we
find an elegant representation to express the complex environment illumination?
Recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and
its variants (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Barron et al. 2021;
Verbin et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021b) have shown great potential to recover underlying scene proprieties (e.g. geometry, materials, and lighting) from a set of images. NeRF uses
a continuous volumetric function to represent the outgoing
ray observed by a viewer. The recent development of NeRF
provides new possibilities to model complex environmental
illumination. To the best of our knowledge, little in the literature has ever tapped into using volumetric radiance fields
to express lighting. By doing so we could achieve plug-andplay: re-render an object with natural illumination of the
NeRF-style real-world environment. However, directly gathering thousands of incoming rays through volume rendering
to compute the color of each surface point is computationally expensive and may seem impossible.
This paper presents the Neural Illumination Fields (NeIF)
to express the incoming ray of each surface point as the volumetric radiance fields (density and color) that have the efficient capability of handling environment occlusions and directional lighting naturally, as shown in Fig. 1. We first acquire the object’s geometry from the input images using the
existing method (Yariv et al. 2020). We focus solely on the
decomposition of environment illumination and object material. Specifically, pixel’s specular color is equivalent to the
interaction between object materials and the integral of incoming rays within the specular lobe, whose size is related
to material roughness. Inspired by environment convolution
maps used in traditional image-based lighting, we consider

Recent advances in implicit neural representation have
demonstrated the ability to recover detailed geometry and material from multi-view images. However, the use of simplified
lighting models such as environment maps to represent nondistant illumination, or using a network to fit indirect light
modeling without a solid basis, can lead to an undesirable decomposition between lighting and material. To address this,
we propose a fully differentiable framework named Neural Illumination Fields (NeIF) that uses radiance fields as a lighting
model to handle complex lighting in a physically based way.
Together with integral lobe encoding for roughness-adaptive
specular lobe and leveraging the pre-convolved background
for accurate decomposition, the proposed method represents
a significant step towards integrating physically based rendering into the NeRF representation. The experiments demonstrate the superior performance of novel-view rendering compared to previous works, and the capability to re-render objects under arbitrary NeRF-style environments opens up exciting possibilities for bridging the gap between virtual and
real-world scenes.

Introduction
Modeling and representing the environment illumination
from multi-view images is the fundamental issue that has
been extensively studied throughout the development of rendering algorithms (Park, Holynski, and Seitz 2020; Yao et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2022). This task is inherently related to
materials decomposition, since the observed scene appearance is affected by the interactions between environment
illumination and scene materials. It has drawn significant
attention in this era of blowout VR and AR applications,
where there is a high demand for photo-realistic rendering
of the scene with visually natural illumination in a realistic environment. However, this problem is hard to solve because the environment illumination is of high-dimensional
information and strongly coupled with materials.
Recent methods employ approximated illumination representations (e.g., environment map (Zhang et al. 2021b), and
spherical Gaussian (SG) models (Zhang et al. 2021a; Boss
et al. 2021a,b; Zhang et al. 2022)) to simplify the interaction
* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7828

