The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Complexity of Computing Robust Mediated Equilibria in Ordinal Games
Vincent Conitzer
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
conitzer@cs.cmu.edu

8, 9
7.8, 6
8.1, 6

Abstract
Usually, to apply game-theoretic methods, we must specify
utilities precisely, and we run the risk that the solutions we
compute are not robust to errors in this specification. Ordinal
games provide an attractive alternative: they require specifying only which outcomes are preferred to which other ones.
Unfortunately, they provide little guidance for how to play
unless there are pure Nash equilibria; evaluating mixed strategies appears to fundamentally require cardinal utilities.
In this paper, we observe that we can in fact make good use
of mixed strategies in ordinal games if we consider settings
that allow for folk theorems. These allow us to find equilibria
that are robust, in the sense that they remain equilibria no
matter which cardinal utilities are the correct ones – as long as
they are consistent with the specified ordinal preferences. We
analyze this concept and study the computational complexity
of finding such equilibria in a range of settings.

9, 9
9.1, 6
8.8, 6

0, 0
6, 7
7, 7

8, 9
7.9, 6
8.2, 6

9, 9
9.2, 6
8.9, 6

0, 0
6, 7
7, 7

Figure 1: Left: game with an equilibrium with utilities 8.5, 9.
Right: only the equilibrium with utilities 7, 7 survives.

2 to mix 50-50 between Left and Center, for utilities of
(8.5, 9); another is (Bottom, Right) for utilities of (7, 7).
It seems natural to play the former equilibrium given the
higher utilities. However, in the slightly modified game on
the right of Figure 1, only the latter equilibrium survives.
(This follows by iterated elimination of strictly dominated
strategies, because mixing 50-50 between Middle and Bottom now strictly dominates Top.) Now, if player 1 thinks the
game is the left one and player 2 thinks it is the right one,
they may well play the disastrous outcome (Top, Right).1
Ordinal games (Cruz and Simaan 2000; Bonanno 2008;
Gafarov and Salcedo 2015) constitute one appealing framework for robustness. In such a game, it is assumed we know
nothing more than ordinal preferences over the outcomes,
e.g., we know that player 1 weakly prefers outcome 1 to outcome 2 – but not by how much. Indeed, across the two games
in Figure 1, each player’s ordinal comparisons of outcomes
are the same, so they correspond to the same ordinal game;
and abstracting to this ordinal game would focus attention
on the (Bottom, Right) pure equilibrium.
To illustrate: it is generally safe to assume that a student will prefer a grade of A (“excellent”) to a grade of B
(“good”), and a grade of B to a grade of C (“average”); but
the (cardinal) utility the student gets for each of these outcomes is generally unknown. A student that requires at least
a B to remain in good standing in the program may have
utility u(A) = 1, u(B) = .99, u(C) = 0; a student that
will be applying to another highly competitive program that
requires all A grades may have utility u(A) = 1, u(B) =
.01, u(C) = 0; and a student that is in both situations at the
same time may have utility u(A) = 1, u(B) = .5, u(C) = 0.
We often do not know which of these situations the student is
in, and in certain circumstances the difference would affect

Introduction
Game theory (see, e.g., (Fudenberg and Tirole 1991;
Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2009)) is the study of rational
behavior in the presence of other agents that also behave
rationally, but with possibly different utility functions. As
such, it should be useful for the design and analysis of systems of multiple self-interested agents in AI, and certainly
for many purposes it is. But one limitation is that game theory generally requires the specification of precise utilities. In
games with clear rules – say, poker – this is not a problem.
But out in the real world, we often do not know the players’
precise utilities. One method for dealing with uncertainty
about utilities in game theory is to use Bayesian games, in
which there is a common prior distribution over the agents’
utilities. However, determining an accurate prior distribution
is no less demanding a task. More practical are methods that
assume relatively little about the utility functions and are inherently robust (e.g., (Pita et al. 2010; Gan et al. 2023). Such
robustness can also bring significant safety benefits to AI
systems, especially as they interact with a complex human
world. Otherwise, if agents fail to correctly estimate each
other’s utility functions, the result can be disastrous.
For example, consider the game on the left in Figure 1.
One Nash equilibrium is for player 1 to play Top and player

1
In particular, note that player 2 cannot distinguish the games
based on knowing his own utilities.

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9607

