The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Comparing the Robustness of Modern No-Reference Image- and Video-Quality
Metrics to Adversarial Attacks
Anastasia Antsiferova1,2 , Khaled Abud3 , Aleksandr Gushchin1,2,3 , Ekaterina Shumitskaya3 , Sergey
Lavrushkin1,2 , Dmitriy Vatolin1,2,3
1

MSU Institute for Artificial Intelligence
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence
3
Lomonosov Moscow State University
{aantsiferova, khaled.abud, alexander.gushchin, ekaterina.shumitskaya, sergey.lavrushkin, dmitriy}@graphics.cs.msu.ru
2

Abstract

Decrease of perceptual quality. Metrics-oriented optimization modes are already being implemented in video encoders. libaom (Deng, Han, and Xu 2020) and LCEVC (VNova 2023) have options that optimize bitstream for increasing a VMAF score. Such tuning was designed to improve
the visual quality of the encoded video; however, as VMAF
is a learning-based metric, it may decrease perceptual quality (Zvezdakova et al. 2019; Siniukov et al. 2021). Using
unstable image quality metrics as a perceptual proxy in a
loss function may lead to incorrect restoration results (Ding
et al. 2021). For instance, LPIPS is widely used as a perceptual metric, but optimizing its scores leads to increased
brightness (Kettunen, Härkönen, and Lehtinen 2019), which
is unwanted or even harmful (for example, when analyzing
medical images).
Cheating in benchmarks. The developers of image- and
video-processing methods can use metrics’ vulnerabilities
to achieve better competition results. For example, despite
LPIPS already being shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, it is still used as the main metric in some benchmarks, e.g. to compare super-resolution methods (Zhang
et al. 2021). In some competitions that publish the results of
subjective comparisons and objective quality scores, we can
see the vast difference in these leaderboards. For instance,
the VMAF leaders in 2021 Subjective Video Codecs Comparisons differ from leaders by subjective quality (Comparison 2021).
Manipulating the results of image web search. Search engines use not only keywords and descriptions but also image
quality measurement to rank image search results. For example, the developers of Microsoft Bing used image quality
as one of the features to improve its output (Bing 2013). As
shown in MediaEval 2020 Pixel Privacy: Quality Camouflage for Social Images competition (MediaEval 2020), there
are a variety of ways to fool image quality estimators.
Our study highlights the necessity of measuring the adversarial robustness of contemporary metrics for the research
community. There are different ways to cheat on IQA/VQA
metrics, such as increasing or decreasing their scores. In our
study, we focus on analyzing metrics’ resistance to attacks
that increase estimated quality scores, as this kind of attack
has already appeared in many real-life cases. Also, by choosing to investigate metrics’ stability to scores increasing, we
do not limit the generability of the results. We believe that

Nowadays, neural-network-based image- and video-quality
metrics perform better than traditional methods. However,
they also became more vulnerable to adversarial attacks that
increase metrics’ scores without improving visual quality.
The existing benchmarks of quality metrics compare their
performance in terms of correlation with subjective quality
and calculation time. Nonetheless, the adversarial robustness
of image-quality metrics is also an area worth researching.
This paper analyses modern metrics’ robustness to different
adversarial attacks. We adapted adversarial attacks from computer vision tasks and compared attacks’ efficiency against 15
no-reference image- and video-quality metrics. Some metrics
showed high resistance to adversarial attacks, which makes
their usage in benchmarks safer than vulnerable metrics.
The benchmark accepts submissions of new metrics for researchers who want to make their metrics more robust to attacks or to find such metrics for their needs. The latest results
can be found online: https://videoprocessing.ai/benchmarks/
metrics-robustness.html.

Introduction
Nowadays, most new image- and video-quality metrics
(IQA/VQA) employ deep learning. For example, in the latest NTIRE challenge on perceptual quality assessment (Gu
et al. 2022), all winning methods were based on neural networks. With the increased sizes of datasets and availability of crowdsourced markup, deep-learning-based metrics
started to outperform traditional approaches in correlation
with subjective quality. However, learning-based methods,
including IQA/VQA metrics, are more vulnerable to adversarial attacks. A simple metric like PSNR is more stable to
image modifications that aim to manipulate quality scores
(any changed pixel will decrease the score). In contrast, the
behaviour of deep metrics is much more complex. The existing benchmarks evaluate metrics’ correlation with subjective quality but do not consider their robustness. At the same
time, the possibility to manipulate IQA/VQA metrics scores
is already being exploited in different real-life scenarios. Below are some examples of such scenarios and potential negative impacts from using non-robust IQA/VQA.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

700

