The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transportable Representations for Domain Generalization
Kasra Jalaldoust and Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Columbia University
{kasra,eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

finite samples) to something unobserved and general (e.g.,
a probability distribution, a classifier). Tom Mitchell, one of
the precursors of the field, noted (Mitchell 1997, p. 44): “a
fundamental property of inductive inference: a learner that
makes no a priori assumptions regarding the identity of the
target concept has no rational basis for classifying any unseen instances.”, refining Hume’s observation. The question
then becomes how to link the data collected from the distribution to the distribution itself. One of the fundamental
approaches in the field is known as empirical risk minimization, due to Vapnik, which tied the risk between hypothetical
and empirical distributions under some very general conditions (Vapnik 1991, 1998).
Despite the power of these ensuing results, we note that,
in practice, the domains where the data is collected (called
sources) are related to, but not necessarily the same as the
one where the predictions are intended (target), violating
a key assumption underlying many of the prior results. In
fact, if the target domain is arbitrary, or drastically different from the source domains, no learning could take place
(David et al. 2010; Bareinboim et al. 2022). However, the
fact that we generalize and adapt relatively well to a new
domain suggest that certain domains share common characteristics and that, owing to these commonalities, statistical
claims can be generalized even to domains where no data is
available (Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000;
Bareinboim and Pearl 2016). How could one described the
shared features across domain that allow this inferential
leap? The anchors of knowledge that allow generalization to
take place are eminently causal, following from the stability
of the mechanisms shared across settings (Aldrich 1989). 1
The systematic analysis of these mechanisms and the conditions under which generalizations could be formally justified has been studied in the causal inference literature under
the rubric of transportability theory (Bareinboim and Pearl
2014, 2016; Bareinboim et al. 2013; Pearl and Bareinboim
2011; Correa and Bareinboim 2020, 2019; Lee, Correa, and
Bareinboim 2020).
In modern machine learning literature, the challenge of
predicting in an unseen target domain is acknowledged and

One key assumption in machine learning literature is that the
testing and training data come from the same distribution,
which is often violated in practice. The anchors that allow
generalizations to take place are causal, and provenient in
terms of the stability and modularity of the mechanisms underlying the system of variables. Building on the theory of
causal transportability, we define the notion of “transportable
representations”, and show that these representations are suitable candidates for the domain generalization task. Specifically, considering that the graphical assumptions about the
underlying system are provided, the transportable representations can be characterized accordingly, and the distribution
of label conditioned on the representation can be computed
in terms of the source distributions. Finally, we relax the assumption of having access to the underlying graph by proving a graphical-invariance duality theorem, which delineates
certain probabilistic invariances present in the source data as
a sound and complete criterion for generalizable classification. Our findings provide a unifying theoretical perspective
over several existing approaches to the domain generalization
problem.

1

Introduction

Generalizing findings across settings is central throughout
human experience. The discussion about the conditions under which induction can be formally justified can be traced
back at least to Scottish philosopher David Hume circa the
18th century. Hume acknowledged that humans perform inferences from observed and particular experiences to more
general and unobserved situations, but disputed its rational
basis (Hume 1739). This challenge is called the problem
of induction (Henderson 2018), and have puzzled generations of philosophers and mathematicians, from Kant to Popper, Goodman to Russell (Popper 1971, 1953; Russell 1912;
Watkins et al. 2005).
The generalization problem plays a fundamental role in
artificial intelligence and machine learning as well (Mitchell
1997; Russell and Norvig 2010), where it appears in different forms. For instance, one of the most well-studied tasks in
the field is classification, where one tries to predict the label
and generalize from something observed and specific (e.g.,

1
While arguing in response to Hume’s skepticism, Kant noted
that some a priori knowledge of concepts such as causation could
be available before the inductive step (Kant 1781); for further discussion on this point, refer to (De Pierris and Friedman 2018).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12790

