The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Debiasing Multimodal Sarcasm Detection with Contrastive Learning
Mengzhao Jia1 , Can Xie1 , Liqiang Jing2 *
1

Shandong University,
University of Texas at Dallas
{jiamengzhao98, xiecan02, jingliqiang6}@gmail.com
2

Sarcastic
Sample

Abstract

Non-Sarcastic
Sample

Revised Text：I just hate
setting an example by
getting to work before
everyone else. Waking up
at 3:30 am is so frustrating.

0.99
0.01

SOTA Model

Despite commendable achievements made by existing work,
prevailing multimodal sarcasm detection studies rely more
on textual content over visual information. It unavoidably induces spurious correlations between textual words and labels,
thereby significantly hindering the models’ generalization capability. To address this problem, we define the task of outof-distribution (OOD) multimodal sarcasm detection, which
aims to evaluate models’ generalizability when the word distribution is different in training and testing settings. Moreover, we propose a novel debiasing multimodal sarcasm detection framework with contrastive learning, which aims to
mitigate the harmful effect of biased textual factors for robust
OOD generalization. In particular, we first design counterfactual data augmentation to construct the positive samples
with dissimilar word biases and negative samples with similar word biases. Subsequently, we devise an adapted debiasing contrastive learning mechanism to empower the model to
learn robust task-relevant features and alleviate the adverse
effect of biased words. Extensive experiments show the superiority of the proposed framework.

Original Text：I just love
setting an example by
getting to work before
everyone else. Waking up
at 3:30 am is so rewarding.

N-S

S

Classification
Probability
0.83
0.17

N-S

S

Figure 1: Prediction results of a sarcastic sample and the revised non-sarcastic sample by the SOTA model. The original
sarcastic sample and rewritten non-sarcastic sample are included in blue and orange dashed boxes, respectively. N-S
and S denote the non-sarcastic and sarcastic categories, respectively.

visual content accompanying such posts often carries crucial
cues for conveying sarcasm, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Noticing this issue, nowadays the research interests have
shifted to exploring the task of multimodal sarcasm detection (MSD), whose key objective is to accurately detect the
inter- and intra-modal incongruities of someone’s implied
sentiment expression within the given context. Early approaches incorporated fusion techniques that combined entire text and image features by concatenating operation (Pan
et al. 2020) or attention mechanism (Gupta et al. 2021). Despite their considerable progress, they overlook the possibility that sarcastic information may be expressed in some local
segments of the text and certain regions of the image. Motivated by this, recent studies tried to employ advanced Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) to explore the local semantic relationships within the textual and visual modalities (Liang
et al. 2022, 2021; Qiao et al. 2023; Jing et al. 2023b).
Despite the remarkable advancements made in MSD, existing studies still suffer from spurious correlations in the
textual modality. Particularly, existing MSD models tend
to place a heavier reliance on textual modality over visual
modality (Liang et al. 2022; Pan et al. 2020). However, this
over-reliance can be problematic as unreliable clues in the
text (e.g., biased words) can mislead the models, causing inaccurate predictions. By making slight word-level modifications to the original samples, the predicting accuracy of
the MSD models exhibits substantial disparity. As shown

Introduction
With the rise of social media, individuals have increasingly
embraced the use of ironic expressions in their posts on platforms such as Twitter1 and Weibo2 . Hence, the accurate detection of sarcastic/ironic expressions has become crucial for
sentiment and opinion mining (Cai, Cai, and Wan 2019).
In pursuit of this aim, numerous researchers dedicate their
efforts to identifying the underlying sarcastic/ironic semantics within social media posts. Early studies (Riloff et al.
2013; Poria et al. 2016) mainly concentrate on text-only approaches, which focus on recognizing sarcastic expressions
in the textual content. While these endeavors have yielded
impressive achievements, they are primarily centered around
investigating sarcasm detection solely based on textual inputs. However, owing to the advancements in multimedia
devices, individuals nowadays tend to express their emotions
and opinions through multimodal social posts. Moreover, the
* Liqiang Jing is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://twitter.com.
2
https://weibo.com.

18354

