The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Far3D: Expanding the Horizon for Surround-View 3D Object Detection
Xiaohui Jiang * 1† , Shuailin Li * 2 , Yingfei Liu2 , Shihao Wang1† , Fan Jia2 ,
Tiancai Wang2‡ , Lijin Han1 , Xiangyu Zhang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
MEGVII Technology

Abstract
Recently 3D object detection from surround-view images has
made notable advancements with its low deployment cost.
However, most works have primarily focused on close perception range while leaving long-range detection less explored. Expanding existing methods directly to cover long
distances poses challenges such as heavy computation costs
and unstable convergence. To address these limitations,
this paper proposes a novel sparse query-based framework,
dubbed Far3D. By utilizing high-quality 2D object priors,
we generate 3D adaptive queries that complement the 3D
global queries. To efficiently capture discriminative features
across different views and scales for long-range objects, we
introduce a perspective-aware aggregation module. Additionally, we propose a range-modulated 3D denoising approach
to address query error propagation and mitigate convergence issues in long-range tasks. Significantly, Far3D demonstrates SoTA performance on the challenging Argoverse 2
dataset, covering a wide range of 150 meters, surpassing
several LiDAR-based approaches. The code is available at
https://github.com/megvii-research/Far3D.

Figure 1: Peformance comparisons on Argoverse 2 between
3D detection and 2D detection. (a) and (b) demonstrate predicted boxes of StreamPETR and YOLOX, respectively. (c)
imply that 2D recall is notably better than 3D recall and can
act as a bridge to achieve high-quality 3D detection. Note
that 2D recall does not represent 3D upper bound due to different recall criteria.

Introduction
3D object detection plays an important role in understanding 3D scenes, aiming to provide accurate object localization
and category around the ego vehicle. Surround-view methods (Huang and Huang 2022; Li et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022b;
Li et al. 2022c; Yang et al. 2023; Park et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2023a), with their advantages of low cost and wide applicability, have achieved remarkable progress. However, most of
them focus on close-range perception (e.g., ∼50 meters on
nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020)), leaving the long-range detection field less explored. Detecting distant objects is essential
for real-world driving to maintain a safe distance, especially
at high speeds or complex road conditions.
Existing surround-view methods can be categorized into
two groups based on the intermediate representation, dense
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) based methods and sparse querybased methods. BEV based methods (Huang et al. 2021;

Huang and Huang 2022; Li et al. 2023, 2022c; Yang et al.
2023) usually convert perspective features to BEV features
by employing a view transformer (Philion and Fidler 2020),
then utilizing a 3D detector head to produce the 3D bounding boxes. However, dense BEV features come at the cost of
high computation even for the close-range perception, making it more difficult to scale up to long-range perception.
Instead, following DETR (Carion et al. 2020) style, sparse
query-based methods (Wang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022a,b;
Wang et al. 2023a) adopt learnable global queries to represent 3D objects, and interact with surround-view image features to update queries. Although sparse design can avoid the
squared growth of query numbers, its global fixed queries
cannot adapt to dynamic scenarios and usually miss targets
in long-range detection. We adopt the sparse query design
to maintain detection efficiency and introduce 3D adaptive
queries to address the inflexibility weaknesses.

* Equal contribution.
†

Work done during the internship at MEGVII Technology.
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

2561

