The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Procedural Level Generation with Diffusion Models
from a Single Example
Shiqi Dai1 , Xuanyu Zhu1 , Naiqi Li1 , Tao Dai3 , Zhi Wang* 1,2,4
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{daisq21,zhuxy22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, daitao@szu.edu.cn, {linaiqi,wangzhi}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Level generation is a central focus of Procedural Content
Generation (PCG), yet deep learning-based approaches are
limited by scarce training data, i.e., human-designed levels.
Despite being a dominant framework, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) exhibit a substantial quality gap between
generated and human-authored levels, alongside rising training costs, particularly with increasing token complexity. In
this paper, we introduce a diffusion-based generative model
that learns from just one example. Our approach involves two
core components: 1) an efficient yet expressive level representation, and 2) a latent denoising network with constrained
receptive fields. To start with, our method utilizes token semantic labels, similar to word embeddings, to provide dense
representations. This strategy not only surpasses one-hot encoding in representing larger game levels but also improves
stability and accelerates convergence in latent diffusion. In
addition, we adapt the denoising network architecture to confine the receptive field to localized patches of the data, aiming to facilitate single-example learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model is capable of generating
stylistically congruent samples of arbitrary sizes compared
to manually designed levels. It suits a wide range of level
structures with fewer artifacts than GAN-based approaches.
The source code is available at https://github.com/shiqi-dai/
diffusioncraft.

Figure 1: Random generated levels from one Super Mario
Bros level. Our model is trained to capture the internal distribution of a single level and can subsequently generate levels of arbitrary sizes.

tree is composed of “oak wood” and “leaf” tokens. In tokenbased level generation that has similar meanings to pixels,
traditional algorithms are based on search, grammar, or rules
(Liu et al. 2021). Recently, approaches based on deep learning, which can automatically learn complex patterns, have
made significant breakthroughs. GAN and its variants are
currently popular models (Awiszus, Schubert, and Rosenhahn 2020, 2021; Park et al. 2019; Volz et al. 2018). However, deep learning-based methods face two key challenges
in level generation: data scarcity and content generation incoherence. Most game levels are designed manually, and it
is usually difficult to obtain a large dataset, which is not
friendly to data-sensitive models. In order to learn from
small data, one of the approaches is to design generative
models to learn from a single level. The cutting-edge work
is to adopt pyramid-shaped GANs with multi-scale training (Awiszus, Schubert, and Rosenhahn 2020, 2021). The
training level is downsampled into different resolutions and
groups of GANs learn the internal distribution in a coarseto-fine manner, starting from the lowest resolution scale. Although this network structure addresses the demand for dataintensive generative models, errors accumulate during generation in multi scales (Wang et al. 2022), leading to numerous low-quality samples, i.e., content incoherence such as
unclear shapes and meaningless floating blocks. This kind

Introduction
3D content creation tools form the basis of many emerging metaverse applications. Despite this, current approaches
often rely heavily on manual labor, resulting in high costs
and inefficiencies. Gaming is considered as the medium that
most closely resembles the concept of metaverse. A downstream task in game study, i.e., level generation, utilizes algorithms to generate reasonable game levels automatically.
Addressing this task can effectively assist in the efficient and
automatic construction of a large number of 3D scenes for
game-based metaverse applications.
The game levels studied in this article can be simplified as
2D/3D arrays of tokens, where each token represents a type
of object or part of an object. For example, in Minecraft, a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10021

