The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pano-NeRF: Synthesizing High Dynamic Range Novel Views with Geometry
from Sparse Low Dynamic Range Panoramic Images
Zhan Lu1 , Qian Zheng2,3 * , Boxin Shi4,5 , Xudong Jiang1
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
4
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
zhan007@e.ntu.edu.sg, qianzheng@zju.edu.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn, exdjiang@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
Panoramic imaging research on geometry recovery and High
Dynamic Range (HDR) reconstruction becomes a trend with
the development of Extended Reality (XR). Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) provide a promising scene representation
for both tasks without requiring extensive prior data. However, in the case of inputting sparse Low Dynamic Range
(LDR) panoramic images, NeRF often degrades with underconstrained geometry and is unable to reconstruct HDR radiance from LDR inputs. We observe that the radiance from
each pixel in panoramic images can be modeled as both a
signal to convey scene lighting information and a light source
to illuminate other pixels. Hence, we propose the irradiance
fields from sparse LDR panoramic images, which increases
the observation counts for faithful geometry recovery and
leverages the irradiance-radiance attenuation for HDR reconstruction. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the irradiance fields outperform state-of-the-art methods on both geometry recovery and HDR reconstruction and validate their
effectiveness. Furthermore, we show a promising byproduct
of spatially-varying lighting estimation. The code is available
at https://github.com/Lu-Zhan/Pano-NeRF.

Figure 1: Comparison between the existing radiance fields
(top) and the proposed irradiance fields (bottom) on geometry recovery (left) and HDR reconstruction (right) from
sparse LDR panoramic images. Radiance fields suffer from
poor geometry recovery due to a few observation counts
(number of blue dots) and cannot reconstruct HDR radiance with LDR inputs. In contrast, the proposed irradiance
fields recover faithful geometry by increasing the observation counts (number of blue dots) from incident rays (yellow
lines) and infer over-saturated radiance from the unsaturated
area by considering irradiance-radiance attenuation.

Introduction
Panoramic imaging stands as a trend with the rise of extended reality (XR) for achieving immersive experiences,
such as virtual walks in 360◦ scenes and inserting virtual objects with 360◦ lighting information. These XR applications
motivate panoramic imaging techniques, particularly in the
tasks of geometry recovery (da Silveira et al. 2022) and High
Dynamic Range (HDR) reconstruction (Yu et al. 2021b) under a panoramic scene. Previous research yields promising
outcomes via supervised learning on extensive pre-collected
datasets or under specific predetermined conditions, e.g., a
stereo camera system for geometry recovery (Wang et al.
2020b) or controllable multi-exposure for HDR reconstruction (Shen et al. 2011). However, the efficacy of these approaches is profoundly influenced by the quality of the underlying training data and the imposed conditions.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al. 2021) emerged with a promising scene representa-

tion to recover geometry and radiance information through
self-supervised training from multi-view images, which
avoids extensive pre-collected data requirement. Later research on sparse-view NeRF further improves the practicability of NeRF technique by reducing the number of
multi-view images, where the recovered geometry is constrained by several priors, e.g., depth (Niemeyer et al. 2022),
visibility (Somraj and Soundararajan 2023), and semantic
feature (Jain, Tancik, and Abbeel 2021). Besides, several
NeRF-based models exhibit the capability to reconstruct
HDR radiance by requiring casual multi-exposed LDR images (Huang et al. 2022; Jun-Seong et al. 2022) or a pretrained HDR reconstruction model (Gera et al. 2022).
However, NeRF-based models encounter two primary
limitations: 1) existing sparse-view NeRF might fail to recover accurate geometry for a panoramic scene by using
priors from objects rather than a panoramic scene. And the
scale variety of nearby/far objects in the panoramic scene
further increases the trouble (Barron et al. 2022); 2) they are
unable to reconstruct HDR radiance from LDR inputs cap-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3927

