The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Video-Context Aligned Transformer for Video Question Answering
Linlin Zong1 , Jiahui Wan1 , Xianchao Zhang1 , Xinyue Liu1 * , Wenxin Liang1 , Bo Xu2
1

Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province,
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology
{llzong, xczhang, xyliu, wxliang, xubo}@dlut.edu.cn, wanjiahui1011@gmail.com

Video:

Abstract
Video question answering involves understanding video content to generate accurate answers to questions. Recent studies
have successfully modeled video features and achieved diverse multimodal interaction, yielding impressive outcomes.
However, they have overlooked the fact that the video contains richer instances and events beyond the scope of the
stated question. Extremely imbalanced alignment of information from both sides leads to significant instability in reasoning. To address this concern, we propose the Video-Context
Aligned Transformer (V-CAT), which leverages the context
to achieve semantic and content alignment between video and
question. Specifically, the video and text are encoded into a
shared semantic space initially. We apply contrastive learning to global video token and context token to enhance the
semantic alignment. Then, the pooled context feature is utilized to obtain corresponding visual content. Finally, the answer is decoded by integrating the refined video and question
features. We evaluate the effectiveness of V-CAT on MSVDQA and MSRVTT-QA dataset, both achieving state-of-theart performance. Extended experiments further analyze and
demonstrate the effectiveness of each proposed module.

Video
Enc

Video:

Text:

Common Space

feature

Text
Enc

(a) Semantic Alignment

Match

(b) Content Alignment

Two elephants
are pushing a
car forward.
Context:
who is singing
in a car?
how many elephants are
pushing a car
forward?
What the color
of the car?

Figure 1: The two challenges of video question answering
are semantic alignment, which refers to ensuring that the semantics of the video and related text are consistent in the encoded features, and content alignment, which entails matching the questions and related content in the video.
et al. 2023), hierarchical (Le et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021;
Peng et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2022; Dang et al. 2021), multiscale (Peng et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2021), or multi-granularity
(Xiao et al. 2022) structured models, and generate useful
answers through complex and precise interactions. Furthermore, some researchers have focused on causal analysis (Li
et al. 2022b,a; Yu et al. 2023; Zang et al. 2023), answering questions by finding relevant information in the video.
Although achieving promising performance improvement,
there exist two main challenges that hinder precisely matching the exact answers. The first challenge lies in the semantic
unalignment of visual contents in videos and textual contents in questions. To obtain accurately matched answers,
semantics in video and question need to be precisely aligned
into the same common space, and then generate the exact answer for the question. As shown in Figure 1(a), the text ’two
elephants are pushing a car forward’ and its corresponding
video event should be semantically aligned into the same
feature space for effectively question answering.
The second challenge lies in the content unalignment
within videos that contain much richer information than a
single question sentence. More complete coverage of video
information provides a deeper understanding than a single question sentence that only aligns with a specific event
within the video. To improve the content alignment, multiple
sentences can be used to offer a more comprehensive cover-

Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is a challenging task
within the multimodal learning domain, aiming to understand videos and answer questions (Zhong et al. 2022).
VideoQA not only requires precise semantic understanding
of both the video and the question, but also need effectively
interactions to locate the most critical feature within the
video with rich spatiotemporal information.
Currently, the mainstream paradigm for video question
answering is to encode the video and question using separate pre-trained models (He et al. 2016; Hara, Kataoka, and
Satoh 2018; Devlin et al. 2018), and then fuse the visual
and textual features through a complex interaction model
for classifying the final answer. Many existing works have
exhibited powerful video content modeling abilities and
achieved high performance on multi-modal information interaction. They input extracted features into spatio-temporal
(Jin et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2020; Dang et al. 2021; Gao
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19795

