The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Runtime vs. Extracted Proof Size: An Exponential Gap for CDCL on QBFs
Olaf Beyersdorff1 , Benjamin Böhm1 , Meena Mahajan2
1

2

Institute of Computer Science, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
The Institute of Mathematical Sciences (CI of Homi Bhabha National Institute), Chennai, India
olaf.beyersdorff@uni-jena.de, benjamin.boehm@uni-jena.de, meena@imsc.res.in

Abstract

Both in SAT and in QBF there are intimate connections
between solving techniques and proof systems (Buss and
Nordström 2021; Beyersdorff et al. 2021). This manifests
in the fact that each run of a solver on an unsatisfiable
propositional formula (resp. a true or false QBF) can be
understood as a proof of unsatisfiability (resp. truth or falsity) of the formula. While in principle, every solver gives
thus rise to a proof system, CDCL corresponds to propositional resolution, which is arguably the most-studied and
best-understood proof system in proof complexity.
One direction of this correspondence arises from the efficient extraction of resolution proofs from CDCL traces
(Beame, Kautz, and Sabharwal 2004). A similar proof extraction also works from QCDCL to the QBF resolution system long-distance Q-Resolution (LD-Q-Res) (Zhang and
Malik 2002; Balabanov and Jiang 2012).
These connections open the door towards analysing the
runtime of (Q)CDCL via proof complexity: formulas without short resolution or LD-Q-Res proofs cannot possibly be
solved efficiently by (Q)CDCL. Proof complexity – both in
SAT and QBF – offers a wealth of techniques and crafted
formulas on which exponential lower bounds for (QBF) resolution can be shown, implying analogous runtime lower
bounds for the corresponding solvers (Buss and Nordström
2021; Beyersdorff 2022; Krajı́ček 2019).
Further, proof extraction is of huge practical importance
as the extracted proofs can be used to certify answers of (potentially buggy) solvers (though practical proof logging employs more succinct proof formats than resolution (Wetzler,
Heule, and Jr. 2014; Heule, Seidl, and Biere 2017)).
It is important, both theoretically and practically, to understand how tight this proof extraction is. This manifests in
two related, yet different questions:
Q1: Solver runtime vs minimal proof size: Are there formulas that are hard for (Q)CDCL, but with short resolution
(LD-Q-Res) proofs?
Q2: Solver runtime vs minimal extracted proof size:
Are there formulas that are hard for (Q)CDCL, but where
short resolution (LD-Q-Res) proofs can be extracted from
(Q)CDCL runs?
Clearly, a positive answer for Q2 implies a positive answer for Q1 (hence answering Q2 positively is harder).
For SAT, Q1 received a negative answer in seminal work
(Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2011; Atserias, Fichte, and

Conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) is the dominating algorithmic paradigm for SAT solving and hugely successful in
practice. In its lifted version QCDCL, it is one of the main
approaches for solving quantified Boolean formulas (QBF).
In both SAT and QBF, proofs can be efficiently extracted from
runs of (Q)CDCL solvers. While for CDCL, it is known that
the proof size in the underlying proof system propositional
resolution matches the CDCL runtime up to a polynomial factor, we show that in QBF there is an exponential gap between
QCDCL runtime and the size of the extracted proofs in QBF
resolution systems. We demonstrate that this is not just a gap
between QCDCL runtime and the size of any QBF resolution
proof, but even the extracted proofs are exponentially smaller
for some instances. Hence searching for a small proof via
QCDCL (even with non-deterministic decision policies) will
provably incur an exponential overhead for some instances.

1

Introduction

SAT solving has revolutionised the way we approach computationally hard problems (Vardi 2014). While SAT – determining whether a propositional formula is satisfiable – is the
canonical NP-complete problem, modern SAT solvers successfully tackle huge instances of industrial problems from
virtually all application domains (Biere et al. 2021). This
algorithmic success has been extended to computationally
even harder problems, in particular to the PSPACE-complete
problem of solving quantified Boolean formulas (QBF), thus
reaching to even further applications (Shukla et al. 2019).
SAT solving is dominated by the algorithmic paradigm of
conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) on which almost all
contemporary SAT solvers are based (Marques Silva, Lynce,
and Malik 2021). This approach was lifted to QBF in the
form of QCDCL (Zhang and Malik 2002), one of the principal, but not the only (Biere 2004; Janota and Marques-Silva
2015), competitive QBF solving techniques, implemented
e.g. in the state-of-the-art solvers DepQBF (Lonsing and
Egly 2017) and Qute (Peitl, Slivovsky, and Szeider 2019).1
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
These solvers go beyond plain QCDCL and use advanced techniques such as dependency learning that can improve performance.
We will only consider plain QCDCL in this paper.

7943

