The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

M3SOT: Multi-Frame, Multi-Field, Multi-Space 3D Single Object Tracking
Jiaming Liu1 , Yue Wu1 * , Maoguo Gong1 , Qiguang Miao1 , Wenping Ma1 , Cai Xu1 , Can Qin2
1

Xidian University, China
Northeastern University, USA
{ljm@stu., ywu@, qgmiao@, wpma@mail., cxu@}xidian.edu.cn, gong@ieee.org, qin.ca@northeastern.edu
2

Abstract

Integration

3D Single Object Tracking (SOT) stands a forefront task of
computer vision, proving essential for applications like autonomous driving. Sparse and occluded data in scene point
clouds introduce variations in the appearance of tracked objects, adding complexity to the task. In this research, we
unveil M3SOT, a novel 3D SOT framework, which synergizes multiple input frames (template sets), multiple receptive fields (continuous contexts), and multiple solution spaces
(distinct tasks) in ONE model. Remarkably, M3SOT pioneers
in modeling temporality, contexts, and tasks directly from
point clouds, revisiting a perspective on the key factors influencing SOT. To this end, we design a transformer-based
network centered on point cloud targets in the search area,
aggregating diverse contextual representations and propagating target cues by employing historical frames. As M3SOT
spans varied processing perspectives, we’ve streamlined the
network—trimming its depth and optimizing its structure—to
ensure a lightweight and efficient deployment for SOT applications. We posit that, backed by practical construction,
M3SOT sidesteps the need for complex frameworks and auxiliary components to deliver sterling results. Extensive experiments on benchmarks such as KITTI, nuScenes, and Waymo
Open Dataset demonstrate that M3SOT achieves state-of-theart performance at 38 FPS. Our code and models are available
at https://github.com/ywu0912/TeamCode.git.

𝑷𝒕−𝟏

𝑷𝒕−𝒌

Prediction

Resolution
𝑷𝒔

𝑷𝟎

….

….

Input Frames

Receptive Fields

Mask

Center

Solution Spaces

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed M3SOT. M3SOT collects multi-frame point clouds for propagating target cues,
and extracts spatio-temporal context information through
multiple receptive fields. We set additional mask and center prediction tasks for the backbone at intermediate stages.

and compares the target template with a large number of potential candidates in the t-th frame. P2B (Qi et al. 2020) optimizes this process by taking the cropped template and the
search area as inputs, and propagating the cues to the search
area by training again to predict the current bounding box.
This idea has broad implications for subsequent research.
Yet, the paradigm rooted in Siamese networks overlooks the
background information from two sequential frames. Moreover, it fails when the target is potentially absent in the current frame. To address these issues, M2-Track (Zheng et al.
2022) presents a motion-centric approach, processing two
point cloud frames as input and directly segmenting the
target points from their respective backgrounds, eliminating the need for cropping. TAT (Lan, Jiang, and Xie 2022)
ensures dependable target-specific feature propagation. It
achieves this by sampling high-quality target templates derived from historical frames, applying template data across
various timelines. However, these strategies predominantly
operate on cropped subregions, which are fragmentary of essential contextual information in localization. Echoing the
sentiments of CXTrack (Xu et al. 2023a), leveraging the
contextual information surrounding the target for predicting
its current bounding box is indeed an applicable move.
Hence, a logical proposition might be: by integrating
multi-frame input, motion modeling, and context extraction,
would SOT performance enhance? We refute this seemingly
straightforward yet inelegant hypothesis. Through experimentation, we find that this approach places excessive strain
on the network, potentially diminishing performance. Additionally, we re-examine the variables influencing SOT, un-

Introduction
Visual object tracking is a basic task in computer vision,
while single object tracking (SOT) is tracking a specific object in sequential data, considering only its initial pose. With
the development of 3D sensors such as LiDAR, the acquisition of 3D data and the progress of 3D tasks become more
active. In particular, great progress has been made in the 3D
field based on point clouds (Wu et al. 2022, 2023b,d; Huang,
Mei, and Zhang 2023; Liu et al. 2023c). Yet, SOT remains
challenging due to the variation in object appearance and the
sparseness caused by sensors with inherent limitations.
Existing 3D SOT methods can be summarized into two
main paradigms, i.e., Siamese network and spatio-temporal
modeling. As a pioneering work, SC3D (Giancola, Zarzar,
and Ghanem 2019) crops the target from the (t−1)-th frame
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3630

