The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

WeditGAN: Few-Shot Image Generation via Latent Space Relocation
Yuxuan Duan1 , Li Niu∗1 , Yan Hong2 , Liqing Zhang* 1
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tiansuan Lab, Ant Group
sjtudyx2016@sjtu.edu.cn, ustcnewly@sjtu.edu.cn, yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In few-shot image generation, directly training GAN models
on just a handful of images faces the risk of overfitting. A
popular solution is to transfer the models pretrained on large
source domains to small target ones. In this work, we introduce WeditGAN, which realizes model transfer by editing
the intermediate latent codes w in StyleGANs with learned
constant offsets (∆w), discovering and constructing target latent spaces via simply relocating the distribution of source
latent spaces. The established one-to-one mapping between
latent spaces can naturally prevents mode collapse and overfitting. Besides, we also propose variants of WeditGAN to
further enhance the relocation process by regularizing the direction or finetuning the intensity of ∆w. Experiments on a
collection of widely used source/target datasets manifest the
capability of WeditGAN in generating realistic and diverse
images, which is simple yet highly effective in the research
area of few-shot image generation. Codes are available at
https://github.com/Ldhlwh/WeditGAN.

1

Δ𝑤

Δ𝑤
Δ𝑤
Δ𝑤

latent spaces

Δ𝑤

Δ𝑤

latent space relocation

Figure 1: The core idea of latent space relocation with constant latent codes ∆w, based on the fact that the latent spaces
of related domains in the same generative model share similar shapes of manifolds.

Introduction

2020), yet the effects are usually limited. Other methods propose regularization terms imposing penalties on feature/parameter changes during the transfer processes (Li et al. 2020;
Ojha et al. 2021; Xiao et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022b; Hou
et al. 2022). By minimally updating the model, these methods seek to keep some characteristics of the source images,
hence inherit the diversity of the source domain. Nevertheless, regularization-based methods often face the dilemma
of balancing the characteristics of the source/target domains,
since sacrificing the characteristics of the target domain impairs the image fidelity.
StyleGANs (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al.
2020b) are among the most popular GANs nowadays. They
not only manifest strong generative abilities, but also construct an intermediate latent space W . This latent space is
highly disentangled and well aligned to dataset attributes,
which enables a variety of latent space manipulation methods for image editing (Collins et al. 2020; Goetschalckx
et al. 2019; Härkönen et al. 2020). Most of these methods
focus on in-domain manipulation, such as editing the expression, appearance and/or facial pose of a face into another
face. However, since some previous works discover that outof-distribution latent codes may still render reasonable images (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka 2019, 2020; Tov et al. 2021),

While achieving convincing performance in many tasks
since proposed by Goodfellow et al. (2014), Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are renowned for the enormous
data they require to possess satisfying fidelity and variety
of the generated samples. Mainstream datasets for image
generation methods typically cover 20k (CelebA) (Liu et al.
2015), 70k (FFHQ) (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) or 126k
(LSUN church) (Yu et al. 2015) items. Some researches focus on efficient data usage by enhancing the training processes of GANs with differentiable augmentation (Zhao
et al. 2020; Karras et al. 2020a). These methods lower the
data threshold to hundreds or thousands, yet leaving training
GANs on even fewer images (e.g. ten or five) unsolved. Another paradigm of solutions to few-shot image generation
(FSIG) is model transfer, where GANs pretrained on source
domains with large datasets are adapted to target domains
with only a handful of images. Finetuning-based methods
reduce the number of trainable parameters trying to alleviate
the overfitting issue (Wang et al. 2018; Noguchi and Harada
2019; Robb et al. 2020; Mo, Cho, and Shin 2020; Wang et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1653

