The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Nonparametric Tensor Decomposition for Binary and Count Data
Zerui Tao1,2 , Toshihisa Tanaka1,2 , Qibin Zhao2,1 *
1

Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan
zerui.tao@riken.jp, tanakat@cc.tuat.ac.jp, qibin.zhao@riken.jp
2

Abstract

et al. 2016). Choosing proper TD structures often involves
domain knowledge and can largely affect the final performance (Li and Sun 2020; Li et al. 2022).
While most TD models focus on continuous problems,
many real-world applications may encounter binary or count
data. For example, in click-trough-rate (CTR) prediction
tasks, a tensor of shape user × item × time may store
records of whether a specific user clicked on the item at
the time. Additionally, many tensors consist of multi-way
events, where each element is the count of the event history (Schein et al. 2015, 2016). For example, the Covid-19
dataset (Dong, Du, and Gardner 2020) contains the number
of infection claims, and each observation is associated with
several attributes (tensor modes) such as locations, time, and
claim types. However, less effort is made to deal with such
discrete observations. Compared to continuous counterparts,
handling discrete distributions brings additional difficulties
when constructing probabilistic models, due to their nondifferentiable and non-conjugacy nature.
To address these issues, we propose ENTED, an Efficient
Nonparametric TEnsor Decomposition for binary and count
data. The proposed model is inherited from the Gaussian
process tensor factorization (GPTF, Zhe et al. 2016). Specifically, we adopt a Gaussian process (GP) to replace traditional multi-linear contraction rules. The great flexibility
of nonparametric GPs enables us to learn underlying structures of complex real-world datasets adaptively, rather than
picking one beforehand. To cope with discrete data, the
Pólya-Gamma (PG) augmentation (Polson, Scott, and Windle 2013) is adopted, which provides a unified framework to
establish conjugate models for both binary and count data
(Klami 2015). Moreover, to efficiently approximate infeasible covariance matrices in GPs, we derive a novel sparse
orthogonal variational inference (SOLVE, Shi, Titsias, and
Mnih 2020) scheme for our model that incorporates PG augmentation and natural gradient (NG) updates. Notably, our
model allows for stochastic optimization that is scalable to
large tensors. The contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a flexible nonparametric TD for binary and
count data. By using GPs, the model can adaptively learn
complex hidden structures of high-order tensors.
• A PG augmentation scheme is adopted, resulting in a unified augmented model for binary and count data. Due to
the conjugacy, efficient NG updates can be derived.

In numerous applications, binary reactions or event counts
are observed and stored within high-order tensors. Tensor
decompositions (TDs) serve as a powerful tool to handle
such high-dimensional and sparse data. However, many traditional TDs are explicitly or implicitly designed based on
the Gaussian distribution, which is unsuitable for discrete
data. Moreover, most TDs rely on predefined multi-linear
structures, such as CP and Tucker formats. Therefore, they
may not be effective enough to handle complex real-world
datasets. To address these issues, we propose ENTED, an Efficient Nonparametric TEnsor Decomposition for binary and
count tensors. Specifically, we first employ a nonparametric Gaussian process (GP) to replace traditional multi-linear
structures. Next, we utilize the Pólya-Gamma augmentation
which provides a unified framework to establish conjugate
models for binary and count distributions. Finally, to address
the computational issue of GPs, we enhance the model by incorporating sparse orthogonal variational inference of inducing points, which offers a more effective covariance approximation within GPs and stochastic natural gradient updates
for nonparametric models. We evaluate our model on several
real-world tensor completion tasks, considering binary and
count datasets. The results manifest both better performance
and computational advantages of the proposed model.

1

Introduction

Tensor data are ubiquitous in many real-world applications,
such as visual processing (Liu et al. 2012; Zhao, Zhang,
and Cichocki 2015), spatial-temporal forecasting (Bahadori,
Yu, and Liu 2014; Qiu et al. 2021), probabilistic modeling
(Glasser et al. 2019; Novikov, Panov, and Oseledets 2021),
among many others. Tensor decomposition (TD) is a powerful tool for handling such high-order data. Due to the large
tensor sizes, TD aims to factorize the original data into much
smaller tensor factors. Through these sharing tensor factors,
underlying structures or correlations among different tensor
modes can be captured. Based on this idea, many elegant
TD models have been proposed, such as CP decomposition
(Hitchcock 1927), Tucker decomposition (Tucker 1966),
tensor train/ring decomposition (Oseledets 2011; Zhao et al.
2019) and many variants (Kolda and Bader 2009; Cichocki
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15319

