The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Unstable Convergence Regime of Gradient Descent
Shuo Chen1 , Jiaying Peng2 , Xiaolong Li1 * , Yao Zhao1
1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
School of Mathematical Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, 100048, China
schen1307@foxmail.com, jiayingpeng.math@foxmail.com, lixl@bjtu.edu.cn, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Traditional gradient descent (GD) has been fully investigated
for convex or L-smoothness functions, and it is widely utilized in current neural network optimization. The classical descent lemma ensures that for a function with L-smoothness,
the GD trajectory converges stably towards the minimum
when the learning rate is below 2/L. This convergence is
marked by a consistent reduction in the loss function throughout the iterations. However, recent experimental studies have
demonstrated that even when the L-smoothness condition is
not met, or if the learning rate is increased leading to oscillations in the loss function during iterations, the GD trajectory still exhibits convergence over the long run. This phenomenon is referred to as the unstable convergence regime
of GD. In this paper, we present a theoretical perspective to
offer a qualitative analysis of this phenomenon. The unstable
convergence is in fact an inherent property of GD for general twice differentiable functions. Specifically, the forwardinvariance of GD is established, i.e., it ensures that any point
within a local region will always remain within this region
under GD iteration. Then, based on the forward-invariance,
for the initialization outside an open set containing the local
minimum, the loss function will oscillate at the first several
iterations and then become monotonely decreasing after the
GD trajectory jumped into the open set. This work theoretically clarifies the unstable convergence phenomenon of GD
discussed in previous experimental works. The unstable convergence of GD mainly depends on the selection of the initialization, and it is actually inevitable due to the complex nature
of loss function.

Figure 1: For loss function with a strict local minimum θ ∗ ,
all stable initializations constitute an open set marked in
cyan. For the initialization outside the open set, its GD trajectory (red dots in the left figure) will ultimately jump into
the open set and then stable convergence occurs, while the
loss function will oscillate for the first several GD updates.
such that the following Lipschitz condition holds, for all
θ1 , θ2 ∈ D,
∥∇f (θ1 ) − ∇f (θ2 )∥ ≤ L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥.

Besides the convexity or strong convexity, the L-smoothness
condition is the most common assumption in traditional optimization (Nesterov 2003; Schmidt 2014; Bottou, Curtis,
and Nocedal 2018; Martens 2020). Such assumption is also
supposed to be valid for the loss function of neural networks.
With the L-smoothness assumption, we have the following
classical descent lemma,


Lη
f (θk+1 ) ≤ f (θk ) − η 1 −
∥∇f (θk )∥2 . (3)
2

Introduction
Gradient descent (GD) has been extensively studied in the
literature, especially for convex or L-smoothness functions.
This technique serves as a basis for current neural networks
optimization. Given a loss function f ∈ C 1 (D) and an initialization θ0 ∈ D, where D is a subset of Rn , the GD trajectory {θk }k≥0 is iteratively generated as
θk+1 = θk − η∇f (θk )

(2)

In this situation, we have f (θk+1 ) ≤ f (θk ) if LR satisfies
η < 2/L.

(4)

It establishes a sufficient condition for loss reduction during
each iteration of GD.This criterion leads to a “stable” convergence phase in GD, as discussed in (Ahn, Zhang, and Sra
2022). Additionally, for quadratic functions, condition (4)
becomes indispensable to ensure the stability of the GD trajectory. In fact, when η > 2/L, the GD trajectory diverges
for quadratic functions.The sufficient condition (4) considering L-smooth globally characterizes the loss function. Most

(1)

where η > 0 is a pre-selected learning rate (LR). The function f is called L-smoothness, if there exists a constant L
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11373

