The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NestE: Modeling Nested Relational Structures for Knowledge Graph Reasoning
Bo Xiong1 , Mojtaba Nayyeri1 , Linhao Luo2 , Zihao Wang1 ,
Shirui Pan3 , Steffen Staab1,4
1

University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
Griffith University, Queensland, Australia
4
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom
bo.xiong@ki.uni-stuttgart.de
2

United States

contains
use

_la

nationality

Reasoning with knowledge graphs (KGs) has primarily focused on triple-shaped facts. Recent advancements have been
explored to enhance the semantics of these facts by incorporating more potent representations, such as hyper-relational
facts. However, these approaches are limited to atomic facts,
which describe a single piece of information. This paper
extends beyond atomic facts and delves into nested facts,
represented by quoted triples where subjects and objects
are triples themselves (e.g., ((BarackObama, holds position,
President), succeed by, (DonaldTrump, holds position, President))). These nested facts enable the expression of complex semantics like situations over time and logical patterns
over entities and relations. In response, we introduce NestE, a
novel KG embedding approach that captures the semantics of
both atomic and nested factual knowledge. NestE represents
each atomic fact as a 1 ⇥ 3 matrix, and each nested relation is
modeled as a 3⇥3 matrix that rotates the 1⇥3 atomic fact matrix through matrix multiplication. Each element of the matrix is represented as a complex number in the generalized
4D hypercomplex space, including (spherical) quaternions,
hyperbolic quaternions, and split-quaternions. Through thorough analysis, we demonstrate the embedding’s efficacy in
capturing diverse logical patterns over nested facts, surpassing the confines of first-order logic-like expressions. Our experimental results showcase NestE’s significant performance
gains over current baselines in triple prediction and conditional link prediction. The code and pre-trained models are
open available at https://github.com/xiongbo010/NestE.

imp
lies
_la
ng.

age

implies_language

ngu

age

k

spea

English
succeed_by

_

use

Washington DC

gu
lan

spe

ak

lives_in

Abstract

holds_position

profession

holds_position

holds_position

holds_position
Joe Biden
President
Donald Trump
y
_b
ed i
e
m
cc
pl
su
ies
works_for_when
_p
im
ro
pl
f.
ie
s_
pr
of
.
Barack Obama
Politician
Vice President
profession

Figure 1: An example of a nested factual KG consisting of 1)
a set of atomic facts describing the relationship between entities and 2) a set of nested facts describing the relationship
between atomic facts. Nested factual relations are colored
and they either describe situations in/over time (e.g., succeed by and works for when) or logical patterns (e.g., implies profession and implies language).
(Liu, Yao, and Li 2020; Fatemi et al. 2020) describe relationships between multiple entities, and hyper-relational
facts (Galkin et al. 2020; Xiong et al. 2023a) augment primal
triples with key-value qualifiers that provide contextual information. These approaches allow for expressing complex
semantics and enable answering more sophisticated queries
with additional knowledge (Alivanistos et al. 2022).
However, these beyond-triple representations typically focus only on relationships between entities that jointly define an atomic fact, overlooking the significance of relationships that describe multiple facts together. Indeed,
within a KG, each atomic fact may have a relationship with another atomic fact. Consider the following two
atomic facts: T1 =(JoeBiden, holds position, VicePresident)
and T2 =(BarackObama, holds position, President). We can
depict the scenario where JoeBiden held the position of VicePresident under the President BarackObama using a triple
(T1 , works for when, T2 ). Such a fact about facts is referred
to as a nested fact 1 and the relation connecting these two
facts is termed a nested relation. Fig. 1 provides an illustration of a KG containing both atomic and nested facts.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) depict relationships between entities, commonly through triple-shaped facts such as (JoeBiden, holds position, VicePresident). KG embeddings map
entities and relations into a lower-dimensional vector space
while retaining their relational semantics. This empowers
the effective inference of missing relationships between entities directly from their embeddings. Prior research (Bordes et al. 2013; Trouillon et al. 2016) has primarily centered on embedding triple-shaped facts and predicting the
missing elements of these triples. Yet, to augment the tripleshaped representations, recent endeavors explore knowledge
that extends beyond these triples. For instance, n-ary facts
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9205

This is also called a quoted triple in RDF star (Champin 2022).

