The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MFABA: A More Faithful and Accelerated Boundary-Based Attribution Method
for Deep Neural Networks
Zhiyu Zhu1 , Huaming Chen1* , Jiayu Zhang2 , Xinyi Wang3 , Zhibo Jin1 , Minhui Xue4
Dongxiao Zhu5 , Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo6
1

The University of Sydney
2
SuZhouYierqi
3
University of Malaya
4
CSIRO’s Data61
5
Wayne State University
6
University of Texas at San Antonio
Abstract

which can find the causal relationship between the inputs
and outputs. In general, there are two fundamental axioms
proposed in Integrated Gradients (IG) (Sundararajan, Taly,
and Yan 2017): Sensitivity, and Implementation Invariance.
Sensitivity requires good capability of differing the feature
and prediction for every input, which ensures that the input
information can be correctly attributed for the predictions. In
addition, a method that satisfies Implementation Invariance
defines that two neural networks with the same input and
output values are functionally equivalent regardless the implementation details. The attribution method should retain
the same results given two identical networks.
Different from IG using integration to calculate the contribution, Expected Gradient (EG) method (Erion et al. 2021)
introduces prior knowledge and uses it as a prior probability distribution for feature attribution, proposing expectation
gradients to calculate the importance of an input feature
to the output. Boundary-based Integrated Gradient (BIG)
method is one of the first methods that uses adversarial attacks with a linear attribution path to identify appropriate decision boundaries for interpretation (Wang, Fredrikson, and
Datta 2021). However, the overall performance is limited
due to the linear attribution path of IG algorithm (Jin et al.
2023), and BIG requires much more time for computation.
Adversarial Gradient Integration (AGI) method (Pan, Li,
and Zhu 2021) exploits the gradient information of adversarial examples to compute the contribution of all input features
by integrating the gradient along the non-linear path with the
steepest ascent. While AGI does not depend on the choice
of reference points in IG, it employs targeted adversarial attacks to discern optimal decision boundaries. Consequently,
AGI incurs significant computational costs, particularly in
complex tasks and models where extensive gradient integrations are required. The interpretation performance is further
hindered if noise or outliers exist in the input data.
To address the noise pixels generated by IG in regions
where the prediction category is irrelevant, the Guided Integrated Gradients (GIG) method (Kapishnikov et al. 2021)
sets all contributions in the region specified in the feedforward process to zero by guided gradients and only the target
region of the network output needs to be considered. While

To better understand the output of deep neural networks
(DNN), attribution based methods have been an important
approach for model interpretability, which assign a score for
each input dimension to indicate its importance towards the
model outcome. Notably, the attribution methods use the axioms of sensitivity and implementation invariance to ensure
the validity and reliability of attribution results. Yet, the existing attribution methods present challenges for effective interpretation and efficient computation. In this work, we introduce MFABA, an attribution algorithm that adheres to axioms, as a novel method for interpreting DNN. Additionally, we provide the theoretical proof and in-depth analysis for MFABA algorithm, and conduct a large scale experiment. The results demonstrate its superiority by achieving
over 101.5142 times faster speed than the state-of-the-art attribution algorithms. The effectiveness of MFABA is thoroughly evaluated through the statistical analysis in comparison to other methods, and the full implementation package
is open-source at: https://github.com/LMBTough/MFABA.

Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has shown prominent performance in
various areas of computing tasks, such as image classification (Li 2022), semantic segmentation (Mo et al. 2022), object detection (Zaidi et al. 2022), and text classification (Minaee et al. 2021). A wide range of applications in practice
have demonstrated its effectiveness, unfortunately without
much contextual explanation of the decision process. This
has led to a severe crisis towards the trustworthiness of DL
models given the facts of poor interpretability of results,
intractability of model errors, and the difficulty in tracing
model behaviours (Janik, Sankaran, and Ortiz 2019). It remains challenging for researchers to obtain a better understanding of complicated models, especially those based on
multiple layers and designed for nonlinear learning.
Recently, the attribution methods have been proposed as
one of the most promising means to solve this problem,
* Corresponding author: huaming.chen@sydney.edu.au
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17228

