The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unifying Multi-Modal Uncertainty Modeling and Semantic Alignment for
Text-to-Image Person Re-identification
Zhiwei Zhao1,2 , Bin Liu1,2 * , Yan Lu3 , Qi Chu1,2 , Nenghai Yu1,2
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
zwzhao98@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {flowice,qchu,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn, luyan@pjlab.org.cn
(a) Uncertainty in pedestrian images and textual descriptions
(1) The woman has long brown hair and she
is walking.She is wearing a dark red and
purple coat, black pants and a pair of black
shoes.

Abstract
Text-to-Image person re-identification (TI-ReID) aims to retrieve the images of target identity according to the given
textual description. The existing methods in TI-ReID focus
on aligning the visual and textual modalities through contrastive feature alignment or reconstructive masked language
modeling (MLM). However, these methods parameterize the
image/text instances as deterministic embeddings and do not
explicitly consider the inherent uncertainty in pedestrian images and their textual descriptions, leading to limited imagetext relationship expression and semantic alignment. To address the above problem, in this paper, we propose a novel
method that unifies multi-modal uncertainty modeling and
semantic alignment for TI-ReID. Specifically, we model the
image and textual feature vectors of pedestrian as Gaussian distributions, where the multi-granularity uncertainty of
the distribution is estimated by incorporating batch-level and
identity-level feature variances for each modality. The multimodal uncertainty modeling acts as a feature augmentation
and provides richer image-text semantic relationship. Then
we present a bi-directional cross-modal circle loss to more
effectively align the probabilistic features between image and
text in a self-paced manner. To further promote more comprehensive image-text semantic alignment, we design a task that
complements the masked language modeling, focusing on the
cross-modality semantic recovery of global masked token after cross-modal interaction. Extensive experiments conducted
on three TI-ReID datasets highlight the effectiveness and superiority of our method over state-of-the-arts.

(2) A lady with long brown hair, a rose
striped coat, black trousers and black boots.
She is carrying a rose red bag and a yellow
handbag.
(1)

(2)
point

(3)

(3) A woman with long hair, dark coat, white
work card around her neck, black trousers
and black high-heeled boots is walking.
distribution

(b) deterministic image/text modeling (c) uncertain-aware image/text modeling

Figure 1: (a) The inherent uncertainty for pedestrian images and text descriptions in TI-ReID. (b) Current TI-ReID
methods do not explicitly depict the uncertainty and parameterize visual-textual data as deterministic embeddings. (c)
We model image/text embeddings as distributions and estimate the multi-granularity distribution uncertainty to express more reasonable and richer image-text relationships.
of the complex semantic concepts of pedestrians across the
image and text modalities, as well as the establishment of
cross-modal correspondences to bridge the inherent modality gap. Existing TI-ReID methods mainly revolve around
aligning the image and text description of pedestrian into
a shared space. They can be classified into cross-modal
interaction-free (Zhang and Lu 2018; Han et al. 2021; Sarafianos, Xu, and Kakadiaris 2019; Wang et al. 2020) and crossmodal interaction-based (Li et al. 2017; Niu et al. 2020; Gao
et al. 2021; Jiang and Ye 2023) methods. The former primarily utilized contrastive alignment (Zhang and Lu 2018; Han
et al. 2021) to embed image-text features into shared space.
In contrast, the latter employed the cross-attention mechanism (Niu et al. 2020; Farooq et al. 2022) and masked language modeling (Jiang and Ye 2023) to build fine-grained
correlation between image regions and textual entities.
While successful to some extent, these methods have
not explicitly considered the inherent uncertainty between
pedestrian images and textual descriptions. As shown in
Fig. 1 (a), uncertainty in pedestrian images arises from factors like viewpoint variations, lighting changes, while in tex-

Introduction
Text-to-Image person re-identification (TI-ReID) is a subtask of person re-identification (Ye et al. 2022), aiming to
retrieve the most matching pedestrian images from an image
gallery based on given textual descriptions. Leveraging the
ease of obtaining textual descriptions of the query compared
to actual images, this technology offers a more versatile and
user-friendly person search manner. Given its practical applicability in the domain of public safety, the TI-ReID has
gained increasing attention in recent years.
Compared to general image-text retrieval, the TI-ReID is
more challenging. It requires a fine-grained understanding
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7534

