The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causal Representation Learning via Counterfactual Intervention
Xiutian Li1 * , Siqi Sun1 * , Rui Feng1,2,3†
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, Shanghai
200433
2
Fudan Zhangjiang Institute, Shanghai, 200120
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
lixt22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {siqi sun, fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

et al. 2022; Lippe et al. 2022; Reddy, Balasubramanian et al.
2022; Shen et al. 2022) design complex mechanisms to endow underlying semantic factors of interest with causality
learned from observed data. The important part of these
methods is learning causal effects of factor pairs. However,
these methods ignore the impact of inductive and dataset biases in the observed data on learning causal effects. Taking
CelebA dataset (Liu et al. 2015) in Figure 1 (a) as an example, it includes semantic factors age, gender, bald and
beard. Figure 1 (b.1) shows the causal graph constructed by
current methods. The causal graph illustrates the causal relationships among age, gender, bald and beard. When models
learn causal effect from age to bald, there are inductive biases, factors affect bald besides age, that influence learning
causal effect. For instance, the image influences the values of
both age and bald. If models observe that bald is always with
sunglasses and not bald always occurs without sunglasses in
images, there will be negative effects from the image to bald
through sunglasses. Besides, some factors not in the image
such as genes, habits and jobs also influence the value of
bald. On this occasion, the causal effect from age to bald
learned by models is mixed by direct causal effect from age
to bald and negative effects from inductive biases. Moreover, dataset bias affects learning causal effect from age to
bald as well. Concretely, when not bald sample size far exceeds bald sample size, the learned causal effect from age to
bald will also be weakened, since bald sample is not easily
observed. With inductive and dataset biases, causal effects
they learned are biased that deviate from the actual values,
and thus the performance of causal representation learning
would be harmed.

Existing causal representation learning methods are based on
the causal graph they build. However, due to the omission
of bias within the causal graph, they essentially encourage
models to learn biased causal effects in latent space. In this
paper, we propose a novel causally disentangling framework
that aims to learn unbiased causal effects. We first introduce
inductive and dataset biases into traditional causal graph for
the physical concepts of interest. Then, we eliminate the negative effects from these two biases by counterfactual intervention with reweighted loss function for learning unbiased
causal effects. Finally, we employ the causal effects into the
VAE to endow the latent representations with causality. In
particular, we highlight that removing biases in this paper is
regarded as a part of learning process for unbiased causal
effects, which is crucial for causal disentanglement performance improvement. Through extensive experiments on realworld and synthetic datasets, we show that our method outperforms different baselines and obtains the state-of-the-art
results for achieving causal representation learning.

Introduction
Disentangled representation learning (DRL) (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013) aims at identifying and separating underlying independent semantic factors of interest
from observed data. Though DRL has achieved many advances (Gilpin et al. 2018; Creager et al. 2019; Zhu et al.
2020; Montero et al. 2020), these methods hold a collective
assumption that the underlying semantic factors are mutually independent, which is inadaptable in most real circumstances. This is because the underlying semantic factors of
interest are often causally related rather than mutually independent (Bengio et al. 2019). And not capturing causal
relationships between underlying factors limits the generalization of disentanglement on causally related factors scenarios (Shen et al. 2022). To this end, the task of causal representation learning (Suter et al. 2019) has been proposed,
for learning causal relationships among underlying semantic factors of interest during DRL.
To realize causal representation learning, many methods (Khemakhem et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Brehmer

To address the problem, in this paper, we propose CounterFactual Intervention Variational AutoEncoder (CFI-VAE)
to remove the influences of inductive and dataset biases
in causal representation learning. Given images and weak
supervision annotations, CFI-VAE first learns an unbiased
causal effect matrix by counterfactual intervention with
reweighted loss function. Then, the images are transferred
to independent exogenous variables through an encoder. The
exogenous variables consist of independent representations
corresponding to the physical concepts of interest and other
information in images. With causal effect matrix, the independent representations are endowed with causality as
causal representations through a nonlinear Structural Causal

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3234

