The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Evaluating Pre-trial Programs Using Interpretable Machine Learning Matching
Algorithms for Causal Inference
Travis Seale-Carlisle* 1 , Saksham Jain* 2† , Courtney Lee3 , Caroline Levenson3 , Swathi
Ramprasad3 , Brandon Garrett3 , Sudeepa Roy3 , Cynthia Rudin3 , Alexander Volfovsky3
1
University of Aberdeen
University of Washington
3
Duke University
travis.seale-carlisle@abdn.ac.uk, sj305@uw.edu, courtney.lee@duke.edu, cglevenson18@gmail.com,
ramprasadswathi@gmail.com, bgarrett@law.duke.edu, sudeepa@cs.duke.edu, cynthia@cs.duke.edu,
alexander.volfovsky@duke.edu
2

Abstract

A common alternative to pre-trial detention in the United
States is community-based supervision (Mahoney et al.
2001). The primary goal of these ‘pre-trial programs’ is
to provide community support for people while they await
trial. The programs also aim to reduce re-arrests and failures
to appear in court. They typically provide access to education, employment training, and transitional housing as long
as certain conditions and restrictions are met (Clarke 1988;
Mamalian et al. 2011; VanNostrand and Keebler 2009; VanNostrand, Rose, and Weibrecht 2016). There is often considerable discretion in selecting which community supervision conditions are imposed, but a pre-trial services agency
may provide the judge with recommendations concerning
what program may be suitable for a person, and that agency
may then be responsible for supervising that program. For
example, people who take part in these pre-trial programs
may need to have periodic check-ins with a case manager,
maintain employment, undergo alcohol testing and treatment, wear an electronic monitor, or take part in cognitive
behavioral therapy (Levin 2007; Clark and Henry 2003). If
they fail to meet the imposed conditions or violate any restrictions, they may have their bond conditions modified,
and could be jailed for the duration of the pre-trial period.

After a person is arrested and charged with a crime, they may
be released on bail and required to participate in a community supervision program while awaiting trial. These ‘pretrial programs’ are common throughout the United States, but
very little research has demonstrated their effectiveness. Researchers have emphasized the need for more rigorous program evaluation methods, which we introduce in this article. We describe a program evaluation pipeline that uses recent interpretable machine learning techniques for observational causal inference, and demonstrate these techniques in
a study of a pre-trial program in Durham, North Carolina.
Our findings show no evidence that the program either significantly increased or decreased the probability of new criminal
charges. If these findings replicate, the criminal-legal system
needs to either improve pre-trial programs or consider alternatives to them. The simplest option is to release low-risk
individuals back into the community without subjecting them
to any restrictions or conditions. Another option is to assign
individuals to pre-trial programs that incentivize pro-social
behavior. We believe that the techniques introduced here can
provide researchers the rigorous tools they need to evaluate
these programs.

Introduction

While pre-trial programs are common throughout the
United States (Mahoney et al. 2001), there is little research
demonstrating that such programs are effective at reducing
new arrests (Cadigan and Lowenkamp 2011; Cohen 2012;
Lowenkamp and VanNostrand 2013; Mamalian et al. 2011;
Robinson et al. 2011). Based on limited data available, researchers have found no impact on re-arrest rates (Austin,
Krisberg, and Listky 1985; Cooprider and Kerby 1990) or
a slight reduction in re-arrest (Goldkamp and White 2006;
Lowenkamp and VanNostrand 2013). Bechtel et al. (2017)
conducted a meta-analysis of the pre-trial literature to clarify these mixed findings. They emphasized that while the
research does not support any finding that pre-trial supervision is effective in reducing re-arrest, the quality of the
extant research “was not very good” (p. 460) and there is a
“great need for new and more rigorous pre-trial research in
all related areas” (p. 459). We answer that call here by introducing a rigorous method for evaluating pre-trial programs.

In the United States, about five-hundred thousand people
are held each day in jail while awaiting a criminal trial,
often because they cannot afford to pay cash bail (Minton
and Zeng 2021). This problem is compounded by a large
body of research that suggests that pre-trial detention causes
a variety of negative outcomes (Dobbie, Goldin, and Yang
2018; Heaton, Mayson, and Stevenson 2017; Leslie and
Pope 2017; Lowenkamp, VanNostrand, and Holsinger 2013;
Phillips 2012; Stevenson 2018). In an attempt to improve
pre-trial justice, many people including researchers, policymakers, and legal scholars have expressed a strong interest
in alternatives to pre-trial detention (Garrett 2022).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done while at Duke University
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22331

