The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scaling Up Semi-supervised Learning with Unconstrained Unlabelled Data
Shuvendu Roy, Ali Etemad
Queen’s University, Canada
{shuvendu.roy, ali.etemad}@queensu.ca

Abstract

UnMixMatch

+5.61%

We propose UnMixMatch, a semi-supervised learning framework which can learn effective representations from unconstrained unlabelled data in order to scale up performance.
Most existing semi-supervised methods rely on the assumption that labelled and unlabelled samples are drawn from the
same distribution, which limits the potential for improvement
through the use of free-living unlabeled data. Consequently,
the generalizability and scalability of semi-supervised learning are often hindered by this assumption. Our method aims
to overcome these constraints and effectively utilize unconstrained unlabelled data in semi-supervised learning. UnMixMatch consists of three main components: a supervised
learner with hard augmentations that provides strong regularization, a contrastive consistency regularizer to learn underlying representations from the unlabelled data, and a selfsupervised loss to enhance the representations that are learnt
from the unlabelled data. We perform extensive experiments
on 4 commonly used datasets and demonstrate superior performance over existing semi-supervised methods with a performance boost of 4.79%. Extensive ablation and sensitivity
studies show the effectiveness and impact of each of the proposed components of our method. The code for our work is
publicly available.

1

Labelled Samples

CoMatch

ReMixMatch

Unlabelled Samples

Figure 1: Learning from unconstrained unlabelled data
(left). Scaling up unlabelled data provides a large improvement for UnMixMatch (right).

necessitating the inclusion of samples from every known
class and ensuring that its data distribution is similar. These
constraints create two important challenges. First, collecting an unlabelled dataset that necessarily includes samples
from certain classes can be challenging in real-world settings. Second, this approach severely restricts the scalability
of SSL to large, web-scale, unconstrained, unlabelled data
since such data do not hold the aforementioned constraints.
Most existing semi-supervised methods are not suitable for
learning from unconstrained data as they rely on pseudolabel predictions, which require the ‘unlabeled’ set to have
the same classes as the ‘labelled’ set.
In this paper, we propose a novel SSL approach called UnMixMatch, which can learn effective representations from
unconstrained unlabelled data and effectively enable SSL
to scale up using web-scale unlabelled data. UnMixMatch
comprises three main components, which have some similarities to previous SSL methods but have been specifically
modified and tailored toward the ‘scalability’ criteria: (1) A
supervised learner with hard augmentations: We introduce
a new hard augmentation module that combines RandAug
with MixUp to prevent overfitting on the small labelled set.
The convention of using soft augmentations of the existing
literature does not perform well when learning from unconstrained unlabelled data. (2) A contrastive consistency regularizer: The primary unsupervised learning component of
our method involves a contrastive regularizer, which learns
the underlying data representations by enforcing the model
to produce consistent predictions under strong perturbations.

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) uses large amounts of unlabeled data along with small amounts of labelled data to
reduce the reliance on fully-labelled datasets. Most existing
semi-supervised methods rely on the assumption that the labelled and unlabelled data belong to the same distributions,
an assumption that is not necessarily true in real-world scenarios. Moreover, this assumption prohibits us from leveraging free-living unlabelled data with different distributions. In
fact, it has been shown in previous studies that incorporating out-of-distribution data with the unlabelled set for SSL
impairs performance (Oliver et al. 2018).
To adopt a less constrained approach regarding unlabelled
data, open set SSL has been proposed (Saito, Kim, and
Saenko 2021; Yu et al. 2020), which allows the unlabeled
training set to contain samples from classes which are not
necessarily present in the labelled set. Nevertheless, this setting still places certain restrictions on the unlabeled data,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14847

