The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Finding Interpretable Class-Specific Patterns through Efficient Neural Search
Nils Philipp Walter1 , Jonas Fischer2 , Jilles Vreeken1
1

2

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Department of Biostatistics
nils.walter@cispa.de, jfischer@hsph.harvard.edu, jv@cispa.de

Abstract

gene expression data, most existing approaches are not applicable as they either do not scale or are limited to pair-wise
interactions. Here, we suggest a novel neural network learning approach that follows the paradigm of neuro-symbolic
learning: leverage the predictive power of, and efficient
frameworks for neural networks, while constraining the
models such that learned patterns are fully interpretable.
In particular, we learn a modified NN architecture that in
the forward pass leverages binary weights and activations
to achieve symbolically interpretable intermediate features,
while leveraging efficient continuous optimization during
backpropagation (Fischer and Vreeken 2021).
To learn patterns that differentiate classes, such as healthy
and tumor tissue, we build an architecture that is comprised
of both a binary autoencoder and a separate classification
head, which we call D IFF NAPS. We propose a multi-task
objective to jointly optimize reconstruction and classification, driving learned patterns to differentiate between classes
through a bottleneck in the autoencoder (see Fig. 1). We additionally introduce regularizers that improve optimization
and emphasize interpretability of learned patterns.
We empirically evaluate D IFF NAPS on synthetic and realworld data, comparing against baseline approaches such as
classification trees, but also recent proposals such as rule
lists, statistical and compression-based pattern mining, and
neuro-symbolic learning. We show that D IFF NAPS faithfully
reconstructs patterns relevant for distinguishing between
classes, is robust to noise, and easily scales to hundreds of
thousands of features, which makes it unique among existing
work. We consider three high-dimensional biological applications, including breast cancer genomics, on which D IFF NAPS finds meaningful patterns that hold promise for giving
domain experts insight in the drivers of these diseases. We
make the code publicly available.1

Discovering patterns in data that best describe the differences
between classes allows to hypothesize and reason about classspecific mechanisms. In molecular biology, for example, this
bears promise of advancing the understanding of cellular processes differing between tissues or diseases, which could lead
to novel treatments. To be useful in practice, methods that
tackle the problem of finding such differential patterns have
to be readily interpretable by domain experts, and scalable to
the extremely high-dimensional data.
In this work, we propose a novel, inherently interpretable binary neural network architecture D IFF NAPS that extracts differential patterns from data. D IFF NAPS is scalable to hundreds of thousands of features and robust to noise, thus overcoming the limitations of current state-of-the-art methods in
large-scale applications such as in biology. We show on synthetic and real world data, including three biological applications, that, unlike its competitors, D IFF NAPS consistently
yields accurate, succinct, and interpretable class descriptions.

1

Introduction

Machine learning can be broadly categorized into predictive and discovery-based approaches. Predictive tasks, such
as object detection, protein folding (Jumper et al. 2021) and
fusion reactor control (Degrave et al. 2022), are aimed at
maximizing performance. Mastering such a given task often requires learning deep and intricate models from which
it is hard up to impossible to understand how it arrived at a
decision. In data-driven discovery, the goal is to find interpretable relations, called patterns, in the data that best describe observed classes. That is, the focus is on interpretability rather than maximizing performance. Discovery-based
approaches are in especially high demand in biology, where
the complex gene-regulatory dynamics and their differences
between tissues or across diseases remain unclear, but, when
elucidated, can offer new avenues for treatment and prevention. Here, symbolic explanations are essential for domain
experts, for example, patterns of gene expression that are
associated with cancer subtypes, to be able to directly understand and act on these patterns.
Although there exist massive amounts of highdimensional data, such as genetic human variation or

2

Related Work

Finding class-specific descriptions is at the core of
discovery-oriented approaches in machine learning and data
mining. A text-book example—and still widely used in
practice—is the decision tree, which yields an interpretable
decision path leading to a classification.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9062

https://eda.rg.cispa.io/prj/diffnaps/

