The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Worst-Case VCG Redistribution Mechanism Design Based on the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis
Mingyu Guo
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences
University of Adelaide, Australia
mingyu.guo@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

computer science and economics. Under this model, a group
of agents decide whether or not to build a public project
(i.e., a bridge). In this paper, we focus on binary and nonexcludable public project. That is, the mechanism decision
is binary – we either build the project or not. The project
is non-excludable in the sense that once it is built, it can
be consumed by every agent, regardless of their contributions. Our model follows prior works on VCG redistribution
mechanism design for the public project problem (Naroditskiy et al. 2012; Guo 2016; Guo and Shen 2017; Guo 2019;
Wang, Zuo, and Guo 2021). Below we describe the model.

We study worst-case VCG redistribution mechanism design
for the public project problem. The mechanism design task
comes down to designing a payment function that maximizes
the worst-case allocative efficiency ratio.
We propose a suite of techniques for worst-case mechanism
design via neural networks. We use a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) with R E LU activation to model the payment function
and use mixed integer programming (MIP) to solve for the
worst-case type profiles that maximally violate the mechanism design constraints. We collect these worst-case type profiles and use them as training samples to train toward better
worst-case mechanisms.
In practice, we require a tiny neural network structure for
the above approach to scale. The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis states that a large network is likely to contain a “winning
ticket” – a much smaller subnetwork that “won the initialization lottery”, which makes its training particularly effective.
Motivated by this hypothesis, we train a large network and
prune it into a tiny subnetwork (i.e., “draw” a ticket). We run
MIP-based worst-case training on the drawn subnetwork and
evaluate the resulting mechanism’s worst-case performance
(i.e., “scratch” the ticket). If the subnetwork does not achieve
good worst-case performance, then we record the type profiles that cause the current draw to be bad. To draw again, we
restore the large network to its initial weights and prune using
recorded type profiles from earlier draws (i.e., redraw from
the original ticket pot while avoiding drawing the same ticket
twice). We expect to eventually encounter a tiny subnetwork
that leads to effective training for our worst-case mechanism
design task. Lastly, a by-product of multiple ticket draws is
an ensemble of mechanisms with different worst cases, which
improves the worst-case performance further.
Using our approach, we find previously unknown optimal
mechanisms for up to 5 agents. Our results confirm the tightness of conjectured theoretical upper bounds. For up to 20
agents, we derive significantly improved worst-case mechanisms, surpassing a long list of existing manual results.

Definition 1 (Public Project Problem). n agents decide
whether or not to build a public project that costs 1. Agent
i’s type is θi (0 ≤ θi ≤ 1). If the mechanism decision is
NOT BUILD , then agent i retains her share of the project cost
1
1
n and her valuation is n for this outcome. If the mechanism
decision is to BUILD, then agent i’s valuation is θi .
VCG redistribution mechanisms all share the same allocation rule. As the name suggests, we allocate efficiently
according to the VCG mechanism (Vickrey 1961; Clarke
1971; Groves 1973). In the context of the public project
problem, the project is built if and only if the agents’ total
valuation of the project reaches
P the project cost. That is, the
project is built if and only if i θi ≥ 1. VCG redistribution
mechanisms first charge the VCG payments, which ensures
strategy-proofness. Then on top of the VCG payments, every
agent receives back a redistribution payment. Agent i’s redistribution must be independent of her own type θi , which
ensures that the redistribution term does not affect the original VCG mechanism’s efficiency and strategy-proofness.
We further require that the total amount redistributed does
not exceed the total VCG payment collected (i.e., we require
the non-deficit constraint). Actually, due to Holmström’s
characterization (Holmström 1979), for our model, the VCG
redistribution mechanisms are the only mechanisms that are
strategy-proof and efficient. Also due to Holmström’s characterization, VCG redistribution mechanisms are essentially
non-deficit Groves mechanisms (Groves 1973).

Introduction
The public project problem (Mas-Colell, Whinston, and
Green 1995; Moore 2006; Moulin 1988) is a fundamental
mechanism design model that has been well studied in both

Definition 2 (VCG redistribution mechanisms for the public
project problem (Naroditskiy
et al. 2012)). ThePproject is
P
built if and only i θi ≥ 1. Agent i receives j̸=i θj −
h(θ−i ) if the project is built and receives n−1
n − h(θ−i ) if
the project is not built.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9740

