The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Tuning-Free Inversion-Enhanced Control for Consistent Image Editing
Xiaoyue Duan1,2 * † , Shuhao Cui2 * , Guoliang Kang1,4 , Baochang Zhang1,3,4,5 ,
Zhengcong Fei2 , Mingyuan Fan2 , Junshi Huang2‡
1

School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
Meituan
3
Hangzhou Research Institute, Beihang University, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
5
Nanchang Institute of Technology, Nanchang, China
{LittleMoon, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn, {hassassin1621, kgl.prml, feizhengcong, fanmingyuan01, junshi.huang}@gmail.com
Abstract
Consistent editing of real images is a challenging task, as
it requires performing non-rigid edits (e.g., changing postures) to the main objects in the input image without changing
their identity or attributes. To guarantee consistent attributes,
some existing methods fine-tune the entire model or the textual embedding for structural consistency, but they are timeconsuming and fail to perform non-rigid edits. Other works
are tuning-free, but their performances are weakened by the
quality of Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) reconstruction, which often fails in real-world scenarios. In
this paper, we present a novel approach called Tuning-free
Inversion-enhanced Control (TIC), which directly correlates
features from the inversion process with those from the sampling process to mitigate the inconsistency in DDIM reconstruction. Specifically, our method effectively obtains inversion features from the key and value features in the selfattention layers, and enhances the sampling process by these
inversion features, thus achieving accurate reconstruction and
content-consistent editing. To extend the applicability of our
method to general editing scenarios, we also propose a maskguided attention concatenation strategy that combines contents from both the inversion and the naive DDIM editing processes. Experiments show that the proposed method outperforms previous works in reconstruction and consistent editing, and produces impressive results in various settings.

Figure 1: Naive DDIM reconstruction may result in bad
cases (col. 2). Therefore, querying the contents from the
naive DDIM reconstruction process during editing (i.e.,
MasaCtrl) lead to unreasonable editing results (col. 4). By
enhancing the self-attention layer with contents from inversion, our method accurately reconstruct the input image (col.
3), and thus achieve content-consistent editing (col. 5).
ance and task settings, which highlight the need to address
the challenges and opportunities in field.
In the realm of text-guided image editing, a crucial and
practical task is to achieve consistent image editing. Consistent image editing, as demonstrated in recent works such
as (Meng et al. 2021; Hertz et al. 2022), involves preserving
the identity of objects and background details in the input
image while modifying only certain non-rigid attributes of
the objects (e.g., changing posture). Nevertheless, this requirement remains challenging, as existing text-guided editing methods can hardly solve the problems of consistent
editing effectively. For example, some methods (Brooks,
Holynski, and Efros 2022; Tumanyan et al. 2022) are capable of preserving the structure or layout of the input image
when performing style transfer or object replacement, but
they can barely preserve the content or identity of the object,
resulting in inconsistent editing. Imagic (Kawar et al. 2022)
can preserve the original attributes of the object, which allows for non-rigid editing. Yet, it requires fine-tuning the
entire T2I model and optimizing the textual embedding for
each input image, which is not acceptable for real-world applications in terms of efficiency.
To achieve efficient consistent image editing, subsequent

Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress in text-to-image (T2I)
generation has been witnessed, as evidenced by the impressive results by powerful models (Ramesh et al. 2021; Ding
et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022). These large-scale T2I models (e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022)) are capable of generating diverse and high-quality images that
match the given text descriptions. Moreover, by leveraging
T2I models, we can also perform text-guided image editing,
as demonstrated by recent works (Nichol et al. 2021; Parmar
et al. 2023). These works involve various forms of text guid* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during an internship in Meituan.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

1644

