The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UniCATS: A Unified Context-Aware Text-to-Speech Framework
with Contextual VQ-Diffusion and Vocoding
Chenpeng Du1 , Yiwei Guo1 , Feiyu Shen1 , Zhijun Liu1 , Zheng Liang1 ,
Xie Chen1 , Shuai Wang2 , Hui Zhang3 , Kai Yu1 *
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
3
AISpeech Ltd, Beijing, China
{duchenpeng, kai.yu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Original speech:
His brother likes travelling so much.

The utilization of discrete speech tokens, divided into semantic tokens and acoustic tokens, has been proven superior to
traditional acoustic feature mel-spectrograms in terms of naturalness and robustness for text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis.
Recent popular models, such as VALL-E and SPEAR-TTS,
allow zero-shot speaker adaptation through auto-regressive
(AR) continuation of acoustic tokens extracted from a short
speech prompt. However, these AR models are restricted to
generate speech only in a left-to-right direction, making them
unsuitable for speech editing where both preceding and following contexts are provided. Furthermore, these models rely
on acoustic tokens, which have audio quality limitations imposed by the performance of audio codec models. In this
study, we propose a unified context-aware TTS framework
called UniCATS, which is capable of both speech continuation and editing. UniCATS comprises two components, an
acoustic model CTX-txt2vec and a vocoder CTX-vec2wav.
CTX-txt2vec employs contextual VQ-diffusion to predict semantic tokens from the input text, enabling it to incorporate
the semantic context and maintain seamless concatenation
with the surrounding context. Following that, CTX-vec2wav
utilizes contextual vocoding to convert these semantic tokens into waveforms, taking into consideration the acoustic context. Our experimental results demonstrate that CTXvec2wav outperforms HifiGAN and AudioLM in terms of
speech resynthesis from semantic tokens. Moreover, we show
that UniCATS achieves state-of-the-art performance in both
speech continuation and editing. Audio samples are available
at https://cpdu.github.io/unicats.

1

Speech continuation (for zero-shot speaker adaptation):
His brother likes likes travelling so much. To be or not to be, that is
the question.

Context A
(a.k.a. 'prompt')

Continuation speech

Speech editing:
His brother likes Shakespeare's works so much.

Context A

Edited speech

Context B

Figure 1: Definitions of context-aware TTS tasks, including
speech continuation and speech editing.

models like Soundstream (Zeghidour et al. 2022) and Encodec (Défossez et al. 2022), are trained specifically for
speech reconstruction. As a result, they capture acoustic details, especially speaker identity.
The typical neural text-to-speech (TTS) pipeline, such
as Tacotron 2 (Shen et al. 2018) and FastSpeech 2 (Ren
et al. 2020), consists of two stages: predicting the melspectrogram from text and then vocoding it into waveform.
Additional techniques, such as normalizing flow (Valle et al.
2020; Kim et al. 2020) and diffusion models (Liu et al. 2022;
Popov et al. 2021; Liu, Guo, and Yu 2023), have been introduced to generate the mel-spectrogram. Recently, VQTTS
(Du et al. 2022) proposes a novel approach by utilizing
discrete speech tokens as the intermediate representation
for text-to-speech synthesis. The discrete tokens have been
found to exhibit superior naturalness and robustness compared to mel-spectrograms. Textless NLP (Lakhotia et al.
2021) and AudioLM (Borsos et al. 2022) propose to leverage wav2vec 2.0 and w2v-BERT (Chung et al. 2021) respectively for language model training and consequently are able
to generate speech unconditionally via auto-regressive inference. InstructTTS (Yang et al. 2023) uses VQ-diffusion to
generate acoustic tokens whose speaking style is guided by

Introduction

Recently, two types of discrete speech tokens have been
proposed, which are known as semantic tokens and acoustic tokens (Borsos et al. 2022). Semantic tokens, such as
vq-wav2vec (Baevski, Schneider, and Auli 2019), wav2vec
2.0 (Baevski et al. 2020) and HuBERT (Hsu et al. 2021),
are trained for discrimination or masking prediction. Consequently, they primarily capture articulation information
while providing limited acoustic details. On the other hand,
acoustic tokens, which have been introduced by audio codec
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17924

