The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Fair Graph Federated Learning via Incentive Mechanisms
Chenglu Pan1,2 * † , Jiarong Xu* 2‡ , Yue Yu2 , Ziqi Yang1,3 , Qingbiao Wu1 ,
Chunping Wang4 , Lei Chen4 , Yang Yang1
1

Zhejiang University
2
Fudan University
3
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
4
FinVolution Group
{chenglupan,yangziqi,qbwu,yangya}@zju.edu.cn, jiarongxu@fudan.edu.cn, yuyue22@m.fudan.edu.cn,
{wangchunping02,chenlei04}@xinye.com
Abstract

collaboration among multiple agents without compromising
data privacy, with each agent conducting local model training and sharing their updates/gradients with a global model
on a server (McMahan et al. 2017; Karimireddy et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2021b; Xie, Xiong, and Yang 2023; Gu et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2021a). For instance, financial companies with their
own transaction networks can join forces to enhance fraud
detection model by participating in a graph federation.
However, in reality, self-interested agents may lack cooperation if uniform models are given, despite differing contributions. This implies that to achieve a competitive global
graph model, there is a strong need to establish a fair graph
federated learning framework that incentives agents to provide high-quality information. In view of this, several studies have explored incentive mechanisms for FL, with a primary focus on image domain (Xu and Lyu 2021; Xu et al.
2021; Deng et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021).
These previous works almost assume that all agents contribute positively and in a timely manner (as depicted in
Figure 1(a)). However, our observations in Figure 1(b) uncover substantial differences in graph federated learning,
even with honest participants: (1) Specific agents, like agent
4 and 5, negatively impact the entire federation; (2) Contributions from agents like agent 1 may be delayed but eventually become significant. As the first contribution, we unveil a unique phenomenon in the context of graph federated
learning: the presence of agents posing potentially harm and
contributing with delays.
In light of the uniqueness of graph federated learning, we
believe that an ideal incentive mechanism for graph federated learning should simultaneously satisfy two criteria: the
capability of (1) rewarding contributing agents while penalizing those causing harm, and (2) offering post-hoc compensation to agents with delayed contributions.
However, the primary challenge lies in designing a comprehensive incentive mechanism framework that satisfies
both criteria. Existing incentive mechanisms mainly fall into
two lines, each with inherent limitations to the desired one.
One line aims to allocate model gradients—the aggregated
parameter updates/gradients that agents download from the

Graph federated learning (FL) has emerged as a pivotal
paradigm enabling multiple agents to collaboratively train a
graph model while preserving local data privacy. Yet, current efforts overlook a key issue: agents are self-interested
and would hesitant to share data without fair and satisfactory incentives. This paper is the first endeavor to address this
issue by studying the incentive mechanism for graph federated learning. We identify a unique phenomenon in graph
federated learning: the presence of agents posing potential
harm to the federation and agents contributing with delays.
This stands in contrast to previous FL incentive mechanisms
that assume all agents contribute positively and in a timely
manner. In view of this, this paper presents a novel incentive mechanism tailored for fair graph federated learning, integrating incentives derived from both model gradient and
payoff. To achieve this, we first introduce an agent valuation
function aimed at quantifying agent contributions through the
introduction of two criteria: gradient alignment and graph diversity. Moreover, due to the high heterogeneity in graph federated learning, striking a balance between accuracy and fairness becomes particularly crucial. We introduce motif prototypes to enhance accuracy, communicated between the server
and agents, enhancing global model aggregation and aiding
agents in local model optimization. Extensive experiments
show that our model achieves the best trade-off between accuracy and the fairness of model gradient, as well as superior
payoff fairness.

1

Introduction

Graph data is ubiquitous, exhibiting diverse and generic connectivity patterns, yet a notable portion is distributed or isolated among distinct agents (e.g., companies, research institutions). Unlocking the potential of this “closed graph data”
represents a hidden gold mine in the era of big data. Recent
advances of graph federated learning offer opportunities for
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was done when the author was a visiting student at
Fudan University.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14499

