The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Layer-Wise Score Aggregation for Textual OOD Detection
Maxime Darrin1,2,3,4 , Guillaume Staerman4,6,9 , Eduardo Dadalto Camara Gomes4,5,6,7 ,
Jackie CK Cheung2,3,8 , Pablo Piantanida1,2,4,6 , Pierre Colombo4,7,10,11
1

International Laboratory on Learning Systems,
2
MILA - Quebec AI Institute,
3
McGill University,
4
Université Paris-Saclay,
5
Laboratoire signaux et systèmes,
6
CNRS,
7
CentraleSupélec,
8
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Mila,
9
INRIA, CEA, Paris
10
Equal, Paris,
11
MICS

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a rapidly growing field
due to new robustness and security requirements driven by
an increased number of AI-based systems. Existing OOD textual detectors often rely on anomaly scores (e.g., Mahalanobis
distance) computed on the embedding output of the last layer
of the encoder. In this work, we observe that OOD detection
performance varies greatly depending on the task and layer
output. More importantly, we show that the usual choice (the
last layer) is rarely the best one for OOD detection and that far
better results can be achieved, provided that an oracle selects
the best layer. We propose a data-driven, unsupervised method
to leverage this observation to combine layer-wise anomaly
scores. In addition, we extend classical textual OOD benchmarks by including classification tasks with a more significant
number of classes (up to 150), which reflects more realistic
settings. On this augmented benchmark, we show that the proposed post-aggregation methods achieve robust and consistent
results comparable to using the best layer according to an
oracle while removing manual feature selection altogether.

Introduction
With the increasing deployment of ML tools and systems, the
issue of their safety and robustness is becoming more and
more critical. Out-of-distribution robustness and detection
have emerged as an important research direction. These OOD
samples can cause the deployed AI system to fail as neural
models rely heavily on previously seen concepts or patterns
and tend to struggle with anomalous samples (Berend et al.
2020) or new concepts. These failures affect users’ trust or
even rule out the adoption of AI in critical applications.
Distinguishing OOD samples (OUT) from in-distribution
(IN) samples is a challenge when working on complex data
structures (e.g., text or image) due to their high dimensionality. Although OOD detection has attracted much attention in
computer vision, few studies focused on textual data. Furthermore, distortion and perturbation methods used in computer
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17880

vision are not suitable due to the discrete nature of text.
A fruitful line of research (Lee et al. 2018; Liang, Li, and
Srikant 2018) focuses on adding simple filtering methods on
top of pre-trained models without requiring retraining the
model. They include plug-in detectors that rely on softmaxbased- or hidden-layer-based- confidence scores (Lee et al.
2018; Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018). Softmax-based detectors (Liu et al. 2020; Pearce, Brintrup, and Zhu 2021; Techapanurak, Suganuma, and Okatani 2019) rely on the predicted
probabilities to decide whether a sample is OOD. In contrast,
hidden-layer-based scores (e.g., cosine similarity, data-depth
(Colombo et al. 2022), or Mahalanobis distance (Lee et al.
2018)) rely on input embedding of the model encoder. In computer vision and more recently in natural language processing,
these methods arbitrarily rely on either the embedding generated by the last layer of encoder or on the logits (Wang
et al. 2022a; Khalid et al. 2022) to compute anomaly scores.
While Softmax-based detectors can be applied in black-box
scenarios, where one can only access the model’s output, they
have a very narrow view of the model’s behaviour. In contrast, hidden-layer-based methods enable one to get deeper
insights.
We argue that the choice of the penultimate layers (i.e.,
the last layer, or the logits) ignores the multi-layer nature of
the encoder and should be questioned. We give evidence that
these representations are (i) not always the best choices (see
Fig. 1) and (ii) that leveraging information from all layers
can be beneficial. We introduce a data-driven procedure to
exploit the information extracted from existing OOD scores
across all the different layers of the encoder.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows:
1.We introduce a new paradigm. Previous methods rely
on a manual selection of the layer to be used, which ignores
the information in the other layers of the encoder. We propose an automatic approach to aggregate information from
all hidden layers without human (supervised) intervention.
Our method does not require access to OOD samples and
harnesses information available in all model layers by leveraging principled anomaly detection tools.

