The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Accurate and Bidirectional Transformation via Dynamic Embedding
Transportation for Cross-Domain Recommendation
Weiming Liu1 , Chaochao Chen1 * , Xinting Liao1 , Mengling Hu1 , Yanchao Tan2 , Fan Wang1 ,
Xiaolin Zheng1 , Yew-Soon Ong3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Ave, Singapore
{21831010, zjuccc, xintingliao, humengling}@zju.edu.cn, yctan@fzu.edu.cn, {fanwang97, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn,
asysong@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

or items) might be difficult to obtain, and thus, the contributions of these CDR models might be insignificant (Li, Yang,
and Xue 2009; Moreno et al. 2012; Gao et al. 2013; Choi
et al. 2022). How to obtain preeminent recommendation results without explicit domain-shareable information has become an urgent problem.
In this paper, we focus on the dual-target non-overlapped
CDR problem. That is, we aim to provide source (or target) users with target (or source) items according to preference characteristics. We further assume that both source and
target users are non-overlapped. Meanwhile, each domain
has multiple types of information, e.g., user-item ratings and
reviews information, which is commonly available in real
practice (Yi and et al 2018; Wang, Ounis, and Macdonald
2021; Chen et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2020). This problem is
rather challenging since (1) there is no explicit transferring
bridges (e.g., via overlapped users) for dual knowledge sharing and (2) the existence of embedding discrepancy across
domains that strongly hurdles the model performance.
Previous CDR models cannot better resolve these challenges well, resulting in limited performance. On the one
hand, most CDR models should rely on overlapped users
or items to develop reliable representations via embedding mapping and alignment mechanism (Zang et al. 2022).
However, these model performance could be severely degraded when explicit domain-shareable information (e.g.,
overlapped users) are not available. What is worse, different
domains with diverse kinds of items are always heterogeneous which always involves domain bias (Guerraoui et al.
2017; Li et al. 2021). Although commonly-used Maximum
Mean Discrepancy (MMD) is easier to be implemented for
domain adaptation without overlapped users, it fails to provide accurate matching results among complicated latent
embedding spaces (Korba et al. 2021). Meanwhile previous
papers have pointed out that adversarial training with domain discriminators could be unstable under some circumstances (Shu et al. 2018) which degrades the model performance. On the other hand, recent CDR models (Yu et al.
2020; Li et al. 2023) still mainly focus on unidirectional
mapping from rich to sparse domains. However, unidirectional mapping cannot satisfy dual-target recommendation
task which limits their potentials. Thus how to fully exploit

With the rapid development of Internet and Web techniques,
Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) models have been
widely explored for resolving the data-sparsity and cold-start
problem. Meanwhile, most CDR models should utilize explicit domain-shareable information (e.g., overlapped users
or items) for knowledge transfer across domains. However,
this assumption may not be always satisfied since users and
items are always non-overlapped in real practice. The performance of many previous works will be severely impaired
when these domain-shareable information are not available.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose the Joint
Preference Exploration and Dynamic Embedding Transportation model (JPEDET) in this paper which is a novel framework for solving the CDR problem when users and items
are non-overlapped. JPEDET includes two main modules,
i.e., joint preference exploration module and dynamic embedding transportation module. The joint preference exploration
module aims to fuse rating and review information for modelling user preferences. The dynamic embedding transportation module is set to share knowledge via neural ordinary
equations for dual transformation across domains. Moreover,
we innovatively propose the dynamic transport flow equipped
with linear interpolation guidance on barycentric Wasserstein
path for achieving accurate and bidirectional transformation.
Our empirical study on Amazon datasets demonstrates that
JPEDET outperforms the state-of-the-art models under the
CDR setting.

Introduction
Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) has been widely investigated nowadays since it is an effective approach for
tackling data sparsity and cold-start issues in the recommender system (Zang et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2015; Zhu
et al. 2021a). Leveraging useful knowledge (e.g., useritem ratings and reviews) across domains can enhance the
model performance. Meanwhile, most current CDR models (Man et al. 2017) assume that users or items are overlapped across domains for knowledge sharing. However, explicit domain-shareable information (e.g., overlapped users
* Chaochao Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8815

