The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SpaceGTN: A Time-Agnostic Graph Transformer Network for
Handwritten Diagram Recognition and Segmentation
Haoxiang Hu1, 2 , Cangjun Gao1, 2 , Yaokun Li1, 2 , Xiaoming Deng1, 2 , YuKun Lai3 , Cuixia Ma1, 2 * ,
Yong-Jin Liu4 , Hongan Wang1, 2
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Human-Computer Interaction, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Cardiff University
4
Tsinghua University
{huhaoxiang22, gaocangjun23, liyaokun22}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {xiaoming, cuixia, hongan}@iscas.ac.cn,
yukun.lai@cs.cardiff.ac.uk, liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Online handwriting recognition is pivotal in domains like
note-taking, education, healthcare, and office tasks. Existing
diagram recognition algorithms mainly rely on the temporal
information of strokes, resulting in a decline in recognition
performance when dealing with notes that have been modified or have no temporal information. The current datasets
are drawn based on templates and cannot reflect the real freedrawing situation. To address these challenges, we present
SpaceGTN, a time-agnostic Graph Transformer Network,
leveraging spatial integration and removing the need for temporal data. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets have
demonstrated that our method consistently outperforms existing methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance. We
also propose a pipeline that seamlessly connects offline and
online handwritten diagrams. By integrating a stroke restoration technique with SpaceGTN, it enables intelligent editing
of previously uneditable offline diagrams at the stroke level.
In addition, we have also launched the first online handwritten diagram dataset, OHSD, which is collected using a freedrawing method and comes with modification annotations.

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed Diagram Manipulation
System. For offline diagrams, stroke data can be obtained by
a stroke restorer. Stroke and symbol annotations are generated by SpaceGTN, facilitating symbol relationship reconstruction. Stroke-level and symbol-level manipulation functions are available to users.

temporal features, consequently compromising the precision
of recognition and segmentation.
Current handwritten diagram datasets, such as (Yun et al.
2022; Bresler et al. 2014; Awal et al. 2011; Bresler, Průša,
and Hlaváč 2016), have serious limitations in applications
due to the limited numbers of samples and templates. Additionally, these datasets exhibit consistent drawing styles,
achieved through copying or tracing, resulting in minimal
deviations such as irregular pauses or alterations. As a consequence, they diverge from the context of real-world usage.
Many existing diagram datasets only contain a single category of diagrams, like flowchart datasets (Yun et al. 2022;
Awal et al. 2011; Bresler, Průša, and Hlaváč 2016; Gervais
et al. 2020) or automaton datasets (Bresler et al. 2014). The
lack of type diversity makes it difficult to train models with
the diagram classification capability.
There is limited research on the recognition and interaction systems for handwritten diagrams. Jiang et al. (2011)
implemented a recognition and interaction system for handwritten Concept Maps, designing various pen-gesture-based
interaction methods. Bresler, Průša, and Hlaváč (2016) proposed a recognition system for arrow-connected diagrams,

Introduction
In handwriting recognition and machine learning, researchers have been concentrating on extracting structural
information from handwritten diagrams to enhance both
interaction design and intent comprehension. Methods for
recognizing handwritten diagrams can be categorized into
offline and online approaches. Offline methods, such as
(Herrera-Camara and Hammond 2017; Julca-Aguilar and
Hirata 2018; Montellano, Garcia, and Leija 2022), disregard original stroke information, leading to difficulties in
editing interactions. Online algorithms, such as (Yun et al.
2022; Bresler, Průša, and Hlaváč 2016), leverage temporal
information from strokes to enhance algorithm performance.
However, temporal information is not always consistently
reliable. For example, temporal data is absent in strokes restored from offline handwritten documents, and user editing
actions such as moving, erasing and redrawing can influence
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2211

