The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hybrid-Supervised Dual-Search: Leveraging Automatic Learning for Loss-Free
Multi-Exposure Image Fusion
Guanyao Wu, Hongming Fu, Jinyuan Liu, Long Ma, Xin Fan, Risheng Liu*
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology
rollingplainko@gmail.com, {hm.fu, atlantis918}@hotmail.com, malone94319@gmail.com, {xin.fan, rsliu}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-exposure image fusion (MEF) has emerged as a prominent solution to address the limitations of digital imaging
in representing varied exposure levels. Despite its advancements, the field grapples with challenges, notably the reliance
on manual designs for network structures and loss functions,
and the constraints of utilizing simulated reference images
as ground truths. Consequently, current methodologies often suffer from color distortions and exposure artifacts, further complicating the quest for authentic image representation. In addressing these challenges, this paper presents a
Hybrid-Supervised Dual-Search approach for MEF, dubbed
HSDS-MEF, which introduces a bi-level optimization search
scheme for automatic design of both network structures and
loss functions. More specifically, we harness a unique dual research mechanism rooted in a novel weighted structure refinement architecture search. Besides, a hybrid supervised contrast constraint seamlessly guides and integrates with searching process, facilitating a more adaptive and comprehensive
search for optimal loss functions. We realize the state-ofthe-art performance in comparison to various competitive
schemes, yielding a 10.61% and 4.38% improvement in Visual Information Fidelity (VIF) for general and no-reference
scenarios, respectively, while providing results with high contrast, rich details and colors. The code is available at https:
//github.com/RollingPlain/HSDS MEF.

Figure 1: The coxcomb chart of visual results and key evaluation metrics. Our approach demonstrates the most visually pleasing and well-exposed fused results, with rich details that closely resemble human perception.

Introduction

and Mitsunaga 2000), multi-exposure image fusion (MEF)
has emerged as a primary alternative for HDRI. This approach, propelled by advancements in digital image processing, showcases extensive applicability across diverse domains, such as image enhancement (Liu et al. 2020; Jiang
et al. 2022a; Ma et al. 2021b, 2022a, 2023) and object detection (Piao et al. 2019, 2020; Zhang et al. 2020c), etc.
By merging a series of LDR images with varying exposure
levels, it sidesteps hardware constraints, producing images
more congruent with human visual perception. Nevertheless, in spite of the many methodologies that have surfaced
driven by deep learning, there still remain two significant
challenges in the current techniques.
First, existing multi-exposure image fusion methods predominantly rely on manually designed network structures
and loss functions, such as DeepFuse (Prabhakar, Sai Srikar,
and Venkatesh Babu 2017), PMGI (Zhang et al. 2020b),
TransMEF (Qu et al. 2022), etc. On one hand, such manu-

High dynamic range imaging (HDRI) has garnered extensive attention and research in recent years, aiming to accurately represent scenes from the direct sunlight to the
darkest shadows found in the real world. The sensors in
contemporary digital imaging devices capture a color spectrum far narrower than the intrinsic dynamic range of natural scenes (Shen, Cheng, and Basu 2012). This discrepancy
leads to low dynamic range (LDR) images that often fall
short in aspects of luminance and contrast, especially suffering from detrimental effects under extreme over-/underexposure scenarios.
Rather than resorting to the costly and less efficient solution of developing high dynamic range imaging hardware to overcome traditional sensor limitations, e.g., (Nayar
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5985

