The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Forced Exploration in Bandit Problems
Qi Han, Li Zhu * , Fei Guo
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, 28 Xianning West Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710049, China
{qihan19,co.fly}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhuli@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

of the variance parameter. Additionally, some works assume
that the reward distribution is bounded, and the algorithm
design necessitates specific upper-bound information.
In the standard MAB model, the reward distribution remains constant. However, in real-world scenarios, the distribution of rewards may vary over time. In the context of
clinical trials, the target disease may undergo mutations,
causing the initially optimal treatment to potentially become
less effective compared to another candidate (Gorre et al.
2001). Similarly, in online recommendation systems, user
preferences are prone to evolve (Wu, Iyer, and Wang 2018),
rendering collected data progressively outdated. During the
past ten years, several works have been conducted on nonstationary multi-armed bandit problems. These approaches
can be broadly classified into two categories: one category
involves detecting changes in the reward distribution using change-point detection algorithms (Liu, Lee, and Shroff
2018; Cao et al. 2019; Auer, Gajane, and Ortner 2019; Chen
et al. 2019; Besson et al. 2022). In contrast, the other category focuses on mitigating the impact of past observations
in a passive manner (Garivier and Moulines 2011; Raj and
Kalyani 2017; Trovo et al. 2020). Among them, Auer, Gajane, and Ortner (2019); Chen et al. (2019); Besson et al.
(2022) can derive regret bounds without knowing the number of changes. However, as in the stationary settings, these
algorithms also require prior information on the reward distributions for their implementation.
Recently, the non-parametric multi-armed bandit algorithm has garnered considerable attention (Lattimore 2017;
Kveton et al. 2019a,b; Riou and Honda 2020; Baudry, Russac, and Cappé 2021; Liu et al. 2022). The implementation
of these algorithms does not require strong parametric assumptions on the reward distributions, that is, a single implementation can be applied to several different reward distributions. Although the implementation of some mentioned
algorithms (Kveton et al. 2019b,b; Riou and Honda 2020)
does not need to know the information of reward distribution in advance, they require that the reward distribution is
bounded. Therefore, they cannot be applied to a wider unbounded distribution. Wang et al. (2020) propose a perturbation based exploration method called ReBoot which has
been analyzed only for Gaussian distributions. Chan (2020)
propose SSMC by comparing the subsample means of the
leading arm with the sample means of its competitors for

The multi-armed bandit(MAB) is a classical sequential decision problem. Most work requires assumptions about the
reward distribution (e.g., bounded), while practitioners may
have difficulty obtaining information about these distributions to design models for their problems, especially in nonstationary MAB problems. This paper aims to design a multiarmed bandit algorithm that can be implemented without
using information about the reward distribution while still
achieving substantial regret upper bounds. To this end, we
propose a novel algorithm alternating between greedy rule
and forced exploration. Our method can be applied to Gaussian, Bernoulli and other subgaussian distributions, and its
implementation does not require additional information. We
employ a unified analysis method for different forced exploration strategies and provide problem-dependent regret upper
bounds for stationary and piecewise-stationary settings. Furthermore, we compare our algorithm with popular bandit algorithms on different reward distributions.

Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a classical reinforcement
learning problem. It simulates the process of pulling different arms of a slot machine, where each arm has an unknown
reward distribution and only the selected arm’s reward is observed. The learner aims to find the optimal policy that maximizes the cumulative reward. To achieve better long-term
rewards, the learner must balance exploration and exploitation.
MAB has been widely used in many sequential decision
tasks, such as online recommendation systems (Li et al.
2011; Li, Karatzoglou, and Gentile 2016), online advertisement campaign (Schwartz, Bradlow, and Fader 2017) and
diagnosis and treatment experiment (Vermorel and Mohri
2005). Most of the existing multi-armed bandit algorithms
are based on Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) (Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002) and Thompson Sampling (TS)
(Thompson 1933), which often rely on assumptions about
the reward distribution. For example, some studies assume
that the reward distribution follows a sub-Gaussian distribution, and the algorithm implementation requires knowledge
* Li Zhu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12270

