The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MedSegDiff-V2: Diffusion-Based Medical Image Segmentation with Transformer
Junde Wu1,2,3,4 , Wei Ji5 , Huazhu Fu6 , Min Xu* 7,3 , Yueming Jin2 , Yanwu Xu* 8
1

University of Oxford
National University of Singapore
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Kids with Tokens
5
University of Alberta
6
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
7
Carnegie Mellon University
8
Singapore Eye Research Institute
jundewu@ieee.org, ywxu@ieee.org, xumin100@gmail.com
2

Abstract

high-quality and diverse images(Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia
et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022). Inspired by its success,
many researches have applied DPM in the field of medical
image segmentation(Wu et al. 2022e; Wolleb et al. 2021;
Kim, Oh, and Ye 2022; Guo et al. 2022; Rahman et al. 2023).
Many of them reported new SOTA on several benchmarks by
using the DPM. The remarkable performance of this model
stems from its inherent stochastic sampling process(Wu
et al. 2022e; Rahman et al. 2023). DPM has the capability
to generate different segmentation predictions by running
multiple times. The diversity among these samples directly
captures the uncertainty associated with targets in medical
images, where organs or lesions commonly have ambiguous
boundaries. However, it is worth noting that all these
methods rely on classical UNet backbones. In comparison
to the increasingly popular vision transformers, classical
UNet models compromise on segmentation quality, which
can lead to the generation of divergent yet incorrect masks
in ensemble, ultimately introducing noise that permanently
hampers the performance. A natural next step is to combine
the transformer-based UNet, such as TransUNet(Chen et al.
2021), with DPM. However, we found that implementing it
in a straightforward manner resulted in subpar performance.
One issue is that the transformer-abstracted conditional
feature is not compatible with the feature of the diffusion
backbone. The transformer is able to learn deep semantic
features from the raw image, whereas the diffusion backbone
abstracts features from a corrupted and noisy mask, making
feature fusion more challenging. Additionally, the dynamic
and global nature of the transformer makes it more sensitive
than CNNs (Naseer et al. 2021). Thus, the adaptive condition
strategy used in previous diffusion-based methods(Wu et al.
2022e) will cause large variance in the transformer setting.
This leads more ensemble and converge difficulties.

The Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DPM) has recently gained
popularity in the field of computer vision, thanks to its image generation applications, such as Imagen, Latent Diffusion Models, and Stable Diffusion, which have demonstrated
impressive capabilities and sparked much discussion within
the community. Recent investigations have further unveiled
the utility of DPM in the domain of medical image analysis, as underscored by the commendable performance exhibited by the medical image segmentation model across various
tasks. Although these models were originally underpinned by
a UNet architecture, there exists a potential avenue for enhancing their performance through the integration of vision
transformer mechanisms. However, we discovered that simply
combining these two models resulted in subpar performance.
To effectively integrate these two cutting-edge techniques
for the Medical image segmentation, we propose a novel
Transformer-based Diffusion framework, called MedSegDiffV2. We verify its effectiveness on 20 medical image segmentation tasks with different image modalities. Through comprehensive evaluation, our approach demonstrates superiority
over prior state-of-the-art (SOTA) methodologies. Code is
released at https://github.com/KidsWithTokens/MedSegDiff

Introduction
Medical image segmentation is to divide a medical image
into distinct regions of interest. It is a crucial step in many
medical applications, such as diagnosis (Li et al. 2022; Han
et al. 2022) and image-guided surgery. In recent years, there
has been a growing interest in automated segmentation methods, as they have the potential to improve the consistency and
accuracy of results. With the advancement of deep learning
techniques, several studies have successfully applied neural
network-based models, including classical convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Ji et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022c, 2020)
and the recently popular vision transformers (ViTs)(Wu et al.
2022d,b, 2023), to medical image segmentation tasks.
Very recently, the Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DPM)(Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) has gained popularity as
a powerful class of generative models, capable of generating

To overcome these challenges, we have designed a novel
Transformer-based Diffusion framework for the Medical image segmentation, called MedSegDiff-V2. We employ two
conditioning techniques over the backbone with the raw image in the diffusion process. One is the Anchor Condition,
which integrates the conditional segmentation features into
the diffusion model encoder to reduce the diffusion variance.
We design a novel U ncertain Spatial Attention (U -SA) mech-

* co-corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6030

