The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CAMEL: Capturing Metaphorical Alignment with Context Disentangling for
Multimodal Emotion Recognition
Linhao Zhang1,2,3 , Li Jin1,2 * , Guangluan Xu1,2 , Xiaoyu Li1,2 ,
Cai Xu4 , Kaiwen Wei1,2,3 , Nayu Liu5 , Haonan Liu1,2,3
1
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology (NIST), Aerospace Information Research Institute
3
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tiangong University
zhanglinhao20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, jinlimails@gmail.com

2

Abstract
Understanding the emotional polarity of multimodal contents
with metaphorical characteristics, e.g., memes, poses a significant challenge in Multimodal Emotion Recognition (MER).
Previous MER research has overlooked the phenomenon of
metaphorical alignment in multimedia contents, which involves non-literal associations between concepts to convey
implicit emotional tones. Metaphor-agnostic MER methods
may be misinformed by the isolated unimodal emotions,
which are distinct from the real emotions blended in multimodal metaphors. Moreover, contextual semantics can further affect the emotions associated with similar metaphors,
leading to the challenge of maintaining contextual compatibility. To address the issue of metaphorical alignment in
MER, we propose to leverage a conditional generative approach for capturing metaphorical analogies. Our approach
formulates schematic prompts and corresponding references
based on theoretical foundations, which allows the model to
better grasp metaphorical nuances. To maintain contextual
sensitivity, we incorporate a disentangled contrastive matching mechanism, which undergoes curricular adjustment to
regulate its intensity during the learning process. The automatic and human evaluation experiments on two benchmarks
prove that, our model provides considerable and stable improvements in recognizing multimodal emotions.

Figure 1: Different from text metaphors with explicit analogy: {[A] is as [similarity] as [B]}, multimodal metaphors
are implicitly established based on concepts across heterogeneous modalities. Similar metaphors (i.e., Humans are monkeys) can be embedded in various contexts to show different
emotions (i.e., hate and sorrow).

secondary concept. Such metaphorical alignments not only
express information, but also encapsulate implicit emotions
blended in multimodal metaphors, which differ significantly
from isolated unimodal emotions they may initially appear
to represent. Therefore, it is crucial to capture metaphorical
alignment when recognizing the implicit emotions embedded in multimedia contents, which has drawn little attention
from previous MER research.
Directly applying methods from the well-established field
of Metaphor Analysis to MER is difficult. As previous research mainly analyzes textual metaphors in the form of
{(primary concept) is as (relationship) as (secondary concept)}, commonly known as similes with explicit metaphorical characteristics. However, this explicit form does not
align with real-world situations of MER, as Internet users
are more likely to express emotions through multimodal
contents, whose metaphorizations are implicitly established
across heterogeneous modalities. Although enabling works
of multimodal metaphor analysis have been proposed (Xu
et al. 2022) with the introduction of high-quality benchmarks, their methods are relatively simplified through early

Introduction
Multimodal Emotion Recognition (MER) over multimedia
contents plays a crucial role in facilitating interactions and
offering timely interventions to sustain social relationships
(Qiu, Sekhar, and Singhal 2023). Social media platforms
like Twitter, Facebook, etc., have recently become fertile
ground for the creation and dissemination of emotional contents (Zhang et al. 2021; Alzu’bi et al. 2023). Recognizing
these emotions holds immense practical value, which enables the capture and analysis of genuine public attitudes
and meanings in multimedia. However, multimedia contents
often incorporates abstract metaphorical characteristics, (Xu
et al. 2022), which establish non-literal similarities and implicitly associate a physical primary concept with an abstract
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9341

