The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Minimal Macro-Based Rewritings of Formal Languages:
Theory and Applications in Ontology Engineering (and Beyond)
Christian Kindermann1 , Anne-Marie George2 , Bijan Parsia3 , Uli Sattler3
1

Biomedical Informatics, Stanford University, United States of America
2
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom
christian.kindermann@stanford.edu, annemage@ifi.uio.no, {bijan.parsia, uli.sattler}@manchester.ac.uk
into Lm = {m, m∨c, (m∨c)∧d}. Note that the expression
m ∨ c occurs twice in the macrofied language Lm . So, the
question arises whether a rewriting mechanism allows for
nested macro definitions, e.g., m′ 7→ m ∨ c, or not.
Deciding what features to include in a rewriting mechanism, e.g., allowing for nesting or not, is not straightforward.
To evaluate a feature’s impact, we propose to analyse its influence on computational problems formulated w.r.t. rewriting mechanisms. For instance, consider the above example
and the problem of computing size-minimal rewritings. If
the complexity of computing minimal rewriting with unnested macros is lower than that of minimal rewriting with
nested macros, then this effect of the feature “nesting” can
inform its inclusion for practical purposes.
In this paper, we investigate a rewriting mechanism based
on syntactic macros allowing for nesting. We show conditions under which the problem of finding size-minimal
rewritings can be solved in polynomial time. We implement
this rewriting mechanism and apply it to find size-minimal
rewritings of large biomedical ontologies of practical relevance. The attained size reductions are comparable to, if not
better than those of existing approaches, while also showcasing superior performance in terms of processing time.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the problem of rewriting finite formal languages using syntactic macros such that the rewriting
is minimal in size. We present polynomial-time algorithms
to solve variants of this problem and show their correctness.
To demonstrate the practical relevance of the proposed problems and the feasibility and effectiveness of our algorithms in
practice, we apply these to biomedical ontologies authored in
OWL. We find that such rewritings can significantly reduce
the size of ontologies by capturing repeated expressions with
macros. In addition to offering valuable assistance in enhancing ontology quality and comprehension, the presented approach introduces a systematic way of analysing and evaluating features of rewriting systems (including syntactic macros,
templates, or other forms of rewriting rules) in terms of their
influence on computational problems.

Introduction
KISS and DRY, standing for “Keep It Simple, Stupid” and
“Don’t Repeat Yourself”, are key principles in software development. These principles prove advantageous in other
contexts involving formal languages, including knowledge
bases, formal specifications, and logical theories.
Despite the value of simplification and reduction of repetition, there is no universally applicable mechanism assisting
with the associated refactoring of formal languages. Challenges arise from the need to preserve application-specific
properties and the difficulty of specifying desirable and undesirable refactorings. In other words, there is a fine line between succinct simplicity and obscure terseness.
This paper proposes a formal framework for refactoring formal languages through automated conversions into
smaller rewritings. The focus is on identifying rewriting
mechanisms applicable in diverse situations and analysing
their properties. One simple but effective refactoring strategy is the introduction of names for more complex recurring
structures. Preserving syntactic structure is often important,
motivating our exploration of rewriting mechanisms based
on syntactic macros.
Consider the following example language consisting of
formulas in propositional logic L = {a ∧ b, (a ∧ b) ∨ c, ((a ∧
b) ∨ c) ∧ d}. A macro m 7→ a ∧ b can be used to “macrofy” L

Preliminaries
We define the technical terms used in the following sections.
In particular, we introduce terms over a mixture of ranked,
unranked, and mixed symbols, which will then enable us to
apply our framework to the Web Ontology Language (OWL)
which uses all three kinds of symbols.
Definition 1 (Alphabet, Terms, Language). A ranked alphabet F is a finite set of symbols together with a function
Ar : F → N that associates symbols with their arity. Symbols f ∈ F with Ar(f ) = 0 are called constants and symbols with Ar(f ) = 1 are called unary. An unranked alphabet
U is a set of symbols. A mixed alphabet X ⊆ F is a subset
of the ranked alphabet. An alphabet Σ = F ∪ U is a set of
ranked or unranked symbols.
The set of terms T (Σ) over an alphabet Σ = F ∪ U is
inductively defined as follows:
• f ∈ T (Σ) if f ∈ F and Ar(f ) = 0,
• f (t1 , . . . , tn ) ∈ T (Σ) if f ∈ F , n ≥ 1, and Ar(f ) = n,
• f (t1 , . . . , tn ) ∈ T (Σ) if f ∈ U and n ≥ 1, and

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10581

