The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bootstrapping Cognitive Agents with a Large Language Model
Feiyu Zhu, Reid Simmons
Carnegie Mellon University
feiyuz@andrew.cmu.edu, rsimmons@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

LLM
query

generate

Large language models contain noisy general knowledge of
the world, yet are hard to train or fine-tune. In contrast cognitive architectures have excellent interpretability and are flexible to update but require a lot of manual work to instantiate. In
this work, we combine the best of both worlds: bootstrapping
a cognitive-based model with the noisy knowledge encoded
in large language models. Through an embodied agent doing
kitchen tasks, we show that our proposed framework yields
better efficiency compared to an agent entirely based on large
language models. Our experiments also indicate that the cognitive agent bootstrapped using this framework can generalize
to novel environments and be scaled to complex tasks.

World Knowledge:

Envt Knowledge:

(tomatoes belong in the fridge)

(gripper empty & table empty)

observe

⇒
Productions:

:
Introduction

(goal)

AND

→

act

(subtask: find a tomato)

push

Large language models (LLM) such as GPT-4 (OpenAI
2023), have shown emerging capabilities after training on
internet-scale text data with human feedback, and have been
employed in robot planning (Huang et al. 2022), animal behavior analysis (Ye et al. 2023), human proxies (Zhang and
Soh 2023), and many more. However, they have also been
criticized for being susceptible to adversarial attacks (Zou
et al. 2023), hallucination (Casper et al. 2023), and having
diminishing returns for scaling (OpenAI 2023).
Cognitive architectures are another approach in the pursuit of AI that attempts to model human cognition computationally (Newell 1994). Despite the variety of architectures
developed, most of them share the same central components,
consisting of declarative memory reflecting knowledge of
the world, procedural memory dictating the agent’s behavior, and short-term working memory that assists reasoning
and planning (Laird, Lebiere, and Rosenbloom 2017).
The procedural memory is represented by a set of production rules, each with a precondition and an effect. Agents operate in perceive-plan-act cycles, dynamically matching relevant features of the environment to the production rules and
applying their effects. Unlike operators in symbolic planning, production rules do not represent alternative actions
but instead reflect different contextual knowledge (Laird
2022). These rules can be reinforced and modified throughout the agent’s learning process. Despite some pioneering

Task Stack:
slice a tomato
find a tomato

Figure 1: Overview of agent framework. It shows the agent
executing the production of attending to a new subtask of
finding a tomato when the original task is to slice a tomato
and the tomato is not in the gripper nor on the table. Dotted
lines represent the information a production rule may condition on. Solid lines represent information flow.

work on data-driven cognitive model creation (Hake, Sibert,
and Stocco 2022), almost all previous work generate their
initial set of production rules manually, limiting their application to simple environments such as blocks world or psychology experiments (Park et al. 2023).
In this work, we combine the two approaches in a complementary fashion (Figure 1). LLMs encode the common
sense knowledge of the world (Madaan et al. 2022) that can
be used in place of human labor for constructing agents in
the cognitive architecture. The reasoning and learning capabilities in the cognitive architecture can identify and filter the
noise in LLMs while converting the knowledge in language
to actionable productions of an embodied agent.
This combined framework separates knowledge generation and knowledge application, and this modularity is the
key to generalization. The LLM is responsible only for generating general knowledge, such as “if the task is to find an

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

655

