The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

I NFORMED QX: Informed Conflict Detection for Over-Constrained Problems
Viet-Man Le1,3 , Alexander Felfernig1 , Thi Ngoc Trang Tran1,4 , Mathias Uta2
1

Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
2
Siemens Energy AG, Germany
3
University of Economics, Hue University, Hue, Vietnam
4
School of Hospitality and Tourism, Hue University, Hue, Vietnam
{vietman.le,alexander.felfernig,ttrang}@ist.tugraz.at, mathias.uta@siemens-energy.com
Abstract

tion) to accept some relaxations of technical car features before accepting to further extend the pre-defined price limit.
With an increasing size and complexity of the underlying knowledge bases, there is a need to further improve
the performance of the reasoning engines as well as related algorithms for conflict detection and resolution (Jannach, Schmitz, and Shchekotykhin 2015). To tackle related
scalability issues, different approaches have been developed
on-top of constraint solvers. Examples thereof are the application of machine learning for improving constraint solver
performance (Popescu et al. 2022), algorithmic parallelization (Jannach, Schmitz, and Shchekotykhin 2015; Gent et al.
2018; Vidal et al. 2021; Le et al. 2023), and knowledge compression techniques (Cheng and Yap 2005).
On the basis of a simplified working example from the
domain of smartwatch configuration, we introduce a hybrid approach to conflict detection. The related algorithm
(I NFORMED QX) that helps to decide, based on the existing
historic conflict data, if an activation of conflict detection is
still needed or if a preferred conflict has already been determined in previous configuration sessions. In this context, we
focus on scenarios where the complete set of conflicts cannot be determined ahead due to complexity reasons, i.e., we
want to reuse pre-existing conflicts and to figure out on the
algorithmic level when the activation of a conflict detection
algorithm is still needed due to the fact that further (more
preferred) conflicts exist in a given constraint set.
Conflict detection algorithms have been proposed in the
context of different knowledge representations such as constraint solving (Junker 2004; Shchekotykhin, Jannach, and
Schmitz 2015) and SAT solving (Liffiton and Sakallah 2008;
Marques-Silva and Previti 2014a). In this context, the terms
minimal unsatisfiable cores (MUC) or minimal unsatisfiable
subsets (MUS) are often used as synonyms for minimal conflict sets. In this paper, we focus on complete and optimal
conflict detection algorithms, i.e., algorithms that are able to
find a minimal conflict if one exists and at the same time find
the optimal solution with regard to a predefined optimiality
criteria.
For demonstration purposes, we show how to exploit
knowledge about existing conflicts in the context of the
Q UICK XP LAIN algorithm (Junker 2004) which is a divideand-conquer based algorithm for the determination of preferred conflicts, i.e., conflicts that take into account pre-

Conflict detection is relevant in various application scenarios, ranging from interactive decision-making to the diagnosis
of faulty knowledge bases. Conflicts can be regarded as sets
of constraints that cause an inconsistency. In many scenarios (e.g., constraint-based configuration), conflicts are repeatedly determined for the same or similar sets of constraints.
This misses out on the valuable opportunity for leveraging
knowledge reuse and related potential performance improvements, which are extremely important, specifically interactive constraint-based applications. In this paper, we show how
to integrate knowledge reuse concepts into non-instructive
conflict detection. We introduce the I NFORMED QX algorithm, which is a reuse-aware variant of Q UICK XP LAIN.
The results of a related performance analysis with the Linux2.6.3.33 configuration knowledge base show significant improvements in terms of runtime performance compared to
Q UICK XP LAIN.

Introduction
Conflict detection has many applications in constraint-based
systems (and beyond) (Junker 2004; Rossi, van Beek, and
Walsh 2006). Examples thereof are recommender systems
(Felfernig and Burke 2008), knowledge-based configuration
(Junker 2006), scheduling (Baptiste et al. 2006), and knowledge base testing and debugging (Felfernig et al. 2004).
In such scenarios, the task of conflict detection is to identify minimal sets of constraints (so-called conflict sets or
conflicts) that can be interpreted as an explanation for the
given inconsistency. Often associated with conflict detection
is conflict resolution (often denotes as diagnoses), which focuses on resolving all identified conflicts so that knowledge
base consistency can be restored (Reiter 1987; de Kleer and
Williams 1987).
Especially in interactive settings, there is often a need to
identify preferred conflicts (Junker 2004; O’Sullivan et al.
2007; Walsh 2007; Rossi, Venable, and Walsh 2011), i.e.,
conflicts whose resolution could be regarded as acceptable
for a user. For example, users of a car configurator with
strong preferences regarding an upper price limit are more
inclined (in the case that a configurator cannot find a soluCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10616

