The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Comprehensive Analysis of the Effectiveness of Large Language Models as
Automatic Dialogue Evaluators
1

2

1

3

Chen Zhang , Luis Fernando D’Haro , Yiming Chen , Malu Zhang * , Haizhou Li

1,4

1

2

National University of Singapore
Speech Technology Group - Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), China
chen zhang@u.nus.edu, maluzhang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

demonstrated improved correlations with human evaluation
over reference-based metrics, they are still far from being
the perfect proxy of human judges. Additionally, they exhibit poor generalization to dialogue data that are different
from what they are trained on (Zhang et al. 2022a).
The recent advancement in large language models (Brown
et al. 2020; Chowdhery et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023a)
coupled with refined alignment techniques (Wei et al. 2022a;
Ouyang and et al. 2022) lead to an extensive array of
general-purpose AI assistants that are capable of tackling a
broad spectrum of NLP tasks. Harnessing their strong language understanding capability, LLMs, especially the family of instruction-tuned models, offer great promise as effective and generalized automatic dialogue evaluators. Several recent works (Huynh et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a;
Liu et al. 2023; Lin and Chen 2023; Fu et al. 2023) report
strong correlations of LLMs with human evaluation. Yet, the
scope of their assessment is limited: (1) The coverage of
LLMs is restricted, with a primary emphasis on proprietary
models, such as OpenAI ChatGPT/GPT-4. Lately, there has
been an exponential growth of open-source foundation models (Almazrouei et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023a; Scao et al.
2023) and ChatGPT-like LLMs (Taori et al. 2023; Chiang
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023b), a timely survey is neccessary to examine their effectiveness as automatic dialogue
evaluators. (2) The mode of evaluation primarily concentrates on correlation analysis with a limited number of metaevaluation datasets. We not only conduct a comprehensive
1
correlation analysis on 12 meta-evaluation datasets along
2
different evaluation dimensions , but also probe the robustness of LLMs against adversarial perturbations at both turn
and dialogue levels.
Our work serves as a useful guide for future research on
applying LLMs to automatic dialogue evaluation and the
contributions are listed as follows:

Automatic evaluation is an integral aspect of dialogue system research. The traditional reference-based NLG metrics
are generally found to be unsuitable for dialogue assessment.
Consequently, recent studies have suggested various unique,
reference-free neural metrics that better align with human
evaluations. Notably among them, large language models
(LLMs), particularly the instruction-tuned variants like ChatGPT, are shown to be promising substitutes for human judges.
Yet, existing works on utilizing LLMs for automatic dialogue
evaluation are limited in their scope in terms of the number of meta-evaluation datasets, mode of evaluation, coverage of LLMs, etc. Hence, it remains inconclusive how effective these LLMs are. To this end, we conduct a comprehensive study on the application of LLMs for automatic dialogue
evaluation. Specifically, we analyze the multi-dimensional
evaluation capability of 30 recently emerged LLMs at both
turn and dialogue levels, using a comprehensive set of 12
meta-evaluation datasets. Additionally, we probe the robustness of the LLMs in handling various adversarial perturbations at both turn and dialogue levels. Finally, we explore
how model-level and dimension-level ensembles impact the
evaluation performance. All resources are available at https:
//github.com/e0397123/comp-analysis.

Introduction
Evaluation remains a persistent challenge in dialogue system research (Mehri et al. 2022a). At present, human evaluation is regarded as the most reliable method for comprehensively assessing the quality of dialogue. However,
because of the considerable expense and lack of reproducibility associated with human evaluations, automatic
measures have been proposed to complement human evaluation. The automatic measures can be categorized into
two main groups: reference-based and reference-free. Due
to the poor alignment of reference-based metrics, such as
BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), with human evaluation (Liu
et al. 2016), existing studies mainly focus on developing
neural-based reference-free evaluators (Yeh, Eskenazi, and
Mehri 2021). Although such reference-free evaluators have

• We conduct a comprehensive analysis of the multidimensional evaluation ability of 30 recent LLMs at both
1

6 turn-level and 6 dialogue-level respectively.
Dimension refers to the quality aspect that is usually assessed
in the human evaluation process, such as relevance at the turn level
and dialogue coherence at the dialogue level.
2

*

corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19515

