The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Data Augmented Graph Neural Networks for Personality Detection
Yangfu Zhu, Yue Xia, Meiling Li, Tingting Zhang, Bin Wu∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
zhuyangfu,meilinglee,zhangtingting,wubin@bupt.edu.cn, 1216918224@qq.com

Abstract

Early researchers primarily combined two sources of psychological lexicon such as Linguistic Inquiry Word Count
(LIWC) (Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010) and Medical Research Council (MRC) (Coltheart 1981) to manually find
statistical word usage patterns for identifying personality
traits from the text. With the blossoming of social media,
users are posting massive content daily that reveals their
psychological activities, providing new opportunity for automatically inferring traits. Subsequently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) were employed to learn meaningful representations of posts to detect personality (Kampman et al.
2018; Sun et al. 2018). However, understanding the traits
behind the posts is non-trivial. Recently, a line of efforts focused on the structure of posts to dig deeper into the relationship between language and personality traits, including using hierarchical attention network (Lynn, Balasubramanian,
and Schwartz 2020), constructing a heterogeneous tripartite
graph with psycholinguistic information (Yang et al. 2021b),
learning dynamic graph neural networks for post set (Yang
et al. 2023a).
Despite considerable progress in personality detection,
existing models still suffer from the inherent weakness of
the amount limitation of labels. Modern trait theory (John,
Robins, and Pervin 2010) tries to model the personality by
several dimensions and construct a questionnaire to measure
their ground-truth traits. As a famous personality indicator,
the Big Five personality inventory typically includes 50 or
more items to answer, which is very time-consuming and requires a lot of human resources. Furthermore, due to privacy
concerns, people are less willing to share personal trait information on the Internet. Hence, insufficient trained DNNs
may limit the inference of personality from posts. The question of how to accurately recognize personality with limited
labeled data remains unresolved.
To address the above issues, we similarly start from the
structure of user-generated documents and propose psycholinguistic data augmented graph neural network to detect personality in a semi-supervised manner, called SemiPerGCN. Specifically, we construct a heterogeneous personality graph for each labeled and unlabeled user, which includes three kinds of nodes, i.e., user nodes, word nodes, and
LIWC category nodes. Then a personality graph convolution
network with path-specific attention is employed to refine labeled user representation on a heterogeneous graph. For un-

Personality detection is a fundamental task for user psychology research. One of the biggest challenges in personality detection lies in the quantitative limitation of labeled data collected by completing the personality questionnaire, which is
very time-consuming and labor-intensive. Most of the existing works are mainly devoted to learning the rich representations of posts based on labeled data. However, they still suffer
from the inherent weakness of the amount limitation of labels, which potentially restricts the capability of the model to
deal with unseen data. In this paper, we construct a heterogeneous personality graph for each labeled and unlabeled user
and develop a novel psycholinguistic augmented graph neural
network to detect personality in a semi-supervised manner,
namely Semi-PerGCN. Specifically, our model first explores
a supervised Personality Graph Neural Network (PGNN) to
refine labeled user representation on the heterogeneous graph.
For the remaining massive unlabeled users, we utilize the empirical psychological knowledge of the Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count (LIWC) lexicon for multi-view graph augmentation and perform unsupervised graph consistent constraints
on the parameters shared PGNN. During the learning process of finite labeled users, noise-invariant learning on a large
scale of unlabeled users is combined to enhance the generalization ability. Extensive experiments on three real-world
datasets, Youtube, PAN2015, and MyPersonality demonstrate
the effectiveness of our Semi-PerGCN in personality detection, especially in scenarios with limited labeled users.

Introduction
Personality is the overall characteristics and manifestations
of an individual in terms of their psychology and behavior
(Fang et al. 2023). Personality detection aims to identify
the personality traits implied in social media posts that offering a deeper insight into human behavior (Nutescu and
Mocanu 2023), emotional processes (Lian, Liu, and Tao
2022), and mental health (Zanwar et al. 2023). Besides, it
can provide timely and objective support for downstream
applications, such as human–computer interaction systems
(Chien, Chen, and Chan 2022), virtual dialogue systems
(Yang, Chen, and Narasimhan 2021), and recommendation
systems (Yang et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2020).
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

664

