The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Repeated Fair Allocation of Indivisible Items
Ayumi Igarashi1 , Martin Lackner2 , Oliviero Nardi2 , Arianna Novaro3
1

The University of Tokyo
2
DBAI, TU Wien
3
CES, University of Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne
igarashi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, oliviero.nardi@tuwien.ac.at, arianna.novaro@univ-paris1.fr

Abstract

Amanatidis et al. (2022)). One of the challenges of fair division problems is that often, given the agents’ preferences,
it is impossible to find an allocation of the items which is
both fair (e.g., no agent envies another agent’s bundle) and
efficient (e.g., no other allocation would make some agents
better off, without making anyone worse off). However, a
crucial feature which has so far received little attention, is
that many fair allocation problems occur repeatedly, in the
sense that the same items will need to be assigned multiple
times to the agents. For instance, university courses are usually offered every year, computing facilities may be needed
daily or weekly by the same teams of employees, and household chores need to be done regularly.
In this paper, we thus focus precisely on those settings
where a set of items has to be repeatedly allocated to a set
of agents. This opens the field to new and exciting research
directions, revolving around the following central question:

The problem of fairly allocating a set of indivisible items is
a well-known challenge in the field of (computational) social choice. In this scenario, there is a fundamental incompatibility between notions of fairness (such as envy-freeness
and proportionality) and economic efficiency (such as Paretooptimality). However, in the real world, items are not always
allocated once and for all, but often repeatedly. For example,
the items may be recurring chores to distribute in a household. Motivated by this, we initiate the study of the repeated
fair division of indivisible goods and chores, and propose a
formal model for this scenario. In this paper, we show that,
if the number of repetitions is a multiple of the number of
agents, there always exists a sequence of allocations that is
proportional and Pareto-optimal. On the other hand, irrespective of the number of repetitions, an envy-free and Paretooptimal sequence of allocations may not exist. For the case
of two agents, we show that if the number of repetitions is
even, it is always possible to find a sequence of allocations
that is overall envy-free and Pareto-optimal. We then prove
even stronger fairness guarantees, showing that every allocation in such a sequence satisfies some relaxation of envyfreeness. Finally, in case that the number of repetitions can
be chosen freely, we show that envy-free and Pareto-optimal
allocations are achievable for any number of agents.

1

Can some fairness and efficiency notions be guaranteed when taking a global perspective on the overall sequence of repeated allocations? Can we additionally achieve fairness and efficiency guarantees at
each individual repetition?
Contribution and outline. Our main contribution is the
definition of a new (offline) model for the repeated fair allocation of goods and chores, which we present in Section 2.
In particular, we specify how sequences of allocations will
be evaluated with respect to classical axioms of fairness
and efficiency: we distinguish between sequences satisfying
some axioms per-round (i.e., for every allocation composing
them), or overall (i.e., when considering the collection of all
the bundles every agent has received in the sequence). We
consider two general cases: one where the number of repetitions is predetermined and given as part of the input and one
where the number of repetitions can be chosen freely based
on the instance. In the sequel, we refer to these as the fixed
and variable cases, respectively.
In Section 3, we study our model for a fixed number of
rounds (k) with n agents. We show that: if the number of
rounds is a multiple of n, we can always guarantee the existence of a sequence of allocations that is envy-free overall in (Proposition 4), and a sequence of allocations that is
proportional and Pareto-optimal (Theorem 7). This is essentially optimal in two respects. First, for any number n ⩾ 2 of

Introduction

In a variety of real-life scenarios, a group of agents has to
divide a set of items among themselves. These items can be
desirable (goods) or undesirable (chores) and agents have
(heterogeneous) preferences concerning them. In the case of
goods, we can think, for instance, of employees having to
share access to some common infrastructure, like computing
facilities. In the case of chores, we can think of roommates
having to split household duties or teams having to split admin tasks. We may even have a set of mixed items, where
the agents may consider some items good and others bad:
for instance, when assigning teaching responsibilities, some
courses may be desirable to teach for some while undesirable (negative) for others.
The examples above are all instances of problems of fair
allocation of indivisible items (see the recent survey by
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9781

