The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Sparse Visual Prompt for Domain Adaptive Dense Prediction
Senqiao Yang1* , Jiarui Wu1* , Jiaming Liu1 * , Xiaoqi Li1 , Qizhe Zhang1 ,
Mingjie Pan1 , Yulu Gan1 , Zehui Chen2 , Shanghang Zhang1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
University of Science and Technology of China
jiamingliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The visual prompts have provided an efficient manner in addressing visual cross-domain problems. In previous works,
(Gan et al. 2022a) first introduces domain prompts to tackle
the classification Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) problem by
placing image-level prompts on the input and fine-tuning
prompts for each target domain. However, since the imagelevel prompts mask out continuous spatial details in the
prompt-allocated region, it will suffer from inaccurate contextual information and limited domain knowledge extraction, particularly when dealing with dense prediction TTA
problems. To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel
Sparse Visual Domain Prompts (SVDP) approach, which
applies minimal trainable parameters (e.g., 0.1%) to pixels
across the entire image and reserves more spatial information of the input. To better apply SVDP in extracting domainspecific knowledge, we introduce the Domain Prompt Placement (DPP) method to adaptively allocates trainable parameters of SVDP on the pixels with large distribution shifts.
Furthermore, recognizing that each target domain sample exhibits a unique domain shift, we design Domain Prompt Updating (DPU) strategy to optimize prompt parameters differently for each sample, facilitating efficient adaptation to
the target domain. Extensive experiments were conducted
on widely-used TTA and continual TTA benchmarks, and
our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance
in both semantic segmentation and depth estimation tasks.

Figure 1: The motivation and main idea of our method.
(a) Previous dense visual domain prompts (VDP) mask out
consecutive spatial details in the placed regions as shown
in red circles. In dense prediction DA problems, applying
dense VDP will lead to inaccurate context information extraction and severe performance degradation. (b) We introduce Sparse Visual Domain Prompts (SVDP), which are tailored for addressing the occlusion problem of pixel-wise information and can better extract local domain knowledge for
cross-domain learning.

Introduction
Deep neural networks can achieve promising performance if
test data is of the same distribution as the training data. However, it is not the common case in real-world scenarios (Radosavovic et al. 2022), which contain diverse and disparate
domains. When applying a pre-trained model in real-world
tasks, the domain gap commonly exists (Sakaridis, Dai, and
Van Gool 2021), leading to significant performance degradation on target data. Though we can manually collect labeled data for each real-world target domain, it is laborious
and time-consuming (Chen, Wu, and Jiang 2022). To this
end, the domain adaptation (DA) methods are introduced
and have drawn growing attention in the community.

While DA extensively investigates to address distribution
shifts, its typical assumption involves access to raw source
data. However, in real-world scenarios, raw data often cannot be publicly accessible due to data protection regulations. Meanwhile, traditional DA methods present resourceintensive backward computation, leading to high training
costs (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015). To address this, Testtime adaptation (TTA) (Liang, He, and Tan 2023) is gained
significant attention, which tackles distribution shifts at test
time with only unlabeled test data streams. Prior TTA studies (Wang et al. 2021, 2022a; Chen et al. 2022a; Goyal et al.
2022) predominantly focus on model-based adaptation, utilizing model parameters to fit target domain knowledge.
To better solve the TTA problem, motivated by the re-

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16334

