The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multitarget Device-Free Localization via Cross-Domain Wi-Fi RSS Training Data
and Attentional Prior Fusion
Na Fan* , Zeyue Tian* , Amartansh Dubey, Samruddhi Deshmukh, Ross Murch, Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{nfanaa, ztianad, adubey, ssdeshmukh}@connect.ust.hk, {eermurch, cqf}@ust.hk

Abstract

While numerous Wi-Fi nodes around the domain of interest (DOI) pose a challenge for deployment, researchers are
exploring ways to maintain performance with fewer nodes
for commercial use. (Xu et al. 2012; Bocca et al. 2014;
Xu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2023). The
deployment can also be simplified using drones carrying
nodes (Karanam and Mostofi 2017) or intelligent reflective
surfaces integrated into building materials (Wu et al. 2021).
Despite the extensive research for single-target scenarios (Wilson and Patwari 2010; Shit et al. 2019), multitarget localization in an RSS-based DFL system is still challenging, especially in cluttered indoor environments (Nannuru et al. 2013; Xu et al. 2013; Sabek, oustafa Youssef,
and Vasilakos 2015; Shit et al. 2019). Firstly, the association between the RSS measurements and each target is
difficult to draw, particularly with an unknown number of
targets and a lack of shape information (Thouin, Nannuru,
and Coates 2011; Xu et al. 2012; Wilson and Patwari 2012;
Nannuru et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2020). Secondly, the simultaneous presence of multiple targets makes the RSS
changes more unpredictable, degrading algorithms that utilize line-of-sight information (Bocca et al. 2014; Wang et al.
2017). Thirdly, MPI between multiple targets results in unpredictable noise (Zhang et al. 2022), which becomes more
serious when some targets are nearby but hard to simulate
due to complex physics. Additionally, the difficulty of collecting real-world data for multiple targets at different positions increase exponentially as the number of targets grows,
making it hard to obtain training dataset for data-driven
methods. Furthermore, the metrics used in single-target systems, such as MSE, need to be revised for evaluating localization accuracy in multitarget systems due to uncertainties
in associating targets and potential variations in the number
of estimated targets compared to the ground truth.
This paper aims to develop a learning-based algorithm
that improves multitarget localization performance in a WiFi RSS-based DFL system. We approach this task as an inverse imaging problem, utilizing measured RSS as input and
generating an estimated probability map for the presence of
each target in the DOI. Our end-to-end approach avoids information loss that may occur with methods through subsequent processing pipelines (Ma et al. 2020a,b; Fu et al.
2022). With the probability map representation, we do not
require the number of targets known in advance.

Device-free localization (DFL) using easily-obtained WiFi received signal strength (RSS) has wide real-world applications for not requiring people to carry trackable devices. However, accurate multitarget DFL remains challenging due to the unknown number of targets, multipath interference (MPI), especially between nearby targets, and limited real-world data. In this study, we pioneeringly propose
a transformer-based learning method with Wi-Fi RSS as input, and an attentional prior fusion module, to simultaneously locate an unknown number of people at random positions. To overcome the multitarget data collection challenges,
we contribute a large-scale cross-domain real-simulationaugmentation training dataset with one and two real-world
nearby non-person objects at limited positions and up to five
simulated and augmented randomly distributed targets. Experimental results demonstrate our method’s improved accuracy, generalization ability, and robustness with fewer Wi-Fi
nodes than previous methods.

Introduction
Device-free localization (DFL) is a passive non-cooperative
localization method that eliminates the need for targets carrying trackable devices, ideal for applications like intelligent buildings, intrusion detection, emergency rescue, and
healthcare monitoring. In these scenarios, multitarget DFL
systems are usually required to simultaneously detect and
accurately locate multiple targets for practical use.
To deploy such a system, several factors must be considered, such as cost-effectiveness, commercial viability, and
adaptability to environmental changes. Free from issues like
lighting conditions, occlusion, and privacy concerns, Wi-Fi
signals that can even go through walls provide an alternative to cameras. Some recent works utilize Wi-Fi phase information (Adib et al. 2015), but the requirements for expensive duplexers and probably new spectrum allocations
for required bandwidth may make it commercially unviable.
Instead, we focus on cost-effective Wi-Fi received signal
strength (RSS) systems as shown in Fig. 1a that are easily accessed from existing wireless communication systems.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

91

