The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DocMSU: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Document-Level Multimodal
Sarcasm Understanding
Hang Du1 , Guoshun Nan1 * , Sicheng Zhang1 , Binzhu Xie1 , Junrui Xu1 , Hehe Fan2 , Qimei Cui1 ,
Xiaofeng Tao1 , Xudong Jiang3
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Zhejiang University
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{7597892, nanguo2021, zhangsicheng, xbz nicous, bbxst0371}@bupt.edu.cn, crane.h.fan@gmail.com, {cuiqimei,
taoxf}@bupt.edu.cn, EXDJiang@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

THE FIRE FIGHTING TOOL

Multimodal Sarcasm Understanding (MSU) has a wide range
of applications in the news field such as public opinion analysis and forgery detection. However, existing MSU benchmarks and approaches usually focus on sentence level MSU.
In document level news, sarcasm clues are sparse or small
and are often concealed in long text. Moreover, compared to
sentence level comments like tweets, which mainly focus on
only a few trends or hot topics (e.g., sports events), content
in the news is considerably diverse. Models created for sentence level MSU may fail to capture sarcasm clues in document level news. To fill this gap, we present a comprehensive
benchmark for Document level Multimodal Sarcasm Understanding (DocMSU). Our dataset contains 102,588 pieces of
news with text image pairs, covering 9 diverse topics such
as health, business, etc. The proposed large-scale and diverse
DocMSU significantly facilitates the research of document
level MSU in real world scenarios. To take on the new challenges posed by DocMSU, we introduce a fine grained sarcasm comprehension method to properly align the pixel level
image features with word level textual features in documents.
Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
showing that it can serve as a baseline approach to the challenging DocMSU.

As we all know, fire extinguisher is a portable fire
fighting tool. It contains chemicals to put out fires
and is stored in public places or places where fires
may occur. Different types of fire extinguishers are
filled with different ingredients and are designed
for different fire starts. Care must be taken when
using it, or it may cause danger.

Figure 1: Example of a piece of sarcastic news. It shows that
a fire extinguisher, a tool used to extinguish fires, has caught
fire. This sarcasm can remind us of the quality of the fire
extinguisher.

Figure 1 illustrates a piece of multimedia sarcastic news.
To understand this sarcastic news, a model must capture textual cues from multiple sentences, including fire fighting and
cause danger. The accompanying visual cue, fire on a fire
extinguisher in the figure below, plays an important role in
this sarcasm. The figurative and creative nature of such multimodal sarcasm poses a great challenge to the effective perception of the true intention under the guise of overt positive
surface involved in a whole document and an image. This requires the design and development of document-level multimodal sarcasm understanding (MSU) methods that specifically take the characteristics of such an ironic expression
into consideration.
Prior research has underscored the critical significance
of utilizing extensive, high-quality, and challenging benchmarks for the development and evaluation of state-of-theart deep learning methods across various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency
2019; Li et al. 2020). In this context, existing sarcasm bench-

Introduction
Sarcasm is a form of verbal irony that often uses positive
words to convey a negative message, such as frustration,
anger, contempt and even ridicule (Wilson 2006). In realworld cases, a piece of sarcastic news often lacks explicit
linguistic markers, and thus requires additional cues to reveal the true intentions. The accompanying visual information provides helpful cues to better perceive ironic discrepancies. Multimodal sarcasm (Wang et al. 2022; Shu et al.
2017) is omnipresent in social media posts, forum discussions, and product reviews, and hence the multimodal sarcasm understanding is of great significance for a wide range
of applications in the news field such as sentiment analysis
(Mao et al. 2021), fake news detection (Ying et al. 2022; Qi
et al. 2023), and public opinion analysis.
* Guoshun Nan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17933

