The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TREE-G: Decision Trees Contesting Graph Neural Networks
Maya Bechler-Speicher1 , Amir Globerson1 , Ran Gilad-Bachrach2
1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University
2 Department of Bio-Medical Engineering and Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics,Tel-Aviv University

mayab4@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract
When dealing with tabular data, models based on decision
trees are a popular choice due to their high accuracy on these
data types, their ease of application, and explainability properties. However, when it comes to graph-structured data, it is not
clear how to apply them effectively, in a way that incorporates
the topological information with the tabular data available on
the vertices of the graph. To address this challenge, we introduce TREE-G. TREE-G modifies standard decision trees, by
introducing a novel split function that is specialized for graph
data. Not only does this split function incorporate the node features and the topological information, but it also uses a novel
pointer mechanism that allows split nodes to use information computed in previous splits. Therefore, the split function
adapts to the predictive task and the graph at hand. We analyze the theoretical properties of TREE-G and demonstrate its
benefits empirically on multiple graph and vertex prediction
benchmarks. In these experiments, TREE-G consistently outperforms other tree-based models and often outperforms other
graph-learning algorithms such as Graph Neural Networks
and Graph Kernels, sometimes by large margins. Moreover,
TREE-Gs models and their predictions can be explained and
visualized.

1

Introduction

Decision Trees (DTs) are one of the cornerstones of modern
data science and are a leading alternative to neural networks,
especially in tabular data settings, where DTs often outperform deep learning models (Shwartz-Ziv and Armon 2021;
Han et al. 2018; Miah et al. 2021; Grinsztajn, Oyallon, and
Varoquaux 2022). DTs are popular with practitioners due
to their ease of use, out-of-the-box high performance, and
explainability properties. In a large survey conducted by Kaggle1 in 2022 with 23,997 data scientists worldwide, 63%
of the participants reported using decision trees, Random
Forests (RF) or Gradient Boosted Trees (GBT) on a regular
basis (Ho 1995; Friedman 2000, 2002).
In this study we investigate whether the merits of DTs can
be repeated in tasks that involve graph structured data. Such
tasks are found in diverse domains including social studies,
molecular biology, drug discovery, and communication (Sperduti and Starita 1997; Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli 2005).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1 www.kaggle.com/competitions/kaggle-survey-2022/data

The ability to perform regression and classification on graphs
is important in these domains and others, which explains
the ongoing efforts to develop machine learning algorithms
for graphs (Li et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017; Duvenaud et al. 2015; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Barrett et al. 2018; Ganea et al. 2021; Rossi
et al. 2020; Ingraham et al. 2019).
Graph data often exhibits characteristics similar to those of
tabular data. For instance, in a social network, vertices represent individuals with associated features such as age, marital
status, and education. Given the efficacy of DTs with tabular data, one might wonder if this success can be translated
to graph-related tasks. However, adapting DTs to integrate
both the graph structure and vertex attributes remains a challenge. To address this gap, we present a novel and efficient
technique, named TREE-G, to apply DTs to graphs.
DTs split the input space by comparing feature values to
thresholds. When operating on graphs, these split decisions
should incorporate the features on the vertices of the graph as
well as its topological structure.2 Moreover, these decisions
should be applicable to graphs of varying sizes and satisfy
the appropriate invariance and equivariance properties with
respect to vertex ordering. Current methods achieve these
goals using ’feature engineering’, a process in which the
“raw features” are augmented with computed features using
pre-defined functions that may use the graph structure. These
features, which are computed before the evaluation (or training) of the DT, use domain knowledge, or graph theoretic
measures (Barnett et al. 2016; de Lara and Pineau 2018).
However, these approaches are labor intensive, require domain knowledge, and may fail to capture interactions between
vertex features and graph structure. We show this formally in
Lemma 4.3 where a pair of non-isomorphic graphs over 4 vertices and 2 features are shown to be inseparable by standard
tree methods.
TREE-G enhances standard decision trees by introducing
a novel split function, specialized for graph data which is
dynamically evaluated while the DT is applied to a graph.
It supports both directed and undirected graphs of arbitrary
sizes and can be used for classification, regression, and other
prediction tasks on entire graphs or on the vertices and edges
of these graphs. It preserves the standard decision trees frame2 For the sake of clarity, we ignore edge-features in this work.

11032

