The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

No Prior Mask: Eliminate Redundant Action for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Dianyu Zhong* , Yiqin Yang* , Qianchuan Zhao†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{zhongdy19, yangyiqi19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhaoqc@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

agents to make repeated invalid attempts, even leading to
task failure.
To solve this issue, current researchers attempt to utilize the underlying structure in the action space to filter the
irrelevant actions. One paradigm for algorithm design incorporates the prior knowledge into the learning algorithm.
There are several works in the existing empirical literature,
especially in challenging domains such as Dota2 (Berner
et al. 2019), StarCraftII (Vinyals et al. 2017) and Honor of
Kings (Ye et al. 2020). These approaches build simple handcrafted action masks to determine the availability of an action, such as checking if a valid target is nearby or if the
ability is on cooldown. Ye et al. (2020) demonstrates that
action mask can largely reduce the training time and Huang
et al. (2021) conducts ablation studies on action mask, revealing its substantial potential in enhancing performance.
However, despite the interpretability and efficiency of these
methods, it remains exceptionally challenging to manually
construct an accurate relationship between actions, particularly in high-dimensional and state-dependent scenarios
with limited expert information.
On the other hand, recent advances were made in autonomously learning such underlying structures in the action space. For example, Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015) leverages prior information about the actions to embed them in a
continuous space. Zahavy et al. (2018a) utilizes an external
elimination signal provided by the environment to predict
invalid actions. Tennenholtz and Mannor (2019) combines
existing methods in natural language processing (NLP) to
group similar actions and utilizing relations between different actions from expert data. Chandak et al. (2019) provides
an algorithm to learn and use action representations on largescale real-world problems. Baram, Tennenholtz, and Mannor (2021) proposes maximizing the next states’ entropy instead of action entropy to minimize action redundancy.
Nevertheless, the aforementioned methods either rely
heavily on prior information or are tightly coupling with the
policy, which significantly limits their applicability in various real-world scenarios. Therefore, the shortcoming of the
current redundant action filtering mechanism naturally leads
to the following question:

The large action space is one fundamental obstacle to deploying Reinforcement Learning methods in the real world.
The numerous redundant actions will cause the agents to
make repeated or invalid attempts, even leading to task failure. Although current algorithms conduct some initial explorations for this issue, they either suffer from rule-based
systems or depend on expert demonstrations, which significantly limits their applicability in many real-world settings.
In this work, we examine the theoretical analysis of what action can be eliminated in policy optimization and propose
a novel redundant action filtering mechanism. Unlike other
works, our method constructs the similarity factor by estimating the distance between the state distributions, which requires no prior knowledge. In addition, we combine the modified inverse model to avoid extensive computation in highdimensional state space. We reveal the underlying structure of
action spaces and propose a simple yet efficient redundant action filtering mechanism named No Prior Mask (NPM) based
on the above techniques. We show the superior performance
of our method by conducting extensive experiments on highdimensional, pixel-input, and stochastic problems with various action redundancy tasks. Our code is public online at
https://github.com/zhongdy15/npm.

Introduction
Although Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods have
found tremendous success in challenging domains, including video games (Mnih et al. 2015) and classic games (Silver et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2021), deploying them in real-world applications is still limited. One of
the main challenges towards that goal is dealing with large
action spaces. For example, maximizing long-term portfolio value using various trading strategies in the finance system (Jiang, Xu, and Liang 2017), regulating the voltage level
of all the units in the power system (Glavic, Fonteneau,
and Ernst 2017), and generating recommendation sequences
from an extensive collection of options (Sidney et al. 2005)
pose significant challenges due to the numerous actions involved. The redundant actions in these tasks will cause the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Advising.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

How to learn the underlying structure accurately in the
action space without prior knowledge?

17078

