The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

iTrendRNN: An Interpretable Trend-Aware RNN for Meteorological
Spatiotemporal Prediction
Xu Huang1 , Chuyao Luo2 , Bowen Zhang3∗ , Huiwei Lin1 , Xutao Li1 , Yunming Ye1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Big Data and Internet, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, China
huangxuu@outlook.com, luochuyao.dalian@gmail.com, zhang bo wen@foxmail.com, linhuiwei@stu.hit.edu.cn,
lixutao@hit.edu.cn, yeyunming@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Accurate prediction of meteorological elements, such as temperature and relative humidity, is important to human livelihood, early warning of extreme weather, and urban governance. Recently, neural network-based methods have shown
impressive performance in this field. However, most of them
are overcomplicated and impenetrable. In this paper, we propose a straightforward and interpretable differential framework, where the key lies in explicitly estimating the evolutionary trends. Specifically, three types of trends are exploited. (1) The proximity trend simply uses the most recent
changes. It works well for approximately linear evolution. (2)
The sequential trend explores the global information, aiming to capture the nonlinear dynamics. Here, we develop an
attention-based trend unit to help memorize long-term features. (3) The flow trend is motivated by the nature of evolution, i.e., the heat or substance flows from one region to
another. Here, we design a flow-aware attention unit. It can
reflect the interactions via performing spatial attention over
flow maps. Finally, we develop a trend fusion module to adaptively fuse the above three trends. Extensive experiments on
two datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: An example of temperature evolution. The values
of central region (u) at time t, t + 1, and t + 2 are 277.98
K, 278.58 K, and 279.59 K, respectively. That is, it heats up
by 0.6 K and 1.01 K. Most of the previous methods, such
as PredRNN and TAU, directly predict u through implicit
networks. In this paper, we explicitly estimate the change
δu , which can better reflect the meteorological evolution.
temporal dynamics are both modeled by convolution operations. However, these methods show a weakness in capturing long-term sequential variations. (2) The second line
also learns the spatial features by convolution, but employs
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to better capture the temporal dynamics (Shi et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2017, 2019; Lin
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022b). Specifically, Shi et al. (Shi et al. 2015) first replaced the fully connected layer in long short-term memory (LSTM) units with
convolution, and proposed a new model ConvLSTM. Afterwards, ConvLSTM has become one of the most representative benchmark in this filed. A variety of subsequent methods were developed to further improve the performance. For
example, Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2017) introduced a spatiotemporal state to memorize both spatial appearances and
temporal variations. Lin et al. (Lin et al. 2020) designed
a self-attention mechanism to extract spatial features with
both global and local dependencies.
Despite the effectiveness of previous studies, most of
them rely on overcomplicated and obscure models. Researchers and users know little about their internals, thus
limiting the development of this field. Recently, explainable artificial intelligence, which aims to reveal the internal mechanisms or decision basis of black-box models,
has received increasing attention. However, existing studies
mainly focused on the tasks of image classification (Zhou
et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2019, 2022) or time series anal-

Introduction
The spatiotemporal prediction of meteorological elements,
such as temperature and relative humidity, is of great significance to our daily life. Conventional numerical weather prediction (NWP) methods mainly resort to specific mathematical models, which are known as computationally expensive
and time-consuming. Later, data-driven shallow neural networks are utilized in this field. For example, Kuligowski et
al. (Kuligowski and Barros 1998) employed a backpropagation neural network to predict 6-hour precipitation amounts.
In the last decade, deep neural networks have achieved
remarkable success in many fields, including computer vision (Peng et al. 2022), natural language processing (Ma
et al. 2023), etc. As for the spatiotemporal prediction tasks,
existing methods can be grouped into two types. (1) The
first one is based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Xu et al. 2018; Gao et al.
2022b; Tan et al. 2023), where the spatial dependencies and
∗

Both are Corresponding Authors.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22132

