The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Object Attribute Matters in Visual Question Answering
Peize Li1 * , Qingyi Si2, 3 * , Peng Fu2, 3† , Zheng Lin2, 3 , Yan Wang1, 4†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Computer
Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
lipz21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {siqingyi, fupeng, linzheng}@iie.ac.cn, wy6868@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Visual question answering is a multimodal task that requires the joint comprehension of visual and textual information. However, integrating visual and textual semantics solely
through attention layers is insufficient to comprehensively
understand and align information from both modalities. Intuitively, object attributes can naturally serve as a bridge to
unify them, which has been overlooked in previous research.
In this paper, we propose a novel VQA approach from the
perspective of utilizing object attribute, aiming to achieve
better object-level visual-language alignment and multimodal
scene understanding. Specifically, we design an attribute fusion module and a contrastive knowledge distillation module.
The attribute fusion module constructs a multimodal graph
neural network to fuse attributes and visual features through
message passing. The enhanced object-level visual features
contribute to solving fine-grained problem like countingquestion. The better object-level visual-language alignment
aids in understanding multimodal scenes, thereby improving the model’s robustness. Furthermore, to augment scene
understanding and the out-of-distribution performance, the
contrastive knowledge distillation module introduces a series
of implicit knowledge. We distill knowledge into attributes
through contrastive loss, which further strengthens the representation learning of attribute features and facilitates visuallanguage alignment. Intensive experiments on six datasets,
COCO-QA, VQAv2, VQA-CPv2, VQA-CPv1, VQAvs and
TDIUC, show the superiority of the proposed method.

Figure 1: An illustration of our motivation. Compared with
previous multimodal content, object-level attributes are indispensable in both object counting (a) and scene understanding (b).

the spatial understanding of image content. Attention mechanisms (Kim, Jun, and Zhang 2018; Anderson et al. 2018;
Yu et al. 2019) give co-occurrence information in multimodal scenes, which enables the model to concentrate on the
important words and visual elements. External knowledge
(Gao et al. 2022; Gui et al. 2022) offers relevant background
and topological relationships among the entities, which contribute to understanding the contextual information of multimodal scenes. However, both of these lack attributes of visual objects, which can directly offer fine-grained semantic information about visual objects. The object attributes
cover a wide range of advanced concepts, including objects,
scenes, actions and modifiers, which are indispensable for
enhancing the understanding of object-level visual content
and achieving object-level visual-language alignment. Next,
we can better explain this idea through the following two
examples.
An example from COCO-QA (Ren, Kiros, and Zemel
2015) dataset is shown in Figure 1(a). Answering this question first requires understanding the various types of children

Introduction
Visual Question Answering is a multimodal task involving
the interaction of vision and language, which aims to answer the question based on visual image content. Most of
the existing solutions (Kim, Jun, and Zhang 2018; Anderson
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2022a;
Si et al. 2023b) depend on visual relations, attention mechanisms and external knowledge to connect question information and associated visual clues. Visual relations (Li et al.
2019; Peng et al. 2022a) provide semantic connections and
relative positions between the objects, aiding in enhancing
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18545

