The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scores for Learning Discrete Causal Graphs with Unobserved Confounders
Alexis Bellot1 * , Junzhe Zhang2 , Elias Bareinboim2
1

Google DeepMind
Columbia University, New York
abellot@google.com, junzhez@cs.columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu
2

d-separation between nodes in a causal graph induces a
corresponding conditional independence between variables
in V . The reverse implication, i.e. that each conditional
independence in data implies a corresponding d-separation
in the underlying causal graph (known as faithfulness),
serves as a statistically testable constraint to narrow the class
of compatible graphs (Pearl 1988; Meek 1995; Uhler et al.
2013; Zhang 2006; Marx, Gretton, and Mooij 2021). This
is the cornerstone assumption for a plethora of structure
learning algorithms (Verma and Pearl 1990; Glymour,
Scheines, and Spirtes 2014; Spirtes et al. 2000). When all
variables are observable, d-separation statements capture all
testable constraints implied by the underlying causal model
(Verma and Pearl 1990).

Abstract
Structural learning is arguably one of the most challenging
and pervasive tasks found throughout the data sciences. There
exists a growing literature that studies structural learning in
non-parametric settings where conditional independence constraints are taken to define the equivalence class. In the presence of unobserved confounders, it is understood that nonconditional independence constraints are imposed over the
observational distribution, including certain equalities and
inequalities between functionals of the joint distribution. In
this paper, we develop structural learning methods that leverage additional constraints beyond conditional independencies.
Specifically, we first introduce a score for arbitrary graphs
combining Watanabe’s asymptotic expansion of the marginal
likelihood and new bounds over the cardinality of the exogenous variables. Second, we show that the new score has desirable properties in terms of expressiveness and computability.
In terms of expressiveness, we prove that the score captures
distinct constraints imprinted in the data, including Verma’s
and inequalities’. In terms of computability, we show properties of score equivalence and decomposability, which allows
us, in principle, to break the problem of structural learning into
smaller and more manageable pieces. Third, we implement
this score using an MCMC sampling algorithm and test its
properties in several simulation scenarios.

Introduction
Learning the causal structure underlying a particular
phenomenon from data is a fundamental problem across the
data sciences. One of the common approaches in the field of
causal discovery models the underlying system as a causal
model represented by a causal graph, where nodes denote
random variables (measured or latent) and directed edges
denote causal effects from tails to arrowheads (Pearl 2009;
Spirtes et al. 2000; Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017).
The task is then to piece together the constraints found in
the data (and implied by the underlying, unobserved causal
system) to infer the corresponding causal graph.

This is not the case in the presence of latent variables that
are typically used to represent systems involving unobserved
confounding. Such causal models are known to induce distributions over observed variables that are defined by more
complex statistical constraints, not necessarily of the conditional independence type. The earliest example was given
by Verma and Pearl (Verma and Pearl 1990), in which two
graphs, shown in Figs. 1c and 1d, imply the same set of conditional independence constraints and yet can be distinguished
because they imply an equality between different functionals of P pV q. In particular, only the Verma graph in Fig. 1c
entails the equality
ÿ
ÿ
P pz | x, yqP pxq “
P pz | x, y, wqP px | wq. (1)
x

Another example is given by the Instrumental Variable (IV)
graph in Fig. 1a. While the IV graph does not impose any conditional independencies between variables, compatible data
distributions (with discretely-valued observables) P px, y, zq
must satisfy the inequality, first shown by Pearl (Pearl 1995),
ÿ
maxP px, y | zq ă
y

There are a variety of different types of statistical
constraints imposed by the underlying causal system into
the observed data with distribution P pV q. For example, a

x

z

ÿ
u2 ,y

max P px | z, u2 qP py | x, u2 qP pu2 q ď 1. (2)
z

The same inequality does not hold in the (otherwise
statistically equivalent) unconstrained graph in Fig. 1b. In
systems with discrete observables, distributions induced by

*Work done primarily while affiliated with Columbia University.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11043

