The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Monitoring of Perception Systems: Deterministic, Probabilistic, and
Learning-Based Fault Detection and Identification (Abstract Reprint)
Pasquale Antonante1 , Heath Nilsen1 , Luca Carlone1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Antonante, Nilsen, and Carlone (2023).

Abstract
This paper investigates runtime monitoring of perception
systems. Perception is a critical component of high-integrity
applications of robotics and autonomous systems, such as
self-driving cars. In these applications, failure of perception
systems may put human life at risk, and a broad adoption
of these technologies requires the development of methodologies to guarantee and monitor safe operation. Despite the
paramount importance of perception, currently there is no
formal approach for system-level perception monitoring. In
this paper, we formalize the problem of runtime fault detection and identification in perception systems and present
a framework to model diagnostic information using a diagnostic graph. We then provide a set of deterministic, probabilistic, and learning-based algorithms that use diagnostic
graphs to perform fault detection and identification. Moreover, we investigate fundamental limits and provide deterministic and probabilistic guarantees on the fault detection
and identification results. We conclude the paper with an extensive experimental evaluation, which recreates several realistic failure modes in the LGSVL open-source autonomous
driving simulator, and applies the proposed system monitors to a state-of-the-art autonomous driving software stack
(Baidu’s Apollo Auto). The results show that the proposed
system monitors outperform baselines, have the potential of
preventing accidents in realistic autonomous driving scenarios, and incur a negligible computational overhead.

References
Antonante, P.; Nilsen, H.; and Carlone, L. 2023. Monitoring of perception systems: Deterministic, probabilistic, and
learning-based fault detection and identification. Artificial
Intelligence, 325: 103998.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22692

