The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Ensemble Clustering with Adaptive High-Order Topological Weights
Jiaxuan Xu1 , Taiyong Li2 * , Lei Duan1 *
1

2

School of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
xujx@stu.scu.edu.cn, litaiyong@gmail.com, leiduan@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

USPS

Coil20

4

6

Binalpha

Ensemble clustering learns more accurate consensus results
from a set of weak base clustering results. This technique
is more challenging than other clustering algorithms due to
the base clustering result set’s randomness and the inaccessibility of data features. Existing ensemble clustering methods rely on the Co-association (CA) matrix quality but lack
the capability to handle missing connections in base clustering. Inspired by the neighborhood high-order and topological
similarity theories, this paper proposes a topological ensemble model based on high-order information. Specifically, this
paper compensates for missing connections by mining neighborhood high-order connection information in the CA matrix
and learning optimal connections with adaptive weights. Afterward, the learned excellent connections are embedded into
topology learning to capture the topology of the base clustering. Finally, we incorporate adaptive high-order connection
representation and topology learning into a unified learning
framework. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first ensemble clustering work based on topological similarity and
high-order connectivity relations. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The source code of the proposed approach is
available at https://github.com/ltyong/awec.

Missing connection rate

0.5
0.4

Ground Truth
Missing Edge

0.3
0.2

Base clustering

0.1

2

8

# of CA matrix generation

10

Figure 1: The missing connection refers to two samples of
the same class in the ground truth that are clustered into different classes by all base clustering, and the value of the CA
matrix element representing their relationship is also 0. The
missing connection rate refers to the ratio of missing edges
to the edges of the ground truth. The missing connection
rates from three real datasets are shown on the right side.

solving this problem. Ensemble clustering first adopts any
clustering algorithm to generate a set of base clustering result labels, and then applies the consensus function to obtain
a more robust consensus result.
Existing ensemble clustering algorithms interpret the intrinsic relationship patterns of samples by constructing CA
matrix. The CA matrix with symmetric properties describes
the probability that samples belong to the same class. Therefore, consensus results can be obtained by using spectral
clustering or hierarchical clustering on the CA matrix, but
this leads to extremely low accuracy. Many ensemble clustering algorithms introduce various theories to improve the
CA matrix and then improve the clustering performance.
Some of these methods improve the quality of the CA matrix by applying weights to the CA matrix. For example,
(Berikov and Pestunov 2017) applied weights determined by
the evaluation function, (Huang, Wang, and Lai 2017) applied the weight calculated by the entropy value, and (Xu
and Ding 2021) applied the weight with dual-granularity.
Another approach involves designing a learning framework
to enhance the quality of the CA matrix. (Jia et al. 2021) utilized low-rank tensor approximation to capture a refined CA
matrix. (Zhou et al. 2023) proposed a method to enhance the
CA matrix by active learning and self-paced learning. These
methods focus on non-zero element value information in the

Introduction
Clustering is an important type of unsupervised learning
widely used in pattern recognition (Liu et al. 2017), medical
data mining (Dai et al. 2022), object detection (Wang et al.
2020), and other fields (Chen et al. 2022). Unlike supervised
learning, which has label information to refer to, accurate labels are transparent to clustering, making it more challenging. In general, clustering algorithms divide different clusters by extracting the internal associations of the data feature. Many representative clustering algorithms have been
proposed, such as density peak clustering (Rodriguez and
Laio 2014), multi-view clustering (Wang et al. 2018), and
subspace clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Liu et al.
2012). Nevertheless, the variety in data types and distributions compels researchers to devise clustering algorithms
tailored to particular datasets. Ensemble clustering has received much attention in recent years and can contribute to
* Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16184

