The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SimPSI: A Simple Strategy to Preserve Spectral Information
in Time Series Data Augmentation
Hyun Ryu, Sunjae Yoon, Hee Suk Yoon, Eunseop Yoon, and Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
{ryuhyun1905, sunjae.yoon, hskyoon, esyoon97, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Data augmentation is a crucial component in training neural
networks to overcome the limitation imposed by data size,
and several techniques have been studied for time series. Although these techniques are effective in certain tasks, they
have yet to be generalized to time series benchmarks. We
find that current data augmentation techniques ruin the core
information contained within the frequency domain. To address this issue, we propose a simple strategy to preserve
spectral information (SimPSI) in time series data augmentation. SimPSI preserves the spectral information by mixing the original and augmented input spectrum weighted by
a preservation map, which indicates the importance score
of each frequency. Specifically, our experimental contributions are to build three distinct preservation maps: magnitude spectrum, saliency map, and spectrum-preservative map.
We apply SimPSI to various time series data augmentations and evaluate its effectiveness across a wide range of
time series benchmarks. Our experimental results support that
SimPSI considerably enhances the performance of time series data augmentations by preserving core spectral information. The source code used in the paper is available at
https://github.com/Hyun-Ryu/simpsi.

Figure 1: Dependency on data domain of time series data
augmentation techniques. The plot shows the increment of
classification accuracy of a baseline model after applying
each data augmentation technique, which is evaluated on
signal demodulation (Simulation), human activity recognition (HAR), and sleep stage detection (SleepEDF) tasks.

Time series data, whether univariate or multivariate, plays
a crucial role in various domains such as medicine (Lipton
et al. 2016), physiology (Jia et al. 2020), and sensory devices (Yao et al. 2017). Unfortunately, it is limited to collecting data samples under consideration of different types,
constraining the performance and capabilities of neural networks that learn from it. To address this issue, data augmentation (Iwana and Uchida 2021; Um et al. 2017) is employed
as a simple yet effective solution via artificially increasing
the number of samples based on a slight variation or perturbation on the original samples.
Data augmentation techniques have been extensively
studied for time series, incorporating methods such as Jittering, Scaling, Magnitude warping, Time warping, Permutation (Um et al. 2017), Shifting (Woo et al. 2022), and
Dropout (Yang and Hong 2022). These perturbations have
been popular choices in the time domain. The data augmen-

tation is also considered in the frequency domain via applying the Fourier transform to time series data. The spectrum
is then randomly perturbed before being converted back into
the time domain through the inverse Fourier transform. Notable techniques in this category include Frequency masking, Frequency mixing (Chen et al. 2023), and Frequency
adding (Zhang et al. 2022).
We have discovered that while the aforementioned data
augmentation techniques show effectiveness in certain specific tasks (Um et al. 2017), they do not generalize well
to time series classification benchmarks. Our experimental
evidence in Fig. 1 presents the ungeneralized effectiveness
of data augmentation techniques according to the datasets,
such as signal demodulation, human activity recognition,
and sleep stage detection.1 Those techniques, though reliant
on randomness, operate under the assumption that the core
information within the data is preserved. However, the result suggests that perturbing the original time series data is
heuristic and depends on the data domain, which leads to
losing essential information necessary to solve the tasks.
The observed reduction in performance is attributed to

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Detailed information about the tasks and our experimental
setup can be found in the Experiments section.

Introduction

14857

