The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ParaGuide: Guided Diffusion Paraphrasers for
Plug-and-Play Textual Style Transfer
Zachary Horvitz1 , Ajay Patel2 , Chris Callison-Burch2 , Zhou Yu1 , Kathleen McKeown1
1

Columbia University
University of Pennsylvania
zfh2000@columbia.edu, ajayp@seas.upenn.edu, ccb@seas.upenn.edu, zy2461@columbia.edu, kathy@cs.columbia.edu
2

Abstract
Textual style transfer is the task of transforming stylistic
properties of text while preserving meaning. Target “styles”
can be defined in numerous ways, ranging from single attributes (e.g. formality) to authorship (e.g. Shakespeare). Previous unsupervised style-transfer approaches generally rely
on significant amounts of labeled data for only a fixed set
of styles or require large language models. In contrast, we
introduce a novel diffusion-based framework for generalpurpose style transfer that can be flexibly adapted to arbitrary
target styles at inference time. Our parameter-efficient approach, PARAG UIDE, leverages paraphrase-conditioned diffusion models alongside gradient-based guidance from both
off-the-shelf classifiers and strong existing style embedders
to transform the style of text while preserving semantic information. We validate the method on the Enron Email Corpus, with both human and automatic evaluations, and find that
it outperforms strong baselines on formality, sentiment, and
even authorship style transfer.

Introduction

Figure 1: We train paraphrase-conditioned text diffusion
models to reconstruct semantically consistent text from
noised word embeddings. At inference time, we guide the
reconstruction towards target styles with off-the-shelf models.

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2022) were originally popularized for image synthesis (Nichol and Dhariwal
2021; Saharia et al. 2022). More recently, however, diffusion
has been successfully applied to text. Diffusion-based language models are increasingly competitive with traditional
approaches for text generation (Li et al. 2022; Gulrajani
and Hashimoto 2023; Han, Kumar, and Tsvetkov 2023; Han
et al. 2023), and on text-to-text modeling tasks (Mahabadi
et al. 2023; Yuan et al. 2023).
A key benefit of diffusion language models for text is their
high degree of controllability. Diffusion-based approaches
hierarchically denoise a continuous representation of an entire sequence, and this process can be effectively guided with
gradient-based methods (Li et al. 2022; Han, Kumar, and
Tsvetkov 2023; Gulrajani and Hashimoto 2023). This differs from the dominant approach of autoregressive decoding, where text is generated by sequentially sampling tokens.
Steering pretrained autoregressive models has proven difficult, as their text is greedily decoded and guidance must operate on partial sequences (Li et al. 2022; Dathathri et al.

2020; Krause et al. 2020; Yang and Klein 2021). We leverage the controllability of nascent text diffusion methods and
adapt them to style transfer.
In textual style transfer, the objective is to transform the
style of the text to exhibit an attribute (such as “formality”), or a target author’s style, while preserving meaning
(Jin et al. 2022; Krishna, Wieting, and Iyyer 2020; Patel,
Andrews, and Callison-Burch 2022). The scarcity of styletransfer datasets has motivated unsupervised style transfer
approaches that perform attribute and authorship style transfer without paired data. These approaches generally require
retraining for new target styles.
In contrast, we introduce a plug-and-play diffusion framework for unsupervised style transfer.1 We initially train a
text diffusion model to reconstruct semantically consistent
text from paraphrases, but at inference time, we perform
new attribute or authorship style transfers by guiding reconstruction with gradients from off-the-shelf models (Figure
1). This allows users to leverage the numerous text classifiers

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/
zacharyhorvitz/ParaGuide.

18216

