The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SyFormer: Structure-Guided Synergism Transformer for Large-Portion Image
Inpainting
Jie Wu1 , Yuchao Feng1 , Honghui Xu1 , Chuanmeng Zhu2 , Jianwei Zheng1 * ,
1

Zhejiang University of Technology
2
Zhejiang University
wuj@zjut.edu.cn, fyc@zjut.edu.cn, xhh@zjut.edu.cn, cmzhu@zju.edu.cn, zjw@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Image inpainting is in full bloom accompanied by the
progress of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and transformers, revolutionizing the practical management of abnormity disposal, image editing, etc. However, due to the evermounting image resolutions and missing areas, the challenges
of distorted long-range dependencies from cluttered background distributions and reduced reference information in image domain inevitably rise, which further cause severe performance degradation. To address the challenges, we propose
a novel large-portion image inpainting approach, namely the
Structure-Guided Synergism Transformer (SyFormer), to rectify the discrepancies in feature representation and enrich the
structural cues from limited reference. Specifically, we devise
a dual-routing filtering module that employs a progressive filtering strategy to eliminate invalid noise interference and establish global-level texture correlations. Simultaneously, the
structurally compact perception module maps an affinity matrix within the introduced structural priors from a structureaware generator, assisting in matching and filling the corresponding patches of large-proportionally damaged images.
Moreover, we carefully assemble the aforementioned modules to achieve feature complementarity. Finally, a feature
decoding alignment scheme is introduced in the decoding
process, which meticulously achieves texture amalgamation
across hierarchical features. Extensive experiments are conducted on two publicly available datasets, i.e., CelebA-HQ
and Places2, to qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate
the superiority of our model over state-of-the-arts.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Inpainted results in cases of background disturbance (upper row) and large missing regions (bottom row).
(a) Corrupted images. (b) Inpainted results. (c) GT.

implies more information as well as more complex properties, whereas the input incompleteness inevitably suffers
drastic changes in feature distribution, which further leads to
cluttered image domain and brings about a catastrophic performance drop for existing methods. Especially in cases with
large-proportion pixel loss, most previous research loses its
original luster due to the severe scarcity of available references.
To address these challenges, massive studies based on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Xiong et al. 2019;
Jin et al. 2023) have come up with well-thought-out ideas.
The main solution is to add auxiliary priors to guide pixel
filling on top of the powerful learning capability of CNNs,
which proves pivotal in mitigating the issue of limited information within the occluded regions. In particular, the
auxiliary information is typically inspired by contextual
cues, e.g., edge maps (Nazeri et al. 2019), semantic maps
(Liao et al. 2020), etc. Following this line, most current approaches bifurcate the inpainting process into two branches.
The initial one revolves around the latent cues associated
with the impaired regions, succeded by the intricate texture
synthesis. For example, CTSDG (Guo, Yang, and Huang
2021) develops a parallel architecture that simultaneously

Introduction
Given corrupted images, inpainting technique endeavors to
restore obscure regions with semantically coherent contents.
Propelled by rapid advancements in digital media, this technique has garnered significant attention and found wideranging applications in real-world scenarios, such as picture editing (Song et al. 2019), restoration of polluted images(Jin et al. 2023; Feihong et al. 2023), and disposal of
undesired objects (Li, Wang, and Hu 2021). However, with
ongoing iterations of hardware and software, the captured
images enjoy a consistently higher resolution, which poses
new challenges to the mission. In practice, high resolution
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6021

