The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Harnessing Holistic Discourse Features and Triadic Interaction for Sentiment
Quadruple Extraction in Dialogues
Bobo Li1 , Hao Fei2 , Lizi Liao3 , Yu Zhao4 , Fangfang Su1 , Fei Li1 , Donghong Ji1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of
Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{boboli, fangsu, lifei csnlp, dhji}@whu.edu.cn, haofei37@nus.edu.sg, lzliao@smu.edu.sg, zhaoyucs@tju.edu.cn
Abstract
Dialogue Aspect-based Sentiment Quadruple (DiaASQ) is a
newly-emergent task aiming to extract the sentiment quadruple (i.e., targets, aspects, opinions, and sentiments) from conversations. While showing promising performance, the prior
DiaASQ approach unfortunately falls prey to the key crux
of DiaASQ, including insufficient modeling of discourse features, and lacking quadruple extraction, which hinders further
task improvement. To this end, we introduce a novel framework that not only capitalizes on comprehensive discourse
feature modeling, but also captures the intrinsic interaction
for optimal quadruple extraction. On the one hand, drawing
upon multiple discourse features, our approach constructs a
token-level heterogeneous graph and enhances token interactions through a heterogeneous attention network. We further
propose a novel triadic scorer, strengthening weak token relations within a quadruple, thereby enhancing the cohesion
of the quadruple extraction. Experimental results on the DiaASQ benchmark showcase that our model significantly outperforms existing baselines across both English and Chinese
datasets. Our code is available at https://bit.ly/3v27pqA.

A #1

I've been using the Xiaomi 10 lately and I genuinely
think it's a pretty solid device.

B #2

I got one, but it hasn't lived up
to my expectations as Mi 9.

A #3

What seems to be the issue?
Any specific drawbacks?
Emm, it really disappoints me,

C #4 especially the battery life.

D #5 It’s fine. But I still miss my last
E #6

T Xiaomi 10
A battery life
O disappoints
P Negative

phone, Mi 6

T Mi 6

I had the Mi 6 and the build
quality was simply top notch.

A build quality

Hah, glad to see that. I really

P Positive

D #7 love it even years passed.

O top notch

Figure 1: An example of aspect-based quadruple extraction
in conversation. The item ‘T ’, ‘A’, ‘O’, and ‘P’ denote target, aspect, opinion, and polarity, respectively. The arraw→
represents the reply relationship in conversation.

Introduction

2021a). This potential has sparked growing research interest
in ABSA for dialogues, enabling real-world applications.
In light of the promising applications, Li et al. (2023a)
pioneered ABSA analysis in dialogue, introducing the task
of DiaASQ. As illustrated in Figure 1, given a multi-party,
multi-turn dialogue, the task aims to extract the quadruple
formed by target, aspect, opinion, and sentiment polarity.
Meanwhile, to benchmark the DiaASQ task, Li et al. (2023a)
proposed a word-pair-based framework by following prior
quadruple extraction (Zhang et al. 2021a). Although exhibiting promising performance, their model still falls short
of two key limitations, in terms of two crux of DiaASQ,
i.e., discourse modeling and triadic quadruple interaction.
First, compared to previous ABSA in the individual texts,
sentiment-related content of DiaASQ is conveyed through
dialogue flow, necessitating an efficient understanding of
dialogue discourse to extract quadruples. Besides, the extraction process of DiaASQ, which involves detecting three
items and subsequently assigning a sentiment label to them,
presents an urgent demand for triadic interaction between

Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) has garnered
considerable research attention in the field of affective computing (Zhang et al. 2023b). The core of ABSA involves
extracting opinions or sentiment preferences towards specific aspects from text, forming tasks such as target-oriented
opinion words extraction (Fan et al. 2019), aspect sentiment
triplet extraction (Peng et al. 2020), and aspect sentiment
quad prediction (Zhang et al. 2021a). Regardless of the diverse forms of current ABSA research, the primary focus
remains limited to individual text pieces, such as online reviews. However, in daily interactions, e.g., on social media,
people tend to convey their fine-grained sentiments in the
dialogue format. Due to the intricate nature of dialogue discourse, traditional ABSA techniques developed for singletext might fail to fully capture the richness and depth of sentiments within them (Cai, Xia, and Yu 2021; Zhang et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18462

