The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

When Do Program-of-Thought Works for Reasoning?
Zhen Bi1,2 , Ningyu Zhang1,2 * , Yinuo Jiang1,2 , Shumin Deng4 ,
Guozhou Zheng1,2,3 , Huajun Chen1,2,3 *
1

Zhejiang University
Zhejiang University - Ant Group Joint Laboratory of Knowledge Graph
3
Donghai Laboratory
4
NUS-NCS Joint Lab, National University of Singapore
{bizhen zju, zhangningyu, 3200100732, guozhou, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn, shumin@nus.edu.sg
2

logic and structure

Abstract

𝑰𝑭 𝒐𝒓 𝑬𝑳𝑺𝑬

In the realm of embodied artificial intelligence, the reasoning
capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) play a pivotal
role. Although there are effective methods like program-ofthought prompting for LLMs which uses programming language to tackle complex reasoning tasks, the specific impact of code data on the improvement of reasoning capabilities remains under-explored. To address this gap, we propose
complexity-impacted reasoning score (CIRS), which combines structural and logical attributes, to measure the correlation between code and reasoning abilities. Specifically,
we use the abstract syntax tree to encode the structural information and calculate logical complexity by considering
the difficulty and the cyclomatic complexity. Through an
empirical analysis, we find not all code data of complexity can be learned or understood by LLMs. Optimal level of
complexity is critical to the improvement of reasoning abilities by program-aided prompting. Then we design an autosynthesizing and stratifying algorithm, and apply it to instruction generation for mathematical reasoning and code data filtering for code generation tasks. Extensive results demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

+
Question: A restaurant has 3 chefs.
Chef A worked for 8 hours, Chef B
worked for 6.5 hours, and Chef C
worked for 9.25 hours. How many
minutes did the chefs work in total?
```python
chef_A_hours = 8
chef_B_hours = 6.5
chef_C_hours = 9.25
total_hours = chef_A_hours +
chef_B_hours + chef_C_hours
total_minutes = total_hours * 60
print(total_minutes)
```

∗

+

𝑪𝒐𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆𝒙𝒊𝒕𝒚 − 𝑰𝒎𝒑𝒂𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅
𝑹𝒆𝒂𝒔𝒐𝒏𝒊𝒏𝒈 𝑺𝒄𝒐𝒓𝒆

Complexity Analysis

Solution
What’s the crucial factor for reasoning?

Figure 1: We leverage code structure to analyze what kind
of data is crucial for reasoning abilities of LLMs models.
remains: When do program-of-thought prompting works
for reasoning1 ?
In this work, we propose the Complexity-Impacted
Reasoning Score (CIRS), a comprehensive metric for the
relationship between code reasoning steps and their impacts
on LLMs’ reasoning capacities. We postulate that programming languages hold distinct advantages due to: (1) their superior modeling of intricate structures compared to serialized natural language. (2) their inherent procedure-oriented
logic, which assists in addressing multi-step reasoning problems. We posit that our metric should evaluate the code complexity from both structural and logical perspectives.
Specifically, we use abstract syntax tree (AST) to calculate the structural complexity of code reasoning steps (rationales). To retain all structural information in AST that
is represented as a tree, our approach leverages three AST
indicators (node count, node type, depth), which provides
a comprehensive understanding of code structures. Meanwhile, inspired by Halsted (Halstead 1977) and McCabe
(McCabe 1976)’s theory, we design a method to calculate

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2023; Anil et al.
2023), have emerged as a general-purpose problem-solving
methodology for embodied artificial intelligence. In the
realm of embodied AI, the reasoning capabilities of LLMs
play a pivotal role, especially when agents need to comprehend the semantic intricacies of their environment for
effective control (Chen et al. 2022b; Huang et al. 2022,
2023; Wang et al. 2023a). Recent approaches (Chen et al.
2022a; Gao et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2023), which we term
program-of-thought, leverages programming language as a
superior prompting mechanism for complex reasoning tasks.
In contrast to chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al. 2022),
program-of-thought prompting disentangles the problems
into executable code segments and address them step-bystep. However, the correlation between the programming
language utilization and the improvement in reasoning ability for LLMs is under-studied. The essential question still
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this work, we use mathematical reasoning tasks for verification, which is a typical problem for complex reasoning tasks.

17691

