The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ESRL: Efficient Sampling-Based Reinforcement Learning
for Sequence Generation
Chenglong Wang1 , Hang Zhou1 , Yimin Hu1 , Yifu Huo1 , Bei Li1 ,
Tongran Liu3 , Tong Xiao1,2 * and Jingbo Zhu1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
3
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, CAS, Beijing, China
{clwang1119, stceum}@gmail.com, {xiaotong, zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn
Abstract

and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.
2017), to optimize the model with the long-term rewards
given the sampled sequences (call it optimization). This
paradigm has achieved promising results on several sequence generation tasks, such as machine translation (Wieting et al. 2019; Yehudai et al. 2022; Donato et al. 2022),
abstractive summarization (Celikyilmaz et al. 2018; Stiennon et al. 2020), and dialogue generation (Hsueh and Ma
2020). Moreover, it has been proved to have a promising potential for guiding a large language model (LLM) to learn
from human feedbacks (Ouyang et al. 2022; OpenAI 2022).
Despite such successes, applying RL to NLP is not lowhanging fruit. In practical applications of sequence generation, we often deal with a large action space (e.g., a vocabulary) and a long action sequence (e.g., a translation). This
poses a serious computational challenge to the exploration
procedure (Keneshloo et al. 2019), and is an important factor
motivating the design of sophisticated sampling approaches.
To mitigate this problem, we investigate strategies for reducing the computational burden of exploration when applying RL to sequence generation models. In this work, we
propose an Efficient Sampling-based RL (ESRL) method,
which enables more efficient exploration by using the following two approaches. For one, we use a two-stage sampling framework to implement the exploration. It can take
full advantage of the Transformer’s parallelism computation,
so the excessive computational graph storage requirements
disappear. Furthermore, we propose a dynamic sampling approach that can reduce redundant sampling by considering
the capability of a model. The motivation is that heavy sampling is simply not necessary because pre-trained generation
models have already acquired some ability of generation.
We experiment with the proposed ESRL on machine
translation and summarization tasks based on Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017). Experimental results show that ESRL
can surpass both the REINFORCE (Williams 1992; Kiegeland and Kreutzer 2021) and minimum risk training (Shen
et al. 2016) in terms of generation quality, training time, and
memory consumption. Notably, compared to REINFORCE,
it can reduce 47% of the memory consumption and 39% of
the training time on the machine translation task. Additionally, our ESRL significantly outperforms the vanilla Transformer over 1.04 BLEU points on the IWSLT’14 De-En and
WMT’14 En-De test sets. It also significantly outperforms

Applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to sequence generation models enables the direct optimization of long-term rewards (e.g., BLEU and human feedback), but typically requires large-scale sampling over a space of action sequences.
This is a computational challenge as presented by the practice of sequence generation problems, such as machine translation, where we often deal with a large action space (e.g.,
a vocabulary) and a long action sequence (e.g., a translation). In this work, we introduce two-stage sampling and dynamic sampling approaches to improve the sampling efficiency during training sequence generation models via RL.
We experiment with our approaches on the traditional sequence generation tasks, including machine translation and
abstractive summarization. Furthermore, we evaluate our approaches in RL from human feedback (RLHF) through training a large language model using the reward model. Experimental results show that the efficient sampling-based RL, referred to as ESRL, can outperform all baselines in terms of
both training efficiency and memory consumption. Notably,
ESRL yields consistent performance gains over the strong
REINFORCE, minimum risk training, and proximal policy
optimization methods. The code is available at https://github.
com/wangclnlp/DeepSpeed-Chat-Extension/examples/esrl.

Introduction
The use of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in training sequence generation models has gained significant attention in
recent years. This is primarily due to the fact that sequence
generation is inherently a long-term decision-making problem and RL is particularly well-suited for optimizing longterm rewards, such as sequence-level scores (Wieting et al.
2019; Donato et al. 2022) and human feedbacks (Nguyen,
Daumé III, and Boyd-Graber 2017; Stiennon et al. 2020;
Ouyang et al. 2022; OpenAI 2022). Additionally, by training
with sampled sequences, using RL to train sequence generation models can significantly mitigate the exposure bias
problem (Ranzato et al. 2016; Wang and Sennrich 2020).
The RL training process typically involves two steps:
(1) sampling a number of candidate sequences with a pretrained model given an input (call it exploration), and (2)
using an RL method, such as REINFORCE (Williams 1992)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19107

