The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PICNN: A Pathway towards Interpretable Convolutional Neural Networks
Wengang Guo* , Jiayi Yang* , Huilin Yin, Qijun Chen, Wei Ye†
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{guowg, 2111125, yinhuilin, qjchen, yew}@tongji.edu.cn

Raw image

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have exhibited great
performance in discriminative feature learning for complex
visual tasks. Besides discrimination power, interpretability
is another important yet under-explored property for CNNs.
One difficulty in the CNN interpretability is that filters and
image classes are entangled. In this paper, we introduce a
novel pathway to alleviate the entanglement between filters
and image classes. The proposed pathway groups the filters in a late conv-layer of CNN into class-specific clusters. Clusters and classes are in a one-to-one relationship.
Specifically, we use the Bernoulli sampling to generate the
filter-cluster assignment matrix from a learnable filter-class
correspondence matrix. To enable end-to-end optimization,
we develop a novel reparameterization trick for handling the
non-differentiable Bernoulli sampling. We evaluate the effectiveness of our method on ten widely used network architectures (including nine CNNs and a ViT) and five benchmark datasets. Experimental results have demonstrated that
our method PICNN (the combination of standard CNNs with
our proposed pathway) exhibits greater interpretability than
standard CNNs while achieving higher or comparable discrimination power.

Grad-CAM using different clusters of filters

Class-specific cluster

Complementary clusters
Dog

Classes

Cat
Sheep
Horse
Bird
Cow
Filters

Figure 1: Top: comparison of Grad-CAM visualizations using different class-specific clusters of filters. Bottom: the
display of the learned filter-class correspondence matrix P.
The dataset is PASCAL VOC Part (Chen et al. 2014) with
six animal classes, and the target late conv-layer consists of
20 class-specific filters.

Introduction
The remarkable discrimination power of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) fosters great applications in numerous tasks. However, in safety-critical domains such as autonomous vehicles (Zablocki et al. 2022) and healthcare
(D’Amour et al. 2022), interpretability is another crucial
property that needs to be considered.
The interpretability of CNNs has received growing interest in recent research. Earlier posthoc explanation methods
(Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2013; Springenberg et al. 2014; Zhou et al. 2016; Selvaraju
et al. 2017; Bau et al. 2017) focus on generating offline
interpretations such as saliency maps (Simonyan, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman 2013) and class activation mapping (CAM)
(Zhou et al. 2016) for well-trained CNNs. But posthoc methods cannot improve the intrinsic interpretability of CNNs,

as they operate independently from the training process. Recently, the focus of the community has shifted to train interpretable CNNs. For example, (Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018;
Shen et al. 2021) encourage each filter in a late conv-layer
to respond to only one object part. Nevertheless, these methods cannot directly reveal concepts learned by filters, as they
rely on some posthoc methods (Bau et al. 2017; Zhou et al.
2015) to associate filters to the predefined concepts.
In this paper, interpretability is characterized by the
alignment between filters and class-level concepts that are
human-understandable. We propose a novel method to train
interpretable CNNs whose filters in the late conv-layer can
directly reveal class-level concepts without the help of any
posthoc methods. We focus on filters in the late conv-layer
since these filters encode class-level concepts rather than
low-level primitives (Zeiler and Fergus 2014). (Fong and
Vedaldi 2018) has shown that a CNN uses multiple filters
in the late conv-layers to collectively encode a class-level

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2003

