The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning with Noisy Labels Using Hyperspherical Margin Weighting
Shuo Zhang1,2,3 , Yuwen Li1,2 , Zhongyu Wang1,2 , Jianqing Li1,2 , Chengyu Liu1,2 *
1
School of Instrument Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
State Key Laboratory of Digital Medical Engineering, Southeast University, China
3
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, China
{zs techo, liyuwen, zhongyu, ljq, chengyu}@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Datasets often include noisy labels, but learning from them
is difficult. Since mislabeled examples usually have larger
loss values in training, the small-loss trick is regarded as a
standard metric to identify the clean example from the training set for better performance. Nonetheless, this proposal ignores that some clean but hard-to-learn examples also generate large losses. They could be misidentified by this criterion. In this paper, we propose a new metric called the Integrated Area Margin (IAM), which is superior to the traditional small-loss trick, particularly in recognizing the clean
but hard-to-learn examples. According to the IAM, we further offer the Hyperspherical Margin Weighting (HMW) approach. It is a new sample weighting strategy that restructures
the importance of each example. It should be highlighted that
our approach is universal and can strengthen various methods
in this field. Experiments on both benchmark and real-world
datasets indicate that our HMW outperforms many state-ofthe-art approaches in learning with noisy label tasks. Codes
are available at https://github.com/Zhangshuojackpot/HMW.

(a) Traditional Small-Loss Trick

(b) Our IAM

Figure 1: The comparison of the traditional small-loss trick
metric and the proposed IAM metric. It is obvious that our
IAM is more powerful in identifying mislabeled examples,
especially from hard-to-learn examples.

determines which examples are ignored. In most cases, the
loss value in the convergence is regarded as a tool to identify, called the small-loss trick. This metric treats the largeloss example as a mislabeled one. Based on this thinking,
various approaches have been developed: Co-teaching (Han
et al. 2018) and Co-teaching+ (Yu et al. 2019) offered two
networks, but each network extracted examples with small
losses and fed them to its peer network for further training. DivideMix (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020a) employed twocomponent and one-dimensional Gaussian mixture models
to fit the loss values of examples and turned noisy samples
into labeled and unlabeled sets. JoCoR (Wei et al. 2020) followed this motivation and tried to reduce the diversity of
the two networks, making predictions about them closer. In
PuriDivER (Bang et al. 2022), the authors applied the smallloss trick for purity-aware sampling.
Nonetheless, the small-loss trick is actually defective.
This criterion does not consider the influence of clean but
hard-to-learn examples. Let us take some images in CIFAR10 as an example to illustrate. When various images
that are labeled to“ship” are employed for training, their loss
curves are shown in Fig. 1(a). As can be seen, the clean and
easy-to-learn “ship” (the green line) has a small loss and is
distinguishable from the clean but hard-to-learn “ship” (the
red line) and the mislabeled “ship” (the blue line). However,
identifying the red line from the blue line is tough, especially in the late stages of training. It reveals that the smallloss trick is not sensitive enough to distinguish the clean but

Introduction
Supervised machine learning has revolutionized artificial intelligence, allowing us to build predictive models that can
recognize patterns and make decisions. The effectiveness of
models depends heavily on the quality of the training data.
Nonetheless, labeling precise annotations is time-consuming
and prone to mistakes. Even accepted high-quality datasets,
such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), include erroneous labels (Northcutt, Athalye, and Mueller 2021). The presence
of noisy labels can dramatically degrade the performance of
models. Therefore, developing algorithms to resist them is
vital. Many approaches have been proposed. Since sample
weighting methods do not suffer from imprecise noise estimates or duplicated model architecture, this kind of strategy
is the main focus of this paper.
In fact, the sample weighting method achieves learning
with noisy labels by decreasing the importance of the mislabeled examples (giving them a small weight or even removing them) in the training procedure. Apparently, the recognition of the mislabeled example is significant. It directly
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16848

