The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MetaDiff: Meta-Learning with Conditional Diffusion for Few-Shot Learning
Baoquan Zhang1 , Chuyao Luo1 , Demin Yu1 , Xutao Li1 , Huiwei Lin1 , Yunming Ye1∗ , Bowen Zhang2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Shenzhen Technology University
baoquanzhang@hit.edu.cn, luochuyao.dalian@gmail.com, deminyu98@gmail.com, lixutao@hit.edu.cn,
linhuiwei@stu.hit.edu.cn, yeyunming@hit.edu.cn, zhang bo wen@foxmail.com

Abstract

Initialize

Equipping a deep model the ability of few-shot learning
(FSL) is a core challenge for artificial intelligence. Gradientbased meta-learning effectively addresses the challenge by
learning how to learn novel tasks. Its key idea is learning
a deep model in a bi-level optimization manner, where the
outer-loop process learns a shared gradient descent algorithm
(called meta-optimizer), while the inner-loop process leverages it to optimize a task-specific base learner with few examples. Although these methods have shown superior performance on FSL, the outer-loop process requires calculating
second-order derivatives along the inner-loop path, which imposes considerable memory burdens and the risk of vanishing
gradients. This degrades meta-learning performance. Inspired
by recent diffusion models, we find that the inner-loop gradient descent process can be viewed as a reverse process (i.e.,
denoising) of diffusion where the target of denoising is the
weight of base learner but origin data. Based on this fact, we
propose to model the gradient descent algorithm as a diffusion model and then present a novel conditional diffusionbased meta-learning, called MetaDiff, that effectively models the optimization process of base learner weights from
Gaussian initialization to target weights in a denoising manner. Thanks to the training efficiency of diffusion models, our
MetaDiff does not need to differentiate through the inner-loop
path such that the memory burdens and the risk of vanishing
gradients can be effectively alleviated for improving FSL. Experimental results show that our MetaDiff outperforms stateof-the-art gradient-based meta-learning family on FSL tasks.

1

w0

...

wt −1

Gradient
Descent

wt

...

Random Weights

wT

Target Weights

(a) Workflow of gradient descent algorithm
Sample

xT

...

xt

Denosing

xt −1

...

x0

Diffusion
Gaussian Noise Data

Target Data

(b) Workflow of diffusion models
Initialize

wT

Random Weights

...

wt

Denosing

wt −1

Diffusion

...

w0

Target Weights

(c) Workflow of our MetaDiff

Figure 1: Connection between gradient descent algorithm
(GDA) and diffusion models. The gradient descent process
(a) of GDA is similar to denoising process (b) of diffusion
models. Based on this, we propose to model GDA as the denoising process of a diffusion model (c) and learn it in a diffusion manner, which does not need to differentiate through
inner-loop path such that the issue of memory burdens and
vanishing gradients can be alleviated for improving FSL.

data-ubundant base classes and then assist novel class prediction with few labeled examples (Wang et al. 2020).
To address this FSL problem, meta-learning (Rusu et al.
2018) has been proposed, which constructs a large number
of base tasks from these base classes and then leverages it
to learn task-agnostic meta knowledge for assisting novel
class learning. Among these methods, gradient-based metalearning methods are gaining increased attention, with its
potential on generalization. This type of methods aims to
learn a sample-efficient gradient descent algorithm (called
meta-optimizer) by directly modeling its initialization (Finn
et al. 2017), learning rate (Baik et al. 2020), or update
rule (Ravi and Larochelle 2017) as a shared meta parameter and then learning it in a bi-level (i.e., outer-loop and
inner-loop) optimization manner. Here, the outer-loop process accounts for learning a task-agnostic meta parameter
for meta-optimizer, while the inner-loop process leverages
the meta-optimizer to learn a task-specific base learner with
few gradient updates. Although these methods have shown

Introduction

With a large number of labeled data, deep learning techniques have shown superior performance and made breakthrough on various tasks. However, collecting such much
data may be impractical or very difficult on some applications such as drug screening (Altae-Tran et al. 2017) and
cold-start recommendation (Vartak et al. 2017). Inspired by
the fast learning abaility of humans, i.e., humans can quickly
learn a new concept or task from only very few examples,
few-shot learning (FSL) has been proposed and has gained
wide attention. It aims to learn transferable knowledge from
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16687

