The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ICAR: Image-Based Complementary Auto Reasoning
Xijun Wang1,2 , Anqi Liang2 , Junbang Liang2 , Ming Lin1,2 , Yu Lou2 , Shan Yang2
1

University of Maryland, College Park, USA
2
Amazon, USA
{xijun, lin}@umd.edu, {lianganq, junbangl, ylou, ssyang}@amazon.com

Abstract

in the scene, and object categories. Therefore, we propose
a visual compatibility concept, consisting of two key elements: similarity and complementarity. Visual similarity and
complementarity, however, can contradict each other sometimes. Items that look similar (color, geometry, texture, and
etc.) may not be complementary (different items like dinner table vs sofa) when putting them into a set. Items that
complement each other do not necessarily look similar (e.g.
an outfit set in contrasting colors). The ambiguous definition for visual complementarity is a major challenge. This
ambiguity makes it difficult to rigorously define an objective and creates extra challenge for collecting such datasets,
when designing a data-driven method.
To address these issues, we first propose a “compatibility leaning” framework to model the visual similarity
and complementarity. To the best of our knowledge, we
are among the first to show qualitatively that our model
based on this framework can generalize to unseen domains
(where the model is not trained with, as shown in Figure 1 and Figure 6). For the scene-based CIR task, it’s complex to learn both the cross-domain similarity and complementarity. Therefore, we use cross-domain visual similarity invariant embeddings in our framework. Many previous CIR works (Han et al. 2017; Kang et al. 2019) also
start from some types of learned embedding. But failing to
model the visual similarity creates extra complexity for the
complementary learning. Secondly, we propose to use selfsupervised learning for visual complementarity reasoning
by introducing an auto-regressive transformer based architecture. Given the difficulty to define style complementarity
mathematically, we propose a solution based on the assumption that the items exist in the inspirational scene images are
compatible with each other.
Built upon the aforementioned premises, we present a
novel self-supervised transformer-based learning framework
(overview shown in Fig. 3). Our model effectively learns
both the similarity and complementarity between a set of
items. Our model does not require extra complementary labels. In addition, compared to the prior work that models
complementary items as pairs or a sequence of items, we
model them as unordered sets. We carefully design our compatibility leaning model. First, we ensure that the learned
embedding both contains and extracts all the necessary information for the compatibility learning. Second, we make

Scene-aware Complementary Item Retrieval (CIR) is a challenging task which requires to generate a set of compatible
items across domains. Due to the subjectivity, it is difficult
to set up a rigorous standard for both data collection and
learning objectives. To address this challenging task, we propose a visual compatibility concept, composed of similarity
(resembling in color, geometry, texture, and etc.) and complementarity (different items like table vs chair completing
a group). Based on this notion, we propose a compatibility
learning framework, a category-aware Flexible Bidirectional
Transformer (FBT), for visual “scene-based set compatibility reasoning” with the cross-domain visual similarity input
and auto-regressive complementary item generation. We introduce a “Flexible Bidirectional Transformer (FBT),” consisting of an encoder with flexible masking, a category prediction arm, and an auto-regressive visual embedding prediction
arm. And the inputs for FBT are cross-domain visual similarity invariant embeddings, making this framework quite generalizable. Furthermore, our proposed FBT model learns the
inter-object compatibility from a large set of scene images
in a self-supervised way. Compared with the SOTA methods,
this approach achieves up to 5.3% and 9.6% in FITB score
and 22.3% and 31.8% SFID improvement on fashion and
furniture, respectively.

Introduction
Online shopping catalogs provide great convenience, such
as searching and comparing similar items. However, when
customers can compare similar items, they often miss the
browsing of complementary items in the e-shopping experience. Millions of online images offer a new opportunity
to shop with inspirational home decoration ideas or outfit
matching. But, to retrieve stylistically compatible products
from these online images for set matching can be an overwhelming process.The ability to recommend visually complementary items becomes especially important, when shopping for home furniture and clothings.
In this work, we aim to address the visual scene-aware
Complementary Item Retrieval (CIR) (Sarkar et al. 2022;
Kang et al. 2019) task. In this task (as shown in Figure 2),
we attempt to model human’s ability to select a set of objects from cross-domain pools, given a scene image, objects
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5633

