The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CcDPM: A Continuous Conditional Diffusion Probabilistic Model for Inverse
Design
Yanxuan Zhao, Peng Zhang, Guopeng Sun, Zhigong Yang, Jianqiang Chen, Yueqing Wang
Computational Aerodynamics Institute, China Aerodynamics Research and Development Center, Mianyang, China
zzz1014751733@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {zp14123456,gpsguopeng,yangzhigong2012,yqwang2013}@163.com, jq-chen@263.net

Abstract

Bendsøe 1998; Bendsoe and Sigmund 2003), and adjoint optimization (Anderson and Venkatakrishnan 1999) into engineering design. However, their efforts have not fundamentally solved the time-consuming problem because the search
space is still very large and the time of a single numeric simulation is still long. Furthermore, in situations where performance is evaluated by non-analytical models (e.g., experiments or expert assessments), some gradient-based methods
fail because they require differentiable physical solvers.
To further improve the efficiency, researchers proposed
inverse design methods, which regard the performance requirements as inputs, and directly generate designs that meet
specific performance requirements, to skip the trial-anderror process. Many works have directly applied cGANs
(Mirza and Osindero 2014) and conditional Variational autoencoders (cVAEs) (Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015) to the inverse design (Yilmaz and German 2020; Achour et al. 2020;
Wang, Shimada, and Farimani 2021). These methods are intuitive and effective, but they have a critical limitation that
they assume the empirical distributions of the performance
requirements are discrete, and estimated through the Dirac
delta function. This assumption is unreasonable because the
distributions of performance requirements of designs are
continuous in this scenario.
To reduce the performance loss caused by this discrete
assumption, Continuous conditional GAN (CcGAN) (Ding
et al. 2022) and Performance conditioned Diverse Generative Adversarial Network (PcDGAN) (Heyrani Nobari,
Chen, and Ahmed 2021), introduce Vicinal Risk Minimization (VRM) (Sain 1996; Chapelle et al. 2000) into conditional GAN (cGAN). Although relaxing the assumption, CcGAN and PcDGAN still face some challenges. First, GANs
(Goodfellow et al. 2020) adopt zero-sum game theory to
train the networks, which are difficult to train and prone to
mode collapse. Second, they cannot work if the input performance requirements belong to different working conditions in multi-point design problems (Piperni and Rahman
2021; Mangano and Martins 2021; Li, Bai, and Qu 2022).
For example, they can only generate new aircraft designs
given lift coefficient (CL) and drag coefficient (CD) under
only one working condition. Third, the continuous empirical distributions of input conditions lead to the increased
computational complexity of the cost function, resulting in
a time-consuming training process.

Engineering design methods aim to generate new designs
that meet desired performance requirements. Past work has
directly introduced conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs) into this field and achieved promising results
in single-point design problems (one performance requirement under one working condition). However, these methods assume that the performance requirements are distributed
in categorical space, which is not reasonable in these scenarios. Although Continuous conditional GANs (CcGANs)
introduce Vicinal Risk Minimization (VRM) to reduce the
performance loss caused by this assumption, they still face
the following challenges: 1) CcGANs can not handle multipoint design problems (multiple performance requirements
under multiple working conditions). 2) Their training process
is time-consuming due to the high computational complexity of the vicinal loss. To address these issues, A Continuous
conditional Diffusion Probabilistic Model (CcDPM) is proposed, which the first time introduces the diffusion model
into the engineering design area and VRM into the diffusion
model. CcDPM adopts a novel sampling method called multipoint design sampling to deal with multi-point design problems. Moreover, the k-d tree is used in the training process
of CcDPM to shorten the calculation time of vicinal loss and
speed up the training process by 2-300 times in our experiments. Experiments on a synthetic problem and three realworld design problems demonstrate that CcDPM outperforms
the state-of-the-art GAN models.

Introduction
Engineering design aims to generate a set of designs that
meet specific performance requirements. Numerous studies
have been conducted in this area over the last few years
with encouraging outcomes (Buede and Miller 2016; Hubka
2015). However, these methods are time-consuming due to
the following reasons: 1) these studies search for the optimal design in a large space using a trial-and-error process,
2) during the trial-and-error process, it is necessary to continuously adopt numerous physical simulations to verify if
obtained designs meet the performance requirements.
To accelerate existing methods, researchers introduce
the genetic algorithm, topology optimization (Duysinx and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17033

