The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

WaveFormer: Wavelet Transformer for Noise-Robust Video Inpainting
Zhiliang Wu1 , Changchang Sun2 , Hanyu Xuan3 * , Gaowen Liu4 , Yan Yan2
2

1
CCAI, Zhejiang University, China
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
3
School of Big Data and Statistics, Anhui University, China
4
Cisco Research, USA

Abstract

the inter-frame motion continuity, resulting in flicker artifacts (Chang et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2023a).
Recently, several deep learning-based video inpainting
methods (Gao et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020)
have been proposed and achieved great progress in terms
of the quality and speed. However, due to the limited receptive field along the temporal domain, these methods still
suffer from limitations of blurry and misplacement artifacts
in the completed video (Ren et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023b). To
address these issues, the state-of-the-art methods (Cai et al.
2022; Lee et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Ren
et al. 2022; Seoung et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2023c; Zhang, Wu,
and Yan 2023) resort to the attention mechanism to explore
the long-term correspondences between frames. In this way,
the available content at distant frames can also be globally
propagated into the missing regions. Notably, the representative technique transformer (Cai et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021;
Ren et al. 2022; Zeng, Fu, and Chao 2020; Cai et al. 2022;
Zhang, Fu, and Liu 2022) has gained increasing attention
from researchers of video inpainting field due to its remarkable advantage of long-range modeling capacity. Typically,
these transformer-based methods first search coherent contents from all the frames along both spatial and temporal dimensions by a patch-wise attention mechanism, and then utilize the attention-weighted summation to generate the missing contents. It means that the attention retrieval accuracy
has become the main bottleneck limiting the inpainting performance. Inaccurate attention retrieval will ignore relevant
content that is essential in video inpainting and introduce
more irrelevant content in the missing regions, resulting in
generating blurry or compromised contents (Zhang et al.
2023; Zhang, Fu, and Liu 2022).
In fact, due to the limitations of transmission media and
recording equipment, digital images and videos will inevitably be polluted by noise during the transmission and
recording process (Geng et al. 2022). Correspondingly, the
learned embeddings always contain noise. Therefore, to improve the performance of video inpainting, it is promising
and necessary to explore the impact of noise on attention
computation. For this purpose, we theoretically certificate
that noise-contained inputs are disadvantageous to transformers’ attention calculation. Then, to address above disadvantages caused by ubiquitous noise in video inpainting, we

Video inpainting aims to fill in the missing regions of the
video frames with plausible content. Benefiting from the
outstanding long-range modeling capacity, the transformerbased models have achieved unprecedented performance regarding inpainting quality. Essentially, coherent contents
from all the frames along both spatial and temporal dimensions are concerned by a patch-wise attention module,
and then the missing contents are generated based on the
attention-weighted summation. In this way, attention retrieval
accuracy has become the main bottleneck to improve the
video inpainting performance, where the factors affecting attention calculation should be explored to maximize the advantages of transformer. Towards this end, in this paper, we
theoretically certificate that noise is the culprit that entangles the process of attention calculation. Meanwhile, we propose a novel wavelet transformer network with noise robustness for video inpainting, named WaveFormer. Unlike existing transformer-based methods that utilize the whole embeddings to calculate the attention, our WaveFormer first separates the noise existing in the embedding into high-frequency
components by introducing the Discrete Wavelet Transform
(DWT), and then adopts clean low-frequency components to
calculate the attention. In this way, the impact of noise on attention computation can be greatly mitigated and the missing
content regarding different frequencies can be generated by
sharing the calculated attention. Extensive experiments validate the superior performance of our method over state-ofthe-art baselines both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Introduction
Video inpainting which aims to fill missing regions of videos
with plausible contents is a fundamental yet challenging task
in the computer vision field. It has great value in many
practical applications, such as scratch restoration (Chang
et al. 2019), undesired object removal (Seoung et al. 2019)
and autonomous driving (Liao et al. 2020). Unlike image
inpainting (Somani et al. 2023; Shukla et al. 2023; Bar
et al. 2022) that usually focuses on the spatial dimension,
video inpainting pays more attention to exploiting the temporal information. Therefore, naively extending the image
inpainting algorithm on individual video frame will neglect
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6180

