The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

REGLO: Provable Neural Network Repair for Global Robustness Properties
Feisi Fu1∗ , Zhilu Wang2∗ , Weichao Zhou1 , Yixuan Wang2 , Jiameng Fan1 ,
Chao Huang3 , Qi Zhu2 , Xin Chen4 , Wenchao Li1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
4
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
fufeisi@bu.edu, zhilu.wang@u.northwestern.edu, zwc662@bu.edu, yixuanwang2024@u.northwestern.edu, jmfan@bu.edu,
chao.huang2@liverpool.ac.uk, qzhu@northwestern.edu, chenxin@unm.edu, wenchao@bu.edu
2

Abstract

cess (Leino, Wang, and Fredrikson 2021; Chen et al. 2021;
Wadsworth, Vera, and Piech 2018; Celis and Keswani 2019;
Adel et al. 2019; Tao et al. 2022; Khedr and Shoukry 2022).
These approaches mainly involve introducing a loss function related to global robustness such that global robustness is taken into account during gradient descent. However, training-based methods that use such a loss term cannot guarantee the satisfaction of global robustness properties as there is no way to guarantee that the loss term will
be minimized to 0 via training. Moreover, applying trainingbased methods to fine-tune pre-trained networks can be prohibitively expensive. The application of these methods to
pre-trained networks can also be hampered by the unavailability of training data, e.g., when the neural network is obtained from a third party or the training data is private.
In this paper, we consider the problem of repairing a pretrained DNN to satisfy a given global robustness property.
At a high level, neural network repair is the class of techniques that involves directly modifying a pre-trained neural
network so that the resulting network satisfies some given
property. A repair method is considered sound if it can guarantee the removal of the discovered violations or the satisfaction of the given property. In contrast to training-based
methods that requires many iterations, repair can be applied once as a post-hoc modification. Existing DNN repair methods mainly consist of weight modification (Dong
et al. 2020; Goldberger et al. 2020; Chen, Li, and Zhang
2022; Refaeli and Katz 2022), either via constraint solving
or fine-tuning, and DNN architecture extension (Sotoudeh
and Thakur 2021; Fu and Li 2021; Mitchell et al. 2021;
Leino et al. 2022). However, these repair methods cannot
handle global robustness or individual fairness properties.
The technique proposed in this paper fills precisely this gap.
We summarize our contributions below.
1. We propose REGLO, the first DNN repair technique
with provable guarantees on satisfying global robustness
properties.
2. We show that any input that is a counterexample to a
global robustness property must have a corresponding large
gradient that indicates the violation.
3. For piecewise linear DNNs, our approach is both
sound and complete – the resulting network is guaranteed
to satisfy the given global robustness property, and a repair
is guaranteed to be found if one exists.

We present REGLO, a novel methodology for repairing pretrained neural networks to satisfy global robustness and individual fairness properties. A neural network is said to be
globally robust with respect to a given input region if and
only if all the input points in the region are locally robust.
This notion of global robustness also captures the notion of
individual fairness as a special case. We prove that any counterexample to a global robustness property must exhibit a corresponding large gradient. For ReLU networks, this result allows us to efficiently identify the linear regions that violate a
given global robustness property. By formulating and solving
a suitable robust convex optimization problem, REGLO then
computes a minimal weight change that will provably repair
these violating linear regions.

Introduction
Motivated by the fragility of deep neural networks (DNNs)
to small input perturbations known as adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), there is a
large, growing body of research on measuring, verifying,
and improving the robustness of DNNs against those perturbations (Tramèr et al. 2017; Madry et al. 2018; Shafahi
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Wong, Rice, and Kolter 2020;
Mirman, Gehr, and Vechev 2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Fan
and Li 2021; Huang et al. 2020). Various notions of robustness have been considered (Casadio et al. 2022; Seshia et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2021; Katz et al. 2017; Carlini et al. 2019),
and can be largely categorized into two groups: local robustness and global robustness. Local robustness is about the
robustness of individual input points. Intuitively, it means
that for an input x, a small change of the input (e.g., any pnorm-bounded ∆x) would not result in a significant change
in the output (e.g., change of a classification result). On the
other hand, global robustness requires local robustness on
all (infinitely many) points within some given input region
X. Global robustness is thus strictly stronger than local robustness, and has the advantage of also enforcing robustness
on any unseen input within the given input region.
The existing approaches for improving the global robustness of neural networks focus on altering their training proCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

12061

