The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HyperFast: Instant Classification for Tabular Data
David Bonet1,2 , Daniel Mas Montserrat1 , Xavier Giró-i-Nieto3 * , Alexander G. Ioannidis1
2

1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
3
Amazon, Barcelona, Spain
ioannidis@stanford.edu

Abstract

process. Further, the computational and temporal costs of the
traditional process can be prohibitive, particularly in realtime and large-scale applications, such as healthcare (Esteva
et al. 2019), or applications where rapid model deployment
is necessary (Deiana et al. 2022), including data streaming,
where models need to be updated or re-trained frequently. In
this work, we propose HyperFast, a novel method to solve
classification tasks from multiple domains with a single forward pass of a hypernetwork. We substitute the slow training stage of a classification network with a fixed hypernetwork that has been pre-trained (meta-trained) to predict the
weights of a smaller neural network (i.e. main network) that
can instantly solve the classification task with state-of-theart performance. Recently, TabPFN (Hollmann et al. 2023)
has been proposed, introducing a pre-trained Transformer
that is able to perform classification without training. However, it is constrained to ≤ 1000 training examples, 100 features and 10 classes, which limits its application to most
real-world scenarios. In this study, we are particularly interested in ensuring adaptability to large dataset sizes, filling the gap present in the current landscape of pre-trained
models for instant tabular data classification. Our model is
designed to work with both large and small datasets, while
also providing adaptability to different numbers of samples,
features, and categories.

Training deep learning models and performing hyperparameter tuning can be computationally demanding and timeconsuming. Meanwhile, traditional machine learning methods like gradient-boosting algorithms remain the preferred
choice for most tabular data applications, while neural network alternatives require extensive hyperparameter tuning or
work only in toy datasets under limited settings. In this paper, we introduce HyperFast, a meta-trained hypernetwork
designed for instant classification of tabular data in a single forward pass. HyperFast generates a task-specific neural network tailored to an unseen dataset that can be directly
used for classification inference, removing the need for training a model. We report extensive experiments with OpenML
and genomic data, comparing HyperFast to competing tabular
data neural networks, traditional ML methods, AutoML systems, and boosting machines. HyperFast shows highly competitive results, while being significantly faster. Additionally,
our approach demonstrates robust adaptability across a variety of classification tasks with little to no fine-tuning, positioning HyperFast as a strong solution for numerous applications and rapid model deployment. HyperFast introduces a
promising paradigm for fast classification, with the potential
to substantially decrease the computational burden of deep
learning. Our code, which offers a scikit-learn-like interface,
along with the trained HyperFast model, can be found at
https://github.com/AI-sandbox/HyperFast.

During the meta-training stage, the hypernetwork parameters are learnt and the parameters of a main model are inferred, that is, we are “learning to learn” from a wide variety
of datasets (meta-training datasets) from different modalities
for which HyperFast generates a smaller neural model that
performs the actual classification. During the meta-testing or
inference stage, HyperFast receives a “support set” of an unseen dataset (both features and labels), and predicts a set of
weights for the main model, which classifies the test samples
of the dataset. In this way, the process of adapting the model
to a new dataset is accelerated, and the model that does the
meta-learning is decoupled from the model that does the actual inference on the data. In other words, we train a highcapacity meta-model to encode task-specific characteristics
in the weights of a smaller model. Model size is also decoupled, which means that a large meta-learner can be trained
just once, while many lightweight models generated by the
meta-learner can be used for deployment in different applications such as edge computing, IoT devices, and mo-

Introduction
Many different machine learning (ML) methods have been
proposed for the task of supervised classification (Duda,
Hart, and Stork 2000), following a traditional two-stage
methodology. The initial stage involves the optimization of a
model using the training portion of a dataset. Several tuning
iterations are performed with the aim of finding the hyperparameter configuration of the model that yields the best performance on the specific task. In the second stage, the model
with the chosen hyperparameter setup is used for evaluation
and inference on the test set. Training and tuning models for
classification tasks is time-consuming, and it often requires
extensive data pre-processing, expertise in selecting hyperparameters that could fit the task at hand, and a validation
* Work done prior to joining Amazon.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11114

