The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RLPeri: Accelerating Visual Perimetry Test with Reinforcement Learning and
Convolutional Feature Extraction
Tanvi Verma1 , Linh Le Dinh1 , Nicholas Tan2 , Xinxing Xu1 , Chingyu Cheng2 , Yong Liu1
1

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore
{vermat,linhld,xuxinx,liuyong}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, yqntan@gmail.com, chingyu.cheng@duke-nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Visual perimetry is an important eye examination that helps
detect vision problems caused by ocular or neurological conditions. During the test, a patient’s gaze is fixed at a specific location while light stimuli of varying intensities are presented in central and peripheral vision. Based on the patient’s
responses to the stimuli, the visual field mapping and sensitivity are determined. However, maintaining high levels of
concentration throughout the test can be challenging for patients, leading to increased examination times and decreased
accuracy.
In this work, we present RLPeri, a reinforcement learningbased approach to optimize visual perimetry testing. By determining the optimal sequence of locations and initial stimulus values, we aim to reduce the examination time without compromising accuracy. Additionally, we incorporate reward shaping techniques to further improve the testing performance. To monitor the patient’s responses over time during
testing, we represent the test’s state as a pair of 3D matrices.
We apply two different convolutional kernels to extract spatial features across locations as well as features across different stimulus values for each location. Through experiments,
we demonstrate that our approach results in a 10-20% reduction in examination time while maintaining the accuracy as
compared to state-of-the-art methods. With the presented approach, we aim to make visual perimetry testing more efficient and patient-friendly, while still providing accurate results.

Figure 1: Three decision-making steps of visual field testing.

testing more efficient and effective will benefit both patients
and society as a whole.
Perimetry tests require patients to maintain focus on a
fixed reference point while pressing a button in response
to presented light stimuli of varying intensities. The test results are used to determine the sensitivity threshold at each
location, and the examination time can range from 3 minutes to 15 minutes per eye, depending on the type of test
and the condition being diagnosed (Bengtsson, Heijl, and
Olsson 1998; Chauhan and Johnson 1999; Phu and Kalloniatis 2021). For older patients, who are at a higher risk of
developing glaucoma, the prolonged examination time can
be taxing and potentially impact the accuracy of the test results. The perimetry test heavily relies on patient attention,
and prolonged testing times can decrease the reliability and
accuracy of the results. Hence, there is a need to optimize
the perimetry procedure to reduce examination times while
maintaining test accuracy. By improving the efficiency of the
perimetry test, patients will benefit from a more streamlined
and less overwhelming diagnostic experience.
As shown in Figure 1, the perimetry test can be divided
into three critical decision-making steps: (1) selection of the
next testing location, (2) determination of the initial stimulus intensity to be presented at the next location, and (3)
estimation of the sensitivity threshold at that location. This
sequential decision-making problem is characterized by uncertainty, as the patient’s response to the presented stimuli is
probabilistic. Reinforcement learning (RL) presents a suitable approach for optimizing the perimetry test, as it can determine the optimal sequence of locations and initial stimulus values to be tested to maximize speed and accuracy.

Introduction
Perimetry, also known as the visual field test, is a crucial diagnostic tool used to assess a patient’s visual abilities. The
test measures the extent of the visual field (VF), and the
sensitivity of vision in different areas without the need for
eye movements. It is an essential examination for identifying and monitoring a range of ocular and neurological conditions, such as glaucoma, which initially affects peripheral
vision and can progress to total blindness if left untreated.
With an estimated 80 million people suffering from glaucoma worldwide in 2020, and a projected increase to 111.8
million by 2040 (Tham et al. 2014), the importance of improving the perimetry test procedure cannot be overstated.
The development of innovative methods that make perimetry
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22401

