The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fine Structure-Aware Sampling: A New Sampling Training Scheme
for Pixel-Aligned Implicit Models in Single-View Human Reconstruction
Kennard Yanting Chan1,2 , Fayao Liu2 , Guosheng Lin1 , Chuan Sheng Foo2,3 , Weisi Lin1
1
Nanyang Technological University
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
kenn0042@e.ntu.edu.sg, liu fayao@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg, foo chuan sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,
wslin@ntu.edu.sgLegend:
2

-

Abstract
Pixel-aligned implicit models, such as PIFu, PIFuHD, and
ICON, are used for single-view clothed human reconstruction. These models need to be trained using a sampling training scheme. Existing sampling training schemes either fail
to capture thin surfaces (e.g. ears, fingers) or cause noisy
artefacts in reconstructed meshes. To address these problems, we introduce Fine Structured-Aware Sampling (FSS), a
new sampling training scheme to train pixel-aligned implicit
models for single-view human reconstruction. FSS resolves
the aforementioned problems by proactively adapting to the
thickness and complexity of surfaces. In addition, unlike existing sampling training schemes, FSS shows how normals of
sample points can be capitalized in the training process to improve results. Lastly, to further improve the training process,
FSS proposes a mesh thickness loss signal for pixel-aligned
implicit models. It becomes computationally feasible to introduce this loss once a slight reworking of the pixel-aligned implicit function framework is carried out. Our results show that
our methods significantly outperform SOTA methods qualitatively and quantitatively. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/kcyt/FSS.

1

-

(a) Spatial
Sampling
1i)
Regions
where
Mesh is
Thick

(b) DOS
Sampling

(c) FSS
(Ours)

1)
Points (red) all outside

1ii)
Regions
where
Mesh is
Thin

Points (red)
both inside
and outside

2)
Points don’t focus on
difficult regions.

More focus
on difficult
regions.

Figure 1: Unlike existing schemes, FSS can: 1. Adapts to
thickness of mesh. 2. Prioritize regions that are challenging.
Refer to our arXiv version for a more detailed figure.

A sampling training scheme provides supervision signals to
a pixel-aligned implicit model by generating sample points
and their corresponding labels. How the sample points are
generated and what labels are computed will drastically
affect the models’ results. The earliest sampling training
scheme, called spatial sampling scheme, was introduced by
the first pixel-aligned implicit model - PIFu (Saito et al.
2019). Since then, subsequent pixel-aligned implicit models, such as PIFuHD (Saito et al. 2020), PaMIR (Zheng et al.
2021), ICON (Xiu et al. 2022), S-PIFu (Chan et al. 2022a),
and more, simply continue to use the same scheme.
IntegratedPIFu (Chan et al. 2022b) is the first work to contribute a new sampling training scheme (i.e. Depth-Oriented
Sampling or DOS) that differs materially from spatial sampling. Unlike spatial sampling, DOS is able to train models
to reconstruct thin but important body features like ears and
fingers. But DOS suffers from a lack of robustness. Specifically, DOS only helps camera-facing mesh surfaces, and
causes wavy, noisy artefacts on non-camera-facing surfaces.
To overcome these issues, we propose Fine Structureaware Sampling (FSS), a new sampling training scheme
that teaches pixel-aligned implicit models to reconstruct thin
body features that are not only artefact-free but also structurally accurate. FSS achieves this by proactively adapting

Introduction

3D reconstruction of human bodies is an area that has garnered interest due to its potential applications in fields such
as virtual reality, 3D printing, and game production. Although it is already possible to accurately reconstruct a
human body using high-end, multi-view capturing systems
(Collet et al. 2015; Lombardi et al. 2018), such systems are
unavailable to typical consumers. This has led to research
efforts to develop deep learning models for 3D human reconstruction using sparse inputs like a single RGB image
(Alldieck et al. 2019; Natsume et al. 2019; Saito et al. 2020).
An influential class of deep learning methods for singleimage clothed human reconstruction is pixel-aligned implicit models (Saito et al. 2019, 2020; Chan et al. 2022b).
These methods learn an implicit function that represents the
surface of a human body. From the learned implicit function,
a mesh of a human body can be extracted using the Marching Cubes algorithm (Lorensen and Cline 1987).
To learn the implicit function, all pixel-aligned implicit
models have to be trained using a sampling training scheme.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

964

