The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Critic-Guided Decision Transformer for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Yuanfu Wang* 1, 2 , Chao Yang* 2 , Ying Wen†1 , Yu Liu2, 3 , Yu Qiao†2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
SenseTime Research
{wangyuanfu,yangchao,qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn, ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn, liuyuisanai@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Recent advancements in offline reinforcement learning (RL)
have underscored the capabilities of Return-Conditioned Supervised Learning (RCSL), a paradigm that learns the action distribution based on target returns for each state in
a supervised manner. However, prevailing RCSL methods
largely focus on deterministic trajectory modeling, disregarding stochastic state transitions and the diversity of future trajectory distributions. A fundamental challenge arises from
the inconsistency between the sampled returns within individual trajectories and the expected returns across multiple
trajectories. Fortunately, value-based methods offer a solution by leveraging a value function to approximate the expected returns, thereby addressing the inconsistency effectively. Building upon these insights, we propose a novel
approach, termed the Critic-Guided Decision Transformer
(CGDT), which combines the predictability of long-term returns from value-based methods with the trajectory modeling capability of the Decision Transformer. By incorporating a learned value function, known as the critic, CGDT ensures a direct alignment between the specified target returns
and the expected returns of actions. This integration bridges
the gap between the deterministic nature of RCSL and the
probabilistic characteristics of value-based methods. Empirical evaluations on stochastic environments and D4RL benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of CGDT over traditional RCSL methods. These results highlight the potential
of CGDT to advance the state of the art in offline RL and
extend the applicability of RCSL to a wide range of RL tasks.

Figure 1: Critic-Guided Decision Transformer framework.
The lower part is a vanilla Decision Transformer that takes
the states s, actions a, and target returns R as inputs to predict the next action ât for each state st . The predicted actions
are then passed through a critic, which is a Gaussian distribution with expected return mean µt and variance σt learned
from offline data. By minimizing the distance between the
expected returns of the predicted actions and the target returns, e.g. ∥(Rt − µt )/σt ∥2 , the critic guides the policy to
take actions that are consistent with the target returns.

Introduction

recent research has introduced Return-Conditioned Supervised Learning (RCSL). Representative works such as the
Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al. 2021) and RvS (Emmons et al. 2021) take cumulative returns or average returns
as conditions to train a conditional policy that can differentiate desired (optimal) behaviors from the dataset.
However, RCSL struggles in stochastic environments and
scenarios that require stitching abilities (Paster, McIlraith,
and Ba 2022), where the policy needs to combine actions
from suboptimal trajectories. The core issue limiting the performance of RCSL is the inconsistency between the sampled target (desired) returns and the expected returns of actions. In other words, trajectories with higher returns does
not necessarily imply that their actions are superior to others; they can be a result of luck. RCSL treats the return-to-go

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) addresses the problem
of deriving effective policies from existing datasets that
capture agent behaviors without interactions with environments. A naive solution to offline RL is imitation learning (IL) (Hussein et al. 2017), which aims to emulate the
behaviors of policies represented in the dataset. However,
IL is limited in its ability to distinguish between optimal
and suboptimal trajectories without predefined returns, often resulting in suboptimal policies that mirror the distribution of the training data. To overcome the limitations of IL,
* Equal contribution.
†

Correspondence to Ying Wen, Yu Qiao.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15706

