The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Text2City: One-Stage Text-Driven Urban Layout Regeneration
Yiming Qin1,2 , Nanxuan Zhao3 * , Bin Sheng1† , Rynson W.H. Lau2∗
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
City University of Hong Kong
3
Adobe Research
{yiming qin, shengbin}@sjtu.edu.cn, nanxuanzhao@gmail.com, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Regenerating urban layout is an essential process for urban
regeneration. In this paper, we propose a new task called textdriven urban layout regeneration, which provides an intuitive
input modal - text - for users to specify the regeneration,
instead of designing complex rules. Given the target region
to be regenerated, we propose a one-stage text-driven urban
layout regeneration model, Text2City, to jointly and progressively regenerate the urban layout (i.e., road and building
layouts) based on textual layout descriptions and surrounding
context (i.e., urban layouts and functions of the surrounding
regions). Text2City first extracts road and building attributes
from the textual layout description to guide the regeneration.
It includes a novel one-stage joint regenerator network based
on the conditioned denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) and prior knowledge exchange. To harmonize
the regenerated layouts through joint optimization, we propose the interactive & enhanced guidance module for selfenhancement and prior knowledge exchange between road
and building layouts during the regeneration. We also design
a series of constraints from attribute-, geometry- and pixellevels to ensure rational urban layout generation. To train our
model, we build a large-scale dataset containing urban layouts and layout descriptions, covering 147K regions. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations show that our proposed
method outperforms the baseline methods in regenerating desirable urban layouts that meet the textual descriptions.

Figure 1: Text-driven Urban Layout Regeneration. Given the
target region (pink region in (a)), Text2City regenerates its
urban layout based on the textual layout description and the
surrounding context. Orange and gray lines represent main
and minor roads. White polygons represent buildings. Purple
lines and blue polygons represent roads and buildings to be
preserved, and are provided by the user as constraints. (b)(d) are regenerated layouts of the red box in (a), based on
different input textual layout descriptions.

longest length, to obtain the desirable urban layout. These
methods are time-consuming and not friendly for lay users.
Thus, in this paper, we aim to allow the user to use textual
descriptions to specify the layout requirements. Despite the
great potential, text-driven urban layout regeneration poses
several challenges. First, urban layout regeneration is complicated, involving many factors such as the diversity of
layout characteristics, the richness of types (e.g., function,
road and building types), and the influence of the surrounding context. Second, roads and buildings are not independent to each other, but interact with each other during layout
regeneration. For example, while roads should bypass historic buildings that need to be preserved, building footprints
should generally align with existing roads. However, existing city modeling methods take a two-stage approach (Parish
and Müller 2001; Chen et al. 2008; Groenewegen et al. 2009;
Vanegas et al. 2010; Benes et al. 2021; Niese et al. 2022).
They first generate roads and then rough building footprints

Introduction
Urban regeneration is a crucial process to revitalize decaying or underused regions in the city (Amirtahmasebi et al.
2016), the basis of which is urban layout regeneration. In urban layout regeneration, plans are first constructed as white
papers. Professional designers visualize the urban layout
based on the white papers, and create the urban layout map
by hand or with the aid of computer-assisted tools. Previous computer-assisted city modeling methods (Parish and
Müller 2001; Chen et al. 2008; Groenewegen et al. 2009;
Niese et al. 2022) generate urban layouts by employing complex hand-crafted rules. Users have to carefully adjust the
control parameters, such as the number of roads, patterns,
* Nanxuan Zhao and Rynson Lau lead this project.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4578

