The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LISR: Learning Linear 3D Implicit Surface Representation Using Compactly
Supported Radial Basis Functions
Atharva Pandey, Vishal Yadav, Rajendra Nagar, Santanu Chaudhury
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India
{pandey.19, yadav.40, rn, santanuc}@iitj.ac.in

Abstract

clouds, mesh-based representations, voxel-based representations, and implicit shape representations (Berger et al. 2017).
Implicit shape representation’s primary superiority lies in its
ability to generate arbitrary shapes and topologies at any resolution due to their continuous nature (Macêdo, Gois, and
Velho 2011). They are modeled using parameterized functions, and learning the shape involves predicting these parameters (Park et al. 2019). Parameterization of the implicit
representation defines the efficiency of the implicit surfaces.
There exist works in the literature that aim to parameterize implicit surfaces (Park et al. 2019; Macêdo, Gois, and
Velho 2011; Yavartanoo et al. 2021). One category of works
aims at modeling the implicit representation by a function
parameterized by the neural networks known as neural implicit (Park et al. 2019; Saito et al. 2019; Michalkiewicz
et al. 2019b; Xu et al. 2022). Yavartanoo et al. represents
the implicit surface by a finite low-degree algebraic polynomial and learns the co-efficient of the algebraic polynomial (Yavartanoo et al. 2021). This suffers from the fact that
the low-degree polynomials fail to model the high curvature region of the surface. The radial basis functions have
been used classically to model complex implicit surfaces
(Macêdo, Gois, and Velho 2011; Liu et al. 2016; Xu et al.
2022).

Implicit 3D surface reconstruction of an object from its partial and noisy 3D point cloud scan is the classical geometry
processing and 3D computer vision problem. In the literature,
various 3D shape representations have been developed, differing in memory efficiency and shape retrieval effectiveness,
such as volumetric, parametric, and implicit surfaces. Radial
basis functions provide memory-efficient parameterization of
the implicit surface. However, we show that training a neural
network using the mean squared error between the groundtruth implicit surface and the linear basis-based implicit surfaces does not converge to the global solution. In this work,
we propose locally supported compact radial basis functions
for a linear representation of the implicit surface. This representation enables us to generate 3D shapes with arbitrary
topologies at any resolution due to their continuous nature.
We then propose a neural network architecture for learning
the linear implicit shape representation of the 3D surface of
an object. We learn linear implicit shapes within a supervised
learning framework using ground truth Signed-Distance Field
(SDF) data for guidance. The classical strategies face difficulties in finding linear implicit shapes from a given 3D point
cloud due to numerical issues (requires solving inverse of a
large matrix) in basis and query point selection. The proposed
approach achieves better Chamfer distance and comparable
F-score than the state-of-the-art approach on the benchmark
dataset. We also show the effectiveness of the proposed approach by using it for the 3D shape completion task.

In this work, we propose a radial basis function-based
representation (Liu et al. 2016; Macêdo, Gois, and Velho
2011) to model implicit representation and learn the parameter of this linear representation using a neural network.
The proposed Linear implicit shape model has significantly
less number of parameters when compared to neural implicit (Park et al. 2019) and algebraic implicit representation (Yavartanoo et al. 2021) and is a great choice for a task
requiring memory efficiency due to less number of parameters. We learn linear implicit surface representation (LISR)
from a partial point cloud using a based learning approach
which is supervised by the ground truth Signed-Distance
Field (SDF) of the underlying shape. In the methodology
section, we show that directly using the RBF framework for
training a neural network to predict the SDF does not work.
For the convergence to the optimal solution, We identify a
constraint on the choice of basis and the query points for
SDF evaluation to find the loss, which facilitates the learning of linear implicit surfaces. We show that the compactlysupported RBF as basis functions, along with a strategical

Introduction
3D surface reconstruction of real-world objects is a fundamental research problem in 3D Computer Vision, Geometry Processing, and Computer Vision with multiple applications such as Gaming, Animation, AR/VR, simulation, etc
(Berger et al. 2017) (Huang et al. 2022). There exist various
variants of this problem like 3D Reconstruction from single view images, multiple view images, single view/multiple
view partial 3D scans, etc. (Berger et al. 2017; Huang et al.
2022; Xiu et al. 2022; Tiwari et al. 2021). The 3D Reconstruction problem can further be classified based on the representation of the 3D shape, differing in their memory efficiency and the effectiveness of shape retrieval. The representations can be broadly classified into four categories: point
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4415

