The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning to Reweight for Graph Neural Network
Zhengyu Chen1,2 , Teng Xiao3 , Kun Kuang1,2 , Zheqi Lv1,2 , Min Zhang1,2 , Jinluan Yang1,2 ,
Chengqiang Lu4 , Hongxia Yang4 , and Fei Wu1,2
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang University
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang University
3
The Pennsylvania State University
4
DAMA Academy, Alibaba Group.
{kunkuang, wufei}@zju.edu.cn, yang.yhx@alibaba-inc.com

2

Abstract

GNNs’ inadequate out-of-distribution generalization is
caused by a spurious correlation between irrelevant features
and category labels in training data (Xiao, Chen, and Wang
2022; Chen et al. 2023b). This correlation varies across distributions and is exploited by GNNs for inference. An example
of spurious correlation is shown in the graph classification
task of the “wheel” motif in Figure 1. In the biased training
dataset, most positive graphs have only “star” motifs added,
leading to a strong correlation between structural features of
“wheel” motifs and “star” motifs. This unexpected correlation
leads to a spurious correlation between the structural features
of “star” motifs and the label “wheel”. The GCN model exploits this spurious correlation and tends to use “star” motifs
for prediction, making false predictions on negative graphs
with a “star” motif.
To solve the spurious correlation problem caused by the
discrepancy between training and testing distributions, earlier research attempts to train a model with stability guarantee through variable decorrelation with sample reweighting, taking model misspecification into consideration (Shen
et al. 2020; Kuang et al. 2020; Lv et al. 2023b; Zhang et al.
2023; Lv et al. 2023a). However, the majority of these approaches are suggested in linear settings. GNNs combine
heterogeneous data from node features and graph topological
structures, resulting in the existence of intricate and unrecognized non-linear relationships across representations (Fan
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021). Non-linear dependencies on graph
data cannot be removed using linear sample reweighting approaches. Recent studies propose non-linear decorrelation
methods for graph tasks (Fan et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021).
They attempt to eliminate the dependencies between all the
variables of the graph representation through a set of learned
sample weights. However, such a demanding aim might result
in an excessively small sample size, which hampers the generalization ability of GNNs (Martino, Elvira, and Louzada
2017; Llorente et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022). Moreover,
these non-linear decorrelation methodologies on graph data
suffer from overfitting problems due to the additional hyperparameters, leading to difficulties in achieving convergence.
We suggest that not all correlations should be eliminated,
in contrast to prior techniques (Fan et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021),
which aggressively decorrelate all connections across graph
representations. Such an aggressive objective may result in
an issue with an overly-reduced sample size (Martino, Elvira,

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) show promising results for
graph tasks. However, existing GNNs’ generalization ability
will degrade when there exist distribution shifts between testing and training graph data. The cardinal impetus underlying
the severe degeneration is that the GNNs are architected predicated upon the I.I.D assumptions. In such a setting, GNNs
are inclined to leverage imperceptible statistical correlations
subsisting in the training set to predict, albeit it is a spurious
correlation. In this paper, we study the problem of the generalization ability of GNNs in Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) settings.
To solve this problem, we propose the Learning to Reweight
for Generalizable Graph Neural Network (L2R-GNN) to enhance the generalization ability for achieving satisfactory performance on unseen testing graphs that have different distributions with training graphs. We propose a novel nonlinear graph
decorrelation method, which can substantially improve the outof-distribution generalization ability and compares favorably
to previous methods in restraining the over-reduced sample
size. The variables of the graph representation are clustered
based on the stability of the correlation, and the graph decorrelation method learns weights to remove correlations between
the variables of different clusters rather than any two variables.
Besides, we interpose an efficacious stochastic algorithm upon
bi-level optimization for the L2R-GNN framework, which facilitates simultaneously learning the optimal weights and GNN
parameters, and avoids the overfitting problem. Experimental
results show that L2R-GNN greatly outperforms baselines on
various graph prediction benchmarks under distribution shifts.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-theart performances on various graph tasks (Kipf and Welling
2016; Veličković et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018a), but they assume that the training and testing data are independent and
identically distributed (i.e., i.i.d assumption), which is not
always the case in real-world applications (Chen, Xu, and
Wang 2021; Chen and Wang 2021; Chen, Gai, and Wang
2019; Chen, Wang, and Yin 2021; Gai et al. 2019). This
leads to inadequate out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
ability, causing significant performance degradation under
distribution shifts (Hu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2018; Chen et al.
2021).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8320

