The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Backdoor Attacks via Machine Unlearning
Zihao Liu1 , Tianhao Wang2 , Mengdi Huai1 , Chenglin Miao1
1

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
zihaoliu@iastate.edu, tianhao@virginia.edu, mdhuai@iastate.edu, cmiao@iastate.edu
2

Abstract

the unlearned model is statistically close to that retrained
from scratch (Warnecke et al. 2021; Thudi et al. 2022a; Neel,
Roth, and Sharifi-Malvajerdi 2021) or devise novel retraining algorithms that offer greater efficiency than starting the
training anew (Bourtoule et al. 2021).
However, existing studies on this technique mainly focus
on enhancing unlearning effectiveness and efficiency, neglecting the security challenges introduced by it. It is possible that some users who contribute training data have malicious intentions, and they may conduct attacks by submitting
deceptive unlearning requests to induce malicious behavior
in the unlearned model. In this paper, we consider an important attack form called backdoor attack, where an attacker
aims to inject a hidden backdoor into a machine learning
model via some methods, such as poisoning its training set,
so that the prediction of the attacked model can be changed
when a particular trigger presents in the inference phase.
While backdoor attacks have drawn significant attention in
recent years, no studies have yet explored the feasibility of
conducting such attacks via machine unlearning. This gap
raises an important question: Is it possible to have a target
model exhibit the backdoor behavior via erasing some of its
training data using machine unlearning? The study on this
question can help us recognize the potential risks associated
with machine unlearning and further facilitate the development of new mechanisms to address them.
To fill the research gap and answer the above question,
in this paper, we propose a novel backdoor attack approach,
which does not require the attacker to poison any training
data of the victim model to achieve the attack goal. Instead,
the attacker only needs to submit an unlearning request to
erase a subset of his contributed training data. In this approach, the unlearning subset and the backdoor trigger are
derived based on an optimization problem with the objective of maximizing the attack utility while minimizing the
number of instances in the unlearning subset. This objective guarantees not only the attack effectiveness but also its
stealthiness. However, the number of unlearning instances is
a discrete value, which makes it hard to solve the optimization problem. To handle this challenge, we use a continuous and differentiable sigmoid function to approximate the
discrete number of unlearning instances, and then solve the
optimization problem via the gradient-based method.
In addition to the above attack approach, we also study

As a new paradigm to erase data from a model and protect
user privacy, machine unlearning has drawn significant attention. However, existing studies on machine unlearning mainly
focus on its effectiveness and efficiency, neglecting the security challenges introduced by this technique. In this paper, we
aim to bridge this gap and study the possibility of conducting malicious attacks leveraging machine unlearning. Specifically, we consider the backdoor attack via machine unlearning, where an attacker seeks to inject a backdoor in the unlearned model by submitting malicious unlearning requests,
so that the prediction made by the unlearned model can be
changed when a particular trigger presents. In our study, we
propose two attack approaches. The first attack approach does
not require the attacker to poison any training data of the
model. The attacker can achieve the attack goal only by requesting to unlearn a small subset of his contributed training
data. The second approach allows the attacker to poison a few
training instances with a pre-defined trigger upfront, and then
activate the attack via submitting a malicious unlearning request. Both attack approaches are proposed with the goal of
maximizing the attack utility while ensuring attack stealthiness. The effectiveness of the proposed attacks is demonstrated with different machine unlearning algorithms as well
as different models on different datasets.

Introduction
Recently, some prominent regulations (e.g., GDPR (Otto
2018) and the California Consumer Privacy Act (Pardau
2018)) have given users the right to erase the impact of their
sensitive information from the trained models to protect their
privacy. To erase data from a model, a naive approach is to
fully retrain the model from scratch after removing the data
from the training set. However, the naive approach is computationally expensive, and it is impractical in many realworld applications. To tackle this issue, significant attention
has been paid to machine unlearning (Cao and Yang 2015;
Bourtoule et al. 2021; Neel, Roth, and Sharifi-Malvajerdi
2021; Guo et al. 2019; Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto 2020;
Izzo et al. 2021), a technique that aims to erase (or unlearn)
data from the model and generate an unlearned model without needing to retrain it from scratch. Existing studies on
machine unlearning either post-process the model to ensure
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14115

