The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Measuring Task Similarity and Its Implication in
Fine-Tuning Graph Neural Networks
Renhong Huang1, 2 † , Jiarong Xu2 ‡ , Xin Jiang3 , Chenglu Pan1 , Zhiming Yang2 ,
Chunping Wang4 , Yang Yang1
1 Zhejiang University,
2 Fudan University,

3 Lehigh University,

4 FinVolution Group

{renh2, chenglupan, yangya}@zju.edu.cn, {jiarongxu, zmyang20}@fudan.edu.cn,
xjiang@lehigh.edu, wangchunping02@xinye.com
Abstract

dataset:

1

improvement (%)

The paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning graph neural
networks has attracted wide research attention. In previous
studies, the pre-trained models are viewed as universally versatile, and applied to a diverse range of downstream tasks. In
many situations, however, this practice results in limited or
even negative transfer. This paper, for the first time, studies
the specific application scope of graph pre-trained models, i.e.,
the extent to which downstream tasks can benefit from specific
pre-training tasks. We find that not all downstream tasks can
eﬀectively benefit from a graph pre-trained model. In light of
this, we introduce the measure task consistency to quantify
the similarity between graph pre-training and downstream
tasks. This measure assesses the extent to which downstream
tasks can benefit from specific pre-training tasks. Moreover, a
novel fine-tuning strategy, Bridge-Tune, is proposed to further
diminish the impact of the diﬀerence between pre-training and
downstream tasks. The key innovation in Bridge-Tune is an
intermediate step that bridges pre-training and downstream
tasks. This step takes into account the task diﬀerences and
further refines the pre-trained model. The superiority of the
presented fine-tuning strategy is validated via numerous experiments with diﬀerent pre-trained models and downstream
tasks.

negative
transfer
(45%)

Brazil-Airport
Europe-Airport
US-Airport
H-index
Wisconsin
Texas
DD242
DD68
DD687
Cornell
Cora

downstream task
node classification
link prediction

task consistency

Figure 1: Plot of performance improvement versus the proposed task consistency measure. It shows a clear positive
correlation: a larger task consistency implies higher improvement, which in turn suggests that the downstream task can
benefit more from the pre-training task. Diﬀerent points represent improvement on diﬀerent downstream tasks and diﬀerent
datasets. The black solid line is fitted via linear regression, and
the gray shaded area indicates the 95% confidence interval.

Introduction

The paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning graph neural
networks (GNNs) has recently become an active research
area and is able to learn transferable knowledge from graph
data without costly labels (Hu et al. 2020b; Liu et al. 2022;
Rong et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2023; Ma et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2022). This paradigm typically involves two
steps: (1) pre-train a GNN encoder on unlabeled graph data
via a pre-training task; (2) fine-tune the pre-trained GNN
These authors contributed equally.

† This work was done when the author was a visiting student at

Fudan University.
‡ Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12617

on unseen data so as to benefit diﬀerent downstream tasks.
Such a design hopes to build a one-fits-all model that always
benefits the downstream.
However, this ideal expectation is far from the truth in realworld scenarios. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the fine-tuned
GCC model (Qiu et al. 2020) suﬀers from negative transfer in
45.5% of downstream tasks tested, and the given pre-trained
model excels in some downstream tasks while underperforms
in others. (The improvement result is computed as the relative
diﬀerence in downstream performance between fine-tuned
GCC and GCC learned from scratch.) This undesirable phenomenon is largely attributed to the diﬀerence between the
pre-training task and the downstream task; as also observed
in (Hu et al. 2020b; Lu et al. 2021; Ju et al. 2023).
In view of this, it is then crucial to examine in which case
the downstream benefits from the pre-trained model, which
in turn asks for a measure to quantify the similarity between a
pre-training task and a downstream task. Task similarity has
been studied in the literature, but is typically defined based
on label distributions (Ganin et al. 2016; Geng 2016; Chen

