The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Feature Fusion from Head to Tail for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Mengke Li1,2 , Zhikai Hu3 , Yang Lu4 , Weichao Lan3 , Yiu-ming Cheung3 , Hui Huang2 *
1

Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
4
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
limengke@gml.ac.cn, cszkhu@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, luyang@xmu.edu.cn, {cswclan, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk,
hhzhiyan@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Head/tail
sample

The imbalanced distribution of long-tailed data presents a
considerable challenge for deep learning models, as it causes
them to prioritize the accurate classification of head classes
but largely disregard tail classes. The biased decision boundary caused by inadequate semantic information in tail classes
is one of the key factors contributing to their low recognition accuracy. To rectify this issue, we propose to augment tail classes by grafting the diverse semantic information
from head classes, referred to as head-to-tail fusion (H2T).
We replace a portion of feature maps from tail classes with
those belonging to head classes. These fused features substantially enhance the diversity of tail classes. Both theoretical analysis and practical experimentation demonstrate that
H2T can contribute to a more optimized solution for the decision boundary. We seamlessly integrate H2T in the classifier adjustment stage, making it a plug-and-play module. Its
simplicity and ease of implementation allow for smooth integration with existing long-tailed recognition methods, facilitating a further performance boost. Extensive experiments
on various long-tailed benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed H2T. The source code is available at
https://github.com/Keke921/H2T.

Training set

Test set
(a) Existing methods

Class
centroid

Fused
head/tail
sample
Class
boundary
Training set

Test set
(b) H2T

Figure 1: Comparison between decision boundaries produced by (a) existing methods and (b) proposed H2T.

Cheung, and Lu 2022; Li, Cheung, and Hu 2022), data augmentation (Kim, Jeong, and Shin 2020; Wang et al. 2021a;
Li et al. 2021; Park et al. 2022), and ensembling learning (Wang et al. 2021b; Li et al. 2022a; Jin et al. 2023).
While these methods demonstrated the capability to yield
robust predictions, they primarily focus on training a new
model to acquire a relatively balanced embedding space
and/or assembling multiple diverse networks. However, they
overlook acquiring a more optimal classifier (determining
the decision boundary), which is crucial for fully releasing
the potential of the acquired backbone.
This paper thereby aims to obtain a more effective classifier with the trained backbone. It is widely recognized that
increasing class margins (Cao et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2019)
and/or tightening the intra-class space (Wang et al. 2018,
2017) for the training set can improve the generalization performance of the model (Liu et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2023).
However, while the clear margin is effective for balanced
data, it may still have a biased decision boundary for longtailed data. Take the binary case in the embedding space of
the obtained backbone as an example, the decision boundary is usually the midline connecting the two class centroids.
The head class has sufficiently sampled and its embedding
space is fully occupied (Xiao et al. 2021). On the opposite,
the tail class suffers from a scarcity of samples, leading to
sparsely distributed semantic regions. The bias in the tail
centroid persists due to head squeeze even if the existence

Introduction
Deep models have shown remarkable capabilities in diverse
visual recognition tasks (Hu et al. 2019; Cheung, Li, and
Zou 2021; Minaee et al. 2022; Lan et al. 2024), yet their
performance heavily relies on data that is evenly distributed
across categories. In contrast, real-world data typically follows long-tailed distributions (Reed 2001; Liu et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2023), which hinders model performance, especially on minority classes (referred to as tail classes in
long-tailed data). This challenge has become one of the bottlenecks limiting the advancement of deep models. In recent
times, a plethora of methods have emerged to address the
problem of severe class imbalance in long-tailed data from
different aspects, such as class-balancing methods (Chawla
et al. 2002; Huang et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2018; Cui et al.
2019; Lin et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020; Hong et al. 2021;
Park et al. 2021), re-margining methods (Cao et al. 2019; Li,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13581

