The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization with Active Preference Learning
Ryota Ozaki1 , Kazuki Ishikawa1 , Youhei Kanzaki1 ,
Shion Takeno3 , Ichiro Takeuchi2, 3 , Masayuki Karasuyama1
1

Nagoya Institute of Technology
2
Nagoya University
3
RIKEN AIP
ozaki.ryota.mllab.nit@gmail.com, ishikawa.kazuki.mllab.nit@gmail.com, kanzaki.youhei.mllab.nit@gmail.com,
shion.takeno@riken.jp, takeuchi.ichiro@mae.nagoya-u.ac.jp, karasuyama@nitech.ac.jp
Abstract

On the other hand, in many practical scenarios, a decision
maker (DM) only needs one of the optimal solutions that
matches their demands (e.g., a drug developer may choose
just one drug design considering the best balance between
the efficacy and side effects). Therefore, if we can incorporate the DM’s preference at the MOO stage, preferred solutions for the DM can be efficiently identified without enumerating all Pareto solutions. However, for the DM, directly
defining their preference mathematically can be difficult.
We propose a Bayesian optimization (BO) method for
the preference-based MOO, optimizing x through an interactive (human-in-the-loop based) estimation of the preference based on weak-supervisions provided by the DM. Let
U : RL → R be a utility function that quantifies the DM
preference. We assume that when the DM prefers f ∈ RL to
f 0 ∈ RL , the utility function values satisfy U (f ) > U (f 0 ).
By using U , the optimization problem can be formulated as
maxx U (f (x)), where f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fL (x))> . Our
proposed method is based on a Bayesian modeling of f (x)
and U , by which uncertainty of both the objective functions and the DM preference can be incorporated. For f (x),
we use the Gaussian process (GP) regression, following the
standard convention of BO. For U , we employ a Chebyshev scalarization function (CSF) based parametrized utility
function because of its simplicity and capability of identifying any Pareto optimal points depending on a setting of the
preference parameter w ∈ RL (Figure 1 (b)).
To estimate utility function U (i.e., to estimate the parameter w), we consider two types of weak supervisions provided by the interaction with the DM. First, we use the pairwise comparison (PC) over two vectors f , f 0 ∈ RL . In this
supervision, the DM answers whether U (f ) > U (f 0 ) holds
based on their preference. In the context of preference learning (e.g., Chu and Ghahramani 2005), this first type of supervision is widely known that the relative comparison is often
much easier to be provided by the DM than the exact value
of U (f ). As the second preference information, we propose
to use improvement request (IR) for a given f ∈ RL . The
DM provides the index ` for which the DM hopes that the
`-th dimension of f , i.e., f` , is required to improve most
among all the L dimensions. To our knowledge, this way
of supervision has never been studied in preference learning
nevertheless it is obviously easy to provide and important
information for the DM. We show that IR can be formulated

There are a lot of real-world black-box optimization problems that need to optimize multiple criteria simultaneously.
However, in a multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem,
identifying the whole Pareto front requires the prohibitive
search cost, while in many practical scenarios, the decision
maker (DM) only needs a specific solution among the set
of the Pareto optimal solutions. We propose a Bayesian optimization (BO) approach to identifying the most preferred
solution in the MOO with expensive objective functions, in
which a Bayesian preference model of the DM is adaptively
estimated by an interactive manner based on the two types of
supervisions called the pairwise preference and improvement
request. To explore the most preferred solution, we define an
acquisition function in which the uncertainty both in the objective function and the DM preference is incorporated. Further, to minimize the interaction cost with the DM, we also
propose an active learning strategy for the preference estimation. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method through the benchmark function optimization
and the hyper-parameter optimization problems for machine
learning models.

1

Introduction

In many real-world problems, simultaneously optimizing
multiple expensive black-box functions f1 (x), . . . , fL (x)
are often required. For example, considering an experimental design for developing novel drugs, there can be several
criteria to evaluate drug performance such as the efficacy of
the drug and the strength of side effects. If we pursue high
efficacy, the strength of side effects usually tends to deteriorate. Another example is in the hyper-parameter optimization of a machine learning model, in which multiple different
criteria such as accuracy on different classes, computational
efficiency, and social fairness should be simultaneously optimized.
In general, multi-objective optimization (MOO) problems
have multiple optimal solutions (Figure 1 (a)), called Pareto
optimal solutions, and MOO solvers typically aim to find all
of the Pareto optimal solutions. However, the search cost of
this approach often becomes prohibitive because the number
of Pareto optimal solutions can be large even with small L.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14490

