The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedA3 I: Annotation Quality-Aware Aggregation for Federated Medical Image
Segmentation against Heterogeneous Annotation Noise
Nannan Wu, Zhaobin Sun, Zengqiang Yan* , Li Yu
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
wnn2000@hust.edu.cn, zbsun@hust.edu.cn, z yan@hust.edu.cn, hustlyu@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a promising
paradigm for training segmentation models on decentralized medical data, owing to its privacy-preserving property. However, existing research overlooks the prevalent annotation noise encountered in real-world medical datasets,
which limits the performance ceilings of FL. In this paper, we, for the first time, identify and tackle this problem. For problem formulation, we propose a contour evolution for modeling non-independent and identically distributed (Non-IID) noise across pixels within each client and
then extend it to the case of multi-source data to form a
heterogeneous noise model (i.e., Non-IID annotation noise
across clients). For robust learning from annotations with
such two-level Non-IID noise, we emphasize the importance
of data quality in model aggregation, allowing high-quality
clients to have a greater impact on FL. To achieve this, we
propose Federated learning with Annotation quAlity-aware
AggregatIon, named FedA3 I, by introducing a quality factor based on client-wise noise estimation. Specifically, noise
estimation at each client is accomplished through the Gaussian mixture model and then incorporated into model aggregation in a layer-wise manner to up-weight high-quality
clients. Extensive experiments on two real-world medical image segmentation datasets demonstrate the superior performance of FedA3 I against the state-of-the-art approaches in
dealing with cross-client annotation noise. The code is available at https://github.com/wnn2000/FedAAAI.

1

client 𝑖

client 𝑗

Figure 1: Annotation noise in multi-source datasets. The
blue and red curves represent the contours of clean (i.e.,
ideal) and noisy annotations, respectively. Given a certain
sample, annotations between two curves are noisy, indicating that noise is distributed near contours instead of being IID among pixels. Given samples from different clients,
annotation noise is heterogeneous where noise on client
i causes under-segmentation and noise on client j causes
over-segmentation.

by enabling multiple medical institutions to train a unified
segmentation model cooperatively without data sharing. As
FMIS enriches training data in a privacy-preserving manner,
it has emerged as a promising paradigm in practice.
Existing research on FMIS has mainly focused on distribution shift (Liu et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022a; Wang, Jin, and
Wang 2022; Jiang et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2023), client-side
unfairness (Jiang et al. 2023a), and region-of-interest (ROI)
inconsistency (Xu et al. 2023) caused by decentralized data.
However, prevalent noisy annotations, referring to annotations containing errors, in medical datasets (Ji et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2020a) have often been overlooked, which are
inevitable in real-world medical datasets. On the one hand,
annotating is subjective that can be biased by annotators’ expertness (i.e., preference). For instance, front-line clinicians
tend to mark ROIs larger to avoid missing positive parts
(i.e. tumors/lesions) in ambiguous regions (Calisto et al.
2021; Salehi, Erdogmus, and Gholipour 2017), while nonprofessionals may only recognize well-characterized core
areas, leading to smaller annotated regions. On the other
hand, the level of annotator engagement can also affect the

Introduction

Accurate medical image segmentation is crucial as it is typically the first step in analytical workflows. Recent developments in segmentation suggest collecting massive data
to train deep learning (DL) models (Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox 2015; Gu et al. 2019; Valanarasu and Patel 2022).
However, growing privacy concerns in medical scenarios
prohibit data transfer among sources (Rieke et al. 2020; Dou
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2023b; Yan et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021), making it infeasible to construct datasets at scale.
Fortunately, federated medical image segmentation (FMIS)
(Liu et al. 2021) based on federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2023a,b) offers a solution
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15943

