The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DGPO: Discovering Multiple Strategies with Diversity-Guided Policy
Optimization
Wentse Chen1 , Shiyu Huang2 , Yuan Chiang3 , Tim Pearce4 , Wei-Wei Tu2 , Ting Chen3 , Jun Zhu3
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
2
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom
wentsec@andrew.cmu.edu, huangsy1314@163.com, yjennice2001@gmail.com, tim.pearce@microsoft.com,
tuweiwei@4paradigm.com, tingchen@tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

improving its competitive edge (Lanctot et al. 2017). Furthermore, in domains like dialogue systems, monotony can
dull user interactions, whereas varied responses could significantly enhance user experience (Li et al. 2016; Gao et al.
2019; Pavel, Budulan, and Rebedea 2020; Xu et al. 2022;
Chow et al. 2022).
For instance, RL algorithms are known for ”overfitting”
tasks. By zeroing in on just one strategy, they often miss out
on exploring a wealth of high-quality alternative solutions.
This over-specialization renders the agent vulnerable to unpredictable environmental changes, as it lacks the robustness
multiple strategies could have offered (Kumar et al. 2020).
In competitive arenas, predictability can be an Achilles heel,
with adversaries exploiting the agent’s inflexibility. A diversified approach would obfuscate the agent’s strategies,
improving its competitive edge (Lanctot et al. 2017). Furthermore, in domains like dialogue systems, monotony can
dull user interactions, whereas varied responses could significantly enhance user experience (Li et al. 2016; Gao et al.
2019; Pavel, Budulan, and Rebedea 2020; Xu et al. 2022;
Chow et al. 2022).
We identify two key scenarios where multiple strategies
are beneficial: 1. The margin for error is inconsequential to
the task’s success. In such cases, agents can operate optimally without adhering strictly to the best strategy, enabling
a spread of near-optimal strategies (Zahavy et al. 2021).
2. The task inherently allows multiple optimal solutions,
such as a maze offering two equally efficient paths (Osa,
Tangkaratt, and Sugiyama 2021; Zhou et al. 2022).
Crafting an algorithm that harnesses diverse high-reward
solutions efficiently is intricate. With the Diversity-Guided
Policy Optimization (DGPO) we propose, we aim to address
several requisites for such an algorithm:
Strategy Representation: the diversity of a policy suite
is evaluated in DGPO using a metric grounded on the mutual information between states and the latent variable, implemented through a learned discriminator.
Diversity Evaluation: The diversity of a policy suite is
evaluated in DGPO using a metric grounded on the mutual
information between states and the latent variable, implemented through a learned discriminator.
Diversity Exploration: DGPO embarks on exploration
that encourages deviation from familiar strategies while

Most reinforcement learning algorithms seek a single optimal strategy that solves a given task. However, it can often
be valuable to learn a diverse set of solutions, for instance, to
make an agent’s interaction with users more engaging, or improve the robustness of a policy to an unexpected perturbance.
We propose Diversity-Guided Policy Optimization (DGPO),
an on-policy algorithm that discovers multiple strategies for
solving a given task. Unlike prior work, it achieves this with
a shared policy network trained over a single run. Specifically, we design an intrinsic reward based on an informationtheoretic diversity objective. Our final objective alternately
constraints on the diversity of the strategies and on the extrinsic reward. We solve the constrained optimization problem
by casting it as a probabilistic inference task and use policy
iteration to maximize the derived lower bound. Experimental results show that our method efficiently discovers diverse
strategies in a wide variety of reinforcement learning tasks.
Compared to baseline methods, DGPO achieves comparable
rewards, while discovering more diverse strategies, and often
with better sample efficiency.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has pioneered breakthroughs
in various domains ranging from video games (Vinyals et al.
2019; Berner et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019a, 2021) to
robotics (Raffin et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2021b). While its
achievements are remarkable, RL is not devoid of challenges. A paramount issue is the innate pursuit of RL algorithms for a singular optimal solution, even when a myriad
of equally viable strategies exists. This tunnel vision for optimization can inadvertently introduce weaknesses.
For instance, RL algorithms are known for ”overfitting”
tasks. By zeroing in on just one strategy, they often miss out
on exploring a wealth of high-quality alternative solutions.
This over-specialization renders the agent vulnerable to unpredictable environmental changes, as it lacks the robustness
multiple strategies could have offered (Kumar et al. 2020).
In competitive arenas, predictability can be an Achilles heel,
with adversaries exploiting the agent’s inflexibility. A diversified approach would obfuscate the agent’s strategies,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11390

