The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CUTS+: High-Dimensional Causal Discovery from Irregular Time-Series
Yuxiao Cheng1 * , Lianglong Li1 * , Tingxiong Xiao1 , Zongren Li3 ,
Jinli Suo1,2† , Kunlun He 3† , Qionghai Dai1,2†
1

2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Science, Tsinghua University (THUIBCS)
3
Chinese PLA General Hospital
{cyx22,li-ll19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

(2023) proposed CUTS, an iterative approach to jointly perform causal graph learning and missing data imputation
for irregular temporal data. Although CUTS is proposed to
boost causal discovery with data imputation and the other
way around, the data prediction module is composed of
component-wise LSTMs and MLPs with redundant structures and parameters, hampering the scalability when encountering high-dimensional datasets. Moreover, the causal
graph in CUTS can be too large to learn with high accuracy.
To overcome these issues, we propose CUTS+, an extension of CUTS with scalability to high-dimensional timeseries, via proposing two specially designed techniques:
coarse-to-fine causal discovery (C2FD) and messagepassing graph neural network (MPGNN) for data prediction.
Our contributions include:

Causal discovery in time-series is a fundamental problem
in the machine learning community, enabling causal reasoning and decision-making in complex scenarios. Recently, researchers successfully discover causality by combining neural networks with Granger causality, but their performances
degrade largely when encountering high-dimensional data
because of the highly redundant network design and huge
causal graphs. Moreover, the missing entries in the observations further hamper the causal structural learning. To overcome these limitations, we propose CUTS+, which is built on
the Granger-causality-based causal discovery method CUTS
and raises the scalability by introducing a technique called
coarse-to-fine-discovery (C2FD) and leveraging a messagepassing-based graph neural network (MPGNN). Compared to
previous methods on simulated, quasi-real, and real datasets,
we show that CUTS+ largely improves the causal discovery
performance on high-dimensional data with different types of
irregular sampling.

• We propose CUTS+, upgrading CUTS (Cheng et al.
2023) to largely increase the scalability towards highdimensional time-series. Specifically, we leverage two
novel techniques, i.e., Coarse to Fine Causal Discovery
(C2FD), a simple yet efficient technique to facilitate scalable causal graph optimization, and message-passingbased graph neural network (MPGNN) to remove structural redundancy in CUTS+.
• With extensive experiments, we show that CUTS+
largely increases causal discovery performance and
decreases time cost, especially on high-dimensional
datasets, with either multiple types of irregular sampling
or no missing values.

Introduction
Analyzing complex interactions behind the observed timeseries, i.e., time-series analysis, is a fundamental problem in
machine learning and holds great potential in various realworld applications. However, revealing the complex relationships buried under massive amounts of variables can be
challenging for algorithm design. Recently, approaches have
been proposed to extract causal relationships from observational data (Tank et al. 2022; Löwe et al. 2022; Khanna and
Tan 2020; Runge et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2023; Xu, Huang,
and Yoo 2019). This task is called time-series causal discovery, which serves as a fundamental tool in machine learning
by enabling causal reasoning of time-series.
Although proven to be able to efficiently discover causal
relationships, most of these methods lack the ability to handle high-dimensional time-series. Actually, many causal discovery algorithms are only tested on datasets with fewer than
20 time-series (i.e. N ≤ 20) (Tank et al. 2022; Khanna and
Tan 2020), while the real time-series datasets often contain
dozens or even hundreds of time-series, e.g., gene regulation networks or air quality index. Recently, Cheng et al.

Related Works
Causal Structural Learning / Causal Discovery.
Existing Causal Structural Learning (or Causal Discovery) approaches can be categorized into five classes. (i) Constraintbased approaches, such as PC (Spirtes and Glymour 1991),
FCI (Spirtes et al. 2000), and PCMCI (Runge et al. 2019;
Runge 2020; Gerhardus and Runge 2020), build causal
graphs by conditional independence tests. (ii) Score-based
learning algorithms which include penalized Neural Ordinary Differential Equations and acyclicity constraint(Bellot,
Branson, and van der Schaar 2022) (Pamfil et al. 2020).
(iii) Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM) proposed by Sugihara et al. (2012) that reconstructs nonlinear state space
for nonseparable weakly connected dynamic systems. This

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11525

