The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Surprisingly Simple Continuous-Action POMDP Solver: Lazy Cross-Entropy
Search Over Policy Trees
Marcus Hoerger1 , Hanna Kurniawati2 , Dirk Kroese1 , Nan Ye1
1

School of Mathematics & Physics, The University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia
2
School of Computing, Australian National University, ACT, Australia
m.hoerger@uq.edu.au, hanna.kurniawati@anu.edu.au, kroese@maths.uq.edu.au, nan.ye@uq.edu.au

Abstract

state-of-the-art online solvers for POMDPs with continuous action spaces (Seiler, Kurniawati, and Singh 2015; Sunberg and Kochenderfer 2018; Mern et al. 2021; Lim, Tomlin,
and Sunberg 2021; Hoerger et al. 2023) typically use Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom 2007) to find a nearoptimal action amongst a sampled representative subset of
the action space, often relying on partitioning of the action
space, diminishing their performance for high-dimensional
action spaces.
We propose a new simple online POMDP solver for
continuous action spaces, Lazy Cross-Entropy Search Over
Policy Trees (LCEOPT), that uses a stochastic optimization approach in the policy space by extending the CrossEntropy method for optimization (Rubinstein and Kroese
2004; de Boer et al. 2005) to compute a near-optimal policy, while avoiding any form of action-space partitioning.
LCEOPT represents a policy as a policy tree, a compact
and interpretable representation that gives rise to simple
policy parameterizations via finite-dimensional vectors. Following the standard procedure of the Cross-Entropy method,
LCEOPT maintains a parameterized distribution over the
policy parameters that is incrementally updated by sampling
sets of parameters from the distribution and evaluating their
associated policies via Monte Carlo sampling. The distribution is then updated towards the best-performing policies.
This enables LCEOPT to quickly focus its search on promising regions of the policy space.
LCEOPT assumes independence of the marginal distributions over each component of the parameter vectors. This
assumption allows us to derive a lazy parameter sampling,
evaluation and distribution update method which only samples parts of a policy tree that are relevant for its evaluation.
Our lazy approach reduces the cost of sampling policies by
up to two orders of magnitude for problems with higherdimensional action spaces, thereby significantly increasing
the overall efficiency of LCEOPT.
In contrast to many MCTS-based solvers, LCEOPT
avoids any form of partitioning of the action space, enabling
it to scale much more effectively to problems with higherdimensional action spaces. Despite its simplicity, LCEOPT
achieves remarkable results in various benchmark problems
with continuous action spaces compared to current stateof-the-art methods, particularly for problems with higherdimensional action spaces (up to 12-D). The source code

The Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) provides a principled framework for decision
making in stochastic partially observable environments.
However, computing good solutions for problems with
continuous action spaces remains challenging. To ease this
challenge, we propose a simple online POMDP solver,
called Lazy Cross-Entropy Search Over Policy Trees
(LCEOPT). At each planning step, our method uses a
novel lazy Cross-Entropy method to search the space of
policy trees, which provide a simple policy representation.
Specifically, we maintain a distribution on promising finitehorizon policy trees. The distribution is iteratively updated
by sampling policies, evaluating them via Monte Carlo
simulation, and refitting them to the top-performing ones.
Our method is lazy in the sense that it exploits the policy tree
representation to avoid redundant computations in policy
sampling, evaluation, and distribution update. This leads to
computational savings of up to two orders of magnitude.
Our LCEOPT is surprisingly simple as compared to existing
state-of-the-art methods, yet empirically outperforms them
on several continuous-action POMDP problems, particularly
for problems with higher-dimensional action spaces.

Introduction
Decision making in stochastic partially observable environments is an essential, yet challenging problem in many domains, such as robotics (Kurniawati 2022), natural resource
management (Filar, Qiao, and Ye 2019) and cybersecurity
(Schwartz, Kurniawati, and El-Mahassni 2020). The Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) provides a principled framework to solve such decision making
problems, by lifting the planning problem from an agent’s
state space to its belief space i.e., the space of all probability
distributions over the state space. While solving POMDPs
exactly is computationally intractable in general (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1987), many efficient approximatelyoptimal sampling-based online POMDP solvers have been
developed (reviewed in Kurniawati (2022)), making them
viable tools for many realistic decision making problems under uncertainty.
However, solving POMDPs with continuous and highdimensional action spaces remains challenging. Current
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20134

