The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Probability-Polarized Optimal Transport for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Yan Wang1 , Chuan-Xian Ren1 * , Yi-Ming Zhai1 , You-Wei Luo1 , Hong Yan2
1

School of Mathematics, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{wangy2277, zhaiym3, luoyw28}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, rchuan@mail.sysu.edu.cn, h.yan@cityu.edu.hk
2

OT-IT

Abstract

DPP Regularizer

PP Regularizer
Intra-class

Optimal transport (OT) is an important methodology to measure distribution discrepancy, which has achieved promising
performance in artificial intelligence applications, e.g., unsupervised domain adaptation. However, from the view of
transportation, there are still limitations: 1) the local discriminative structures for downstream tasks, e.g., cluster structure for classification, cannot be explicitly admitted by the
learned OT plan; 2) the entropy regularization induces a dense
OT plan with increasing uncertainty. To tackle these issues,
we propose a novel Probability-Polarized OT (PPOT) framework, which can characterize the structure of OT plan explicitly. Specifically, the probability polarization mechanism
is proposed to guide the optimization direction of OT plan,
which generates a clear margin between similar and dissimilar transport pairs and reduces the uncertainty. Further, a
dynamic mechanism for margin is developed by incorporating task-related information into the polarization, which directly captures the intra/inter class correspondence for knowledge transportation. A mathematical understanding for PPOT
is provided from the view of gradient, which ensures interpretability. Extensive experiments on several datasets validate
the effectiveness and empirical efficiency of PPOT.

Slack
Inter-class
Entropy-Regularized OT

Class 1

Class 2

Probability-Polarized OT
Intra-class mass

Inter-class mass

Figure 1: Illustration of the optimal transport plan obtained
by entropy-regularized OT (OT-IT), and our probabilitypolarized OT with PP regularizer and DPP regularizer.
Darker lines represent larger transport masses.

ing the domain discrepancy, e.g., Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Tzeng et al. 2014), Central Moment Discrepancy (Zellinger et al. 2017), and H-divergency (Saito et al.
2018). These prior works indicate the importance and effectiveness of reducing domain discrepancy. Adversarial methods use a discriminator to distinguish source and target domain features, which is trained against the feature extractor
to generate more transferable representations.
Optimal Transport (OT) has also been widely used in
UDA since it has solid theoretical supports (Redko, Habrard,
and Sebban 2017). Some OT-based methods (Courty, Flamary, and Tuia 2014; Courty et al. 2016) are built upon
the squared Euclidean distance cost and explicitly learns the
minimal cost for transporting the source distribution into the
target. However, it cannot adequately capture the underlying
structure in distributions under some complicated tasks. To
further enhance the alignment between intra-class samples,
some distance-regularized OT methods exploits task-related
information to reweight the ground cost matrix (Xu et al.
2020; Luo and Ren 2021; Liu, Zhou, and Sun 2023).
Coupling-regularized OT methods directly impose different regularization terms on the probability coupling, which
can introduce some properties to the OT plan. Specifically,
the entropy-regularized OT (Cuturi 2013) (OT-IT) offers a
smooth and dense OT plan, which enables source samples to
transport mass to more target samples. However, high density may blur the margin between intra/inter-class transport
pairs and increase the uncertainty, which makes the OT plan
challenging to achieve a class-wise transportation, as shown

Introduction
With the increasing diversity of data sources, domain shift
between different data distributions has become an essential
problem in machine learning and deep learning (Long et al.
2019). Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) addresses
this issue by adapting a model trained on a labeled source
domain to an unlabeled target domain, i.e., reducing the gap
in representations and improving generalization to the target
domain (Pan and Yang 2009).
Various UDA approaches have been proposed to reduce
domain shift. The main idea is to minimize the domain discrepancy and learn domain-invariant features, which can be
broadly classified as distance metric-based domain adaptation (Zellinger et al. 2017; Ren, Luo, and Dai 2023) and
adversarial learning-based domain adaptation (Long et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2022). Distance metric-based methods
aim to learn a shared feature representation by minimiz* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15653

