The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PG-LBO: Enhancing High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization with
Pseudo-Label and Gaussian Process Guidance
Taicai Chen1 , Yue Duan1 , Dong Li2 , Lei Qi3 , Yinghuan Shi1 * , Yang Gao1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
{taicaichen, yueduan}@smail.nju.edu.cn, lidong106@huawei.com, qilei@seu.edu.cn, {syh, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

provides a powerful method to map high-dimensional structured data into low-dimensional continuous latent spaces,
enabling efficient and effective optimization of the objective
function. Consequently, VAE-BO possesses unique advantages in tackling high-dimensional structured optimization
problems. Currently, the VAE-BO based methods have been
widely applied in various fields, including molecular synthesis (Stanton et al. 2022; Maus et al. 2023), neural architecture search (Ru et al. 2021; Biswas et al. 2023) and anomaly
detection (Zhang, Wei, and Wang 2023). The research focus
of VAE-BO lies in effectively utilizing both labeled and unlabeled data to learn a discriminative latent space. Nevertheless, some existing VAE-BO methods still exhibit limitations
in the utilization of labeled data and unlabeled data.
Firstly, while existing VAE-BO algorithms make use of
labeled data, unfortunately, their utilization of unlabeled
data is still straightforward, whereas the efficacy of unlabeled data has not been fully exploited. For example, the
pioneering work of (Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018) was
the first to introduce VAE into the BO domain. However,
in their method, the VAE was trained in an unsupervised
manner, resulting in a non-discriminative latent space that
was ill-suited to BO processes. Subsequent VAE-BO research has largely focused on better utilizing labeled data
with black-box function values to learn a discriminative latent space. For instance, (Eissman et al. 2018) introduced
additional network structures that allow for the joint utilization of labeled and unlabeled data in the pre-training of the
VAE. While LBO (Tripp, Daxberger, and Hernández-Lobato
2020) employed unlabeled data for the initial pre-training of
the VAE and subsequently leveraged labeled data through
data weighting and periodic retraining of the VAE. In addition, T-LBO (Grosnit et al. 2021) extended LBO by incorporating deep metric learning to utilize labeled data, and the
training of the VAE was divided into two stages: pre-training
on unlabeled data and fine-tuning on labeled data. These
works proposed various ways to leverage labeled data, while
the utilization of unlabeled data has only been explored in
the pre-training stage of the VAE, and its potential has not
been fully exploited. We notice that unlabeled data also contain valuable discriminative information regarding optimization target values. Exploiting this information can help train
more discriminative models and learn a better latent space.
Furthermore, we have observed that existing methods face

Variational Autoencoder based Bayesian Optimization (VAEBO) has demonstrated its excellent performance in addressing high-dimensional structured optimization problems.
However, current mainstream methods overlook the potential
of utilizing a pool of unlabeled data to construct the latent
space, while only concentrating on designing sophisticated
models to leverage the labeled data. Despite their effective
usage of labeled data, these methods often require extra network structures, additional procedure, resulting in computational inefficiency. To address this issue, we propose a novel
method to effectively utilize unlabeled data with the guidance
of labeled data. Specifically, we tailor the pseudo-labeling
technique from semi-supervised learning to explicitly reveal
the relative magnitudes of optimization objective values hidden within the unlabeled data. Based on this technique, we
assign appropriate training weights to unlabeled data to enhance the construction of a discriminative latent space. Furthermore, we treat the VAE encoder and the Gaussian Process
(GP) in Bayesian optimization as a unified deep kernel learning process, allowing the direct utilization of labeled data,
which we term as Gaussian Process guidance. This directly
and effectively integrates the goal of improving GP accuracy
into the VAE training, thereby guiding the construction of the
latent space. The extensive experiments demonstrate that our
proposed method outperforms existing VAE-BO algorithms
in various optimization scenarios. Our code will be published
at https://github.com/TaicaiChen/PG-LBO.

Introduction
Bayesian optimization has found widespread applications in
various optimization problems and machine learning tasks,
enabling the discovery of optimal solutions for complex
functions (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012). Traditional
BO methods based on the Gaussian process have demonstrated their remarkable performance in practical applications. However, with the increase in problem dimensions,
these conventional methods face significant challenges. The
computational cost of searching in high-dimensional spaces
grows exponentially, leading to a drastic decrease in the efficiency of traditional BO algorithms (Kandasamy, Schneider,
and Póczos 2015). Recently, Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11381

