The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SimCalib: Graph Neural Network Calibration Based on Similarity between Nodes
Boshi Tang1 , Zhiyong Wu1 , Xixin Wu2 * ,
Qiaochu Huang1 , Jun Chen1 , Shun Lei1 , Helen Meng2
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
tbs22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, wuxx@se.cuhk.edu.hk,
{hqc22, y-chen21, leis21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hmmeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

However, in many applications, trustworthiness is as important (if no more) than accuracy, especially in safetysensitive fields (Dezvarei et al. 2023). One of the promising solution to ensure trustworthiness of a trained model is
aligning its prediction confidence with the ground truth accuracy, i.e., the model should provide the appropriate confidence to reveal whether the prediction should be trusted. Unfortunately, such an alignment is hardly achieved by modern
neural networks (Guo et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2021). To mitigate the issue, a variety of calibration methods (Kull et al.
2019; Gupta et al. 2020; Zhang, Kailkhura, and Han 2020)
have been proposed to calibrate pretrained deep neural networks (DNNs). However, calibration for GNNs is still underexplored. While it is possible to directly apply calibration
methods designed for DNNs to GNNs by treating each node
in the graph as an isolated sample, the specific challenges
posed by GNN calibration remain unaddressed as the specific characteristics of graph structure, e.g., the relationship
between nodes, is not well utilized for calibrating the GNN
predictions.
Recently, a few works focus on GNN calibration, among
which the most noticeable are CaGCN (Wang et al. 2021)
and GATS (Hsu et al. 2022). Specifically, CaGCN produces nodewise temperatures by processing the pretrained
classifier’s logits with another graph convolutional network
(GCN), in the hope that structural information can be implicitly integrated in model calibration. Following it, GATS
empirically investigates factors that influence GNN calibration, and employs an attention network to account for the influential factors. However, to date, the efforts towards such
a structured prediction problem (Nowozin, Lampert et al.
2011) have mostly concentrated on empirical aspects, suffering from a lack of theoretical supports.
In this paper, we make extensive efforts from both theoretical and practical aspects to tackle the aforementioned
issues. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We develop a theoretical approach for GNN calibration,
and prove that by taking nodewise similarity into consideration we can reduce expected calibration error (ECE)
effectively.
• We propose two similarity-oriented mechanisms to account for both global feature-level similarity and local
nodewise representation movement dynamics similarity.
By incorporating them into network designs, we propose

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have exhibited impressive
performance in modeling graph data as exemplified in various applications. Recently, the GNN calibration problem has
attracted increasing attention, especially in cost-sensitive scenarios. Previous work has gained empirical insights on the issue, and devised effective approaches for it, but theoretical
supports still fall short. In this work, we shed light on the
relationship between GNN calibration and nodewise similarity via theoretical analysis. A novel calibration framework,
named SimCalib, is accordingly proposed to consider similarity between nodes at global and local levels. At the global
level, the Mahalanobis distance between the current node and
class prototypes is integrated to implicitly consider similarity between the current node and all nodes in the same class.
At the local level, the similarity of node representation movement dynamics, quantified by nodewise homophily and relative degree, is considered. Informed about the application of
nodewise movement patterns in analyzing nodewise behavior on the over-smoothing problem, we empirically present a
possible relationship between over-smoothing and GNN calibration problem. Experimentally, we discover a correlation
between nodewise similarity and model calibration improvement, in alignment with our theoretical results. Additionally,
we conduct extensive experiments investigating different design factors and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed SimCalib framework for GNN calibration by achieving
state-of-the-art performance on 14 out of 16 benchmarks.

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous in the real world, including social networks, knowledge graphs, traffic networks, among others.
Due to the universality and expressive power of graph representations, the deep learning community has paid much
attention to learning from graph-structured data and introduced various types of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Veličković et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017). To date, GNNs have been successfully
applied to various downstream applications with remarkable
accuracy, such as drug discovery (Zhang et al. 2022b), fluid
simulation (Liu et al. 2022), and recommendation system
(Fan et al. 2019), to name a few.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15267

