The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Interpretable3D: An Ad-Hoc Interpretable Classifier for 3D Point Clouds
Tuo Feng1 , Ruijie Quan2 * , Xiaohan Wang2 , Wenguan Wang2 , Yi Yang2
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
feng.tuo@student.uts.edu.au, quanruij@hotmail.com, {wxh1996111, wenguanwang.ai}@gmail.com, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

(a)

Class weight W

ϕ

z1

([ w12 , w22 , w32 , …, wd2 ], b2 )

z2

b

z |Y|

Parametric softmax classifier

Eq. (1)

Airplane

√

Bottle

…

…

([w1|Y|, w2|Y|,w3|Y|, …,wd|Y|], b|Y|)

Stool

New
samples

Logits

1 )

…
…

New
sample
(b)

Bias b

([ w11 , w21 , w31 , …, wd1 ],

…

3D decision-critical tasks urgently require research on explanations to ensure system reliability and transparency. Extensive explanatory research has been conducted on 2D images,
but there is a lack in the 3D field. Furthermore, the existing
explanations for 3D models are post-hoc and can be misleading, as they separate explanations from the original model. To
address these issues, we propose an ad-hoc interpretable classifier for 3D point clouds (i.e., Interpretable3D). As an intuitive
case-based classifier, Interpretable3D can provide reliable adhoc explanations without any embarrassing nuances. It allows
users to understand how queries are embedded within past observations in prototype sets. Interpretable3D has two iterative
training steps: 1) updating one prototype with the mean of the
embeddings within the same sub-class in Prototype Estimation, and 2) penalizing or rewarding the estimated prototypes
in Prototype Optimization. The mean of embeddings has a
clear statistical meaning, i.e., class sub-centers. Moreover, we
update prototypes with their most similar observations in the
last few epochs. Finally, Interpretable3D classifies new samples according to prototypes. We evaluate the performance of
Interpretable3D on four popular point cloud models: DGCNN,
PointNet2, PointMLP, and PointNeXt. Our Interpretable3D
demonstrates comparable or superior performance compared
to softmax-based black-box models in the tasks of 3D shape
classification and part segmentation. Our code is released at:
github.com/FengZicai/Interpretable3D.

Prototypical
observations

√
√ Selecting the

most similar one.

Figure 1: (a) The softmax-based DNN models employ parametric classifiers. However, they lack a direct and intuitive
interpretation of the decision-making processes. (b) Interpretable3D selects the most similar prototype (i.e., the one
with the maximum cosine similarity) for new samples.

Introduction
the parametric softmax classifier learns highly abstract parameters and lacks a direct and intuitive interpretation (Wang
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2018; Angelov and Soares 2020). Incorrect data fed into black-box models may lead to harmful
consequences. As a result, the demand for interpretable 3D
models has become increasingly urgent.
Extensive research has been conducted on the interpretability/explainability of 2D images (Wang et al. 2022; Zhang,
Rao, and Yang 2021; Akhtar and Jalwana 2023; Hu et al.
2023), but there is a lack of interpretable 3D point cloud
research. Not to mention the few existing explanation studies
on 3D models have been conducted with post-hoc explanations and only play an auxiliary role in 3D systems. For
instance, saliency/attention maps (Chen et al. 2021; Schinagl
et al. 2022) have been applied to existing voxel-based 3D object detection networks. However, the post-hoc saliency maps

Over the past decade, significant progress has been made
in deep neural networks (DNNs). However, serious concerns have been raised over DNNs’ safety and trustworthiness (Rudin 2019; Rudin et al. 2022), when applied to 3D
real-world decision-critical scenarios, such as self-driving
cars (Meng et al. 2021; Yin et al. 2022a; Zheng et al. 2020)
and medical diagnosis systems. Interpretability has emerged
as a critical concern regarding the trustworthiness of predictions generated by DNNs. However, understanding DNNs
proves to be particularly challenging due to their complex,
non-linear, and high-dimensional nature. They lack natural
explanations that humans can easily comprehend. Similarly,
* Corresponding author: Ruijie Quan.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1761

