The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semi-supervised Active Learning for Video Action Detection
Ayush Singh1 , Aayush J Rana2 , Akash Kumar2 , Shruti Vyas2 , Yogesh Singh Rawat2
1

IIT (ISM) Dhanbad
University of Central Florida
ayush.s.18je0204@cse.iitism.ac.in, {aayushjungbahadur.rana, akash.kumar, shruti, yogesh}@ucf.edu
2

Abstract

vised methods, often requiring externally trained object detector to address the detection aspect of action detection (Chéron
et al. 2018; Weinzaepfel, Martin, and Schmid 2016). Recently,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Kumar and Rawat 2022) and
active learning methods (Rana and Rawat 2022) have shown
promising performance. However, they also have their own
limitations. SSL relies on randomly selected sub-samples,
which can result in non-informative sample selection and
suboptimal models. On the other hand, active learning aims
to address this issue by selecting only informative samples
for training. Nevertheless, it suffers from a cold-start problem, which makes it challenging to train a good model with
limited labels which are initially available.
We propose a unified approach for video action detection
by bridging the gap between semi-supervised learning (SSL)
and active learning. We address the challenges of the coldstart problem in active learning by using an SSL technique to
train a reliable initial model. Similarly, we resolve the need
for informative training sample for SSL using optimized
selection via active learning. Our student-teacher-based SSL
framework benefits from active learning’s informative sample
selection, offering the advantages of both SSL and active
learning for improved video action detection.
Video action detection needs to perform both spatiotemporal localization and classification. Solving this task
using limited labels pose two distinct challenges; 1) determining the informativeness of samples, and 2) generating
high-quality pseudo-labels. To address the first challenge, we
propose NoiseAug, a simple and novel augmentation strategy
designed to estimate sample informativeness in video action
detection. Model-driven AL used in existing works for sample selection often perturbs the model via regularization (Gal
and Ghahramani 2016; Heilbron et al. 2018; Aghdam et al.
2019), which limits the extent of perturbation since too much
perturbation will affect the network negatively. Therefore, we
propose data-driven AL and use varying degree of data augmentations while maintaining video integrity. By isolating
the type of augmentation seen by the model during training
and selection step, we can focus on the relevant regions and
reduce bias from training samples which is a common problem in active learning with limited labeled set (Pardo et al.
2021; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Aghdam et al. 2019).
Active learning enables cost-effective labeling by selecting
informative samples and subsequently helps improve model

In this work, we focus on label efficient learning for video
action detection. We develop a novel semi-supervised active
learning approach which utilizes both labeled as well as unlabeled data along with informative sample selection for action detection. Video action detection requires spatio-temporal
localization along with classification, which poses several
challenges for both active learning (informative sample selection) as well as semi-supervised learning (pseudo label
generation). First, we propose NoiseAug, a simple augmentation strategy which effectively selects informative samples for
video action detection. Next, we propose fft-attention, a novel
technique based on high-pass filtering which enables effective
utilization of pseudo label for SSL in video action detection
by emphasizing on relevant activity region within a video.
We evaluate the proposed approach on three different benchmark datasets, UCF-101-24, JHMDB-21, and Youtube-VOS.
First, we demonstrate its effectiveness on video action detection where the proposed approach outperforms prior works in
semi-supervised and weakly-supervised learning along with
several baseline approaches in both UCF101-24 and JHMDB21. Next, we also show its effectiveness on Youtube-VOS for
video object segmentation demonstrating its generalization
capability for other dense prediction tasks in videos.

Introduction
Video understanding is an essential task for security, automation, and robotics (Rizve et al. 2021a) as video data enables
information extraction for detection (Hou, Sukthankar, and
Shah 2017; Yang et al. 2019), recognition (Hara, Kataoka,
and Satoh 2018; Kumar et al. 2023), tracking (Vondrick et al.
2018), and scene understanding (Lei et al. 2018). Video understanding in general requires a large amount of labeled data
to train an effective model. Collecting such data for dense
prediction tasks such as action detection is even more challenging as it requires spatio-temporal annotations on every
frame of the video. In this work, we focus on label efficient
learning for video action detection.
Existing works on label efficient learning for video action
detection have primarily focused on weakly supervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and active learning. Weakly
supervised methods often underperform compared to superCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4891

