The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LION: Implicit Vision Prompt Tuning
Haixin Wang1 , Jianlong Chang2, † , Yihang Zhai1 , Xiao Luo3 ,
Jinan Sun1, † , Zhouchen Lin4, 5 , Qi Tian2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University,
2
Huawei Cloud & AI,
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University,
4
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University,
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
wang.hx@stu.pku.edu.cn, jianlong.chang@huawei.com, zhaiyihang@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{xiaoluo, sjn, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
Abstract
Despite recent promising performances across a range of vision tasks, vision Transformers still have an issue of high
computational costs. Recently, vision prompt learning has
provided an economical solution to this problem without finetuning the whole large-scale model. However, the efficiency
and effectiveness of existing models are still far from satisfactory due to the parameter cost of extensive prompt blocks
and tricky prompt framework designs. In this paper, we propose a light-weight prompt framework named impLicit vIsion
prOmpt tuNing (LION), which is motivated by deep implicit
models with stable low memory costs for various complex
tasks. In particular, we merely insert two equilibrium implicit
layers in two ends of the pre-trained backbone with parameters frozen. Moreover, according to the lottery hypothesis, we
further prune the parameters to relieve the computation burden
in implicit layers. Various experiments have validated that
our LION obtains promising performances on a wide range
of datasets. Most importantly, LION reduces up to 11.5 %
of training parameter numbers while obtaining higher performance than the state-of-the-art VPT, especially under challenging scenes. Furthermore, we find that our proposed LION
has an excellent generalization performance, making it an easy
way to boost transfer learning in the future.

Figure 1: Demonstration of the implicit vision prompt layer.
The left part shows the traditional construction of the prompt
block by stacking MLPs. The right is LION with the implicit
equilibrium layer and robust training for the prompt block.

phenomenon means separate sets of model parameters are
needed for each task, leading to a high storage requirement.
In recent years, prompt-based learning has generated considerable interest in the natural language processing (NLP)
community because of its fantastic performance on various
downstream problems (Liu et al. 2021a; Li and Liang 2021;
Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021). Prompt tuning aims to
design a trainable lightweight block as a supplementary input,
which can guide or direct the generation of powerful vision
representations to achieve desirable performances, rather than
fine-tuning pre-trained models to adapt to downstream tasks.
To design a prompt framework that combines both a
lightweight architecture and strong representation capability,
we conducted a comprehensive study and analysis of the limitations of current vision prompt tuning methods. First, existing approaches insert trainable networks as prompt blocks
between each layer of the network (Jia et al. 2022), assuming
that the feature representations from different levels contribute to the network’s generalization performance, especially for low- and mid-level representations. This, however,
goes against the lightweight design philosophy of prompt
tuning. The architecture design is also complex and heavily
reliant on tuning skills, making applying to various vision
backbone models with different architectures challenging.

Introduction
With the development of computer vision, models with more
robust representations and larger sizes have been developed.
Despite this, training these models with many parameters is
becoming increasingly challenging.
One common approach to addressing this issue is pretraining on a large dataset, such as ImageNet (Deng et al.
2009), for general vision tasks and then fine-tuning the model
on downstream tasks to improve performance. While this
method has been widely used, several drawbacks should be
considered. Firstly, fine-tuning requires a large amount of
computational resources, especially for large models such
as ViT-B (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) (85.84M parameters) and
Swin-B (Liu et al. 2021b) (86.87M parameters). Secondly,
the model may become overfitted to the small target dataset
and cannot be used for other tasks after fine-tuning. This
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5372

