The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AdvST: Revisiting Data Augmentations for Single Domain Generalization
Guangtao Zheng1 , Mengdi Huai2 , Aidong Zhang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University
gz5hp@virginia, mdhuai@iastate.edu, aidong@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

the same distribution. Their performance can drop significantly when there are shifts between training and test data
distributions caused by, for example, changes in object appearance or data collection methods.
Data augmentation is an effective approach to SDG. It
augments the source domain data to expand the coverage on
the unseen target domain during model training. Methods of
data augmentation include using adversarial learning (Volpi
et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2020; Qiao, Zhao, and Peng 2020) or
using generative models (Qiao, Zhao, and Peng 2020; Wang
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021) to generate diverse data samples.
The utility of standard data augmentations, such as scale,
or CutOut (DeVries and Taylor 2017), has not been fully
exploited in SDG. In practice, these augmentation methods
have been widely used in model training for in-distribution
generalization. However, their applications in SDG are limited. In most cases, they serve as a part of the data preprocessing procedure in other SDG methods (Volpi et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2020; Qiao, Zhao, and Peng 2020). Although it
is intuitive that applying multiple standard data augmentations to the source domain data can generate diverse samples
and hence improve a model’s SDG performance, we lack a
principled approach to fully realize the benefit brought from
multiple standard data augmentations.
Therefore, in this paper, we revisit standard data augmentations for SDG and develop methods that make them a
strong competitor in SDG. We consider the composition of
several standard data augmentation as a semantics transformation which can manipulate certain kinds of semantics of
a sample, such as the brightness and hue of an image. Normally, standard data augmentations have pre-specified and
fixed parameters. Here, we make these parameters learnable
in a semantics transformation so that we can tune these parameters to produce semantically significant variations and
bring new styles that are different from the source domain
data. With semantics transformations, we can transform data
in the source domain to a fictitious one which has large domain shifts from the source and possibly covers data in target
domains, yielding favorable SDG performance.
To learn semantics transformations for SDG, we propose AdvST, an adversarial learning framework that trains
a robust model and generates challenging data samples iteratively with mini-max optimization. In the maximization
phase, we learn the parameters of semantics transforma-

Single domain generalization (SDG) aims to train a robust
model against unknown target domain shifts using data from
a single source domain. Data augmentation has been proven
an effective approach to SDG. However, the utility of standard augmentations, such as translate, or invert, has not been
fully exploited in SDG; practically, these augmentations are
used as a part of a data preprocessing procedure. Although it
is intuitive to use many such augmentations to boost the robustness of a model to out-of-distribution domain shifts, we
lack a principled approach to harvest the benefit brought from
multiple these augmentations. Here, we conceptualize standard data augmentations with learnable parameters as semantics transformations that can manipulate certain semantics of
a sample, such as the geometry or color of an image. Then,
we propose Adversarial learning with Semantics Transformations (AdvST) that augments the source domain data with semantics transformations and learns a robust model with the
augmented data. We theoretically show that AdvST essentially optimizes a distributionally robust optimization objective defined on a set of semantics distributions induced by
the parameters of semantics transformations. We demonstrate
that AdvST can produce samples that expand the coverage on
target domain data. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, AdvST, despite being a simple method, is surprisingly
competitive and achieves the best average SDG performance
on the Digits, PACS, and DomainNet datasets. Our code is
available at https://github.com/gtzheng/AdvST.

Introduction
Domain generalization (Balaji, Sankaranarayanan, and
Chellappa 2018; Li et al. 2017, 2018a, 2019) aims to learn a
model that can generalize well on target (test) domains with
unknown distribution shifts using multiple source (training)
domains. However, having diverse domains for training is
a strong assumption due to various practical considerations,
such as data collection budgets or privacy issues. A realistic alternative is single domain generalization (SDG) (Zhao
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2018a), which only requires data from
a single source domain for model training. SDG is challenging for deep image classifiers. Although they have achieved
impressive performance on benchmarks, they strongly hinge
on the implicit assumption that training and test data follow
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21832

