The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GO-DICE: Goal-Conditioned Option-Aware Offline Imitation Learning via
Stationary Distribution Correction Estimation
Abhinav Jain, Vaibhav Unhelkar
Rice University, Houston, TX
abhinav.jain@rice.edu, vaibhav.unhelkar@rice.edu

Abstract

Originating almost three decades ago, offline IL remains
an active area of research with recent techniques aiming to
solve increasingly challenging sequential tasks (Osa et al.
2018; Arora and Doshi 2021; Seo and Unhelkar 2022).1
For instance, to enhance scalability and address tasks with
high-dimensional state spaces, more recent IL techniques
leverage advances in deep learning and generative adversarial training to represent and learn policies (Ho and Ermon 2016). Similarly, to address poor generalizability of
classical techniques to the states absent in expert demonstrations (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011), recent IL techniques have employed imperfect demonstrations to obtain
a more comprehensive coverage of the state space in the
training data (Kim et al. 2021, 2022; Ma et al. 2022b). Despite these advancements, existing offline IL techniques find
it challenging to learn policies for long-horizon tasks and require significant retraining when task specifications change.
Towards addressing these limitations, we introduce a
goal-conditioned option-aware approach to offline IL: GODICE2 . Inspired by the options framework (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999), GO-DICE segments available demonstrations into a sequence of sub-tasks to facilitate long-horizon
reasoning. It then uses the segmentation results to learn a hierarchy of policies for transitioning between sub-tasks and
action execution within a sub-task. The task segmentation
and hierarchical policy learning repeats iteratively until convergence. In GO-DICE, policies at both the levels of hierarchy depend on not only state but also goals. Similar to recent RL techniques such as HER (Andrychowicz et al. 2017;
Fang et al. 2018), this goal conditioning seeks to minimize
the need for retraining when task goals change.
Given the task segmentations and choice of policy representation, a policy learning subroutine is necessary to learn
each level of hierarchical policy. GO-DICE leverages a technique called DemoDICE for this purpose, owing to its ability
to learn from imperfect demonstrations and without adversarial training (Kim et al. 2021). As a member of the station-

Offline imitation learning (IL) refers to learning expert behavior solely from demonstrations, without any additional interaction with the environment. Despite significant advances in
offline IL, existing techniques find it challenging to learn policies for long-horizon tasks and require significant re-training
when task specifications change. Towards addressing these
limitations, we present GO-DICE an offline IL technique for
goal-conditioned long-horizon sequential tasks. GO-DICE
discerns a hierarchy of sub-tasks from demonstrations and
uses these to learn separate policies for sub-task transitions
and action execution, respectively; this hierarchical policy
learning facilitates long-horizon reasoning. Inspired by the
expansive DICE-family of techniques, policy learning at both
the levels transpires within the space of stationary distributions. Further, both policies are learnt with goal conditioning
to minimize need for retraining when task goals change. Experimental results substantiate that GO-DICE outperforms recent baselines, as evidenced by a marked improvement in the
completion rate of increasingly challenging pick-and-place
Mujoco robotic tasks. GO-DICE is also capable of leveraging
imperfect demonstration and partial task segmentation when
available, both of which boost task performance relative to
learning from expert demonstrations alone.

Introduction
Learning to make decisions and accomplish sequential tasks
is a core problem in artificial intelligence (AI). Reinforcement learning (RL) addresses this problem by enabling
agents to learn task policies by interacting with their environment. However, in many practical scenarios, exploratory
interaction with the environment is expensive, unsafe, or
even infeasible. For these scenarios, offline imitation learning (IL) offers AI agents an approach to learn task policies
without any environmental interaction when task demonstrations provided by other (typically expert) agents are available. Also referred to as learning from demonstration, classic techniques for offline IL include behavioral cloning (BC)
and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Pomerleau 1991;
Abbeel and Ng 2004). These techniques and their extensions
have been used to address complex problems in robotics, human modeling, and beyond (Unhelkar, Li, and Shah 2020;
Ravichandar et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021).

1
Closely related is the paradigm of online imitation learning
that combines demonstration data with agent’s experience. However, like reinforcement learning, it is not suitable when interacting
with environment is unsafe, expensive or infeasible.
2
An extended version of this paper, which includes supplementary material (appendices and video supplements) mentioned in the
text, is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10802

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12763

