The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Intra- and Inter-group Optimal Transport for User-Oriented Fairness in
Recommender Systems
Zhongxuan Han1 , Chaochao Chen1 , Xiaolin Zheng1 * , Meng Li2 , Weiming Liu1 , Binhui Yao3 ,
Yuyuan Li1 , Jianwei Yin1
1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3 Midea
{zxhan, zjuccc, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn, mimas.li777@gmail.com, 21831010@zju.edu.cn, tony.yao@midea.com,
11821022@zju.edu.cn, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Metric:

Recommender systems are typically biased toward a small
group of users, leading to severe unfairness in recommendation performance, i.e., User-Oriented Fairness (UOF) issue.
Existing research on UOF exhibits notable limitations in two
phases of recommendation models. In the training phase,
current methods fail to tackle the root cause of the UOF issue,
which lies in the unfair training process between advantaged
and disadvantaged users. In the evaluation phase, the current UOF metric lacks the ability to comprehensively evaluate
varying cases of unfairness. In this paper, we aim to address
the aforementioned limitations and ensure recommendation
models treat user groups of varying activity levels equally.
In the training phase, we propose a novel Intra- and InterGrOup Optimal Transport framework (II-GOOT) to alleviate
the data sparsity problem for disadvantaged users and narrow the training gap between advantaged and disadvantaged
users. In the evaluation phase, we introduce a novel metric
called 𝜉-UOF, which enables the identification and assessment of various cases of UOF. This helps prevent recommendation models from leading to unfavorable fairness outcomes,
where both advantaged and disadvantaged users experience
subpar recommendation performance. We conduct extensive
experiments on three real-world datasets based on four backbone recommendation models to prove the effectiveness of
𝜉-UOF and the efficiency of our proposed II-GOOT.

: Our

: Existing

Best
UOF ISSUE
Worst

More Satisfying Recommendation

(a) Gradient Distribution

(b) Different Levels of UOF

Figure 1: (a) visualizes the norm (i.e., 𝐿 2 − 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 ) of gradients coming from different users in a training epoch of
LightGCN (He et al. 2020) in the Amazon Health dataset.
(b) shows the best and worst cases of UOF that both share
the same objective of facilitating equitable recommendation
results for different user groups. Though the worst fairness
will lead to dissatisfaction in both user groups, the existing
metric treats these two cases as equally favorable.

RSs are always biased toward a small group of users,
resulting in significant unfairness in the quality of recommendations (Li et al. 2021; Rahmani et al. 2022; Wen et al.
2022), i.e., the User-Oriented Fairness (UOF) issue. We define the users with more satisfied recommendation results as
advantaged users and other users as disadvantaged users.
Existing research has proved that advantaged users constitute only a small proportion of the total user base (Li et al.
2021) since many users suffer from the data sparsity (Han
et al. 2023b; Zheng et al. 2022a) problem and fail to receive
satisfying recommendation results. Therefore, addressing
the UOF issue becomes crucial in RSs to enhance the overall
quality of recommendation services.
To date, the relevant work of UOF is quite limited and
exhibits notable limitations in both the training phase and
evaluation phase. In the training phase, the existing methods fail to tackle the root cause of the UOF issue. The
root of the UOF issue lies in the unfairness of the training
process for recommendation models. Since recommendation models are always trained based on the interactions between users and items, we identify the advantaged users and
disadvantaged users based on their interaction numbers (Li
et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2022) and show the gradient distri-

Introduction
Fairness is a critical research field in Machine Learning
(ML) (Binns 2018; Dai et al. 2022; Mehrabi et al. 2021;
Hutchinson and Mitchell 2019; Verma and Rubin 2018),
and is also widely investigated in Recommender Systems
(RSs) (Deldjoo et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Han et al.
2023a). RS is a complex field involving frequent interactions
between users and items (Su et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2022b;
Li et al. 2022, 2023). Fairness issues commonly arise from
both the users’ side (Li et al. 2021; Rahmani et al. 2022) and
the items’ side (Dash et al. 2021; Deldjoo et al. 2021a). In
this paper, we focus on the fairness issue related to performance disparities among different user groups.
* Xiaolin Zheng is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8463

