The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

IS-DARTS: Stabilizing DARTS through Precise Measurement
on Candidate Importance
Hongyi He, Longjun Liu* , Haonan Zhang, Nanning Zheng
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
hongyihe@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, liulongjun@xjtu.edu.cn, haonanzhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, nnzheng@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

2018; Chen et al. 2019; Chu et al. 2020b,a) are proposed,
which complete searching in one training of the supernet
containing all potential subnets with weight sharing strategy.
Among many proposed approaches, Differential ARchitecture Search (DARTS)(Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018)
leverages architecture parameters to continuously relax the
discrete search space, enabling gradient backpropagation
in the supernet. DARTS enhances the search efficiency by
a large margin while achieving comparable performance.
However, some studies(Chen et al. 2019; Zela et al. 2019;
Chu et al. 2020b) report that DARTS suffers from performance collapse due to the dominance of parameter-free operations in the selected architecture. Existing solutions to
this problem vary considerably, including imposing handcrafted rules(Chu et al. 2020b,a), suppressing the indicator(Liang et al. 2019; Zela et al. 2019) and so on. However,
the vast majority rely on the prior knowledge that performance collapse will happen, which cure the symptoms instead of the disease. Moreover, many methods lack theoretical analysis on their relationship with the original optimization problem, making them less persuasive.
This paper is dedicated to analyzing and resolving the
problems leading DARTS to suboptimal results, including
but not limited to the above two problems. We prove theoretically and experimentally that the architecture parameters
in the supernet fail to represent the importance of the candidate operations in the search space. As a result, the subnet
selected by the magnitude of architecture parameters undisputedly performs disastrously. In response, we measure the
importance more precisely through the information in the
intermediate feature maps output by the operations. We also
prove that nodes in a subnet retaining more important operations output more informative and significant feature maps.
Furthermore, we find that the losses minimized in in the
bi-level optimization objective of DARTS are all concerned
with the supernet. We reformulate the objective with binary
masks and turn its attention to the performance of the subnets, which should be the primary objective of DARTS. In
addition, the training set encounter a forcible split for the
training of the network weights and the architecture parameters, which reduces the efficiency of data utilization. We
emancipate the validation set in the objective function and
calculate more precise weights with the help of the importance measurement.

Among existing Neural Architecture Search methods,
DARTS is known for its efficiency and simplicity. This approach applies continuous relaxation of network representation to construct a weight-sharing supernet and enables the
identification of excellent subnets in just a few GPU days.
However, performance collapse in DARTS results in deteriorating architectures filled with parameter-free operations and
remains a great challenge to the robustness. To resolve this
problem, we reveal that the fundamental reason is the biased
estimation of the candidate importance in the search space
through theoretical and experimental analysis, and more precisely select operations via information-based measurements.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the excessive concern over
the supernet and inefficient utilization of data in bi-level
optimization also account for suboptimal results. We adopt
a more realistic objective focusing on the performance of
subnets and simplify it with the help of the informationbased measurements. Finally, we explain theoretically why
progressively shrinking the width of the supernet is necessary and reduce the approximation error of optimal weights
in DARTS. Our proposed method, named IS-DARTS, comprehensively improves DARTS and resolves the aforementioned problems. Extensive experiments on NAS-Bench-201
and DARTS-based search space demonstrate the effectiveness of IS-DARTS.

Introduction
Although neural networks have achieved significant success in numerous computer vision domains(He et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2015; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), designing neural architectures remains an uphill task demanding extensive expertise and repeated fine-tuning. In recent
years, researchers have endeavored to discover Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods that automate the manual process of exploiting outstanding architectures. Previous NAS methods based on reinforcement learning(Baker
et al. 2016; Zoph et al. 2018; Pham et al. 2018) and evolutionary algorithm(Real et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017; Real
et al. 2019) typically require thousands of GPU days computational resources, which impede their practical application. Therefore, one-shot methods(Liu, Simonyan, and Yang
* Longjun Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12367

