The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Separation and Alignment Framework for Black-Box Domain Adaptation
Mingxuan Xia1,2 , Junbo Zhao2 , Gengyu Lyu3 , Zenan Huang2 ,
Tianlei Hu2 , Gang Chen2 , Haobo Wang1,2 *
1

2

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology
{xiamingxuan, j.zhao, lccurious, htl, cg, wanghaobo}@zju.edu.cn,
lyugengyu@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Black-box domain adaptation (BDA) targets to learn a classifier on an unsupervised target domain while assuming only
access to black-box predictors trained from unseen source
data. Although a few BDA approaches have demonstrated
promise by manipulating the transferred labels, they largely
overlook the rich underlying structure in the target domain.
To address this problem, we introduce a novel separation and
alignment framework for BDA. Firstly, we locate those welladapted samples via loss ranking and a flexible confidencethresholding procedure. Then, we introduce a novel graph contrastive learning objective that aligns under-adapted samples
to their local neighbors and well-adapted samples. Lastly, the
adaptation is finally achieved by a nearest-centroid-augmented
objective that exploits the clustering effect in the feature
space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
method outperforms best baselines on benchmark datasets,
e.g. improving the averaged per-class accuracy by 4.1% on
the VisDA dataset. The source code is available at: https:
//github.com/MingxuanXia/SEAL.

Introduction
Unsupervised Domain adaptation (UDA) (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Saito et al. 2018; Wilson and Cook 2020) is a
popular research topic in deep learning that enables models
trained on source domains to generalize well to a target domain without accessing target label information. To handle
UDA, researchers have developed a plethora of practical algorithms, including adversarial learning-based approaches
(Tzeng et al. 2015; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Ganin et al.
2016; Tzeng et al. 2017), discrepancy-based methods (Tzeng
et al. 2014; Sun and Saenko 2016; Long et al. 2017; Zhuang
et al. 2018) and so on. Thanks to these methodological innovations, UDA has been applied to many real-world scenarios
such as image classification, speech recognition, and medical
data analysis (Long et al. 2016; Kang et al. 2019; Sun et al.
2017; Perone et al. 2019) where obtaining labeled data in a
target domain can be costly or impractical.
Though widely applied in many fields, existing UDA methods draw some crucial concerns. Specifically, UDA requires
accessing to source data which potentially threatens data privacy and security. Besides, when the source domain contains
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16005

a large amount of data, practicing these UDA methods may
suffer from huge storage and computational costs. Therefore,
a new kind of method called Source Free Domain Adaptation
(SFDA) (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020; Li et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2021) is proposed, where source data is not accessed along
the adaptation process. Even so, the problem of source information privacy and the limitation of computational resources
still remains, due to these methods highly rely on the whitebox source model. To mitigate this problem, a special case of
SFDA called black-box domain adaptation (BDA) has been
proposed recently (Zhang et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2022a),
where only a source API can be utilized to train the unlabeled
target domain. These methods fully detach the target domain
from the source data and source model, which completely
mitigates the issues of privacy and computational resources.
To date, few efforts have been made to address the BDA
problem. In particular, these algorithms (Zhang et al. 2021;
Liang et al. 2022a; Yang et al. 2023) mostly assume many
target samples share features with the source domain and
thus, are easier to adapt. Inspired by research on learning
with noisy labels (LNL), they identify these easy samples
to guide target model training. For example, DINE (Liang
et al. 2022a) develops adaptive label smoothing for easy and
hard samples according to predicted values. (Zhang et al.
2021) selects samples with low loss rank and integrates selftraining methods to adapt the remaining data. The state-ofthe-art BETA method (Yang et al. 2023) also detects small
loss samples which is achieved by Gaussian Mixture Models,
and conducts semi-supervised learning after domain division.
Besides, mixup techniques (Zhang et al. 2018) are integrated
into DINE and BETA that exploit structural input information
for boosted performance. Despite the promise, they suffer
two main limitations. First, these methods mostly rely on
a fixed budget of easy samples but overlook a rich set of
well-adapted samples that emerge when the domain gap is
shrunk. Second, a simple mixup technique is not able to fully
utilize the topological information in the target domain.
To address these problems, we present a novel SEparation
and ALignment (dubbed SEAL) framework for BDA, which
comprises three key components. The first module separates
target data into well-adapted and under-adapted sets. Specifically, apart from the original easy samples with lower loss
rank, we further collect those well-adapted samples with
high confidence by a flexible thresholding mechanism. The

