The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semi-supervised 3D Object Detection with PatchTeacher and PillarMix
Xiaopei Wu1, 2† , Liang Peng1 , Liang Xie1 , Yuenan Hou2 ,
Binbin Lin3* , Xiaoshui Huang2* , Haifeng Liu1 , Deng Cai1 , Wanli Ouyang2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
{wuxiaopei, pengliang}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Current semi-supervised 3D detection methods usually
follow the practice of 2D, leveraging an EMA teacher to
generate better pseudo labels as the training process proceeds. However, the EMA approach requires the teacher to
use the same setting as the student, which limits us from
utilizing stronger teachers. Recently, some works have noticed this and tried to build a heterogeneous teacher based
on or not based on the EMA teacher. For example, (Qi et al.
2021) use a multi-frame teacher to generate accurate pseudo
labels for the single-frame student. (Yin et al. 2022) employs a TTA (test-time augmentation) teacher to supervise
the single-forward student. (Peng et al. 2022) takes advantage of the LiDAR-based teacher to generate strong pseudo
labels for the image-based student. However, the aforementioned methods only focus on complete scene detection. The
huge amount of points of the complete scene limits their
teachers from using high-resolution voxelization to generate
more accurate pseudo labels.
To this end, we propose PatchTeacher, which leverages
the low memory consumption advantage of partial scene detection to process point clouds with a high-resolution voxelization. It aims to break out the performance bottleneck of
the detector trained on the complete scene and produce highquality pseudo labels for the student. Concretely, we divide
a complete scene into N × N patches and feed them to our
PatchTeacher sequentially. Considering that the points of a
patch are much fewer than a complete scene, we can use a
very small voxel size for voxelization. The high-resolution
voxelization enables the model to extract more fine-grained
and discriminative features, which is of great benefit to highperformance 3D object detection.
However, it is non-trivial to train PatchTeacher on point
cloud patches. Firstly, distant patches contain few positive
samples. The total loss will be dominated by the negative
classification loss of distant patches (see Equation 1 for more
details and discussions). Therefore, we propose Patch Normalizer. It normalizes the negative classification loss of different patches in the same frame with the same dominators to prevent the gradient of the classification branch from
being dominated by distant patches. Secondly, to train all
patches with the same detector, we need to shift them to
the same coordinate system, ensuring they are in the same
point cloud range. However, simply shifting patches from
different quadrants to the same range will inevitably alter

Semi-supervised learning aims to leverage numerous unlabeled data to improve the model performance. Current
semi-supervised 3D object detection methods typically use
a teacher to generate pseudo labels for a student, and the
quality of the pseudo labels is essential for the final performance. In this paper, we propose PatchTeacher, which focuses on partial scene 3D object detection to provide highquality pseudo labels for the student. Specifically, we divide
a complete scene into a series of patches and feed them to
our PatchTeacher sequentially. PatchTeacher leverages the
low memory consumption advantage of partial scene detection to process point clouds with a high-resolution voxelization, which can minimize the information loss of quantization
and extract more fine-grained features. However, it is nontrivial to train a detector on fractions of the scene. Therefore,
we introduce three key techniques, i.e., Patch Normalizer,
Quadrant Align, and Fovea Selection, to improve the performance of PatchTeacher. Moreover, we devise PillarMix, a
strong data augmentation strategy that mixes truncated pillars from different LiDAR scans to generate diverse training
samples and thus help the model learn more general representation. Extensive experiments conducted on Waymo and
ONCE datasets verify the effectiveness and superiority of our
method and we achieve new state-of-the-art results, surpassing existing methods by a large margin. Codes are available
at https://github.com/LittlePey/PTPM.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of 3D
object detection owing to the boom in deep learning. Many
3D detection methods (Shi et al. 2020; Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021; Wu et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2023b; Li et al. 2023) have achieved impressive performance on various leaderboards. The appealing performance
of these 3D detectors heavily relies on the high-quality annotations of large-scale 3D datasets, which consume enormous
human efforts and time. Semi-supervised learning (SSL),
which leverages large quantities of low-cost and readily
available unlabeled data, is gaining surging attention.
* Corresponding author. † This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6153

