The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Partial Label Learning with a Partner
Chongjie Si1 , Zekun Jiang1 , Xuehui Wang1 , Yan Wang2 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Wei Shen1 *
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Key Lab of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
{chongjiesi, zkjiangzekun.cmu, wangxuehui, xkyang, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn; ywang@cee.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In partial label learning (PLL), each instance is associated with
a set of candidate labels among which only one is ground-truth.
The majority of the existing works focuses on constructing
robust classifiers to estimate the labeling confidence of candidate labels in order to identify the correct one. However,
these methods usually struggle to rectify mislabeled samples.
To help existing PLL methods identify and rectify mislabeled
samples, in this paper, we introduce a novel partner classifier
and propose a novel “mutual supervision” paradigm. Specifically, we instantiate the partner classifier predicated on the
implicit fact that non-candidate labels of a sample should not
be assigned to it, which is inherently accurate and has not
been fully investigated in PLL. Furthermore, a novel collaborative term is formulated to link the base classifier and the
partner one. During each stage of mutual supervision, both
classifiers will blur each other’s predictions through a blurring mechanism to prevent overconfidence in a specific label.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the performance and
disambiguation ability of several well-established stand-alone
and deep-learning based PLL approaches can be significantly
improved by coupling with this learning paradigm.

Introduction
As a representative framework of weakly supervised learning,
partial label learning (PLL), where each instance is associated with a set of candidate labels among which only one
is ground-truth, has garnered increasing attention in recent
years (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Han et al. 2018; Jin
and Ghahramani 2002a; Papandreou et al. 2015; Ren et al.
2018; Zhou 2018; Zhu and Goldberg 2009; Chai, Tsang, and
Chen 2020; Ren et al. 2018; Li, Guo, and Zhou 2021; Li and
Liang 2019). PLL has also been applied to many real-world
applications due to the growing demand for identifying the
valid label from a set of candidate labels. For instance, in the
automatic face naming task (Zeng et al. 2013; Guillaumin,
Verbeek, and Schmid 2010), each face crapped from images
or videos is associated with a list of names extracted from the
corresponding title or caption (Gong, Yuan, and Bao 2022).
Another example is the facial age estimation task: for each
human face, the ages annotated by crowd-sourcing labelers
are considered as candidate labels (Panis et al. 2016).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15029

Formally speaking, suppose X = Rq denotes the qdimensional feature space and let Y = {0, 1}l be the label space with l classes. Given a partial label data set
D = {xi , Si |1 ≤ i ≤ n} where xi ∈ X , Si ⊆ Y is the
corresponding candidate label set and n is the number of
instances, the task of PLL is to induce a multi-class classifier
f : X → Y based on D. The most challenging part of PLL is
that the ground-truth label yi of a training sample xi conceals
in its candidate labels, i.e, yi ∈ Si , which cannot be directly
accessible during the training process.
To address this challenge, existing works focus on disambiguation, which involves differentiating the labeling confidences of each candidate label to identify the ground truth.
This process typically relies on an alternative and iterative
method for updating the classifier’s parameters. For instance,
PL-AGGD (Wang, Zhang, and Li 2022) constructs a similarity graph to achieve disambiguation, and SURE (Feng and
An 2019) aims to maximize an infinity norm to differentiate
the ground-truth label. However, a significant yet rarely studied question arises in the context of such algorithms: can a
classifier correct a false positive candidate label (i.e., invalid
candidate label) with a large or upward-trending labeling confidence at a later stage? To explore this question, we conduct
experiments on a real-world data set Lost (Cour et al. 2009)
and record the labeling confidences of several candidate labels generated by PL-AGGD (Wang, Zhang, and Li 2022) in
each iteration, which is shown in Fig. 1. Our findings reveal
some intriguing phenomena:
• Each candidate label’s labeling confidence is likely to
continually increase or decrease until convergence.
• For a false positive candidate label with a large labeling
confidence, although its confidence may decrease in subsequent iterations, the confidence remains substantial and
can easily lead to the incorrect identification of the ground
truth label.
The observed phenomena suggest that once the labeling
confidence of a false positive candidate label increases, it
becomes difficult to decrease in the subsequent iterations.
Furthermore, even if the confidence of a false positive candidate label decreases appropriately, it may still be recognized
as the ground truth one, as its initial labeling confidence remains large and continues to be greater than the confidence
of the ground truth label upon convergence. As a result, cor-

