The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SpectralNeRF: Physically Based Spectral Rendering with Neural Radiance Field
Ru Li1 , Jia Liu2 , Guanghui Liu2∗ , Shengping Zhang1 , Bing Zeng2 , Shuaicheng Liu2 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{liru, s.zhang}@hit.edu.cn, {liujia21@std., guanghuiliu@, eezeng@, liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn
2

(a) SpectralMLP

Abstract
In this paper, we propose SpectralNeRF, an end-to-end
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)-based architecture for highquality physically based rendering from a novel spectral perspective. We modify the classical spectral rendering into two
main steps, 1) the generation of a series of spectrum maps
spanning different wavelengths, 2) the combination of these
spectrum maps for the RGB output. Our SpectralNeRF follows these two steps through the proposed multi-layer perceptron (MLP)-based architecture (SpectralMLP) and Spectrum Attention UNet (SAUNet). Given the ray origin and the
ray direction, the SpectralMLP constructs the spectral radiance field to obtain spectrum maps of novel views, which are
then sent to the SAUNet to produce RGB images of whitelight illumination. Applying NeRF to build up the spectral
rendering is a more physically-based way from the perspective of ray-tracing. Further, the spectral radiance fields decompose difficult scenes and improve the performance of
NeRF-based methods. Comprehensive experimental results
demonstrate the proposed SpectralNeRF is superior to recent
NeRF-based methods when synthesizing new views on synthetic and real datasets. The codes and datasets are available
at https://github.com/liru0126/SpectralNeRF.

(b) SAUNet

!
𝐬

𝝈
!
𝐬

Ray distance s

Real-world scene

Spectral radiance field Spectrum fusion

The camera and color absorbers

Third perspective

Spectral image of real-world scene

Figure 1: SpectralNeRF builds up the process of spectral
rendering. The first step samples spectrum points along the
ray and uses volume rendering to generate spectrum maps.
The second step fuses discrete spectrum maps to obtain RGB
images. Up: our pipeline. Bottom: our capture device.

spectral rendering involves two transformations: 1) the spectral power distribution L to the XYZ image, achieved by using integral operation through the visible light; 2) the XYZ
image to the RGB image, realized by the conversion matrix (Smits 1999). Based on the transformations of L →
XYZ → RGB, physically-based spectral rendering has been
widely researched over the past decades (Watanabe et al.
2013; Sun et al. 2001; Knaus and Zwicker 2011). Such
methods predict photo-realistic rendering that no effect that
contributes to the interaction of light with a scene is neglected. However, they merely generate one image of the
current viewpoint and are limited in representing the scene.
Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is designed
to render compelling images of 3D scenes from novel
viewpoints (Mildenhall et al. 2020). NeRF-based methods
achieve photo-realistic rendering of scenes by encoding the
volumetric density and color of a scene within the weights
of a coordinate-based multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Subsequently, a series of works focused on recovering the radiance
field using deep neural networks (Barron et al. 2021, 2022;
Yan, Li, and Lee 2023). This approach has enabled signifi-

Introduction
Newton found that white light can be dispersed into a series
of spectrums with various colors from red to violet by passing light through the glass prism (Newton 1672). After that,
the research on spectral theory developed rapidly (Pickholtz,
Schilling, and Milstein 1982; Helffer 2013). Until now, the
application of spectral images has involved various aspects
of daily life, including object detection (Liang et al. 2018),
face recognition (Uzair, Mahmood, and Mian 2015), and so
on. Spectral images can record and reveal the electromagnetic radiation intensity information of objects, which is an
important interdisciplinary subject mainly involving physics
and chemistry (Bertrand et al. 2021).
Spectral rendering is a fundamental problem in computer
graphics, which can understand the absorption, reflection,
and other interactions with objects and has been used to
generate photo-realistic images (Peercy 1993). Conventional
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3154

