The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DMMR: Cross-Subject Domain Generalization for EEG-Based Emotion
Recognition via Denoising Mixed Mutual Reconstruction
Yiming Wang, Bin Zhang∗, Yujiao Tang
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
{yimingwang, 3121358009}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, bzhang82@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

electromyography (Chen et al. 2015), etc. Among them,
EEG-based emotion recognition has become a crucial
means of emotion identification due to its high temporal resolution and accuracy.
EEG signals from specific channels and frequency bands
demonstrate different responses to various emotional stimuli
(Zheng and Lu 2015), making it possible to detect finegrained emotional tendencies. However, individuals differ
in their cranial structure and emotional experiences, which
result in varying sensitivity to the same emotion. Consequently, there are significant distributional differences
among data from different subjects, making it challenging
for a model trained on source subject data to generalize effectively to target subjects. To solve this problem, transfer
learning and other methods are employed to extract subjectinvariant emotion features, with the expectation that emotional knowledge can be effectively transferred to target
subjects from data of source subjects. Early works assumed
that a large amount of unlabeled data or a small amount of
labeled data from the target subjects is available, explicitly
narrowing the distribution gap between source and target
subjects. These methods are known as unsupervised domain
adaptation (Luo and Lu 2021; Li et al. 2018a) and semisupervised domain adaptation approaches (Li et al. 2020a).
However, these approaches rely on the target subject's data
to train the model, making them less user-friendly. A more
challenging task is domain generalization (DG), which assumes that the target subjects are entirely unseen during the
training process, so the model is trained solely on the source
subject’s data to create a subject-invariant and robust model.
There are two main types of cross-subject DG methods
for EEG-based emotion recognition: Sample-intrinsic subject-invariant feature extraction methods (SI-SIFE) and
Cross-subject subject-invariant feature extraction methods
(CS-SIFE). The two methods are related to two non-inclusive categories of features: internally-invariant and mutually-invariant (Lu et al. 2022). The former extracts features

Electroencephalography (EEG) has proven to be effective in
emotion analysis. However, current methods struggle with
individual variations, complicating the generalization of
models trained on data from source subjects to unseen target
subjects. To tackle this issue, we propose the Denoising
Mixed Mutual Reconstruction (DMMR) model, employing
a two-stage pre-training followed by fine-tuning approach.
During the pre-training phase, DMMR leverages self-supervised learning through a multi-decoder autoencoder, which
encodes and reconstructs features of one subject, aiming to
generate features resembling those from other subjects within
the same category, thereby encouraging the encoder to learn
subject-invariant features. We introduce a hidden-layer
mixed data augmentation approach to mitigate the limitations
posed by the scarcity of source data, thereby extending the
method to a two-stage process. To bolster stability against
noise, we incorporate a noise injection method, named “Time
Steps Shuffling”, into the input data. During the fine-tuning
phase, an emotion classifier is integrated to extract emotionrelated features. Experimental accuracy on the SEED and
SEED-IV datasets reached 88.27% (±5.62) and 72.70%
(±8.01), respectively, demonstrating state-of-the-art and
comparable performance, thereby showcasing the superiority
of DMMR. The proposed data augmentation and noise injection methods were observed to complementarily enhance accuracy and stability, thus alleviating the aforementioned issues.

Introduction
Human emotions are closely related to health conditions and
behavioral patterns, such as Autism Spectrum Disorder
(Mayor-Torres et al. 2021) and depression (Bocharov,
Knyazev, and Savostyanov 2017), as well as malicious behaviors resulting from the accumulation of negative emotions. Real-time monitoring of individuals’ emotional states
can contribute to objective health assessments and early
warning of malicious behaviors. Due to the difficulty in disguising physiological signals, wearable devices are commonly used to monitor emotion-related physiological signals, such as EEG, eye movements (Lu et al. 2015), facial
∗Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

628

