The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Perspective of Q-value Estimation on
Offline-to-Online Reinforcement Learning
Yinmin Zhang1, 2 * , Jie Liu2, 3 * , Chuming Li1, 2 * , Yazhe Niu2 ,
Yaodong Yang4† , Yu Liu2† , Wanli Ouyang2
1

The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Institute for AI, Peking University
yinmin.zhang@sydney.edu.au, jieliu@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, chli3951@uni.sydney.edu.au,
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn, liuyuisanai@gmail.com, ouyangwanli@pjlab.org.cn
Abstract
Offline-to-online Reinforcement Learning (O2O RL) aims
to improve the performance of offline pretrained policy using only a few online samples. Built on offline RL algorithms,
most O2O methods focus on the balance between RL objective
and pessimism, or the utilization of offline and online samples.
In this paper, from a novel perspective, we systematically study
the challenges that remain in O2O RL and identify that the reason behind the slow improvement of the performance and the
instability of online finetuning lies in the inaccurate Q-value
estimation inherited from offline pretraining. Specifically, we
demonstrate that the estimation bias and the inaccurate rank
of Q-value cause a misleading signal for the policy update,
making the standard offline RL algorithms, such as CQL and
TD3-BC, ineffective in the online finetuning. Based on this
observation, we address the problem of Q-value estimation by
two techniques: (1) perturbed value update and (2) increased
frequency of Q-value updates. The first technique smooths
out biased Q-value estimation with sharp peaks, preventing
early-stage policy exploitation of sub-optimal actions. The
second one alleviates the estimation bias inherited from offline
pretraining by accelerating learning. Extensive experiments
on the MuJoco and Adroit environments demonstrate that the
proposed method, named SO2, significantly alleviates Q-value
estimation issues, and consistently improves the performance
against the state-of-the-art methods by up to 83.1%.

Introduction
In recent years, deep offline Reinforcement Learning (RL)
(Yu et al. 2020; Agarwal, Schuurmans, and Norouzi 2020; Bai
et al. 2021) has received increasing attention due to its potential for leveraging abundant logged data or expert knowledge
(e.g., human demonstrations) to learn high-quality policies.
Analogous to trends in computer vision (He et al. 2021; Radford et al. 2021; Bommasani et al. 2021) and natural language
processing (Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020), where
powerful models pretrained on large, diverse datasets generalize to task-specific data through finetuning, offline-to-online
* Equal contribution. Author ordering is determined by coin flip.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16908

reinforcement learning (O2O RL) aims to enhance the performance of a pretrained offline RL policy via finetuning on
only a few online collected samples. In O2O RL, the central
challenge is to maximize the efficient utilization of additional
online samples for further performance improvement.
We find that directly finetuning offline RL policies with online interactions remains inefficient in many cases, as shown
in Figure 2a. Most existing works (Zhao et al. 2022; Lee
et al. 2022) assume that the above issue results from the
state-action distribution shift between the offline and online
samples. To handle this distribution shift, they propose different methods to progressively transfer from offline to online
finetuning settings, including the balance between RL objective and pessimism (Zhao et al. 2022) and between the usage
of offline and online samples (Lee et al. 2022).
The main contribution of this paper is to offer a comprehensive understanding of the problem in O2O RL, focusing
on Q-value estimation, a perspective that has been underexplored. While prior research acknowledges this issue, our
work delves deeper into it, unveiling two key challenges: (1)
biased Q-value estimation and (2) inaccurate rank of Q-value
estimation, which represents the distinguishability in the quality of different state-action pairs. Despite most offline RL
policies trained in pessimistic manners such as conservative
Q-learning (Kumar et al. 2020), action constraints (Fujimoto
and Gu 2021), and Q-ensemble (An et al. 2021), we still
observe severe overestimation (CQL and TD3-BC) or underestimation (EDAC) compared to an online RL policy trained
from scratch with similar performance. These disparities result in in a severe bootstrap error, as shown in Figure 2b.
Moreover, it is well-known that the inaccurate rank of Qvalue estimation, such as inaccurate advantage, results in misleading signals to policy updates. To quantitatively assess the
accuracy of Q-value estimation rank, we compute Kendall’s
τ coefficient between the estimated and true Q-values, separately for offline RL and online RL policies. Figure 2c shows
that offline RL methods (CQL, TD3-BC, and EDAC) have
lower Kendall’s τ coefficient compared to the online RL,
SAC. This indicates that the offline RL is less accurate in
ranking estimated Q-values than the online RL. Consequently,
the signal from the inaccurate Q-value estimation used in pol-

