The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EulerMormer: Robust Eulerian Motion Magnification via
Dynamic Filtering within Transformer
Fei Wang1 , Dan Guo1,2,3 * , Kun Li1 , Meng Wang1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Anhui Zhonghuitong Technology Co., Ltd
jiafei127@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn, kunli.hfut@gmail.com, wangmeng@hfut.edu.cn
𝑰 𝒙, 𝒕

𝑰 𝒙, 𝟎

Space (x)

Baby's abdomen with subtle
breathing motion.

Dynamic
Intensity

Breath

Dynamic field

𝑰 𝒙, 𝟎

𝑰𝒎 𝒙, 𝒕

Space (x)

𝑰 𝒙, 𝒕

𝜹 𝒙, 𝒕

Intensity

Video Motion Magnification (VMM) aims to break the resolution limit of human visual perception capability and reveal
the imperceptible minor motion that contains valuable information in the macroscopic domain. However, challenges arise
in this task due to photon noise inevitably introduced by photographic devices and spatial inconsistency in amplification,
leading to flickering artifacts in static fields and motion blur
and distortion in dynamic fields in the video. Existing methods focus on explicit motion modeling without emphasizing
prioritized denoising during the motion magnification process. This paper proposes a novel dynamic filtering strategy to
achieve static-dynamic field adaptive denoising. Specifically,
based on Eulerian theory, we separate texture and shape to
extract motion representation through inter-frame shape differences, expecting to leverage these subdivided features to
solve this task finely. Then, we introduce a novel dynamic
filter that eliminates noise cues and preserves critical features in the motion magnification and amplification generation phases. Overall, our unified framework, EulerMormer, is
a pioneering effort to first equip with Transformer in learningbased VMM. The core of the dynamic filter lies in a global
dynamic sparse cross-covariance attention mechanism that
explicitly removes noise while preserving vital information,
coupled with a multi-scale dual-path gating mechanism that
selectively regulates the dependence on different frequency
features to reduce spatial attenuation and complement motion boundaries. We demonstrate extensive experiments that
EulerMormer achieves more robust video motion magnification from the Eulerian perspective, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/VUT-HFUT/EulerMormer.

𝑰 𝒙, 𝟎

Intensity

Static field

Static
Intensity

Abstract

𝑰 𝒙, 𝟎

𝑰𝒎 𝒙, 𝒕

(𝟏+𝜶)𝜹 𝒙, 𝒕

Space (x)

Space (x)

(a) Theoretical magnification
Oh et al.

𝑰 𝒙, 𝒕

Singh et al.(a)

Attenuation
Artifacts

Artifacts

Intensity

Intensity

𝑰 𝒙, 𝒕

Ours

Consistency
Mor

e sta
ble

More stable

Static field Dynamic field Static field

Static field Dynamic field Static field

Space (x)

Space (x)

(b) Realistic magnification results.

Figure 1: Theoretical basis and realistic results of VMM.
Theoretically, the static field in (a) is free of position displacement, while the dynamic field should exhibit ideal position displacement to satisfy the desired motion magnification. However, in the real world, unavoidable photon noise
and spatial inconsistency exist with artifacts, intensity attenuation, etc., in (b) for the magnified results (Oh et al. 2018;
Singh, Murala, and Kosuru 2023a). In contrast, we achieve
more robust magnification in both static and dynamic fields.

et al. 2020; Mehra et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2023), robotic
sonography (Huang et al. 2023), clinical medicine (Abnousi
et al. 2019) material properties estimation (Davis et al. 2015,
2017) and modal analysis (Eitner et al. 2021). Specifically,
VMM aims to capture and amplify the imperceptible subtle
motion in the video sequence while preserving fine spatial
details for realistic and accurate visualization.
However, this task faces several challenges: (1) Photon
noise (Oh et al. 2018) is inevitably present in videos due
to the characteristics of charge-coupled devices (CCDs) in
photographic devices and signal attenuation during transmission. The noise, indistinguishable from subtle motions,
can result in flickering artifacts. (2) Spatial inconsistency (Wadhwa et al. 2013) measures the magnified quality,
as forced motion magnification can lead to spatial frequency
collapse, resulting in phenomena such as motion blur and

Introduction
Video Motion Magnification (VMM) has garnered growing
research interest due to its remarkable ability to vividly reveal subtle motions in real-world videos that are imperceptible to the human eye (Rubinstein et al. 2013; Le Ngo and
Phan 2019). Existing VMM techniques behave as computerassisted “eyes” that enable humans to see and grasp meaningful subtle motion in various challenging-to-perceive settings, such as micro-action recognition (Xia et al. 2020; Qi
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5345

