The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FM-OV3D: Foundation Model-Based Cross-Modal Knowledge Blending for
Open-Vocabulary 3D Detection
Dongmei Zhang1 * , Chang Li1 * , Renrui Zhang2 * , Shenghao Xie3
Wei Xue4 , Xiaodong Xie1 , Shanghang Zhang1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Wuhan University
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
dmzhang@stu.pku.edu.cn, {1900012977, donxie, shanghang}@pku.edu.cn,
renruizhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk, xieshenghao@whu.edu.cn, xuewei.x@gmail.com
Abstract

ties (Liang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a). However, utilizing vision-text pairs in training to enable such ability in 3D
models is challenging, since it is difficult to collect a sizable
dataset of 3D point clouds paired with texts.
The knowledge embedded in pre-trained foundation models can potentially enhance 3D models. Despite the differences in modalities between 3D point-cloud and 2D images,
they both share visual information about objects. There have
been efforts to investigate how to transfer knowledge from
2D to 3D models, leading to various distinct methods (Zhang
et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023d).
However, many of them primarily extract knowledge from
individual models. Considering the disparities in training
objectives, model architectures, and training data among
various models, pre-trained models’ knowledge, abilities, or
perception of the world may exhibit diversity. This diversity can potentially enhance the open-vocabulary ability of
3D models complementarily. For example, different from
the contrastive vision-language knowledge in CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023) is designed
to segment all objects in an image, providing information
about their positions and sizes. Moreover, when vocabulary
is involved in training open-vocabulary models to correlate visual and textual features, existing methods only use
predefined class lists or captions, failing to provide rich
information about the classes themselves, thereby limiting
recognition performance. As a text-generative model, GPT3 (Brown et al. 2020) has a rich understanding of various
classes and can serve as a source of textual knowledge.
Therefore, we hypothesize that harnessing complementary
pre-trained knowledge from different models can facilitate
knowledge transfer from 2D pre-trained models to 3D space.
In this work, we propose FM-OV3D, a method of
Foundation Model-Based Cross-Modal Knowledge Blending for Open-Vocabulary 3D Detection, which improves
the open-vocabulary localization and recognition ability of
3D models by incorporating knowledge from diverse pretrained foundation models, without requiring any manual
annotations. Specifically, to train the open-vocabulary localization ability of 3D models, we utilize the object localization knowledge within the Grounded-Segment-Anything

The superior performances of pre-trained foundation models in various visual tasks underscore their potential to
enhance the 2D models’ open-vocabulary ability. Existing
methods explore analogous applications in the 3D space.
However, most of them only center around knowledge extraction from singular foundation models, which limits the
open-vocabulary ability of 3D models. We hypothesize that
leveraging complementary pre-trained knowledge from various foundation models can improve knowledge transfer
from 2D pre-trained visual language models to the 3D
space. In this work, we propose FM-OV3D, a method of
Foundation Model-Based Cross-Modal Knowledge Blending for Open-Vocabulary 3D Detection, which improves
the open-vocabulary localization and recognition abilities
of 3D model by blending knowledge from multiple pretrained foundation models, achieving true open-vocabulary
without facing constraints from original 3D datasets. Specifically, to learn the open-vocabulary 3D localization ability,
we adopt the open-vocabulary localization knowledge of the
Grounded-Segment-Anything model. For open-vocabulary
3D recognition ability, We leverage the knowledge of generative foundation models, including GPT-3 and Stable Diffusion models, and cross-modal discriminative models like
CLIP. The experimental results on two popular benchmarks
for open-vocabulary 3D object detection show that our model
efficiently learns knowledge from multiple foundation models to enhance the open-vocabulary ability of the 3D model
and successfully achieves state-of-the-art performance in
open-vocabulary 3D object detection tasks. Code is released
at https://github.com/dmzhang0425/FM-OV3D.git.

Introduction
Open-vocabulary ability refers to the ability of models to
generate or understand concepts that have not been explicitly
included in training datasets. Pre-trained foundation models’ high performances in various 2D open-vocabulary visual tasks demonstrate their strong open-vocabulary abili* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16723

