The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepSpeed Data Efficiency: Improving Deep Learning Model Quality and Training
Efficiency via Efficient Data Sampling and Routing
Conglong Li* , Zhewei Yao* , Xiaoxia Wu* , Minjia Zhang, Connor Holmes, Cheng Li, Yuxiong He
Microsoft

Abstract
Billion

800

Recent advances on deep learning models come at the price
of formidable training cost. The increasing model size is one
of the root causes, but another less-emphasized fact is that
data scale is actually increasing at a similar speed as model
scale, and the training cost is proportional to both of them.
Compared to the rapidly evolving model architecture, how
to efficiently use the training data (especially for the expensive foundation model pretraining) is both less explored and
difficult to realize due to the lack of a convenient framework
that focuses on data efficiency capabilities. To this end, we
present DeepSpeed Data Efficiency, a framework that makes
better use of data, increases training efficiency, and improves
model quality. Specifically, we propose and combine two data
efficiency techniques: efficient data sampling via a general
curriculum learning library, and efficient data routing via a
novel random layerwise token dropping technique. For GPT-3
1.3B language model pretraining, our work achieves 12.5x less
data/time/cost ($3.7K if rent on Azure), while still maintaining
95% of model quality compared to baseline with full data and
cost ($46.3K). For GPT-3 1.3B and BERT-large pretraining,
our work can also achieve the same model quality with up to
2x less data/time/cost, or achieve better model quality under
same data/time/cost. DeepSpeed Data Efficiency is easy to use
and tune, enabling us to easily apply it and verify its benefit
on additional tasks including GPT-3 MoE model pretraining
and small-scale GPT-2/ViT finetuning.

600
400

Model Scale (Billion)
Data Scale (Billion)

200
0

BERT
(2018)

GPT-2
(2019)

GPT-3
(2020)

BLOOM
(2022)

PaLM
(2022)

Figure 1: Model scale (number of parameters) and data scale
(number of consumed training tokens ) of representative language models in the last 5 years (Devlin et al. 2019; Shoeybi
et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020; Scao et al. 2022; Chowdhery
et al. 2022).

Recently, large-scale deep learning models are empowering us to achieve more in many ways, such as code generation (GitHub 2021) and text-to-image generation (Ramesh
et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022). To keep improving the
service quality, deep learning model architecture evolves
rapidly, and the model size is also growing at a tremendous
speed. The increasing model size leads to unprecedented
training cost (especially for foundation model pretraining),
which recently grows to 2 months on thousands of GPUs/TPUs (Smith et al. 2022; Chowdhery et al. 2022). On the other
hand, a less-emphasized perspective is that data scale is actually increasing at a similar speed as model scale, and

the training cost is proportional to both of them. As plotted in Fig. 1, for several representative language models in
the last 5 years both the model and data scales increase at a
similar speed. Recent works including Chinchilla (Hoffmann
et al. 2022) and PaLM 2 (Google 2023) emphasize the need
of increasing data scale at an even faster speed. This demonstrates the importance of improving data efficiency: achieve
same model quality with less data and reduced training cost,
or achieve better model quality with the same amount of data
and similar training cost.
There are two popular research directions among existing
data efficiency techniques: Data sampling techniques aim to
improve the convergence speed by sampling the most suitable
next data batch from the whole data pool; Data routing techniques aim to reduce the computation by routing each data
to only a subset of the model components. These techniques
improve data and training efficiency, but existing solutions
have several limitations:
• Techniques like curriculum learning (CL) improve data
efficiency by indexing and sampling training data based
on certain difficulty metric (Bengio et al. 2009), and it
has recently proved effective on large-scale pretraining
tasks (Li, Zhang, and He 2022). However, implementing
different CL strategies for different user tasks can require
a lot of code-refactoring, which is time-consuming and
error-prone. In addition, existing implementations have
less consideration on scalability, which makes it difficult

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

NOTICE: We highly recommend you instead read the extended and complete version of this paper on arxiv (Li et al. 2022):
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.03597.

1

Introduction

18490

