The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ArtBank: Artistic Style Transfer with Pre-trained Diffusion Model and Implicit
Style Prompt Bank
Zhanjie Zhang∗ , Quanwei Zhang∗ , Wei Xing† , Guangyuan Li, Lei Zhao† , Jiakai Sun, Zehua Lan,
Junsheng Luan, Yiling Huang, Huaizhong Lin†
Intelligent Vision Lab, Zhejiang University
{cszzj,cszqw,cslgy,wxing,cszhl,csjk,zjucslzh,l.junsheng121,linhz}@zju.edu.cn, huangyiling@hotmail.com

Monet

Abstract

Van Gogh

Artistic style transfer aims to repaint the content image
with the learned artistic style. Existing artistic style transfer
methods can be divided into two categories: small modelbased approaches and pre-trained large-scale model-based
approaches. Small model-based approaches can preserve the
content strucuture, but fail to produce highly realistic stylized
images and introduce artifacts and disharmonious patterns;
Pre-trained large-scale model-based approaches can generate
highly realistic stylized images but struggle with preserving
the content structure. To address the above issues, we propose ArtBank, a novel artistic style transfer framework, to
generate highly realistic stylized images while preserving the
content structure of the content images. Specifically, to sufficiently dig out the knowledge embedded in pre-trained largescale models, an Implicit Style Prompt Bank (ISPB), a set of
trainable parameter matrices, is designed to learn and store
knowledge from the collection of artworks and behave as a
visual prompt to guide pre-trained large-scale models to generate highly realistic stylized images while preserving content structure. Besides, to accelerate training the above ISPB,
we propose a novel Spatial-Statistical-based self-Attention
Module (SSAM). The qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method
over state-of-the-art artistic style transfer methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/Jamie-Cheung/ArtBank.

Content

Ours

InST

CycleGAN

Figure 1: Stylized examples. (a) The 1st column shows the
content image. The 2nd column shows the stylized image
by our method. The other two columns show the stylized
images produced by the pre-trained large-scale models (e.g.,
InST (Zhang et al. 2023a)) and small model-based methods
(e.g., CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017)).
network to learn style information from the collection of artworks. To train such forward networks, Zhu et al. (Zhu et al.
2017) first employed a cycle consistency loss to realize the
mapping between the style domain and the content domain
in the RGB pixel space. AST (Sanakoyeu et al. 2018) proposed a style-aware content loss to learn style from the collection of artworks for real-time and high-resolution artistic style transfer. GcGAN (Fu et al. 2019) designed a predefined geometric transformation to ensure that the stylized
image maintains geometric consistency with the input content image. CUT (Park et al. 2020) used contrastive learning to push the stylized patch to appear closer to its corresponding input content patch and keep a better content structure. Based on CUT, LseSim (Zheng, Cham, and Cai 2021)
introduced a more general-spatially-correlative map in contrastive learning which encourages homologous structures to
be closer. ITTR (Zheng et al. 2022) utilized a transformerbased architecture to capture contextual information from
different perceptions locally and globally. While these methods are capable of learning style information from a collection of artworks and preserving the content structure, they
fail to generate highly realistic stylized images, and introduce disharmonious patterns and evident artifacts (e.g., 4th

Introduction
Artistic style transfer aims to transfer the learned styles
onto arbitrary content images to create a new artistic image. Existing artistic style transfer methods can be classified
into small model-based methods and pre-trained large-scale
model-based methods.
More specifically, small model-based methods (Zhang
et al. 2021; Sanakoyeu et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2019; Park
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021; Sun et al.
2023; Yang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023b; Chen et al. 2023;
Zuo et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021a,b,c;
Zhang et al. 2024) focus on training a well-designed forward
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†
Corresponding authors.

7396

