The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Episodic Return Decomposition by Difference of Implicitly Assigned
Sub-trajectory Reward
Haoxin Lin1,2,3 , Hongqiu Wu1,2 , Jiaji Zhang1,2 , Yihao Sun1,2 , Junyin Ye1,2,3 , Yang Yu1,2,3,4 *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
Polixir Technologies, Nanjing, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
{linhx, wuhq, zhangjj, sunyh, yejy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

It is essential to design a proxy Markovian reward function as the substitute for the original delayed one since current standard RL algorithms prefer instant feedback at each
environmental step. The apparent solution is designing the
required proxy reward function by handcraft, but it depends
on domain knowledge and is not general for all tasks. Reward shaping (Mataric 1994; Randløv and Alstrøm 1998;
Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999), one kind of automatical
reward design method, is widely observed that it can accelerate RL. However, the reshaped rewards are coupled
with the original rewards and are ineffective in environments
where only an episodic reward is fed back. Recent work
(Arjona-Medina et al. 2019; Gangwani, Zhou, and Peng
2020; Efroni, Merlis, and Mannor 2021; Ren et al. 2022)
proposes to decompose the episodic reward into a string
of step-wise rewards through the trajectory, which seems
promising to deal with the long-term delay.
Previous return decomposition methods can be sorted into
two classes, as shown in Figure 1(a) and 1(b). One pays
attention to precisely predicting the long-term episodic return, thinking little of reward redistribution. The representative work is RUDDER (Arjona-Medina et al. 2019), which
utilizes an LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) network to make a return prediction and assigns rewards to each
pair of state-action via contribution analysis from a backward view. Another focuses on step-wise return decomposition without considering temporal structural representations.
A little work (Efroni, Merlis, and Mannor 2021; Liu et al.
2019; Ren et al. 2022) aimed at the least-squares-based return decomposition objective falls into this class. Nevertheless, the above work suffers from a lack of either attribution
or representation capacity, leading to inefficient episodic return decomposition in the case of long-term episodes.
In this paper, we propose to cut an entire trajectory at any
time step and decompose the episodic return into two subtrajectory rewards, as demonstrated in Figure 1(c). The stepwise reward can be straightforwardly obtained by differencing the implicitly assigned sub-trajectory reward in expectation. Based on this key idea, we formulate a simple yet effective episodic return decomposition method called Diaster
(Difference of implicit assigned sub-trajectory reward),
which can be embedded in any model-free RL algorithm.
This new class of return decomposition not only introduces

Real-world decision-making problems are usually accompanied by delayed rewards, which affects the sample efficiency
of Reinforcement Learning, especially in the extremely delayed case where the only feedback is the episodic reward
obtained at the end of an episode. Episodic return decomposition is a promising way to deal with the episodic-reward setting. Several corresponding algorithms have shown remarkable effectiveness of the learned step-wise proxy rewards
from return decomposition. However, these existing methods
lack either attribution or representation capacity, leading to
inefficient decomposition in the case of long-term episodes.
In this paper, we propose a novel episodic return decomposition method called Diaster (Difference of implicitly assigned
sub-trajectory reward). Diaster decomposes any episodic reward into credits of two divided sub-trajectories at any cut
point, and the step-wise proxy rewards come from differences in expectation. We theoretically and empirically verify that the decomposed proxy reward function can guide the
policy to be nearly optimal. Experimental results show that
our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in
terms of both sample efficiency and performance. The code
is available at https://github.com/HxLyn3/Diaster.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made empirical successes
in several simulated domains and attracted close attention
in recent years. Sparse and delayed reward, usually facing
a range of real-world problems such as industrial control
(Hein et al. 2017), molecular design (Olivecrona et al. 2017),
and recommendation systems (Chen et al. 2018), is one of
the critical challenges hindering the application of RL in reality. The trouble with the delayed reward function is that it
affects RL’s sample efficiency when using it to estimate the
value function. Specifically, delayed rewards introduce numerous noneffective updates and fitting capacity loss (Lyle,
Rowland, and Dabney 2022) into Temporal-Difference (TD)
Learning and result in a high variance in Monte-Carlo (MC)
Learning (Arjona-Medina et al. 2019). The problem is more
severe in the highly delayed case that the feedback appears
only at the end of the episode.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13808

