The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarial Attacks on the Interpretation of Neuron Activation Maximization
Geraldin Nanfack1 2 * , Alexander Fulleringer1 2 * ,
Jonathan Marty3 , Michael Eickenberg4 , Eugene Belilovsky1 2
1
Concordia University
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
3
Princeton University
4
Flatiron Institute
geraldin.nanfack@concordia.ca, alexfulleringer@gmail.com
2

Abstract

for the manipulability of the interpretation approach. In this
work, we concentrate on convnet architectures for which interpretation by activation maximization or feature visualization methods (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Yosinski et al. 2015)
has been popular. We study the feature visualization of a
neuron or channel norm via activation maximization and attempt to modify it while maintaining network outputs and
accuracy. We investigate how to characterize these attacks
quantitatively and show three different attacks that can effectively manipulate and explicitly obfuscate interpretations.

Feature visualization is one of the most popular techniques
used to interpret the internal behavior of individual units of
trained deep neural networks. Based on activation maximization, they consist of finding synthetic or natural inputs that
maximize neuron activations. This paper introduces an optimization framework that aims to deceive feature visualization
through adversarial model manipulation. It consists of finetuning a pre-trained model with a specifically introduced loss
that aims to maintain model performance, while also significantly changing feature visualization. We provide evidence of
the success of this manipulation on several pre-trained models for the classification task with ImageNet.

The first proposed attack, push-down, aims to remove the
current interpretation, replacing it with any other interpretation. The second attack, termed push-up, aims to replace the
images with a specific category of images, allowing a more
targeted manipulation. Motivated by recent related work on
feature attribution methods (Aı̈vodji et al. 2021; Slack et al.
2020), the final attack is the fairwashing visualization attack aimed to manipulate the perceived bias of the model
as seen by an interpreter. Consider as motivation a situation
where an actor seeks to deploy a model that is unfair but performs well. For several reasons, including regulations (such
as those being discussed in the EU) the actor may be required to provide access to the model to a regulator who may
use interpretability methods such as activation maximization
to study the model before permitting release. Critically, we
assume that the interpreter may not have access to labels
related to the particular bias exploited by the adversary’s
model. The interpreter can use feature visualization methods
(top-k images) to try to understand the internal logic of neurons and may visually detect that neurons are biased towards
a previously un-categorized but undesirable bias. To prevent
rejection of the unfair model by the interpreter, the adversary may use a set of data with annotated bias attribute (Yang
et al. 2020) (unavailable to the interpreter) to try to perform
an attack by fine-tuning the model to make the feature visualization look fairer while maintaining the performance of
the model and its overall unfair output.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) can be trained to perform
many economically valuable tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2017; Kaplan et al. 2020). They are already pervasive in many sectors, and their prevalence is only expected
to increase over time. With increasing computational power
and ever more available data, DNN architectures are growing in size and executing increasingly intricate tasks. Given
the increasing size and complexity of DNNs, interpreting
how they function, a discipline that has always lagged behind the cutting edge, may experience even more difficulty
keeping up with new developments. However, for certain
classes of critical applications, close inspection and guarantees of functionality will be very important, especially in
heavily regulated and high-stakes domains. Here we ask:
could a malicious actor conceal the true functionality of
a DNN from an interpretability method by perturbing the
DNN? Given the increasing capacity of the architectures,
this is likely to be an increasingly probable concern.
Focusing on the continuously popular feature visualization (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017; Olah et al. 2020) method we propose to create
an optimization procedure to manipulate the interpretation
of individual neurons of a network while keeping its final
behavior the same. A successful modification of the interpretation results while keeping outputs constant is evidence

To date, most previous works on interpretability manipulability (including fairwashing) have focused on the manipulability of interpretability techniques such as feature attribution (Slack et al. 2020; Heo, Joo, and Moon 2019) tailored for model predictions. Little attention has been paid
to the manipulability of neuron interpretability techniques.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4315

