The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Gene-Cell Collective Representation Learning with Optimal
Transport
Jixiang Yu1 , Nanjun Chen1 , Ming Gao2,3 , Xiangtao Li4 , Ka-Chun Wong1,5,6, *
1

2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
School of Management Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Big Data Management Optimization and Decision of
Liaoning Province, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics, Dalian, China
3
Center for Post-doctoral Studies of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Jilin, China
5
Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
6
Hong Kong Institute for Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
{jixiang.yu, nanjuchen2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, gm@dufe.edu.cn, lixt314@jlu.edu.cn, kc.w@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

analysis of scRNA-seq data remains a domain-specific challenge, owing to its unique high dimensionality characteristics (Kiselev, Andrews, and Hemberg 2019).

Cell type identification plays a vital role in single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) data analysis. Although many deep
embedded methods to cluster scRNA-seq data have been proposed, they still fail in elucidating the intrinsic properties of
cells and genes. Here, we present a novel end-to-end deep
graph clustering model for single-cell transcriptomics data
based on unsupervised Gene-Cell collective representation
learning and Optimal Transport (scGCOT) which integrates
both cell and gene correlations. Specifically, scGCOT learns
the latent embedding of cells and genes simultaneously and
reconstructs the cell graph, the gene graph, and the gene
expression count matrix. A zero-inflated negative binomial
(ZINB) model is estimated via the reconstructed count matrix to capture the essential properties of scRNA-seq data.
By leveraging the optimal transport-based joint representation alignment, scGCOT learns the clustering process and the
latent representations through a mutually supervised self optimization strategy. Extensive experiments with 14 competing methods on 15 real scRNA-seq datasets demonstrate the
competitive edges of scGCOT.

Essentially, scRNA-seq data is very sparse and has a large
number of zero elements (Grün, Kester, and Van Oudenaarden 2014; Kulkarni et al. 2019). An intuitive way to alleviate the problem is to leverage a transformation to learn
a latent representation on the original scRNA-seq data, and
conduct clustering in the latent space. Therefore, multiple
approaches are proposed (Butler et al. 2018; Žurauskienė
and Yau 2016; Wang et al. 2018). However, linear transformation methods, such as PCA, suffer from the noise in the
scRNA-seq data; and are difficult to capture the cell-cell relationships. Classical non-linear techniques also have limitations; their parameters are required to be manually defined
by user and can strongly affect the downstream tasks (Kiselev, Andrews, and Hemberg 2019).
In recent years, with the advent of deep learning, deep
embedded clustering methods have been developed to avoid
the shortcomings of the conventional methods and to facilitate cell type identification in scRNA-seq data (Lopez et al.
2018; Wang and Gu 2018; Chen et al. 2020; Tian et al. 2019;
Tran et al. 2021). These methods basically utilize an autoencoder to learn the latent representation of scRNA-seq data.
Among those methods, one of the most representative one is
scDeepCluster (Tian et al. 2019); it is a model-based deep
autoencoder, combining the model of DCA (Eraslan et al.
2019) and the clustering algorithm of DEC (Xie, Girshick,
and Farhadi 2016) together by means of Kullback–Leibler
divergence to realize cell type identification in an end-to-end
manner. However, these autoencoder-based algorithms focus
only on studying the data itself, neglecting the relationships
between cells, thus learns representations ineffectively. To
cover this shortage, some graph neural network-based methods, such as GraphSCC (Zeng et al. 2020), scGAE (Luo
et al. 2021), scDSC (Gan et al. 2022), scGNN (Wang et al.
2021), are developed to capture the cell relations and topological structure information. These methods integrate graph
neural nework and autoencoder to simultaneously capture
the complex relationship among cells and the intrinsic properties of cells. However, they only models the cell correla-

Introduction
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology can
characterize individual cellular states in a high-throughput
manner (Simmons et al. 2023), which enables researchers to
elucidate the heterogenity among individual cells. Over the
past years, scRNA-seq has become an important tool as the
robustness and accessibility of scRNA-seq assays are improved continuously. Cell type identification has become a
vital task in scRNA-seq data analysis, as it can imply different biological processes, such as cellular differentiation,
lineage commitment, and gene regulation (Wan, Chen, and
Deng 2022). Based on the transcriptome similarity, clustering has been proved to be an effect leverage to define
cell types in an unbiased way (Kiselev, Andrews, and Hemberg 2019). However, although many classical clustering algorithms are robust and universal for tabular data, cluster
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

356

