The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Invariant Learning with Subgraph Co-mixup for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Tianrui Jia1 , Haoyang Li2 , Cheng Yang1∗ , Tao Tao3 , Chuan Shi1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Tsinghua University
3
China Mobile Information Technology Co. Ltd.
{jiatianrui, yangcheng, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, lihy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, taotao@chinamobile.com
Abstract

Despite their noticeable success, existing GNNs heavily
rely on the identically distributed (I.D.) assumption (Vapnik
1999), i.e., the training and test data are sampled from an
identical distribution. However, various forms of distribution
shifts between the training and testing datasets widely exist in
the real world, since the uncontrollable data generation mechanisms, resulting in OOD (Hu et al. 2020a; Ji et al. 2022; Koh
et al. 2021) scenarios. For instance, in graph classification
tasks, there could be significant distribution shifts existing
in graph size (Bevilacqua, Zhou, and Ribeiro 2021; Yehudai
et al. 2021), node degree (Yoo et al. 2023), and structure
(e.g., molecule scaffold) (Ji et al. 2022) between the training and testing graphs. Existing GNNs that perform well
on the training data by capturing the spurious correlations
significantly fail to generalize to OOD testing graph data.
Therefore, it is of paramount importance to capture the invariant relationships between predictive graph patterns and
labels.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been demonstrated to perform well in graph representation learning, but always lacking
in generalization capability when tackling out-of-distribution
(OOD) data. Graph invariant learning methods, backed by the
invariance principle among defined multiple environments,
have shown effectiveness in dealing with this issue. However,
existing methods heavily rely on well-predefined or accurately
generated environment partitions, which are hard to be obtained in practice, leading to sub-optimal OOD generalization
performances. In this paper, we propose a novel graph invariant learning method based on invariant and variant patterns comixup strategy, which is capable of jointly generating mixed
multiple environments and capturing invariant patterns from
the mixed graph data. Specifically, we first adopt a subgraph
extractor to identify invariant subgraphs. Subsequently, we
design one novel co-mixup strategy, i.e., jointly conducting
environment mixup and invariant mixup. For the environment
mixup, we mix the variant environment-related subgraphs
so as to generate sufficiently diverse multiple environments,
which is important to guarantee the quality of the graph invariant learning. For the invariant mixup, we mix the invariant
subgraphs, further encouraging to capture invariant patterns
behind graphs while getting rid of spurious correlations for
OOD generalization. We demonstrate that the proposed environment mixup and invariant mixup can mutually promote
each other. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art under various distribution shifts.

Invariant learning (Arjovsky et al. 2019; Krueger et al.
2021; Creager, Jacobsen, and Zemel 2021; Ahuja et al. 2021)
emerges as a prevalent strategy for tackling the challenge
of generalization to OOD data. The basic assumption of invariant learning method is the invariance principle among
defined multiple environments, namely there existing a proportion of input data capturing invariant relations with the
labels across distinct environments (Arjovsky et al. 2019).
Consequently, a predictor that performs well across multiple
pre-defined environments is guaranteed to possess generalization capabilities for unseen data distributions (Arjovsky et al.
2019). In the field of graphs, existing graph invariant learning
methods (Wu et al. 2021; Miao, Liu, and Li 2022; Li et al.
2022b; Chen et al. 2022a; Yang et al. 2022) consider that
within each environment the graph data can be decomposed
into two components, including invariant subgraphs that have
deterministic and truly predictive relations with the labels,
and environment subgraphs that could exhibit spurious correlations with the labels. The main goal of them is focused
on obtaining diverse training environments. For example,
DIR (Wu et al. 2021) generates multiple training environments for invariant learning by implementing distribution
interventions on graphs, while GIL (Li et al. 2022b) clusters
environment subgraphs and treats each cluster as an environment. The performance of invariant learning heavily relies
on the diversity of environment partitioning. In other words,

Introduction
Graph data is ubiquitous in the real world, such as molecular
networks, protein networks, social networks. Graph representation learning (Chen et al. 2020; Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017b) achieves deep learning on graphs by encoding them into vectors in a latent space. Graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016; Xu et al. 2018; Veličković
et al. 2018; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017a), as one
of the most popular graph representation learning methods,
have attracted wide attention in the last decade. (Lee, Rossi,
and Kong 2018; Xu et al. 2018).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8562

