The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Approximation Scheme for Weighted Metric Clustering via Sherali-Adams
Dmitrii Avdiukhin1 , Vaggos Chatziafratis2 , Konstantin Makarychev1 , Grigory Yaroslavtsev3
1
Northwestern University, Illinois
University of California at Santa Cruz, California
3
George Mason University, Virginia
dmitrii.avdiukhin@northwestern.edu, vaggos@ucsc.edu, konstantin@northwestern.edu, grigory@gmu.edu
2

overall measure of dissimilarity between clusters Ci and Cj ,
which is weighted with Aij in the objective (⋆).
Note that we can interpret our objective (⋆) as a minimization valued Constraint Satisfaction Problem (M IN -CSP) on
variables in V and domain D = {1, . . . , k}. In this CSP,
we have a constraint for all pairs of variables. The weight
of the constraint between variables u and v equals the distance duv . The payoff function for each constraint is defined
by matrix A: namely, the cost of assigning labels i and j to
variables u and v equals Aij . The goal is to find an assignment, i.e. a mapping ℓ : V → D minimizing the total payoff:
Pk Pk P
P
i=1
j=1
u∈V
v∈V Aij duv · 1{ℓ(u) = i; ℓ(v) = j}.
The strength of objective (⋆) lies in the flexibility of
choice of matrix A, allowing it to cover many important
problems.

Abstract
Motivated by applications to classification problems on metric data, we study Weighted Metric Clustering problem: given
a metric d over n points, the goal is to find a k-partition
of these points into clusters C1 , . . . , Ck , while minimizing
Pk Pk P
P
i=1
j=1
u∈Ci
v∈Cj Aij duv , where A is a k × k
symmetric matrix with non-negative entries. Specific choices
of A lead to Weighted Metric Clustering capturing wellstudied graph partitioning problems in metric spaces, such as
Min-Uncut, Min-k-Sum, Min-k-Cut, and more.
Our main result is that Weighted Metric Clustering admits
a polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS). Our algorithm handles all the above problems using the SheraliAdams linear programming relaxation. This subsumes several prior works, unifies many of the techniques for various
metric clustering objectives, and yields a PTAS for several
new problems, including metric clustering on manifolds and
a new family of hierarchical clustering objectives. Our experiments on the hierarchical clustering objective show that it
better captures the ground-truth structural information compared to the popular Dasgupta’s objective.

1

Metric Min-Uncut (Indyk 1999) This is the complement
of Max-Cut where we want to split into two clusters so as
to minimize the sum of pairwise

distances within clusters. If
1 0
in (⋆) we set k = 2, A =
, then we pay duv only for
0 1
elements u, v that end up in the same cluster.

Introduction

Metric Min-k-Sum (Bartal, Charikar, and Raz 2001)
Also termed Min-k-Uncut, this is the natural extension of
the previous problem to k clusters, where we want to minimize the sum of distances between pairs of points assigned
to the same cluster. Fixing A = Ik×k to be the k ×k identity
matrix yields the problem.

We introduce and study Weighted Metric Clustering problem: given n points from an arbitrary metric space (V, d),
we want to find a k-partition of V , i.e. a partition into k
clusters C1 , . . . , Ck , where k is assumed to be a fixed constant. Because the quality of clustering may depend on the
application at hand, we allow for a user-defined k × k symmetric matrix A with non-negative entries to be part of the
input. Matrix A determines the “cost penalty” for how the k
different clusters interact: if u is assigned to cluster Ci and
v is assigned to cluster Cj , then the pair (u, v) pays Aij duv ,
where the distance between elements u, v is denoted as duv .
Hence, our goal is to minimize the following objective:
COST (C1 , . . . , Ck ) =

k X
k X X
X

Aij duv .

Metric Multiway Cut (Dahlhaus, Johnson, Papadimitriou, Seymour, and Yannakakis 1994) We can also
model problems where the cost is based on the separated
u, v pairs. For example, taking A = Jk×k −Ik×k , where J is
the all-ones matrix, yields the Min-k-Cut objective, with the
goal of minimizing the sum of distances among all pairs of
separated points. Min-k-Cut problem additionally requires
that all clusters are non-empty, and one possible approach
is to fix one point per cluster; this variant of the problem,
known as a multiway cut, is MAX SNP-hard (Dahlhaus et al.
1994) even for k = 3. Our algorithms are robust to such
modifications of the objective and provide a PTAS for the
metric case for fixed k.
A related problem is a multicut problem (see e.g. Costa,
Létocart, and Roupin (2005)), where, given a set of k pairs

(⋆)

i=1 j=1 u∈Ci v∈Cj

In Weighted Metric Clustering, n is the number of input variables and k is assumed
toPbe a fixed constant independent of
P
n. Observe that u∈Ci v∈Cj duv can be thought of as an
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7926

