The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Considering Nonstationary within Multivariate Time Series with Variational
Hierarchical Transformer for Forecasting
Muyao Wang, Wenchao Chen * , Bo Chen
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
muyaowang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chenwenchao@xidian.edu.cn, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
The forecasting of Multivariate Time Series (MTS) has long
been an important but challenging task. Due to the nonstationary problem across long-distance time steps, previous
studies primarily adopt stationarization method to attenuate
the non-stationary problem of the original series for better
predictability. However, existing methods always adopt the stationarized series, which ignores the inherent non-stationarity,
and has difficulty in modeling MTS with complex distributions due to the lack of stochasticity. To tackle these problems, we first develop a powerful hierarchical probabilistic generative module to consider the non-stationarity and
stochastity characteristics within MTS, and then combine it
with transformer for a well-defined variational generative dynamic model named Hierarchical Time series Variational
Transformer (HTV-Trans), which recovers the intrinsic nonstationary information into temporal dependencies. Being a
powerful probabilistic model, HTV-Trans is utilized to learn
expressive representations of MTS and applied to forecasting tasks. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets show the
efficiency of HTV-Trans on MTS forecasting tasks.

Introduction
Multivariate time series (MTS) is an important type of data
that arises from a wide variety of domains, including internet services, industrial devices, health careand finance, to
name a few. However, the forecasting of MTS has always
been a challenging problem as there exists not only complex
temporal dependencies, as shown in the red box in Fig. 1,
but also inherently stochastic components, as shown in the
green box in Fig. 1. Moreover, there exist non-stationary
issues, as shown in the blue box in Fig. 1, which haves a
huge impact on predictive performance. To model the temporal dependencies of MTS, many dynamic methods based
on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been developed
(Malhotra et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2019; Bai et al. 2019;
Tang et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2018). Meanwhile, to consider
the stochasticity, some probabilistic dynamic methods have
also been developed (Dai et al. 2021, 2022; Chen et al. 2020,
2022; Salinas et al. 2020). With the development of Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) and due to its ability to capture
* Correspondence
to
Wenchao
Chen
(chenwenchao@xidian.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15563

long-range dependencies (Wen et al. 2022; Dosovitskiy et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021), and interactions, which is especially
attractive for time series forecasting, there is a recent trend to
construct Transformer based MTS forecasting methods and
have achieved promising results in learning expressive representations for MTS forecasting tasks. Recently, there are lots
of efficient Transformer-based forecasting methods, such as
Autoformer (Wu et al. 2021), FEDformer (Zhou et al. 2022),
Pyraformer (Liu et al. 2021), Crossformer (Zhang and Yan
2023) and so on. Despite the advanced architectural design, it
is still hard for Transformers to predict real-world time series
because of the non-stationarity of data. Non-stationary time
series is characterized by the continuous change of statistical properties and joint distribution over time, making them
less predictable (Hyndman and Athanasopoulos 2018). In
previous works, they usually pre-process the time series by
stationarization (Ogasawara et al. 2010a; Passalis et al. 2019a;
Kim et al. 2021), which can attenuate the non-stationarity of
raw time series and provide more stable data distribution for
deep models. However, these MTS stationarization methods
ignore the non-stationarity of real-world series, which will
result in the over-stationarization problem (Liu et al. 2022).
Non-stationary transformer (Liu et al. 2022) is proposed to
tackle the over-stationarization problem in the Transformers
by approximating distinguishable attentions learned from raw
series, which is a method limited to a specific transformer situation. Moreover, because of the deterministic architectural
designs, the methods mentioned before still face challenges
when it comes to predicting real-world time series due to
the non-deterministic data caused by noise data. Therefore,
in this paper, we analyze the series forecasting task from
another point of view to bring the non-deterministic and
non-stationarity back to the deep models, especially for the
transformer, and propose a novel dynamic hierarchical generative module to effectively capture both inherent properties.
Moving beyond the constraints of previous work, considering the non-determinism and non-stationarity within MTS
and enhancing the representative power of deep models, we
develop a Hierarchical Time series Variational Transformer
(HTV-Trans), which is a well-defined probabilistic dynamic
model obtained by combining a proposed Hierarchical Time
series Probabilistic Generative Module (HTPGM), as illustrated in Fig. 2 (a)(b), with the Transformer block, as in

