The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hand-Centric Motion Refinement for 3D Hand-Object Interaction via
Hierarchical Spatial-Temporal Modeling
Yuze Hao1,2, * , Jianrong Zhang1 , Tao Zhuo3 , Fuan Wen2,4 , Hehe Fan1,

†

1

Zhejiang University
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Shandong Artificial Intelligence Institute, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Network System and Network Culture
2

Abstract

(a) TOCH
Object-centric
Representation

Hands are the main medium when people interact with the
world. Generating proper 3D motion for hand-object interaction is vital for applications such as virtual reality and
robotics. Although grasp tracking or object manipulation synthesis can produce coarse hand motion, this kind of motion is
inevitably noisy and full of jitter. To address this problem,
we propose a data-driven method for coarse motion refinement. First, we design a hand-centric representation to describe the dynamic spatial-temporal relation between hands
and objects. Compared to the object-centric representation,
our hand-centric representation is straightforward and does
not require an ambiguous projection process that converts
object-based prediction into hand motion. Second, to capture
the dynamic clues of hand-object interaction, we propose a
new architecture that models the spatial and temporal structure in a hierarchical manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms previous methods by a noticeable margin.

Projection
Spatial
Encoder

Hand-centric
Representation Hierarchical
Spatial
Encoder

Temporal
Encoder

Decoder

(b) Ours
Temporal
Encoder

Decoder

Figure 1: Comparing with TOCH (Zhou et al. 2022), our
method has three advantages. (1) To capture the relation between hand and object, the existing method first emits rays
from the object and then collects points that arrive at the
hand. In contrast, we propose a straightforward hand-centric
representation, which directly models the hand-object interaction. (2) Our hierarchical spatial-temporal architecture
better captures dynamic information across different scales
than the fixed-scale design in TOCH. (3) Due to the direct hand-object representation, our method does not require
the additional post-process that converts object-centric representation into hand motions.

Introduction
Recently, hand-object interaction modeling has been widely
used in many applications, such as VR/AR (Höll et al. 2018;
Canales et al. 2019), and robotics (Xu et al. 2023; Qin et al.
2023; Bao et al. 2023). Recent methods can directly predict
the hand-object pose from images (Chen et al. 2021; Doosti
et al. 2020) or generate hand grasping pose given object information (Jiang et al. 2021; Brahmbhatt et al. 2019; Zheng
et al. 2023). However, due to the high degrees of freedom of
hand articulation, self-occlusion of hands, and mutual occlusion of objects, the predicted results tend to be error-prone,
limiting its application in downstream tasks.
Many approaches (Grady et al. 2021; Tse et al. 2022) are
proposed to solve the aforementioned problems. To alleviate
the potential anatomical irregularities in hand poses, Yang et
al. (Yang et al. 2021) introduced a joint bending constraint
to the parametric hand model (Romero, Tzionas, and Black

2017). To avoid the intersection between hands and objects
or noncontact grasping, a heuristic repulsion loss and an attraction loss are employed (Hasson et al. 2019). However,
these methods mainly consider the contacting moment (a
single frame), instead of the entire hand-object interaction
process (multiple frames) that includes both approaching
and contacting stages.
In contrast, hand-object tracking, reconstruction (Hasson et al. 2021, 2020) and interaction synthesis (Taheri
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022) can produce hand-object interaction motions, which involves pre-grasping and postmanipulation stages. Although these methods extend handobject interaction from the contacting moment to the entire process, they introduce the jitter issue and inconsistent
contact, leading to perturbed hand-object interaction motions. To refine the dynamic hand-object interaction mo-

* This work was done when Yuze Hao was an intern
at Zhejiang University. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Holiday888/HST-Net.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2076

