The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Knowledge Injection for AIXI Agents
Samuel Yang-Zhao1 , Kee Siong Ng1 , Marcus Hutter1, 2
1

Australian National University
2
Google DeepMind
samuel.yang-zhao@anu.edu.au, keesiong.ng@anu.edu.au, www.hutter1.net

Abstract

is formally equivalent to the set of all computable distributions; from this perspective, AIXI can be considered the ultimate Bayesian reinforcement learning agent. Furthermore,
(Hutter 2005) shows that AIXI’s environment model converges rapidly to the true environment and its policy is pareto
optimal and self-optimising.
The AIXI agent can be viewed as containing all possible knowledge as its Bayesian mixture is performed over all
computable distributions. From this perspective, AIXI’s performance does not suffer due to limitations in its modelling
capacity. In contrast, all previous approximations of AIXI
are limited to having a finite pre-defined model class containing a subset of computable probability distributions, presenting an irreducible source of error. To address this issue,
we introduce dynamic knowledge injection, a setting where
an external source is used to provide additional knowledge that is then integrated into new candidate environment
models. In particular, dynamic knowledge injection models human-AI teaming constructs where the human can provide additional domain knowledge that the agent can use to
model aspects of the environment. Once a new environment
model is proposed, the central issue is then to determine how
it can be incorporated to improve the agent’s performance.
Utilising a variation of the GrowingHedge algorithm (Mourtada and Maillard 2017), itself an extension of Hedge (CesaBianchi and Lugosi 2006), we construct an adaptive anytime
Bayesian mixture algorithm that incorporates newly arriving models and also allows the removal of existing models.
DynamicHedgeAIXI is the richest direct approximation of
AIXI to date and comes with strong value-convergence guarantees against the best available environment sequence. We
validate the agent’s performance empirically on multiple experimental domains, including the control of epidemics on
large contact networks, and our results demonstrate that DynamicHedgeAIXI is able to quickly adapt to new knowledge
that improves its performance.

Prior approximations of AIXI, a Bayesian optimality notion for general reinforcement learning, can only approximate AIXI’s Bayesian environment model using an a-priori
defined set of models. This is a fundamental source of epistemic uncertainty for the agent in settings where the existence
of systematic bias in the predefined model class cannot be resolved by simply collecting more data from the environment.
We address this issue in the context of Human-AI teaming
by considering a setup where additional knowledge for the
agent in the form of new candidate models arrives from a human operator in an online fashion. We introduce a new agent
called DynamicHedgeAIXI that maintains an exact Bayesian
mixture over dynamically changing sets of models via a timeadaptive prior constructed from a variant of the Hedge algorithm. The DynamicHedgeAIXI agent is the richest direct approximation of AIXI known to date and comes with good performance guarantees. Experimental results on epidemic control on contact networks validates the agent’s practical utility.

Introduction
The AIXI agent (Hutter 2005) is a Bayesian solution to
the general reinforcement learning problem that combines
Solomonoff induction (Solomonoff 1997) with sequential
decision theory. At time t, after observing the actionobservation-reward sequence h1:t−1 := aor1:t−1 , the AIXI
agent computes the action at to choose via an expectimax
search up to a horizon H with a mixture model:
at = arg max
at



t+H
X


j=t

X
ort

X

max
at+1

. . . max

ort+1

at+H

X
ort+H


rj 

X

2−K(ρ) ρ(or1:t+H |a1:t+H ).

(1)

ρ∈MU

The Bayesian mixture

P

2−K(ρ) ρ(or1:t+H |a1:t+H ) is

Related Work

ρ∈MU

AIXI’s environment model and is computed as a mixture
over the set MU of all enumerable chronological semimeasures with each element ρ ∈ MU assigned a prior according to its Kolmogorov complexity K(ρ). Note that MU

While AIXI is only asymptotically computable, it serves as
a strong guiding principle in the design of general purpose
AI agents. (Veness et al. 2011) gives the first tractable approximation of AIXI by using the Context Tree Weighting
algorithm (CTW) (Willems, Shtarkov, and Tjalkens 1995)
to restrict the Bayesian mixture to a set of variable-order

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16388

