The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Proportional Representation in Metric Spaces and Low-Distortion Committee
Selection
Yusuf Kalayci1 , David Kempe1 , Vikram Kher2
1

University of Southern California
2
Yale University *
kalayci@usc.edu, David.M.Kempe@Gmail.com, vikram.kher@yale.edu

Abstract

public facilities to serve the population of a city. Naturally,
there are many ways of defining what it means for a candidate set to be “representative”; we discuss some key definitions from past work in Section 5.
A commonly accepted notion of representation is based
on proportionality (Humphreys 1911; Moulin 2003): subgroups of the population should be represented in the selected set proportionally to their size. That is, if a cohesive
subset S comprises a θ fraction of the documents/population, then (at least) roughly a θ fraction of the representative set should be similar to the members of S. In terms of
documents, this implies that by examining the representative documents, a user can accurately assess the contents of
the document collection. For committee elections, it states
that large like-minded groups of the population should be
suitably represented in the committee. And for the location
of public facilities, it implies that dense population centers
should be sufficiently served with nearby facilities. Indeed,
notions of fairness or representation based on this intuition
have been studied extensively, as discussed in Section 5.
We are particularly interested in the common setting in
which the documents or candidates/population are embedded in a metric space in which distances capture dissimilarity. For documents, this is often the result of featurebased embeddings applied to the documents, and for the
selection of public facilities, the metric is naturally derived
from geographic proximity or transportation times. For voters and candidates in elections, the idea of considering all
agents as embedded in a metric space, and their preferences being reflective of the distances, was first articulated
as single-peaked preferences (where the metric space is the
line, e.g., representing a one-dimensional left-to-right spectrum of opinions) (Black 1948; Moulin 1980), but also subsequently generalized to other metrics (Barberà, Gul, and
Stacchetti 1993; Merrill and Grofman 1999).
Our first main contribution (in Section 2) is a natural and
novel definition of what it means for a set R of k points
to “represent” a larger set V in a metric space; our notion
is a strengthening of the notion of core fairness proposed
recently by Li et al. (2021).
Our second main contribution (in Section 4) is to show
that a natural algorithm (a special case of the E XPANDING
A PPROVALS RULE of Aziz and Lee (2020)) achieves strong
representativeness guarantees for the new definition. It does

We introduce a novel definition for a small set R of k points
being representative of a larger set in a metric space. Given
a set V (e.g., documents or voters) to represent, and a set C
of possible representatives, our criterion requires that for any
subset S comprising a θ fraction of V , the average distance
of S to their best θ · k points in R should not be more than a
factor γ compared to their average distance to the best θ · k
points among all of C. This definition is a strengthening of
proportional fairness and core fairness, but - different from
those notions - requires that large cohesive clusters be represented proportionally to their size.
Since there are instances for which - unless γ is polynomially large - no solutions exist, we study this notion in a resource augmentation framework, implicitly stating the constraints for a set R of size k as though its size were only
k/α, for α > 1. Furthermore, motivated by the application
to elections, we mostly focus on the ordinal model, where
the algorithm does not learn the actual distances; instead, it
learns only for each point v in V and each candidate pairs
c, c0 which of c, c0 is closer to v. Our main result is that the
E XPANDING A PPROVALS RULE of Aziz and Lee is (α, γ)
α
.
representative with γ ≤ 1 + 6.71 · α−1
Our results lead to three notable byproducts. First, we show
that the E XPANDING A PPROVALS RULE achieves constant
proportional fairness in the ordinal model, giving the first
positive result on metric proportional fairness with ordinal information. Second, we show that for the core fairness objective, the E XPANDING A PPROVALS RULE achieves the same
asymptotic tradeoff between resource augmentation and approximation as the recent results of Li et al., which used
full knowledge of the metric. Finally, our results imply a
very simple single-winner voting rule with metric distortion
at most 44.

1

Introduction

Selecting representatives for a large set is a common and
central problem across a wide range of application areas. As
three paradigmatic applications, consider selecting a small
set of documents (such as pictures or text) representing a
much larger collection, selecting a committee of representatives for a large population, or selecting locations for several
* Work done while at the University of Southern California.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9815

