The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DGL: Dynamic Global-Local Prompt Tuning for Text-Video Retrieval
Xiangpeng Yang1 , Linchao Zhu2 , Xiaohan Wang2 , Yi Yang2 *
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
CCAI, Zhejiang University
Xiangpeng.Yang@student.uts.edu.au, wxh1996111@gmail.com, {zhulinchao,yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-video retrieval is a critical multi-modal task to find the
most relevant video for a text query. Although pretrained
models like CLIP have demonstrated impressive potential
in this area, the rising cost of fully finetuning these models due to increasing model size continues to pose a problem. To address this challenge, prompt tuning has emerged as
an alternative. However, existing works still face two problems when adapting pretrained image-text models to downstream video-text tasks: (1) The visual encoder could only
encode frame-level features and failed to extract globallevel general video information. (2) Equipping the visual and
text encoder with separated prompts failed to mitigate the
visual-text modality gap. To this end, we propose DGL, a
cross-modal Dynamic prompt tuning method with GlobalLocal video attention. In contrast to previous prompt tuning methods, we employ the shared latent space to generate local-level text and frame prompts that encourage intermodal interaction. Furthermore, we propose modeling video
in a global-local attention mechanism to capture global video
information from the perspective of prompt tuning. Extensive experiments reveal that when only 0.67% parameters
are tuned, our cross-modal prompt tuning strategy DGL
outperforms or is comparable to fully finetuning methods
on MSR-VTT, VATEX, LSMDC, and ActivityNet datasets.
Code will be available at https://github.com/knightyxp/DGL

Figure 1: In Fig (a), we observed that frame attention methods, like CLIP4Clip, often emphasize non-semantic corners,
missing the protagonist’s action. This led us to design the
global-local video attention for capturing global-level crossframe dynamics. Fig (b) showcases a performance comparison on MSRVTT: DGL outperforms six PEFL methods and
fine-tuned CLIP4Clip while updating minimal parameters.

Introduction
With the recent advancement of large-scale contrastive
image-text pretraining methods i.e., CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), the field of TVR (Text-Video Retrieval) has experienced many works (Luo et al. 2022; Gorti et al. 2022; Zhao
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022a) to adapt image-text pretrained models like CLIP to
the video-text domain and already achieve the promising
performance. These approaches incur a large storage burden
in actual scenarios because they need to store distinct new
models for different tasks. However, as the capacity of pretrained models is rapidly expanding nowadays, i.e., BEIT-3
(Wang et al. 2022b) has 1.9B parameters, and BLIP-L/14
has 578M parameters. Fully finetuning the entire model for

each downstream task requires maintaining separate model
weights for every dataset, hindering the feasibility of deployment given the growing model capacities.
To address this problem, inspired by the recent success of
prompt tuning in both NLP (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant
2021; Liu et al. 2021) and common visual recognition tasks
(Jia et al. 2022), we continue to introduce prompt tuning to
the cross-modal domain. In this way, we only need to store
the parameters of a few prompt vectors for various retrieval
tasks and keep the pretrained model backbone frozen, thus

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6540

