The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization by
Inferring Salient Snippet-Feature
Wulian Yun, Mengshi Qi, Chuanming Wang, Huadong Ma*
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{yunwl,qms,wcm,mhd}@bupt.edu.cn
Action

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims to
locate action regions and identify action categories in
untrimmed videos simultaneously by taking only video-level
labels as the supervision. Pseudo label generation is a promising strategy to solve the challenging problem, but the current methods ignore the natural temporal structure of the
video that can provide rich information to assist such a generation process. In this paper, we propose a novel weaklysupervised temporal action localization method by inferring
salient snippet-feature. First, we design a saliency inference
module that exploits the variation relationship between temporal neighbor snippets to discover salient snippet-features,
which can reflect the significant dynamic change in the video.
Secondly, we introduce a boundary refinement module that
enhances salient snippet-features through the information interaction unit. Then, a discrimination enhancement module
is introduced to enhance the discriminative nature of snippetfeatures. Finally, we adopt the refined snippet-features to produce high-fidelity pseudo labels, which could be used to supervise the training of the action localization network. Extensive experiments on two publicly available datasets, i.e.,
THUMOS14 and ActivityNet v1.3, demonstrate our proposed method achieves significant improvements compared
to the state-of-the-art methods. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/wuli55555/ISSF.

Action

Background

Action

Background Background

Difference
Values
Action
Scores
GT

Figure 1: Illustration of difference values among snippets,
action scores and Ground-Truth (GT). The action and background snippets are marked as red and black boxes, respectively.

have gained increasing attention from both academia and industry, since they only utilize video-level labels for temporal action localization, achieving competitive results while
reducing the cost of manual annotations.
Weakly-supervised TAL methods (Xu et al. 2019; Shi
et al. 2020; Qu et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021;
Narayan et al. 2021) mainly utilize a “localization by classification” framework, where a series of Temporal Class Activation Maps (TCAMs) (Nguyen et al. 2018; Paul, Roy, and
Roy-Chowdhury 2018) are obtained by snippet-wise classification, and then TCAMs are used to generate temporal proposals for action localization. However, the classifiers primarily tend to focus on easily distinguishable snippets while
ignoring other subtle yet equally important information, so
there is a discrepancy between classification and localization. To balance the performance of classification and localization, pseudo label based methods (Huang, Wang, and Li
2022; He et al. 2022; Pardo et al. 2021; Zhai et al. 2020;
Luo et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022) have been proposed, which
supervises the training of the model mainly by generating
snippet-level pseudo label information.
Nevertheless, accurately generating pseudo label remains
challenging, since existing methods ignore the important
role played in the temporal structure of videos. We observed that neighbor snippets exhibit obvious distinctively
difference relationships, which can discover salient features
and identify differentiated boundaries. As shown in Figure 1, neighbour snippet-features with substantial varia-

Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) (Shou, Wang, and
Chang 2016; Zhao et al. 2017; Chao et al. 2018; Huang,
Wang, and Li 2022; He et al. 2022) aims to find action instances from untrimmed videos, i.e., predicting the start positions, end positions, and categories of certain actions. It
is an important yet challenging task in video understanding
and has been widely used in surveillance and video summarization. To achieve accurate localization, most existing
methods (Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016; Zhao et al. 2017;
Chao et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018; Long et al. 2019) rely
on training a model in a fully supervised manner with the
help of human-labeled precise temporal annotations. However, fine-detailed labeling of videos is labor-intensive and
expensive. In contrast, weakly-supervised methods recently
* Corresponding authors: Huadong Ma, Mengshi Qi.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6908

