The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LERE: Learning-Based Low-Rank Matrix Recovery with Rank Estimation
Zhengqin Xu1 , Yulun Zhang2 , Chao Ma1 , Yichao Yan1 , Zelin Peng1 ,
Shoulie Xie3 , Shiqian Wu4 , Xiaokang Yang1, *
1

AMoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
3
Signal Processing, RF & Optical Dept. Institute for Infocomm Research A*STAR, Singapore
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, China
{fate311, chaoma, yanyichao, zelin.peng, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, yulun100@gmail.com,
slxie@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, shiqian.wu@wust.edu.cn
Abstract

is formulated as:

A fundamental task in the realms of computer vision, LowRank Matrix Recovery (LRMR) focuses on the inherent lowrank structure precise recovery from incomplete data and/or
corrupted measurements given that the rank is a known prior
or accurately estimated. However, it remains challenging for
existing rank estimation methods to accurately estimate the
rank of an ill-conditioned matrix. Also, existing LRMR optimization methods are heavily dependent on the chosen parameters, and are therefore difficult to adapt to different situations.
Addressing these issues, A novel LEarning-based low-rank
matrix recovery with Rank Estimation (LERE) is proposed.
More specifically, considering the characteristics of the Gerschgorin disk’s center and radius, a new heuristic decision rule
in the Gerschgorin Disk Theorem is significantly enhanced
and the low-rank boundary can be exactly located, which leads
to a marked improvement in the accuracy of rank estimation.
According to the estimated rank, we select row and column
sub-matrices from the observation matrix by uniformly random sampling. A 17-iteration feedforward-recurrent-mixed
neural network is then adapted to learn the parameters in the
sub-matrix recovery processing. Finally, by the correlation
of the row sub-matrix and column sub-matrix, LERE successfully recovers the underlying low-rank matrix. Overall,
LERE is more efficient and robust than existing LRMR methods. Experimental results demonstrate that LERE surpasses
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. The code for this work is
accessible at https://github.com/zhengqinxu/LERE.

min

1

L∈Rn1 ×n2 2

2

Y − f (L) F

s.t.

rank(L) ≤ r∗ ,

(1)

which is a constrained optimization problem. Apparently,
the rank function constraint is NP-hard and computationally
intractable. Several seminal works (Candès et al. 2011; Recht
2011) relaxed problem (1) as:
min

L∈Rn1 ×n2

Introduction
Low-rank matrix recovery (LRMR) is extensively employed
across several applications, notably in collaborative filtering for recommendation system (Zadeh Kashani and
Hamidzadeh 2020), background subtraction in video processing (Markowitz et al. 2022), robust principal component
analysis (RPCA) for feature extraction (Wang et al. 2022),
matrix sensing (Ma, Li, and Chi 2021) and matrix completion
(Tong, Ma, and Chi 2021). Mathematically, for a large-scale
observation matrix Y = f (L∗ ), where operator f (·) denotes
the sensing process, LRMR seeks to recover its underlying
rank-r∗ low-rank matrix L∗ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 . Commonly, LRMR
* Corresponding Author: Xiaokang Yang, xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16228

1
2
Y − f (L) F + λ L ∗ ,
2

(2)

where L ∗ denotes the nuclear norm of L. The nuclear norm
is recognized to offer the most stringent convex envelope of
the rank function, which can yield precise recovery under
matrix-restricted isometry property (RIP) settings (Recht,
Fazel, and Parrilo 2010). To address the challenge of the
high computational complexity inherent in existing convex
solutions to the problem (2), in spire of the ideas of Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) and Factorization, a range of
efficient LRMR techniques have been developed.
For SVD-based methods, Phan et al. (Phan and Nguyen
2021) proposed a faster algorithm involving iterative
reweighting of nuclear norm, which ensures that each limit
point becomes a critical point to facilitate rapid outcomes.
Gregor et al. (Gregor and LeCun 2010) achieved the most
accurate possible approximation of the sparse code by training a non-linear feed-forward predictor with a specific architecture and a fixed depth. Their approach successfully
implemented deep unfolding for sparse coding and achieved
significant acceleration. Later works (Monga, Li, and Eldar
2021; Shen et al. 2021) successfully expanded their method
to various tasks and network architectures. Inspired by these
efforts, recent works (Cohen et al. 2019; Solomon et al. 2019)
employed deep unfolding techniques to accelerate computation. Nevertheless, existing learning-based approaches for
the nuclear-norm optimizations entail several singular value
thresholding (SVT) (Van Luong et al. 2021), which necessitate a significant amount of computations for SVD (Hu
et al. 2012). Consequently, these methods cannot be scaled
to high-dimensional problems. When the prior rank is known
beforehand, Cai et al. (Cai et al. 2021a) recently substituted
SVD with CUR decomposition to streamline the computational process in LRMR.

