The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalization Analysis of Machine Learning Algorithms via the Worst-Case
Data-Generating Probability Measure
Xinying Zou1 , Samir M. Perlaza1, 2, 3 , Iñaki Esnaola2, 4 , and Eitan Altman1, 5
1

INRIA, Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur, Sophia Antipolis 06902, France
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA
3
GAATI Laboratory, Université de la Polynésie Française, Faaa 98702, French Polynesia
4
Department of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S1 3JD, UK
5
Laboratoire d’Informatique d’Avignon, Université d’Avignon, France
xinying.zou@inria.fr, samir.perlaza@inria.fr, esnaola@sheffield.ac.uk, eitan.altman@inria.fr
2

Related Works

Abstract
In this paper, the worst-case probability measure over the data
is introduced as a tool for characterizing the generalization
capabilities of machine learning algorithms. More specifically, the worst-case probability measure is a Gibbs probability measure and the unique solution to the maximization of
the expected loss under a relative entropy constraint with respect to a reference probability measure. Fundamental generalization metrics, such as the sensitivity of the expected loss,
the sensitivity of the empirical risk, and the generalization
gap are shown to have closed-form expressions involving the
worst-case data-generating probability measure. Existing results for the Gibbs algorithm, such as characterizing the generalization gap as a sum of mutual information and lautum
information, up to a constant factor, are recovered. A novel
parallel is established between the worst-case data-generating
probability measure and the Gibbs algorithm. Specifically,
the Gibbs probability measure is identified as a fundamental commonality of the model space and the data space for
machine learning algorithms.

In general, the EGE of machine learning algorithms is characterized by various upper bounds leveraging different techniques. The metric of mutual information was first proposed in (Russo and Zou 2016), further developed in (Xu
and Raginsky 2017) and combined with chaining methods
in (Asadi, Abbe, and Verdú 2018; Asadi and Abbe 2020)
for deriving upper bounds on the EGE. Similar bounds on
the EGE were obtained in (Bu, Zou, and Veeravalli 2020;
Chu and Raginsky 2023; Hafez-Kolahi et al. 2020; Hellström and Durisi 2020) and references therein. Other information measures such as the Wasserstein distance (Aminian
et al. 2022; Lopez and Jog 2018; Wang et al. 2019), maximal leakage (Esposito, Gastpar, and Issa 2020; Issa, Esposito, and Gastpar 2019), mutual f -information (Masiha,
Gohari, and Yassaee 2023), and Jensen-Shannon divergence
(Aminian, Toni, and Rodrigues 2021) were used for providing upper bounds on EGE as well. In (Duchi, Glynn,
and Namkoong 2021), the notion of closeness of probability measures with respect to a reference measure in terms of
statistical distances was used. Therein, the authors explored
the case for which the reference is the empirical measure,
which is also studied in this work. Such statistical distance
was formulated through f-divergences in (Duchi, Glynn, and
Namkoong 2021), whereas in this work, the statistical distance is described in terms of relative entropy. However,
the objective entailed minimizing the expected loss, while
this work provides explicit expressions for the difference
between empirical risks, population risk, and generalization
gap. For the use of f -divergences in these optimization problems, see also (Daunas et al. 2023b), and references therein.
Generalization can also be studied as a local minmax
problem as in (Lee and Raginsky 2018), in which generalization bounds were given in terms of empirical risks induced by a worst-case probability measure. The set of candidate probability measures in this work was described in
terms of the Wasserstein ambiguity set containing the empirical measure and the ground-truth measure almost surely.
The minimax formulation was further studied by establishing a correspondence between the principle of maximum
entropy and the minimax approach for decision making in
(Mazuelas, Shen, and Pérez 2022). To circumvent the dependence on the statistical description of the dataset, gen-

Introduction
The expected generalization error (GE) is a central
workhorse for the analysis of generalization capabilities
of machine learning algorithms, see for instance (Aminian
et al. 2021, 2022; Chu and Raginsky 2023; Xu and Raginsky
2017) and (Perlaza et al. 2023). In a nutshell, the GE characterizes the ability of the learning algorithm to correctly find
patterns in datasets that are not available during the training
stage. Specifically, it is defined for a fixed training dataset
and a specific model instance, as the difference between the
population risk induced by the model and the empirical risk
with respect to the training dataset.
When the choice of models is governed by a stochastic
kernel, the expected GE (EGE) is the expectation of the
GE with respect to the joint-measure of the models and
the datasets. Closed-form expressions for the EGE are only
known for the Gibbs algorithm in the case in which the reference measure is a probability measure (Aminian et al. 2021);
and for the case in which the reference measure is a σ-finite
measure (Perlaza et al. 2022a).
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17271

