The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ViT-Calibrator: Decision Stream Calibration for Vision Transformer
Lin Chen1 , Zhijie Jia1 , Lechao Cheng2 , Yang Gao1 , Jie Lei3 , Yijun Bei1 * , Zunlei Feng1
1

Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang Lab
3
Zhejiang University of Technology
{lin chen, jiazhijie, roygao, beiyj, zunleifeng}@zju.edu.cn, chenglc@zhejianglab.com, jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2021a; Yuan et al. 2021). Although the Transformer
model demonstrates satisfactory classification performance,
its opaque internal transformations and learning processes
impede a profound understanding and analysis of its internal mechanisms, making it challenging to improve its performance through modification and adjustment.
Currently, there have been some model diagnosis works,
mainly focusing on traditional model repair and detection (Kulesza et al. 2015). The latest work (Feng et al. 2022)
on optimizing deep models exploit gradient constraint strategies to diagnose and repair convolutional neural network
models. In addition, some works (Bastani, Kim, and Bastani 2017; Lei et al. 2018) apply interpretable decision tree
methods to approximate deep learning models for analysis
and detection. Furthermore, other works, such as, visualization techniques (Krause, Perer, and Ng 2016) have also explored to explain and diagnose (Krause et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2018b) the predictions of deep learning models to boost
the performance. Despite these related works for optimizing
deep learning models, there are no effective methods yet for
diagnosing and repairing attention-based Transformers.
In this work, we introduce a novel Decision Stream Calibration paradigm that boosts performance by explicating the
information propagation mechanism based on the correlation among tokens and the relevance coefficient across dimensions. We have derived two insightful discoveries from
empirical experiments, one of which is derived from the biological neural feedback principle (Demos 2005), and we incorporate this idea by developing a dynamic feedback loop
mechanism that enables the interaction between high-level
and shallow-level semantic information. While the remaining one manifests, that specific sparse dimensions of the
deep features of the Transformer are highly correlated with
the target category. In contrast, irrelevant dimensions can
harm classification performance. Consequently, we devise
a two-stage information propagation calibration mechanism
to address the defects at both the token and dimension levels.
Specifically, we first introduce an elaborated network with
a feedback module, as illustrated in Figure 3 (Token Calibration Stage). Inside the module, we define a feedback input
layer capable of capturing and providing more pertinent semantic information for various categories. Besides, we also
present a shallow network that extracts basic visual information as the target layer of the feedback mechanism. Next, the

A surge of interest has emerged in utilizing Transformers
in diverse vision tasks owing to its formidable performance.
However, existing approaches primarily focus on optimizing
internal model architecture designs that often entail significant trial and error with high burdens. In this work, we propose a new paradigm dubbed Decision Stream Calibration
that boosts the performance of general Vision Transformers.
To achieve this, we shed light on the information propagation mechanism in the learning procedure by exploring the
correlation between different tokens and the relevance coefficient of multiple dimensions. Upon further analysis, it was
discovered that 1) the final decision is associated with tokens
of foreground targets, while token features of foreground target will be transmitted into the next layer as much as possible, and the useless token features of background area will be
eliminated gradually in the forward propagation. 2) Each category is solely associated with specific sparse dimensions in
the class token. Based on the discoveries mentioned above,
we designed a two-stage calibration scheme, namely ViTCalibrator, including token propagation calibration stage and
dimension propagation calibration stage. Extensive experiments on commonly used datasets show that the proposed
approach can achieve promising results.

Introduction
Image classification is an important research area in computer vision that involves quantitatively analyzing digital images and categorizing them into different classes. The associated approaches have been widely applied in practical scenarios such as medical image diagnosis (Feng et al. 2021),
security monitoring (Litjens et al. 2017), and autonomous
driving (Bojarski et al. 2016). The remarkable performance
of deep neural networks has propelled them to the forefront
of image classification, where they are now regarded as a
mainstream approach.
As an indispensable part of deep neural networks, Transformers model’s self-attention mechanism captures global
semantic information (Vaswani et al. 2017), allowing Transformers to be more proficient in handling long sequential
data, which opens up new possibilities for visual feature
learning (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Touvron
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1147

