The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Task-Aware Language-Image Representation for Class-Incremental
Object Detection
Hongquan Zhang1, 3 * , Bin-Bin Gao2 * , Yi Zeng2 , Xudong Tian1, 3 , Xin Tan1, 3† ,
Zhizhong Zhang1, 3 , Yanyun Qu4 , Jun Liu2 , Yuan Xie1,3
1

East China Normal University
2
Tencent YouTu Lab
3
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University
4
Xiamen University
{51215901136,51194501066}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {xtan,zzzhang,yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
{csgaobb,yizengstudy,junsenselee}@gmail.com, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
+11.8%

Class-incremental object detection (CIOD) is a real-world desired capability, requiring an object detector to continuously
adapt to new tasks without forgetting learned ones, with the
main challenge being catastrophic forgetting. Many methods
based on distillation and replay have been proposed to alleviate this problem. However, they typically learn on a pure
visual backbone, neglecting the powerful representation capabilities of textual cues, which to some extent limits their
performance. In this paper, we propose task-aware languageimage representation to mitigate catastrophic forgetting, introducing a new paradigm for language-image-based CIOD.
First of all, we demonstrate the significant advantage of
language-image detectors in mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Secondly, we propose a learning task-aware languageimage representation method that overcomes the existing
drawback of directly utilizing the language-image detector
for CIOD. More specifically, we learn the language-image
representation of different tasks through an insulating approach in the training stage, while using the alignment scores
produced by task-specific language-image representation in
the inference stage. Through our proposed method, languageimage detectors can be more practical for CIOD. We conduct
extensive experiments on COCO 2017 and Pascal VOC 2007
and demonstrate that the proposed method achieves state-ofthe-art results under the various CIOD settings.

+27.0%

+38.2%

+15.9%

+56.3%
+9.2%
+32.1%

+1.0%

Figure 1: The performance comparisons (mAP[0.5]) of
language-image and pure visual-based detectors on Pascal
VOC 2007 and COCO 2017 with various incremental protocols. Here, we take Dyhead (Dai et al. 2021a) as a pure
visual-based detector, and GLIP as a language-image detector, where GLIP replaces the classifier used in Dyhead with
language-image alignment and others the same as Dyhead.
We can see that the language-image detector (GLIP) brings
clear improvements in most incremental settings. However,
there is still catastrophic forgetting in some challenging settings (e.g., 40+40 on COCO). To further address this issue,
we first learn task-aware language-image representation and
then use a selective inference strategy for CIOD, which outperforms naive GLIP by a large margin.

Introduction
Object detection has shown remarkable advancements in facilitating various applications, including traffic monitoring,
robotics (Xu et al. 2022) and autonomous driving (Li et al.
2023a). Most object detection works mainly focus on the
offline training paradigm. However, online training plays a
more important role in real-world applications in dynamic
environments which urgently requires a model to continuously recognize new classes and maintain the ability on

learned classes. Therefore, exploiting continual (incremental) object detection based on online data streaming has become an attractive yet challenging topic and aims to sequentially solve tasks with ideally no performance drop when inferred on the previously seen tasks.
In order to mitigate performance drop on previous classes,
some class-incremental object detection (CIOD) methods either use knowledge distillation (Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017; Hu et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021; Feng, Wang,
and Yuan 2022) on image features or replay a small number of previous exemplars (Shieh et al. 2020; Joseph et al.
2021a,b; Liu et al. 2023b). Commonly, these methods typi-

* These authors contributed equally, work done while at Tencent

YouTu Lab.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7096

