The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FD3D: Exploiting Foreground Depth Map for Feature-Supervised
Monocular 3D Object Detection
Zizhang Wu1 , Yuanzhu Gan2 , Yunzhe Wu2 , Ruihao Wang2 , Xiaoquan Wang3 , Jian Pu1 *
1

Fudan University
2
ZongmuTech
3
ExploAI
wuzizhang87@gmail.com, {yuanzhu.gan, nelson.wu, ruihao.wang}@zongmutech.com, rocky.wang@exploai.com,
jianpu@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

Input Image

Monocular 3D object detection usually adopts direct or hierarchical label supervision. Recently, the distillation supervision transfers the spatial knowledge from LiDAR- or stereobased teacher networks to monocular detectors, but remaining the domain gap. To mitigate this issue and pursue adequate label manipulation, we exploit Foreground Depth map
for feature-supervised monocular 3D object detection named
FD3D, which develops the high-quality instructive intermediate features to conduct desirable auxiliary feature supervision with only the original image and annotation foreground
object-wise depth map (AFOD) as input. Furthermore, we
build up our instructive feature generation network to create instructive spatial features based on the sufficient correlation between image features and pre-processed AFOD, where
AFOD provides the attention focus only on foreground objects to achieve clearer guidance in the detection task. Moreover, we apply the auxiliary feature supervision from the
pixel and distribution level to achieve comprehensive spatial
knowledge guidance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on both the
KITTI and nuScenes datasets, with no external data and no
extra inference computational cost. We also conduct experiments to reveal the effectiveness of our designs.

&

Instructive Feature Generation

Instructive Feature
Generation
Network

Instructive Feature

AFOD

Pixel-level & Distribution-level Auxiliary Feature Supervision

Monocular 3D
Detector
Input Image

Primary Detection Network

Detection Results

Figure 1: Illustration of our auxiliary feature supervision
framework, where the instructive features are trained from
the generation network with inputs of image and annotation
foreground object-wise depth (AFOD).
et al. 2021). Recently, researchers have explored the distillation schema to train the LiDAR- or stereo-based teacher networks to transfer the learned spatial features’ knowledge to
monocular 3D detectors (Chong et al. 2022; Chen, Dai, and
Ding 2022). It actually exhibits an auxiliary feature supervision to the original monocular baseline, with the elaborate
manipulation of the labels, teacher models, and inputs like
LiDAR or stereo sensors.
Notably, these multi-modal sensors bring robust spatial
guidance like feature-level (Chen, Dai, and Ding 2022) or
object-level (Chong et al. 2022) adaptation but remain more
expensive compared with the monocular image-only setting
(Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021; Li and Zhao 2021). In
addition, their teacher network’s training stays restricted by
the domain gap, which reveals the other-modal input, the
heavier feature extractor and more challenging cross-modal
feature distillation. Furthermore, they utilize indirect label
supervision to make inaccurate predictions under the model
limitation, ignoring the potential of ground truth as a direct
indication to generate reliable spatial features.
To mitigate these issues and pursue adequate label manipulation, we exploit Foreground Depth map for featuresupervised monocular 3D object detection named FD3D,
which develops the high-quality instructive intermediate

Introduction
3D object detection is crucial for the perception task in extensive applications such as autonomous driving and robotic
manipulation (Reading et al. 2021; Liu, Wu, and Tóth 2020).
Considering different scenarios, recent 3D detection approaches (Thomas et al. 2019; Nabati and Qi 2021; Huang
et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2020) measure the objects’ precise location from the different-modalities inputs, such as 3D point
clouds, radar signals, monocular images or stereo images. In
particular, the monocular setting adopting the deployment of
a single RGB camera has attracted increasing attention.
The usual pipeline for monocular 3D object detection reveals to apply the direct label supervision with the welldesigned model and constrains (Zhang, Lu, and Zhou 2021;
Reading et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022), or deliver the hierarchical label supervision on different-layer features (Lu
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6189

