The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Zhongjing: Enhancing the Chinese Medical Capabilities of Large Language
Model through Expert Feedback and Real-World Multi-Turn Dialogue
Songhua Yang* , Hanjie Zhao* , Senbin Zhu, Guangyu Zhou,
Hongfei Xu, Yuxiang Jia† , Hongying Zan
Zhengzhou University, Henan, China
{suprit,hjzhao zzu,ygdzzx5156,zhougyzzu,hfxunlp}@foxmail.com, {ieyxjia, iehyzan}@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract

最近⼿⾜出现红斑并伴有脱⽪，
已经持续了5个⽉了。这个问题
是在我注射新冠疫苗后出现的...

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have
achieved remarkable breakthroughs in understanding and responding to user intents. However, their performance lag behind general use cases in some expertise domains, such as
Chinese medicine. Existing efforts to incorporate Chinese
medicine into LLMs rely on Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)
with single-turn and distilled dialogue data. These models
lack the ability for doctor-like proactive inquiry and multiturn comprehension and cannot align responses with experts’
intentions. In this work, we introduce Zhongjing, the first
Chinese medical LLaMA-based LLM that implements an
entire training pipeline from continuous pre-training, SFT,
to Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF).
Additionally, we construct a Chinese multi-turn medical dialogue dataset of 70,000 authentic doctor-patient dialogues,
CMtMedQA, which significantly enhances the model’s capability for complex dialogue and proactive inquiry initiation.
We also define a refined annotation rule and evaluation criteria given the unique characteristics of the biomedical domain.
Extensive experimental results show that Zhongjing outperforms baselines in various capacities and matches the performance of ChatGPT in some abilities, despite the 100x parameters. Ablation studies also demonstrate the contributions
of each component: pre-training enhances medical knowledge, and RLHF further improves instruction-following ability and safety. Our code, datasets, and models are available at
https://github.com/SupritYoung/Zhongjing.

根据您描述的症状和病史，可
能是由于新冠疫苗接种引起的
过敏反应导致了⼿⾜红斑和脱
⽪... 我需要了解⼀下您最近的
⽤药情况以及过敏史
我最近⼝服的药物主要是开瑞
坦、⽩芍总苷和美能，⽬前仍
在持续使⽤...
注意到您最近开始接受奥⻢珠单抗治疗，
并且停⽤了雷公藤，改为甲氨蝶呤。这些
药物的使⽤可能对您的⽪肤病症状产⽣⼀
定的影响....您可以考虑使⽤卡泊三醇软膏
(达⼒⼠)进⾏外⽤治疗，每天使⽤两次。
这种药膏在改善⽪肤红斑和脱⽪⽅⾯具有
⼀定的效果。您对此有什么疑问吗？

...

Figure 1: An example of multi-turn Chinese medical consultation dialogues, relies heavily on LLM’s proactive inquiry.

2022; Zhang et al. 2022). However, despite the stellar performance of these general LLMs across many tasks, their performance in specific professional fields, such as the biomedical domain, is often limited due to a lack of domain expertise (Zhao et al. 2023). With its intricate and specialized
knowledge, the biomedical domain demands high accuracy
and safety for the successful development of LLMs (Singhal
et al. 2023a). Despite the challenges, medical LLMs hold
enormous potential, offering value in diagnosis assistance,
consultations, drug recommendations, etc. In the realm of
Chinese medicine, some medical LLMs have been proposed
(Li et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Xiong et al. 2023).
However, these works are totally dependent on SFT. Han
et al. (2021) and Zhou et al. (2023) indicated that almost
all knowledge is learned during pre-training, which is the
critical phase in accumulating knowledge, and RLHF can
guide models to recognize their capability boundaries and
enhance instruction-following ability (Ramamurthy et al.
2022). Over-reliance on SFT may result in overconfident
generalization, the model essentially rote-memorizes the an-

Introduction
Recently, significant progress has been made with LLMs,
exemplified by ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023), allowing them to understand and respond to various questions and even outperform humans in a range of
general areas. Although openai remains closed, Open-source
community swiftly launched high performing LLMs such as
LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023), Bloom (Scao et al. 2022),
Falcon (Almazrouei et al. 2023) etc. To bridge the gap in
Chinese adaptability, researchers also introduced more powerful Chinese models (Cui, Yang, and Yao 2023a; Du et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19368

