The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Uncertainty Quantification Using Conformalised Monte Carlo Prediction
Daniel Bethell, Simos Gerasimou, Radu Calinescu
Department of Computer Science, University of York, United Kingdom
{daniel.bethell, simos.gerasimou, radu.calinescu}@york.ac.uk

Abstract

2016) elegantly quantifies uncertainty within DL models by
outputting the standard deviation of predictions from an ensemble of networks using dropout layers. Running, however,
numerous forward passes is computationally expensive.
Similarly, Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) (MacKay
1992) constitute a more natural UQ method that can estimate
both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty. However, BNNs
are computationally-intensive both during training and inference and require substantial fine-tuning. Finally, conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005)
produces prediction sets/intervals instead of singletons. The
larger the set/interval, the more unsure the model is about its
prediction, with a singleton prediction/narrow interval typically signifying large confidence. Despite their merits, CP
methods are over-conservative, producing larger sets/intervals than necessary (Fan, Ge, and Mukherjee 2023).
Driven by these advances, we introduce Monte CarloConformal Prediction (MC-CP), a novel hybrid method
that comprises adaptive MC dropout and conformal predictive techniques, inheriting both the statistical efficiency
of the former and the distribution-free coverage guarantee
of conformal prediction. MC-CP dynamically adapts the
conventional MC dropout with a convergence assessment,
saving memory and computational resources during inference where possible. The predictions are then consumed
by advanced CP techniques to synthesize robust prediction sets/intervals. Our experimental evaluation shows that
the hybrid MC-CP approach overestimates less than regular CP methods. Despite its simplicity, it outperforms stateof-the-art CP- and MC-based methods, e.g., traditional MC
dropout, RAPS (Angelopoulos et al. 2022) and CQR (Romano, Patterson, and Candes 2019), both in classification
and regression benchmarks. While RAPS and CQR quantify uncertainty by increasing the prediction set/interval size,
MC-CP does this and also outputs an exact quantification in
the form of variance in the prediction distribution. Our MCCP method is designed to be implemented at inference time,
in contrast to evidential deep learning and Bayesian neural
networks. Whilst these methods provide salient and informative UQ estimations, MC-CP is realised post-training.
Our contributions are:
• An adaptive MC dropout method that can save computational resources compared to the original method;
• The hybrid MC-CP method that addresses major issues

Deploying deep learning models in safety-critical applications remains a very challenging task, mandating the provision of assurances for the dependable operation of these
models. Uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods estimate
the model’s confidence per prediction, informing decisionmaking by considering the effect of randomness and model
misspecification. Despite the advances of state-of-the-art UQ
methods, they are computationally expensive or produce conservative prediction sets/intervals. We introduce MC-CP, a
novel hybrid UQ method that combines a new adaptive Monte
Carlo (MC) dropout method with conformal prediction (CP).
MC-CP adaptively modulates the traditional MC dropout at
runtime to save memory and computation resources, enabling
predictions to be consumed by CP, yielding robust prediction sets/intervals. Throughout comprehensive experiments,
we show that MC-CP delivers significant improvements over
comparable UQ methods, like MC dropout, RAPS and CQR,
both in classification and regression benchmarks. MC-CP can
be easily added to existing models, making its deployment
simple. The MC-CP code and replication package is available
at https://github.com/team-daniel/MC-CP.

Introduction
Advances in Deep Learning (DL) enable its employment
in diverse and challenging tasks, including speech recognition (Kumar et al. 2020) and image annotation (Barnard et al.
2003). Despite its numerous potential applications, using
DL in safety-critical applications (e.g., medical imaging/diagnosis) mandates ensuring its dependable and robust operation (Pereira and Thomas 2020; Gerasimou et al. 2020).
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is crucial in assessing the
DL model’s confidence for input-prediction pairs and establishing the potential impact of noisy, sparse, or low-quality
input and misspecification in DL models (Kendall, Badrinarayanan, and Cipolla 2016). Ultimately, UQ enables understanding situations where the model is particularly uncertain, instrumenting uncertainty-aware decision-making (Calinescu et al. 2018).
DL-focused methods for UQ aim at assessing model and
data uncertainty of DL models (Abdar et al. 2021). In particular, Monte Carlo (MC) dropout (Gal and Ghahramani
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20939

