The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Harnessing the Power of SVD:
An SVA Module for Enhanced Signal Classification
Lei Zhai1 , Shuyuan Yang1 * , Yitong Li2 , Zhixi Feng1 * , Zhihao Chang1 , Quanwei Gao1 ,
1

Xidian University
Xi’an Jiaotong University
zhailei@stu.xidian.edu.cn, syyang@xidian.edu.cn, zxfeng@xidian.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep learning methods have achieved outstanding performance in various signal tasks. However, due to degraded signals in real electromagnetic environment, it is crucial to seek
methods that can improve the representation of signal features. In this paper, a Singular Value decomposition-based
Attention, SVA is proposed to explore structure of signal data
for adaptively enhancing intrinsic feature. Using a deep neural network as a base model, SVA performs feature semantic
subspace learning through a decomposition layer and combines it with an attention layer to achieve adaptive enhancement of signal features. Moreover, we consider the gradient
explosion problem brought by SVA and optimize SVA to improve the stability of training. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that applying SVA to a generalized classification
model can significantly improve its ability in representations,
making its recognition performance competitive with, or even
better than, the state-of-the-art task-specific models.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Singular value decomposition and image reconstruction. (a) The original image; (b) Reconstruction result
retaining the first 10 singular values; (c) Reconstructed results retaining only the k-th singular value.
icant progress has been made in attention mechanism modules in existing works, such as SENet (Hu, Shen, and Sun
2018), ECA (Wang et al. 2020), CBAM (Woo et al. 2018),
SimAM (Yang et al. 2021), self-attention (Zhao, Jia, and
Koltun 2020) , etc. Due to the provision of a universal way to
enhance input representation, integrating attention modules
into mainstream models (e.g., CNN (Li et al. 2020a), Transformer (Xia et al. 2022)) can lead to further improvements.
In particular, for signal classification tasks, CNN models
with limited global modeling capabilities require an auxiliary module to extend their view and improve their modeling capabilities for long sequences. Also, different type
of attention can provide new representation subspaces for
Transformer-based models, thereby enhancing the model’s
ability to capture complex patterns.
However, these attention mechanisms often enhance the
focus expression of key features in an explicit manner, which
may not be the optimal solution for signal classification. It is
well known that communication signals contain a significant
amount of noise, or redundancy. When features are explicitly enhanced, it is inevitable to strengthen this part. On the
other hand, they ignore the internal structure of the data, especially the different semantic subspaces of the data itself.
Signals can be viewed as a superposition of subspaces composed of different semantic information, and the information
contained in the internal structure plays an important role in

Introduction
Signal classification tasks play an important role in various
application scenarios, such as communication signal classification (Ma et al. 2023; Hao et al. 2023), medical detection (Malik et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020b), sound recognition (Zhang et al. 2021c; Tzinis et al. 2020), and so on.
With the advancements in artificial intelligence technologies like deep learning, signal classification methods have
become more precise and intelligent. Communication signal
classification task is a time series classification problem that
can be addressed using sequence models like RNN (Chang
et al. 2021) and LSTM (Zhou et al. 2020b), which excel
at handling temporal information. However, these models
may overlook the spatial information of orthogonal signals
and suffer from proportional growth of parameters with sequence length due to recurrent connections. Therefore, models that retain long sequence modeling characteristics while
adept at processing spatial information are needed.
In order to better imitate human comprehension of complex scenes, attention mechanisms have been introduced to
assist models in adaptively focusing on and processing different parts of signals, whether temporal or spatial. Signif* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16669

