The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Quantile-Based Maximum Likelihood Training for Outlier Detection
Masoud Taghikhah1 * , Nishant Kumar1 * † , Siniša Šegvić2 , Abouzar Eslami3 , Stefan Gumhold1
1
Faculty of Computer Science, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
3
Translational Research Lab, Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Munich, Germany
masoud.taghikhah, nishant.kumar, stefan.gumhold@tu-dresden.de, sinisa.segvic@fer.hr, abouzar.eslami@zeiss.com
2

Abstract

There are a lot of outlier-aware image classification approaches that exist in the literature. They can be categorized into supervised (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich
2019), unsupervised (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Lee
et al. 2018b; Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018; Liu et al. 2020),
and self-supervised (Tack et al. 2020; Du et al. 2022). A recent approach (Du et al. 2022) generates synthetic features
from the learned inlier feature distribution and selects a subset of those features as outliers based on a pre-defined sampling strategy. Afterward, the selected outlier features are
used for energy-based regularization of the final layer of the
classification network to encourage a lower energy for inlier
features and higher for outlier features. Subsequently, during
model inference, (Du et al. 2022) perform outlier detection
by thresholding the energy scores computed from the classification head to discriminate outlier instances from inliers.
Maximum likelihood training of the inlier data distribution should assign a lower probability estimate to the outliers. Generative models like normalizing flows offer precise density estimation capability for representing complex distributions (Kingma and Dhariwal 2018). However,
prior works (Kirichenko, Izmailov, and Wilson 2020; Nalisnick et al. 2018) showed that in the pixel space, the density learned by generative models could not distinguish
anomalous instances from inliers as such learning scheme
seems to fail to capture the semantic contents. To overcome this problem, we propose a novel framework named
QuantOD (Quantile-based Maximum Likelihood Training
for Outlier Detection) that derives the inlier feature representations from a pre-trained image classifier and estimates its density using a new maximum likelihood objective
that leverages the q-quantile of the log-likelihood scores per
training batch for learning the generative model. Our framework determines the log-likelihood-based threshold by analyzing the likelihoods of inliers from the validation set. Subsequently, QuantOD performs outlier detection by examining whether the log-likelihood of a test feature is above or
below this threshold. Unlike methods like (Du et al. 2022)
that synthesize outlier features for classifier regularization,
QuantOD trains exclusively on inlier data. The conceptual
simplicity of our method decreases the likelihood of undesirable effects such as bias and over-optimistic evaluation.
Quantile-based optimization has been previously studied in Reinforcement Learning (Dabney et al. 2018; Zhou,

Discriminative learning effectively predicts true object class
for image classification. However, it often results in false positives for outliers, posing critical concerns in applications like
autonomous driving and video surveillance systems. Previous attempts to address this challenge involved training image classifiers through contrastive learning using actual outlier data or synthesizing outliers for self-supervised learning. Furthermore, unsupervised generative modeling of inliers in pixel space has shown limited success for outlier detection. In this work, we introduce a quantile-based maximum likelihood objective for learning the inlier distribution
to improve the outlier separation during inference. Our approach fits a normalizing flow to pre-trained discriminative
features and detects the outliers according to the evaluated
log-likelihood. The experimental evaluation demonstrates the
effectiveness of our method as it surpasses the performance
of the state-of-the-art unsupervised methods for outlier detection. The results are also competitive compared with a recent
self-supervised approach for outlier detection. Our work allows to reduce dependency on well-sampled negative training
data, which is especially important for domains like medical
diagnostics or remote sensing.

Introduction
As AI-based fully-autonomous technologies get introduced
in several commercial sectors, their reliability becomes important in safety-critical systems such as self-driving cars
and surgical robotics. For instance, popular image classifiers (Xie et al. 2016; He et al. 2016) detect inlier objects
with high accuracy. However, they suffer from degraded performance while detecting outlier objects (Hendrycks and
Gimpel 2017). Hence, it is vital to train models that can
precisely learn the data distribution of inliers such that
anomalous instances can be detected as an outlier. Such a
model should significantly improve the reliability of fullyautonomous systems for safety-critical applications while
satisfying evolving regulatory requirements and reinforcing
the public’s trust in such systems for real-world deployment (Koopman and Wagner 2017).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21610

