The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sharpness-Aware Model-Agnostic Long-Tailed Domain Generalization
Houcheng Su1 * , Weihao Luo2 * , Daixian Liu 3 , Mengzhu Wang4† , Jing Tang4 , Junyang Chen5 , Cong
Wang6 , Zhenghan Chen7
1

University of Macau
Donghua University
3
Sichuan Agricultural University
4
Hebei University of Technology
5
Shenzhen University
6
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
7
Peking University
{mc25695,yb77403}@umac.mo, luowh@mail.dhu.edu.cn, 202105787@stu.sicau.edu.cn,
wangmengzhu.wmz@alibaba-inc.com, focusers@163.com, supercong.wang@connect.polyu.hk, pandaarych@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) aims to improve the generalization ability of models trained on a specific group of
source domains, enabling them to perform well on new, unseen target domains. Recent studies have shown that methods that converge to smooth optima can enhance the generalization performance of supervised learning tasks such
as classification. In this study, we examine the impact of
smoothness-enhancing formulations on domain adversarial
training, which combines task loss and adversarial loss objectives. Our approach leverages the fact that converging to a
smooth minimum with respect to task loss can stabilize the
task loss and lead to better performance on unseen domains.
Furthermore, we recognize that the distribution of objects in
the real world often follows a long-tailed class distribution,
resulting in a mismatch between machine learning models
and our expectations of their performance on all classes of
datasets with long-tailed class distributions. To address this
issue, we consider the domain generalization problem from
the perspective of the long-tail distribution and propose using
the maximum square loss to balance different classes which
can improve model generalizability. Our method’s effectiveness is demonstrated through comparisons with state-of-theart methods on various domain generalization datasets. Code:
https://github.com/bamboosir920/SAMALTDG.

Figure 1: Data distributions of two benchmark datasets. (a)
shows the number of different classes in “Infograph”, (b)
shows the number of different classes in “Sketch”.

decade, including those based on domain alignment (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013), meta-training (Li et al.
2018a), and data augmentation (Wang et al. 2022b). Despite the many approaches that have been proposed, a recent
study called DomainBed (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz 2020)
found that the naive DG method via entropy regularization
(DG via ER) (Zhao et al. 2020) can perform better than
most other DG methods under fair evaluation conditions.
Nonetheless, simply minimizing empirical loss on a nonconvex loss landscape is typically insufficient to achieve robust generalization. As such, DG via ER may overfit to the
training data and converge to sharp local minima.
Various recent studies, such as sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) (Foret et al. 2020), aims to improve the
model’s performance by minimizing the sharpness measure
of the loss landscape. The loss function to be minimized, Lθ ,
depends on the neural network’s parameters θ (e.g., crossentropy loss for classification). SAM computes an adversarial weight perturbation ϵ to maximize the empirical risk
Lθ , followed by minimizing the loss of the perturbed network. SAM’s objective is to minimize the maximum loss
around the model parameter θ. Since the min-max optimization problem is highly complex, SAM approximates Lθ instead. Inspired by SAM, we aim to improve the model’s generalization ability by minimizing sharpness. However, recent

Introduction
Deep learning approaches have proven to be highly effective
in computer vision tasks, especially when the source and target data are independently and identically distributed. However, these methods often suffer from reduced performance
when applied to new target domains. To address this, domain generalization (DG) (Zhang et al. 2022a; Qiao, Zhao,
and Peng 2020; Balaji, Sankaranarayanan, and Chellappa
2018) techniques aim to train models using source data that
can perform well on new domains without retraining. Numerous DG methods have been developed over the past
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15091

