The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Prompt-Based Distribution Alignment for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Shuanghao Bai1 , Min Zhang2 , Wanqi Zhou1,4 , Siteng Huang2 , Zhirong Luan3 ,
Donglin Wang2* , Badong Chen1*
1

2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
Westlake University Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
3
School of Electrical Engineering, Xi’an University of Technology, Xi’an, China
4
RIKEN AIP
𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨

Abstract
Recently, despite the unprecedented success of large pretrained visual-language models (VLMs) on a wide range of
downstream tasks, the real-world unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem is still not well explored. Therefore,
in this paper, we first experimentally demonstrate that the
unsupervised-trained VLMs can significantly reduce the distribution discrepancy between source and target domains,
thereby improving the performance of UDA. However, a major challenge for directly deploying such models on downstream UDA tasks is prompt engineering, which requires
aligning the domain knowledge of source and target domains, since the performance of UDA is severely influenced by a good domain-invariant representation. We further propose a Prompt-based Distribution Alignment (PDA)
method to incorporate the domain knowledge into prompt
learning. Specifically, PDA employs a two-branch prompttuning paradigm, namely base branch and alignment branch.
The base branch focuses on integrating class-related representation into prompts, ensuring discrimination among different classes. To further minimize domain discrepancy, for
the alignment branch, we construct feature banks for both
the source and target domains and propose image-guided
feature tuning (IFT) to make the input attend to feature
banks, which effectively integrates self-enhanced and crossdomain features into the model. In this way, these two
branches can be mutually promoted to enhance the adaptation of VLMs for UDA. We conduct extensive experiments on three benchmarks to demonstrate that our proposed
PDA achieves state-of-the-art performance. The code is
available at https://github.com/BaiShuanghao/Prompt-basedDistribution-Alignment.

𝑳𝑳𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊
(T)
𝟐𝟐

𝑲𝑲𝑲𝑲−𝟏𝟏 (𝑰𝑰𝒔𝒔 , 𝑰𝑰𝒕𝒕 )

𝒓𝒓(𝑰𝑰𝒔𝒔 )

𝑴𝑴𝑴𝑴𝑴𝑴−𝟏𝟏 (𝑰𝑰𝒔𝒔 , 𝑰𝑰𝒕𝒕 )

ViT

CLIP

𝒓𝒓(𝑰𝑰𝒕𝒕 )

MaPLe

PDA (Ours)

Figure 1: Metric comparisons on Office-Home. Higher values are better. r measures the compactness of features (i.e.,
the division of inner-class L2 distance and inter-class L2 distance Linter
). MMD and KL divergence measure the do2
main discrepancy. T , Is and It denote the text features, and
image features of the source and target domain, respectively.
Our method demonstrates the most discriminable text features, the most compact image features, the lowest domain
discrepancy, and the best accuracy.

of semantic and domain information (Tang, Chen, and Jia
2020; Ge et al. 2022; Zhang, Huang, and Wang 2022).
Recently, large vision language models (VLMs) like
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) have shown impressive generalization performance in various downstream tasks. With the
disentangled visual and semantic representations, this may
avoid the loss of semantic information and improve UDA
performance. In light of this, we conduct an empirical experiment to demonstrate the applicability of VLMs to the
UDA problem. Specifically, we evaluated the performance
of both unimodal model Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and zero-shot CLIP with hand-crafted
prompts. In Figure 1, although the compactness of source
features r(Is ) and target features r(It ) of CLIP is similar to
that of supervised-trained ViT, yet maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) and KL divergence (KL) minimize, resulting
higher accuracy of target domain (Acc). This indicates CLIP

Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to improve
the generalization performance in the target domain of the
pre-trained model by using the labeled source domain and
unlabeled target domain (Wilson and Cook 2020; Zhu et al.
2023a). Many methods have been proposed to address the
UDA problem, mainly including adversarial training (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015; Rangwani et al. 2022) and metric
learning (Saito et al. 2018; Tang, Chen, and Jia 2020; Zhang,
Wang, and Gai 2020). However, mitigating distribution by
domain alignment may inadvertently result in a loss of semantic information, which comes from the entangled nature
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

729

