The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SeGA: Preference-Aware Self-Contrastive Learning with Prompts for Anomalous
User Detection on Twitter
Ying-Ying Chang, Wei-Yao Wang, Wen-Chih Peng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
cindy88409.cs10@nycu.edu.tw, sf1638.cs05@nctu.edu.tw, wcpeng@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
In the dynamic and rapidly evolving world of social media,
detecting anomalous users has become a crucial task to address malicious activities such as misinformation and cyberbullying. As the increasing number of anomalous users improves the ability to mimic normal users and evade detection,
existing methods only focusing on bot detection are ineffective in terms of capturing subtle distinctions between users.
To address these challenges, we proposed SeGA, preferenceaware self-contrastive learning for anomalous user detection, which leverages heterogeneous entities and their relations in the Twittersphere to detect anomalous users with
different malicious strategies. SeGA utilizes the knowledge
of large language models to summarize user preferences via
posts. In addition, integrating user preferences with prompts
as pseudo-labels for preference-aware self-contrastive learning enables the model to learn multifaceted aspects for describing the behaviors of users. Extensive experiments on the
proposed TwBNT benchmark demonstrate that SeGA significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods (+3.5%
∼ 27.6%) and empirically validate the effectiveness of the
model design and pre-training strategies. Our code and data
are publicly available at https://github.com/ying0409/SeGA.

1

Figure 1: An example of anomalous user behavior in social
media, where the edges connecting entities represent diverse
relationships.

anomalous user. As the variety of anomalous user types increases, and their potential negative impact on social media
becomes more pronounced, it is crucial to emphasize the significance of advancing anomaly detection methods capable
of identifying not only bots but also trolls.
Previous works primarily focused on identifying bots
and achieved effectiveness by leveraging the topology with
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Velickovic et al. 2018) and heterogeneous information networks (HINs) (Feng et al. 2021c, 2022a). However, as the
diversity of anomalous users and the evolutionary strategies for malicious activities continue to expand, such as
spreading fake news through lists1 , existing methods lack
the ability to effectively distinguish various types of anomalous users like both bots and trolls. The main difference in
detecting trolls and bots is that the former is controlled by
humans, resulting in similar behavior to normal users compared with the latter.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of anomalous user behavior with other entities on social media, where anomaly users
are able to not only interact with other users, but also own
lists and add other anomalous users as members to carry out
malicious activities such as spreading fake news. For example, a bot might create a list and add trolls as members. If a

Introduction

The exploration of anomalous user detection has broad applicability across various domains. Whether it involves developing strategies for network security (Bilot et al. 2023),
financial transactions (Chai et al. 2022), or social media analytics (Agarwal et al. 2022; Wang and Peng 2022), these scenarios can be effectively framed as anomalous user detection
systems characterized by intricate relations between users.
Twitter serves as one of the most widely-used social media
platforms; however, the widespread features in recent years
have also led to the rapid growth of anomalous users. For
instance, abnormal users often initiate campaigns to pursue
malicious goals, which violates the principles of healthy online discussions on social media platforms (Alieva, Moffitt,
and Carley 2022). One of the most common types of anomalous users is bots, identified at 9% to 15% of active users
(Varol et al. 2017). In late 2017, the US Congress disclosed
a list of 2.7k Twitter accounts that were identified as Russian
trolls (Zannettou et al. 2019), which is an emerging type of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

30

A list is a curated selection of Twitter accounts for organizing.

