The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Safeguarded Progress in Reinforcement Learning:
Safe Bayesian Exploration for Control Policy Synthesis
Rohan Mitta1 , Hosein Hasanbeig2∗ , Jun Wang3 ,
Daniel Kroening4 * , Yiannis Kantaros3 , Alessandro Abate1
1

University of Oxford,
Microsoft Research,
3
Washington University,
4
Amazon
alessandro.abate@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of maintaining safety during
training in Reinforcement Learning (RL), such that the safety
constraint violations are bounded at any point during learning.
As enforcing safety during training might severely limit the
agent’s exploration, we propose here a new architecture that
handles the trade-off between efficient progress and safety
during exploration. As the exploration progresses, we update
via Bayesian inference Dirichlet-Categorical models of the
transition probabilities of the Markov decision process that
describes the environment dynamics. We then propose a way
to approximate moments of belief about the risk associated to
the action selection policy. We demonstrate that this approach
can be easily interleaved with RL and we present experimental
results to showcase the performance of the overall architecture.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, RL is principally concerned with the policy
that the agent generates by the end of the learning process. In
other words, the quality of agent’s policy during learning is
overlooked at the benefit of learning how to behave optimally,
eventually. Accordingly, many standard RL methods rely
on the assumption that the agent selects each available action at every state infinitely often during exploration (Sutton,
Bach, and Barto 2018; Puterman 2014). A related technical
assumption that is often made is that the MDP is ergodic,
meaning that every state is reachable from every other state
under proper action selection (Moldovan and Abbeel 2012).
These assumptions might be reasonable, e.g., in virtual environments where restarting is always an option. However, in
safety-critical scenarios these assumptions might be unreasonable, as we may explicitly require the agent to never visit
certain unsafe states. Indeed, in a variety of RL applications
the safety of the agent is particularly important, e.g., when
using expensive autonomous platforms or robots that work
in the proximity of humans. Thus, researchers are paying
increasing attention not only to maximising a long-term taskdriven reward, but also to enforcing safety during training.
* The work in this paper was done at the University of Oxford.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21412

Related Work The general problem of Safe RL has been
an active area of research in which numerous approaches
and definitions of safety have been proposed (Brunke et al.
2021; Garcia and Fernandez 2015; Pecka and Svoboda 2014).
Moldovan and Abbeel (2012) define safety in terms of “actions availability”, namely ensuring that an agent is always
able to return to its current state. Chow et al. (2018a) pursue safety by minimising a cost associated with worst-case
scenarios, when cost is associated with a lack of safety. Similarly, Miryoosefi et al. (2019) define the safety constraint
in terms of the expected sum of a vector of measurements
to be in a target set. Other approaches (Li and Belta 2019;
Hasanbeig, Abate, and Kroening 2019a,b; Hasanbeig, Kroening, and Abate 2020; Cai et al. 2021) define safety by the
satisfaction of temporal logical formulae of the learnt policy,
but do not provide safety while training such a policy. Many
existing approaches are concerned with guarantees on the
safety of the learned policy, often under the assumption that
a backup policy is available (Coraluppi and Marcus 1999;
Perkins and Barto 2002; Geibel and Wysotzki 2005; Mannucci et al. 2017; Chow et al. 2018b; Mao et al. 2019). These
methods are applicable to systems if they can be trained on
accurate simulations, but for many other real-world systems
we instead require safety during training.
There has also been research on maintaining safety during
training. For instance, (Alshiekh et al. 2017; Jansen et al.
2019; Giacobbe et al. 2021) leverage the concept of a shield
that stops the agent from choosing any unsafe actions. The
shield assumes the agent observes the entire MDP (and any
opponents) to construct a safety (game) model, which is unavailable for many partially-known MDP tasks. The approach
by Garcia and Fernandez (2012) assumes a predefined safe
baseline policy that is most likely sub-optimal, and attempts
to slowly improve it with a slightly noisy action-selection policy, while defaulting to the baseline policy whenever a measure of safety is exceeded. However, this measure of safety
assumes that nearby states have similar safety levels, which
may not be the case. Another common approach is to use
expert demonstrations to learn how to behave safely (Abbeel,
Coates, and Ng 2010), or even to default to an expert when
the risk is too high (Torrey and Taylor 2012). Obviously, such
approaches rely heavily on the expert. Other approaches (Wen

