The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Clarifying the Behavior and the Difficulty of Adversarial Training
Xu Cheng1,2 , Hao Zhang2 , Yue Xin2 , Wen Shen2 , Quanshi Zhang2 *
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract

generating multi-step perturbations. However, it is a significant challenge to solve the exact dynamics of multi-step perturbations analytically. Thus, we derive an exceedingly simple theory to approximate the dynamics of multi-step perturbations on a two-layer ReLU network under three simplifying assumptions (cf. A1-A3 in Section 3.1).
More crucially, this approximate-yet-analytic dynamics
of perturbations provides new insights into different findings in adversarial training, which are responsible for the
difficulty of adversarial training.
• Finding 1. The dynamics of the adversarial perturbation reveals that the perturbation strengthens gradient components along a few top-ranked eigenvectors of the Hessian
matrix of the loss w.r.t. the input.
• Finding 2. Based on the above dynamics, we infer that
adversarial training is more influenced by a few input samples with large gradient norms, compared to vanilla training.
This unbalanced influence on adversarial training over different samples boosts the difficulty of adversarial training.
According to our analysis, the normalization/regularization
of perturbations in `2 attacks and `∞ attacks usually can alleviate such an imbalance.
• Finding 3. Adversarial training usually strengthens the
influence of Hessian matrix of the loss w.r.t. network parameters, which makes network parameters more likely to oscillate and increases the difficulty of adversarial training.
Although our simple theory is derived on a two-layer
ReLU network, our findings can still predict the imbalance
problem and the oscillation problem in adversarial training on deeper and more complex networks in experiments,
which account for the difficulty of adversarial training. Our
simple theory also reveals interesting verifiable predictions
about the dynamics of perturbations on deeper networks.

Adversarial training is usually difficult to optimize. This paper provides conceptual and analytic insights into the difficulty of adversarial training via a simple theoretical study,
where we derive an approximate dynamics of a recursive
multi-step attack in a simple setting. Despite the simplicity
of our theory, it still reveals verifiable predictions about various phenomena in adversarial training under real-world settings. First, compared to vanilla training, adversarial training
is more likely to boost the influence of input samples with
large gradient norms in an exponential manner. Besides, adversarial training also strengthens the influence of the Hessian
matrix of the loss w.r.t. network parameters, which is more
likely to make network parameters oscillate and boosts the
difficulty of adversarial training.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown
promise in different tasks, the DNN was generally fooled by
specific imperceptible perturbations of the input data (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), which were termed adversarial examples. Adversarial training (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016;
Madry et al. 2018) is the most widely used strategy to defend against adversarial examples. Despite the effectiveness
of adversarial training, extensive experiments have shown
that adversarial training is considerably more difficult to
optimize than vanilla training. Previous studies have explained this from various perspectives, such as sharp loss
landscapes (Liu et al. 2020; Kanai et al. 2021; Wu, Xia,
and Wang 2020; Yamada et al. 2021), obfuscated gradients (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018), and inhomogeneous data distributions (Sinha et al. 2017; Zhang and Wang
2019; Miyato et al. 2018).
Unlike previous research, we make a first attempt to provide conceptual and analytic insights into the difficulty of
adversarial training from the perspective of the dynamics of

2

Related Work

Previous studies have analyzed the difficulty of adversarial training from different perspectives. Specifically, some
works (Liu et al. 2020; Kanai et al. 2021; Wu, Xia, and Wang
2020; Yamada et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2018) considered that the
sharp loss landscape w.r.t. network parameters resulted in
the difficulty of adversarial training. Kurakin, Goodfellow,
and Bengio (2016) demonstrated that label leaking hindered
adversarial training. Tsipras et al. (2019) had proven compared to vanilla training, adversarial training relied on robust

* Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft
Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Quanshi Zhang < zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11507

