The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CREAD: A Classification-Restoration Framework with Error Adaptive
Discretization for Watch Time Prediction in Video Recommender Systems
Jie Sun, Zhaoying Ding, Xiaoshuang Chen, Qi Chen, Yincheng Wang, Kaiqiao Zhan, Ben Wang*
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
jie.sun327@gmail.com,{dingzhaoying, chenxiaoshuang, chenqi11, wangyincheng, zhankaiqiao, wangben}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
The watch time is a significant indicator of user satisfaction in video recommender systems. However, the prediction of watch time as a target variable is often hindered by
its highly imbalanced distribution with a scarcity of observations for larger target values and over-populated samples
for small values. State-of-the-art watch time prediction models discretize the continuous watch time into a set of buckets in order to consider the distribution of watch time. However, it is highly uninvestigated how these discrete buckets
should be created from the continuous watch time distribution, and existing discretization approaches suffer from either a large learning error or a large restoration error. To address this challenge, we propose a Classification-Restoration
framework with Error-Adaptive-Discretization (CREAD) to
accurately predict the watch time. The proposed framework
contains a discretization module, a classification module, and
a restoration module. It predicts the watch time through multiple classification problems. The discretization process is a
key contribution of the CREAD framework. We theoretically
analyze the impacts of the discretization on the learning error
and the restoration error, and then propose the error-adaptive
discretization (EAD) technique to better balance the two errors, which achieves better performance over traditional discretization approaches. We conduct detailed offline evaluations on a public dataset and an industrial dataset, both showing performance gains through the proposed approach. Moreover, We have fully launched our framework to Kwai App,
an online video platform, which resulted in a significant increase in users’ video watch time by 0.29% through A/B testing. These results highlight the effectiveness of the CREAD
framework in watch time prediction in video recommender
systems.

1

Figure 1: Probability density plot of watch time.

time becomes a crucial metric for measuring user engagement (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016). To ensure optimal user experience, it is essential to predict watch time in
online recommender systems accurately. By doing so, these
platforms can gain a better understanding of user preferences and make personalized video recommendations tailored to their interests. A large body of research (Zhan et al.
2022; Gong et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022;
Cai et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023) has been devoted to developing neural network models, and significantly improves
the prediction accuracy over traditional regression methods.
The prediction of watch time poses a regression problem due to the continuous and wide-ranging nature of users’
watch time values, which amplifies susceptibility to outliers and potential prediction skew. The distribution of watch
time for short videos, as depicted in Figure 1, is rightskewed, featuring substantial concentrations within limited
time frames: 30% of views within 3 seconds and 80% within
32 seconds. This distribution presents a challenge for earlier
watch time prediction attempts (Zhan et al. 2022; Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016), which neglected the longtailed nature of regression problems, thus yielding suboptimal results for tail instances. Moreover, in recommendation
systems, ordinal relationships among predictions play a key
role, with watch time as a metric for video comparison, highlighting the importance of ordinal ranking. However, standard regression losses like `1 and `2 do not consider ranking comparisons, focusing solely on discrepancy magnitude.
Consequently, maintaining prediction accuracy and ranking

Introduction

Recommender systems have seen great success in matching users with items they are interested in (Herlocker et al.
2004). One of the most popular applications is short-video
social media (Tang et al. 2017; Wu, Rizoiu, and Xie 2018)
such as TikTok and Instagram Reels, where short videos appear on the user’s screens without any active operation such
as clicking. Consequently, traditional metrics such as clickthrough rates are non-applicable anymore. Intuitively, watch
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9027

