The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Full-Body Motion Reconstruction with Sparse Sensing from Graph Perspective
Feiyu Yao1 , Zongkai Wu2* , Li Yi3,4,5*
1

2012 Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
2
Fancy Technology
3
Tsinghua University
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
5
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
yaofeiyu1@huawei.com, wuzongkai@fancy.tech, ericyi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Various learning-based methods have been made to generate full-body avatars from sparse inputs in AR/VR (Dittadi et al. 2021) (Du et al. 2023) (Jiang et al. 2022) (Jiang
et al. 2022). These methods in these diverse studies essentially entail the extraction of features from sparse sensor
data, devoid of considerations for human body joint relationships. Subsequently, these extracted features are integrated into various network architectures that similarly also
lack a profound consideration of the interdependence among
human body joints. The homogenization of these methodologies confines the development of reconstructing human
motion from sparse inputs to the realm of network structure
updates. Also, the absence of sufficient human body information contributes to a notable disparity between the reconstructed outcomes of the lower human body and actual motion dynamics.
To solve the problems mentioned above, we consider the
human body from graph perspective and propose BPG to
represent full body. The task is then transformed to be predicting missing nodes in established BPG. Considering the
limited information available on missing nodes, the BPG
is initialized and updated referring to node properties. The
first stage is processing node features. Position feature and
angle feature are fused since they share different transformation law and distribution. Temporal Pyramid Structure
is proposed on fusing frame-level and clip-level features
to build temporal properties for feature representation. To
model spatial properties, features of limb joints and trunk
joints are generated separately referring to the human skeleton dynamic. The generated motion features are assigned to
be initial features in BPG. In Node Feature Updating stage,
the nodes in BPG is updated referring to joint relations.
We split the node relations into static skeleton relations, dynamic skeleton relations and latent relations. Then the node
features in BPG are updated in Graph Convolution Network
with expressive edges generated from node relations.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We are the first to conduct research on full body pose reconstruction with sparse sensing from graph perspective.
The task is viewed as predicting missing nodes in an established graph.
• We propose a framework to reconstruct full body motions
via Body Pose Graph (BPG). Motion features with temporal and spatial properties are generated and assigned

Estimating 3D full-body pose from sparse sensor data is a
pivotal technique employed for the reconstruction of realistic human motions in Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality.
However, translating sparse sensor signals into comprehensive human motion remains a challenge since the sparsely
distributed sensors in common VR systems fail to capture
the motion of full human body. In this paper, we use welldesigned Body Pose Graph (BPG) to represent the human
body and translate the challenge into a prediction problem
of graph missing nodes. Then, we propose a novel full-body
motion reconstruction framework based on BPG. To establish BPG, nodes are initially endowed with features extracted
from sparse sensor signals. Features from identifiable joint
nodes across diverse sensors are amalgamated and processed
from both temporal and spatial perspectives. Temporal dynamics are captured using the Temporal Pyramid Structure,
while spatial relations in joint movements inform the spatial
attributes. The resultant features serve as the foundational elements of the BPG nodes. To further refine the BPG, node features are updated through a graph neural network that incorporates edge reflecting varying joint relations. Our method’s
effectiveness is evidenced by the attained state-of-the-art performance, particularly in lower body motion, outperforming
other baseline methods. Additionally, an ablation study validates the efficacy of each module in our proposed framework.

Introduction
Continuously full-body motion reconstruction from sparse
motion sensing is crucial for applications in Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (AR/VR), which demands highly
accurate human motion poses to render vivid avatars in
the digital world and do interactions. Common VR systems
are composed by head-mounted displays and handheld controllers. These devices can provides resourceful abundant
upper body motion information, yet they are unable to provide corresponding lower body motion data. The significant sparsity inherent in known data distribution makes the
generation of realistic full-body motion a particularly challenging endeavor for conventional methods based on human
kinematics (Company 2018) and matching motions (Ahuja
et al. 2021).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6612

