The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Reactive Synthesis for LTL and LTLf Modulo Theories
Andoni Rodrı́guez1,2 and César Sánchez1
1

IMDEA Software Institute
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
{andoni.rodriguez,cesar.sanchez}@imdea.org
2

Abstract

Sánchez 2023), using a Boolean abstraction or Booleanization method that translates a specification ϕT in LTLT into
an equi-realizable LTL ϕB formulae: i.e. ϕT is realizable if
and only if ϕB is realizable.
However, to perform LTLT reactive synthesis it is not
enough to synthesize a controller for the Booleanized specifications because the system will receive and will have to
produce values from theory variables. Some previous synthesis methods try to create statically a controller that always
produces the same outputs for the same inputs (e.g. (Katis
et al. 2016)) but are incomplete for many T , since they need
to compute Skolem functions. In this paper, we propose a
general method that uses on-the-fly procedures to dynamically produce outputs as the results of computing models of
existential T formulae. Concretely, the method we propose
statically receives an LTLT specification ϕ, Booleanizes ϕ
using (Rodriguez and Sánchez 2023) and synthesizes a controller S using standard methods. Then, dynamically S is
combined with a tool that can produce models of satisfiable
T formulae (e.g., an SMT solver) which collaborate in tandem at each step of the execution. To guarantee that the reaction is produced at every step, we require that T has an efficient procedure to provide models of existential fragments
of T . Our approach does not guarantee termination using
semi-decidable T , but still yields a partial solution for such
cases. We also use an additional component, called partitioner, which discretizes the environment T -input providing
a suitable input for the Boolean controller (but this is an easy
by-product of the Booleanization procedure and can be computed statically). As far as we know, this is the first successful reactive synthesis procedure for LTLT specifications.

Reactive synthesis is the process of generate correct controllers from temporal logic specifications. Typically, synthesis is restricted to Boolean specifications in LTL. Recently, a
Boolean abstraction technique allows to translate LTLT specifications that contain literals in theories into equi-realizable
LTL specifications, but no full synthesis procedure exists yet.
In synthesis modulo theories, the system receives valuations
of environment variables (from a first-order theory T ) and
outputs valuations of system variables from T . In this paper, we address how to syntheize a full controller using a
combination of the static Boolean controller obtained from
the Booleanized LTL specification together with on-the-fly
queries to a solver that produces models of satisfiable existential T formulae. This is the first synthesis method for LTL
modulo theories. Additionally, our method can produce adaptive responses which increases explainability and can improve runtime properties like performance. Our approach is
applicable to both LTL modulo theories and LTLf modulo
theories.

Introduction
Reactive synthesis is the problem of automatically producing a system that models a given temporal specification,
where the Boolean variables (i.e., atomic propositions) are
split into those controlled by the environment and those
controlled by the system. Realizability is the related decision problem of deciding whether such a system exists.
These problems have been widely studied (Pnueli and Rosner 1989), specially in the domain of Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL) (Pnueli 1977). Realizability corresponds to an infinite game where players alternatively choose the valuations
of the Boolean variables they control. A specification is realizable if and only if the system has a strategy such that
the specification is satisfied in all plays played according to
the strategy. The system is extracted from a winning system strategy. Both reactive synthesis and realizability are
decidable for LTL (Pnueli and Rosner 1989). LTL modulo
theories (LTLT ) is the extension of LTL where Boolean
atomic propositions can be literals from a (multi-sorted)
first-order theory T . Realizability of LTLT specifications is
decidable under certain conditions over T (Rodriguez and

Preliminaries
LTL, LTLf and reactive synthesis. We use synthesis of
LTL (Pnueli 1977) specifications. The syntax of LTL is:
ϕ ::= T a ϕ ∨ ϕ ¬ϕ ϕ ϕ U ϕ
where a ranges from an atomic set of proposition AP, ∨,
∧ and ¬ are the usual Boolean disjunction, conjunction and
negation, and  and U are the next and until temporal operators (other derived operators include R,  and ). The
semantics of LTL associate traces σ ∈ Σω with formulae.
Our technique also applies to LTLf specifications (Manna
and Pnueli 1995; Giacomo and Vardi 2013), that borrow the

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10679

