The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Faithful Model Explanations through
Energy-Constrained Conformal Counterfactuals
Patrick Altmeyer1 , Mojtaba Farmanbar2 , Arie van Deursen1 , Cynthia C. S. Liem1
1

Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science
2
ING Bank
p.altmeyer@tudelft.nl

by D attributes, for which the model Mθ : X 7→ Y initially predicts a different outcome: Mθ (x) ̸= y+ . Counterfactuals are then searched by minimizing a loss function that
compares the predicted model output to the target outcome:
yloss(Mθ (x), y+ ). Since counterfactual explanations work
directly with the black-box model, valid counterfactuals always have full local fidelity by construction where fidelity is
defined as the degree to which explanations approximate the
predictions of a black-box model (Molnar 2022).
In situations where full fidelity is a requirement, counterfactual explanations offer a more appropriate solution to Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) than other popular approaches like LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and
SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017), which involve local surrogate models. But even full fidelity is not a sufficient condition for ensuring that an explanation faithfully describes the
behaviour of a model. That is because multiple distinct explanations can lead to the same model prediction, especially
when dealing with heavily parameterized models like deep
neural networks, which are underspecified by the data (Wilson 2020). In the context of counterfactuals, the idea that no
two explanations are the same arises almost naturally. A key
focus in the literature has therefore been to identify those
explanations that are most appropriate based on a myriad of
desiderata such as closeness (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), sparsity (Schut et al. 2021), actionability (Ustun,
Spangher, and Liu 2019) and plausibility (Joshi et al. 2019).
In this work, we draw closer attention to modelling faithfulness rather than fidelity as a desideratum for counterfactuals. We define faithfulness as the degree to which counterfactuals are consistent with what the model has learned
about the data. Our key contributions are as follows: first,
we show that fidelity is an insufficient evaluation metric for
counterfactuals (Section ) and propose a definition of faithfulness that gives rise to more suitable metrics (Section ).
Next, we introduce a ECCCo: a novel algorithmic approach
aimed at generating energy-constrained conformal counterfactuals that faithfully explain model behaviour in Section .
Finally, we provide extensive empirical evidence demonstrating that ECCCo faithfully explains model behaviour and
attains plausibility only when appropriate (Section ).
To our knowledge, this is the first venture in this direction for generating faithful counterfactuals. Thus, we anticipate that ECCCo can serve as a baseline for future research.

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations offer an intuitive and straightforward way to explain black-box models and offer algorithmic
recourse to individuals. To address the need for plausible explanations, existing work has primarily relied on surrogate
models to learn how the input data is distributed. This effectively reallocates the task of learning realistic explanations
for the data from the model itself to the surrogate. Consequently, the generated explanations may seem plausible to
humans but need not necessarily describe the behaviour of
the black-box model faithfully. We formalize this notion of
faithfulness through the introduction of a tailored evaluation
metric and propose a novel algorithmic framework for generating Energy-Constrained Conformal Counterfactuals that
are only as plausible as the model permits. Through extensive empirical studies, we demonstrate that ECCCo reconciles the need for faithfulness and plausibility. In particular,
we show that for models with gradient access, it is possible to achieve state-of-the-art performance without the need
for surrogate models. To do so, our framework relies solely
on properties defining the black-box model itself by leveraging recent advances in energy-based modelling and conformal prediction. To our knowledge, this is the first venture in
this direction for generating faithful counterfactual explanations. Thus, we anticipate that ECCCo can serve as a baseline
for future research. We believe that our work opens avenues
for researchers and practitioners seeking tools to better distinguish trustworthy from unreliable models.

Introduction
Counterfactual explanations provide a powerful, flexible and
intuitive way to not only explain black-box models but also
offer the possibility of algorithmic recourse to affected individuals. Instead of opening the black box, counterfactual explanations work under the premise of strategically perturbing model inputs to understand model behaviour (Wachter,
Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017). Intuitively speaking, we generate explanations in this context by asking what-if questions
of the following nature: ‘Our credit risk model currently predicts that this individual is not credit-worthy. What if they
reduced their monthly expenditures by 10%?’
This is typically implemented by defining a target outcome y+ ∈ Y for some individual x ∈ X = RD described
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10829

