The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Frame Semantic Role Labeling
Using Arbitrary-Order Conditional Random Fields
Chaoyi Ai, Kewei Tu*
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{aichy,tukw}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

target word

Abstract
This paper presents an approach to frame semantic role labeling (FSRL), a task in natural language processing that
identifies semantic roles within a text following the theory
of frame semantics. Unlike previous approaches which do
not adequately model correlations and interactions amongst
arguments, we propose arbitrary-order conditional random
fields (CRFs) that are capable of modeling full interaction
amongst an arbitrary number of arguments of a given predicate. To achieve tractable representation and inference, we
apply canonical polyadic decomposition to the arbitraryorder factor in our proposed CRF and utilize mean-field variational inference for approximate inference. We further unfold our iterative inference procedure into a recurrent neural
network that is connected to our neural encoder and scorer,
enabling end-to-end training and inference. Finally, we also
improve our model with several techniques such as spanbased scoring and decoding. Our experiments show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in FSRL.

playing

frame elements

arguments

Instrument

the violin

Performer

the musician
a farmer

Place

in a small village
in the national theater

We watch the musician, raised in a small village by a farmer,
playing the violin in the national theater.

Figure 1: An example input sentence for FSRL. Italicized
texts are the correct arguments.

Bastianelli, Vanzo, and Lemon 2020; Zheng et al. 2022;
Zheng, Wang, and Chang 2023). However, most of these approaches still do not adequately model high-order correlations and interactions amongst arguments which are prevalent in FSRL. Take the sentence in Figure 1 for example: “We
watch the musician, raised in a small village by a farmer,
playing the violin in the national theater.” The frame for
this sentence is denoted as Performance with the target
word being “playing”. In this example, each frame element presents multiple plausible candidate arguments. Determining the correct arguments by observing them in isolation, i.e., using first-order inference, proves challenging.
Even taking pairwise interactions between arguments into
consideration is still not enough: “a farmer” and “in a small
village” are quite compatible as frame elements of “playing”. To ascertain the correct frame semantic structure, it is
helpful to evaluate the full combinations of all arguments
through high-order inference. In our example, the combination “the musician”, “the violin”, and “in the national theater” as frame elements related to the target word “playing” appears more probable than others such as “a farmer”,
“the violin”, and “in a small village”. Recent researches in
FSRL (Zheng et al. 2022; Zheng, Wang, and Chang 2023)
have typically used first-order inference or only modeled
pairwise argument interactions via GNN or cross-encoder.
Consequently, FSRL exploring high-order modeling and inference amongst all arguments remains untapped.

Introduction
Frame semantic role labeling (FSRL) is a task grounded
in the theory of frame semantics (Litkowski 2004), aiming
to identify and assign semantic roles, known as frame elements (FEs), to the arguments of each predicate in a sentence. In this context, each predicate triggers a specific semantic frame defined with a unique set of frame elements.
The FrameNet lexical resource (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe
1998) provides comprehensive descriptions for frames and
frame elements, which encapsulate a wide range of events,
relationships, objects, and situations. By extracting frame
semantic structures from text, FSRL serves as an invaluable tool for a multitude of downstream applications, including but not limited to information extraction (Surdeanu
et al. 2003), summary generation (Trandabăt, 2011), machine
translation (Liu and Gildea 2010; Marcheggiani, Bastings,
and Titov 2018), question answering (Shen and Lapata 2007;
Eckert and Neves 2018; Khashabi et al. 2018), and reading
comprehension (Wang et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2020).
Over the past several years, a series of approaches have
been proposed for FSRL that reach increasingly high accuracy (Kshirsagar et al. 2015; Swayamdipta et al. 2017;
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17638

