The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DenoSent: A Denoising Objective for Self-Supervised Sentence Representation
Learning
Xinghao Wang, Junliang He, Pengyu Wang, Yunhua Zhou, Tianxiang Sun, Xipeng Qiu*
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{xinghaowang22, jlhe22, pywang22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhouyh20, txsun19, xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Recently, contrastive methods have been adopted to sentence representation learning (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021;
Yan et al. 2021; Giorgi et al. 2021) and brought substantial improvement in both STS tasks and transfer tasks like
sentiment analysis. These methods regularize the pre-trained
language models (PLMs) representation space to be less
anisotropic (Ethayarajh 2019; Wang and Isola 2020), yielding competitive performance in downstream tasks.
However, one limitation of contrastive-learning-based
methods is that their performance is highly dependent on
the strategies of constructing positive pairs and selecting negative pairs. For instance, previous works adopted
standard dropout (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021), different
data augmentation strategies (Yan et al. 2021) and different prompts (Jiang et al. 2022) to construct positive pairs
and may include a true-negative sample selection (Zhou
et al. 2022) to alleviate the above problem. Nevertheless,
contrastive methods solely learn the representation from
the inter-sentence perspective, i.e., their supervision signal
comes from the relationship between data samples, making
it challenging to capture fine-grained semantics.
To address the above issue, we start from another perspective, i.e., the intra-sentence perspective, to learn sentence
representations. In this work, we propose a novel denoising
objective for sentence representation learning, which corresponds to another main branch of self-supervised learning (Liu et al. 2021) other than contrastive, the generative branch, to provide intra-sentence supervision signals.
Specifically, we adopt an encoder-decoder model structure
that is identical to the original Transformer, except we
only keep the encoded sentence representation to do crossattention with a noisy version of the original sentence input.
The training objective is to recover the noisy input to its original. Furthermore, the structure of our training framework
has been designed to enable self-supervised integration of
both intra-sentence and inter-sentence objectives.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. We propose a novel training objective to learn highquality sentence representations from an intra-sentence
perspective, i.e., utilize an auto-encoder structure and
learn sentence representations by reconstructing the input sentence.
2. We incorporate both discrete noises and continuous
noises into our training framework, which facilitates our

Contrastive-learning-based methods have dominated sentence representation learning. These methods regularize the
representation space by pulling similar sentence representations closer and pushing away the dissimilar ones and have
been proven effective in various NLP tasks, e.g., semantic textual similarity (STS) tasks. However, it is challenging for these methods to learn fine-grained semantics as they
only learn from the inter-sentence perspective, i.e., their supervision signal comes from the relationship between data
samples. In this work, we propose a novel denoising objective that inherits from another perspective, i.e., the intrasentence perspective. By introducing both discrete and continuous noise, we generate noisy sentences and then train our
model to restore them to their original form. Our empirical
evaluations demonstrate that this approach delivers competitive results on both semantic textual similarity (STS) and a
wide range of transfer tasks, standing up well in comparison to contrastive-learning-based methods. Notably, the proposed intra-sentence denoising objective complements existing inter-sentence contrastive methodologies and can be integrated with them to further enhance performance. Our code
is available at https://github.com/xinghaow99/DenoSent.

Introduction
Sentence representation learning is a fundamental task for
natural language processing, which aims to embed sentencelevel semantics into vectors of a fixed-sized d. High-quality
sentence representations are expected to form a uniform
space where similar semantics stay close, which is proven
beneficial to various downstream tasks such as semantic textual similarity and information retrieval.
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)-based pre-trained language models (PLMs) like BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) and
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) have shown remarkably superior performance on token-level tasks and can be adapted to
various downstream tasks through fine-tuning, but they perform poorly in encoding sentence-level semantics due to the
well-known anisotropy phenomenon in their representation
space. Therefore, further training these PLMs for sentencelevel representation learning remains a challenge.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19180

