The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Partial Optimal Transport: Revising the Infeasibility of Sinkhorn and Efficient
Gradient Methods
Anh Duc Nguyen1 , Tuan Dung Nguyen2 , Quang Minh Nguyen3 , Hoang H. Nguyen4 ,
Lam M. Nguyen5 , Kim-Chuan Toh1, 6
1
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, USA
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
4
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
5
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, USA
6
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
anh duc@u.nus.edu, joshtn@seas.upenn.edu, nmquang@mit.edu,
hnguyen455@gatech.edu, LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com, mattohkc@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

masses, such as averaging of neuroimaging data (Gramfort,
Peyré, and Cuturi 2015) and image classification (Pele and
Werman 2008; Rubner, Tomasi, and Guibas 2000).
In response to such limitations, Partial Optimal Transport (POT), which explicitly constrains the mass to be transported between two unbalanced measures, was proposed. It
has been studied from the perspective of partial differential
equations by theorists (Figalli 2010; Caffarelli and McCann
2010). Practically, the relaxation of the marginal constraints,
which are strictly imposed by the standard OT, and the control over the total mass transported grant POT immense flexibility compared to OT (Chapel, Alaya, and Gasso 2020) and
more robustness to outliers (Le et al. 2021). POT has been
deployed in various recent AI applications such as color
transfer (Bonneel and Coeurjolly 2019), graph neural networks (Sarlin et al. 2019), graph matching (Liu et al. 2020),
partial covering (Kawano, Koide, and Otaki 2021), point set
registration (Wang et al. 2022), and robust estimation (Nietert, Cummings, and Goldfeld 2023).
Despite its potential applicability, POT still suffers from
the computation bottleneck, whereby the more intricate
structural constraints imposed on admissible couplings have
hindered the direct adaptation of any efficient OT solver in
the literature. Currently, the literature (Chapel, Alaya, and
Gasso 2020; Le et al. 2021) relies on reformulating POT
into an extended OT problem under additional assumptions
on the input masses, which can then be solved via existing
OT methods, and finally retrieves an admissible POT coupling from the solution to the extended OT problem. This
approach has two fundamental drawbacks. First, in the reformulated OT problem, the maximum entry of the extended
cost matrix is increased (Chapel, Alaya, and Gasso 2020,
Proposition 1), which will always worsen the computational
complexity since most efficient algorithms for standard OT
(Dvurechensky, Gasnikov, and Kroshnin 2018; Lin, Ho, and
Jordan 2019; Guminov et al. 2021) depend on this maximum entry in their complexities. Second, we discover, more
details in the Revisiting Sinkhorn section, that although
Sinkhorn for POT proposed by (Le et al. 2021) achieves
e 2 /ε2 ), it in fact always
the best known complexity of O(n

This paper studies the Partial Optimal Transport (POT) problem between two unbalanced measures with at most n supports and its applications in various AI tasks such as color
transfer or domain adaptation. There is hence a need for
fast approximations of POT with increasingly large problem
sizes in arising applications. We first theoretically and experimentally investigate the infeasibility of the state-of-the-art
Sinkhorn algorithm for POT, which consequently degrades its
qualitative performance in real world applications like pointcloud registration. To this end, we propose a novel rounding
algorithm for POT, and then provide a feasible Sinkhorn procedure with a revised computation complexity of e
O(n2 /ε4 ).
Our rounding algorithm also permits the development of
two first-order methods to approximate the POT problem.
The first algorithm, Adaptive Primal-Dual Accelerated Gradient Descent (APDAGD), finds an ε-approximate solution
to the POT problem in e
O(n2.5 /ε). The second method,
Dual Extrapolation, achieves the computation complexity of
e 2 /ε), thereby being the best in the literature. We further
O(n
demonstrate the flexibility of POT compared to standard OT
as well as the practicality of our algorithms on real applications where two marginal distributions are unbalanced.

Introduction
Optimal Transport (OT) (Villani 2008; Kantorovich 1942),
which seeks a minimum-cost coupling between two balanced measures, is a well-studied topic in mathematics and
operations research. With the introduction of entropic regularization (Cuturi 2013), the scalability and speed of OT
computation have been significantly improved, facilitating
its widespread applications in machine learning such as domain adaptation (Courty et al. 2017), and dictionary learning
(Rolet, Cuturi, and Peyré 2016). However, OT has a stringent requirement that the input measures must have equal
total masses (Chizat et al. 2015), hindering its practicality in
various other machine learning applications, which require
an optimal matching between two measures with unbalanced
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8090

