The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Hybrid Dynamics Models with Simulator-Informed Latent States
Katharina Ensinger1,2 , Sebastian Ziesche1 , Sebastian Trimpe2
1

2

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen Univeristy
katharina.ensinger@bosch.com

Abstract
Dynamics model learning deals with the task of inferring unknown dynamics from measurement data and predicting the
future behavior of the system. A typical approach to address
this problem is to train recurrent models. However, predictions
with these models are often not physically meaningful. Further,
they suffer from deteriorated behavior over time due to accumulating errors. Often, simulators building on first principles
are available being physically meaningful by design. However,
modeling simplifications typically cause inaccuracies in these
models. Consequently, hybrid modeling is an emerging trend
that aims to combine the best of both worlds. In this paper, we
propose a new approach to hybrid modeling, where we inform
the latent states of a learned model via a black-box simulator. This allows to control the predictions via the simulator
preventing them from accumulating errors. This is especially
challenging since, in contrast to previous approaches, access to
the simulator’s latent states is not available. We tackle the task
by leveraging observers, a well-known concept from control
theory, inferring unknown latent states from observations and
dynamics over time. In our learning-based setting, we jointly
learn the dynamics and an observer that infers the latent states
via the simulator. Thus, the simulator constantly corrects the
latent states, compensating for modeling mismatch caused
by learning. To maintain flexibility, we train an RNN-based
residuum for the latent states that cannot be informed by the
simulator.

1

Introduction
N

Physical processes (xn )n=0 ∈ Rdx can often be described
via a discrete-time dynamical system
xn+1 = f (xn ).
(1)
In practice, the dynamics f are often unknown but measurements are available. Typically, it is not possible to measure
the full state space but noisy measurements ŷn for a function
g of the states can be obtained by sensors, thus
yn = g(xn )
(2)
ŷn = yn + n , with n ∼ N (0, σ 2 ),

and g : Rdx → Rdy . Our general motivation here is to
make accurate predictions for the future behavior of the measurable states yn in Eq. (2). One common strategy to address this problem is to train recurrent architectures on ŷn
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11892

in Eq. (2) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Oliva, Póczos, and Schneider 2017). Analogous to the unknown system,
they possess internal latent states. Predictions are obtained by
mapping the latent states to the measurable states yn (cf. Eq.
(2)) via an observation model. While these methods are able
to accurately reflect the system’s transitions, they often lack
physically meaningful predictions, e.g. by violating physical
laws. Further, small model mismatches lead to accumulating errors over time in the latent states and thus, also in the
predictions (Zhou et al. 2018).
To address these problems, it is often beneficial to include
physical prior knowledge such as energy conservation, invariants etc. in the architecture (Chen et al. 2020; Greydanus,
Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019). For many systems, it is even
possible to model a physics-based simulator for the system
producing stand-alone predictions (Jia et al. 2021; Willard
et al. 2022). By design, predictions from these models are
physically meaningful. Further, they typically do not suffer
as much from error accumulation. However, modeling simplifications or incomplete knowledge lead to inaccuracies
in the model. In order to combine the best of both worlds,
hybrid modeling (HM) fuses physics-based simulations with
learning-based approaches (Takeishi and Kalousis 2021; Wehenkel et al. 2023; Yin et al. 2021). Most hybrid modeling
approaches rely on analytical descriptions of physics laws.
However, such simulators are often not available in practice.
Instead, numerical simulators building on these laws are available that are incompatible with most HM approaches. Further,
simulator software is often proprietary. As a consequence,
the simulators are often black-box. More specifically, they
provide approximations ŝ ∈ Rds to the true outputs y (cf.
Eq. (2)). Any additional insight as access to the simulator’s
internal latent states or dynamics is not available.
We propose to extract the hidden information and dynamics of the simulator outputs. By informing the latent states
of a learning-based model with this information, we prevent
them from error accumulation and ensure that they are consistent with the simulator. In contrast to our approach, previous
approaches in the black-box HM case, typically fuse the
final predictions to one common prediction. The simplest
approach is fusing them additively via a residuum model
(Suhartono et al. 2017), while more sophisticated approaches
e.g. leverage the spectral properties (Ensinger et al. 2023).
Thus, the simulator has an influence on the final predictions

