The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

STDiff: Spatio-Temporal Diffusion for Continuous Stochastic Video Prediction
Xi Ye * , Guillaume-Alexandre Bilodeau
LITIV, Polytechnique Montréal
xi.ye@polymtl.ca, gabilodeau@polymtl.ca

Abstract

Previous works (Castrejon et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2021)
empirically observed that the main issue which limits the
performance is that the stochastic video prediction model is
not expressive enough, specifically, shallow levels of latent
variables are incapable of capturing the complex groundtruth latent distribution. Castrejon et al. (2019) introduced
hierarchical latent variables into variational RNNs (VRNNs)
to mitigate the problem. Recent progress of diffusion-based
video prediction models (Voleti et al. 2022; Harvey et al.
2022; Höppe et al. 2022) can also be attributed to the increase of model expressiveness, because diffusion models can be considered as infinitely deep hierarchical VAEs
(Huang, Lim, and Courville 2021; Tzen and Raginsky 2019)
with a fixed encoder and latent variables across different levels having the same dimensionality as the data.
However, none of the previous models explored extending
the stochastic expressiveness along the temporal dimension.
Hierarchical VRNNs incorporate randomness at each fixed
time step, which is limited by the discrete nature of RNNs.
Meanwhile, almost all the previous diffusion-based video
prediction models (Voleti et al. 2022; Harvey et al. 2022;
Höppe et al. 2022) concatenate a few frames together and
learn the distribution of those short video clips as a whole,
which ignores an explicit temporal stochasticity estimation
between frames. Therefore, there is a need to increase the
expressiveness of the stochastic video prediction model over
both the spatial and temporal dimensions.
One more issue is that almost all video prediction models
can only predict future frames at fixed time steps, ignoring
the continuous nature of real-world dynamic scenes. Thus,
additional video interpolation models are required to generate videos with a different frame rate. Only a few recent preliminary works have explored this topic (Park et al. 2021; Ye
and Bilodeau 2023b), but they are either limited to deterministic predictions (Park et al. 2021) or exhibit low diversity in
stochastic predictions (Ye and Bilodeau 2023b). To improve
video prediction, a method should be able to do continuous
stochastic prediction with a good level of diversity.
In this paper, we propose a novel diffusion-based stochastic video prediction model that addresses the limited expressiveness and the temporal continuous prediction problems
for the video prediction task. We propose to increase the
expressiveness of the video prediction model by separately
learning the temporal and spatial stochasticity. Specifically,

Predicting future frames of a video is challenging because it
is difficult to learn the uncertainty of the underlying factors
influencing their contents. In this paper, we propose a novel
video prediction model, which has infinite-dimensional latent
variables over the spatio-temporal domain. Specifically, we
first decompose the video motion and content information,
then take a neural stochastic differential equation to predict
the temporal motion information, and finally, an image diffusion model autoregressively generates the video frame by
conditioning on the predicted motion feature and the previous frame. The better expressiveness and stronger stochasticity learning capability of our model lead to state-of-theart video prediction performances. As well, our model is
able to achieve temporal continuous prediction, i.e., predicting in an unsupervised way the future video frames with an
arbitrarily high frame rate. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/XiYe20/STDiffProject.

Introduction
Given some observed past frames as input, a video prediction model forecasts plausible future frames, with the aim of
mimicking the vision-based precognition ability of humans.
Anticipating the future is critical for developing intelligent
agents, thus video prediction models have applications in the
field of autonomous driving, route planning, and anomaly
detection (Lu et al. 2019).
Video frame prediction (VFP) is challenging due to the inherent unpredictability of the future. Theoretically, there are
an infinite number of potential future outcomes corresponding to the same past observation. Moreover, the stochasticity increases exponentially as the model predicts towards
a more distant future. Early deterministic video prediction
models (Finn, Goodfellow, and Levine 2016; Villegas et al.
2017) are incapable of dealing with a multimodal future and
thus the prediction tends to be blurry. Subsequently, techniques such as VAE and GANs were introduced for stochastic video prediction (Babaeizadeh et al. 2018; Lee et al.
2018; Denton and Fergus 2018; Castrejon et al. 2019). However, they still fall short in achieving satisfactory results.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6666

