The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Point Cloud Part Editing: Segmentation, Generation, Assembly, and Selection
Kaiyi Zhang1 , Yang Chen1 , Ximing Yang1 , Weizhong Zhang1,2 , Cheng Jin1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China
{zhangky20, chen yang19, xmyang19, weizhongzhang, jc}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

hand, methods such as MRGAN (Gal et al. 2021) and SPGAN (Li et al. 2021) do not realize radical disentanglement
between parts. Therefore, when some parts are modified,
other parts will also change, which means they do not guarantee the fidelity to the remaining parts. Similarly, multimodal shape completion methods such as MSC-cGAN (Wu
et al. 2020a), which can be regarded as a subset of part editing, also do not disentangle parts. This not only changes
the input parts but also makes the completion results less
diverse. Someone may argue that the adjacent parts may
change to accommodate the edited parts, but this will not
affect the requirement of radical disentanglement, since all
changed parts can be regarded as edited parts. On the other
hand, some methods (Schor et al. 2019; Li, Niu, and Xu
2020; Li, Liu, and Walder 2022) do not implement constraints between parts effectively. This may result in poor
part assembly and mismatched parts to be used in the formation of an object. Although these methods attempt to achieve
assembly by moving parts, the changed parts still need a
manual selection to ensure high-quality edited results that
lead to a reasonable object.

Ideal part editing should guarantee the diversity of edited
parts, the fidelity to the remaining parts, and the quality of
the results. However, previous methods do not disentangle
each part completely, which means the edited parts will affect
the others, resulting in poor diversity and fidelity. In addition,
some methods lack constraints between parts, which need
manual selections of edited results to ensure quality. Therefore, we propose a four-stage process for point cloud part
editing: Segmentation, Generation, Assembly, and Selection.
Based on this process, we introduce SGAS, a model for
part editing that employs two strategies: feature disentanglement and constraint. By independently fitting part-level
feature distributions, we realize the feature disentanglement.
By explicitly modeling the transformation from object-level
distribution to part-level distributions, we realize the feature
constraint. Considerable experiments on different datasets
demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of SGAS on
point cloud part editing. In addition, SGAS can be pruned to
realize unsupervised part-aware point cloud generation and
achieves state-of-the-art results.

Introduction

To address these issues, as shown in Figure 1(b), we first
propose a four-stage process for point cloud part editing:
segmentation, generation, assembly, and selection. For the
three properties of edited results, segmentation can guarantee the fidelity to the remaining parts by isolating the parts;
generation can guarantee the diversity of edited parts by exploring different variations of the parts; assembly and selection can guarantee the quality of the results by choosing
the most appropriate edited parts and assembling them in
a coherent manner. Based on this process, we introduce a
model SGAS for part editing that employs two strategies:
feature disentanglement and constraint. We first use unsupervised shape co-segmentation methods (Chen et al. 2019;
Zhu et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022) or manual segmentation to obtain Ground Truth parts. Then we pre-train several
autoencoders at the part level. Finally, by adversarially supervising part-level feature transformations, we realize the
feature disentanglement during generation. Since each part
is generated separately, this not only ensures the diversity of
edited parts but also the fidelity to the remaining parts. In
addition, we make the distribution of each part transformed
from the same Gaussian distribution and adversarially supervise the generations of all parts simultaneously to ensure that

In the context of 3D object modeling, parts are considered
the fundamental units. Recently, part-based methods (Wang
et al. 2018; Mo et al. 2019a; Li, Niu, and Xu 2020; Jones
et al. 2020; Gal et al. 2021; Li, Liu, and Walder 2022) have
become more and more prevailing. These methods typically
involve obtaining different parts first and then assembling
them. Although many works have explored procedural content generation (Liu et al. 2021), which is often used to
make material maps and game maps, the rapid development
of game scenes still relies heavily on the generation of 3D
objects. Part-based methods enable part editing, which involves replacing some parts of an object to create a new one,
thereby enhancing the diversity of 3D modeling.
Ideal part editing should make edited parts diverse while
keeping unedited parts unchanged to form a reasonable object. These correspond to three important properties of the
edited results: diversity, fidelity, and quality. However, when
previous part-based methods are applied to part editing, they
have two problems. As shown in Figure 1(a), on the one
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7187

