The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stratified GNN Explanations through Sufficient Expansion
Yuwen Ji1 , Lei Shi 1 * , Zhimeng Liu2 , Ge Wang2
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
{jiyuwen, leishi}@buaa.edu.cn, d202210287@xs.ustb.edu.cn, gewang@ustb.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Despite the surge of this topic, there is currently little work considering the hierarchically clustered structure
within the graph whilst explaining the GNN on top of these
graphs. In fact, such hierarchical structure arises naturally in
scientific or social contexts and can be central to their graph
characteristics and application-level properties. For example, a popular class of compound in material science, namely
Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs), is composed of complex molecular graphs built recursively from a variety of
Secondary Building Units (SBUs). As shown in Figure 1(a),
the catalytic performance of MOF in a chemical reaction is
influenced by both the local atomic structure of the underlying SBU and the connectivity among high-level SBUs.
In this work, we consider the problem of explaining GNN
models at multiple levels aligning with the inherent hierarchical structure of the input graph. Currently, the only
hierarchy-aware GNN explanation method, i.e. MotifExplainer (Yu and Gao 2022), focuses on extracting influential
high-level clusters out of the graph data, but misses the opportunity to credit inter-cluster connectivity and high-level
subgraphs, of the pattern crucial to most classical GNN explainers at the input graph level. Meanwhile, the subgraph
explanation by classical methods (Ying et al. 2019; Luo et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2021) can also be hierarchically clustered
according to the prior knowledge on the graph and achieves
multi-level explanations. Yet, this mash-up approach does
not capture the importance of group-based features at multiple graph levels, imposing limitations on the essential processes of candidate subgraph generation and optimization.
This paper studies explanation methods that natively support multi-level GNN interpretation. Though existing approaches have established a general pipeline for GNN explanation and adapted effective optimization algorithms, there
are still several challenges in solving our recent problem.
First, the classical objective function based on mutual information is only defined at the input graph level. The hierarchical graph structure vital to our work is yet to be incorporated. Second, the optimization framework adopted by
existing methods depends on the context that the individual features optimized have already been embedded by the
GNN explained, which can be trained altogether to optimize
the objective. In contrast, high-level graph features are not
necessarily embedded in the original GNN model. Finally,
evaluating multi-level GNN explanations is a new task that

Explaining the decisions made by Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) is vital for establishing trust and ensuring fairness
in critical applications such as medicine and science. The
prevalence of hierarchical structure in real-world graphs/networks raises an important question on GNN interpretability:
”On each level of the graph structure, which specific fraction imposes the highest influence over the prediction?” Currently, the prevailing two categories of methods are incapable
of achieving multi-level GNN explanation due to their flat
or motif-centric nature. In this work, we formulate the problem of learning multi-level explanations out of GNN models and introduce a stratified explainer module, namely STFExplainer, that utilizes the concept of sufficient expansion to
generate explanations on each stratum. Specifically, we learn
a higher-level subgraph generator by leveraging both hierarchical structure and GNN-encoded input features. Experiment results on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our stratified explainer on standard
interpretability tasks and metrics such as fidelity and explanation recall, with an average improvement of 11% and 8%
over the best alternative on each data type. The case study
on material domains also confirms the value of our approach
through detected multi-level graph patterns accurately reconstructing the knowledge-based ground truth.

Introduction
Interpreting Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Dwivedi et al.
2020; Wu et al. 2020) is considered a key agenda for Explainable AI as GNNs grow flourishing in our machine
learning toolbox, yet still suffer greatly from the well-known
black box problem. Fortunately, the field has been witnessing a burst of literature in the recent few years (Yuan et al.
2022; Kakkad et al. 2023). These successful proposals build
a solid theoretical foundation for GNN explanation. Both
instance-level post-hoc explanation methods (notably the
seminal work of GNNExplainer (Ying et al. 2019)) and
mechanism for model-level explanation (e.g., XGNN (Yuan
et al. 2020)) are introduced. They help to establish trust
and ensure fairness in critical applications such as chemistry (Reiser et al. 2022), material science (Choudhary et al.
2022), and finance (Wu, Chao, and Li 2023).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12839

