The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Weakly Supervised Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Jianghang Lin1 , Yunhang Shen2 , Bingquan Wang1 , Shaohui Lin3 , Ke Li2 , Liujuan Cao1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, China.
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, China.
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, China.
{hunterjlin007, wangbingquan}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{shenyunhang01, shaohuilin007, tristanli.sh}@gmail.com, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn,
Abstract

Despite weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) being
a promising step toward evading strong instance-level annotations, its capability is confined to closed-set categories
within a single training dataset. In this paper, we propose
a novel weakly supervised open-vocabulary object detection
framework, namely WSOVOD, to extend traditional WSOD
to detect novel concepts and utilize diverse datasets with
only image-level annotations. To achieve this, we explore
three vital strategies, including dataset-level feature adaptation, image-level salient object localization, and region-level
vision-language alignment. First, we perform data-aware feature extraction to produce an input-conditional coefficient,
which is leveraged into dataset attribute prototypes to identify dataset bias and help achieve cross-dataset generalization.
Second, a customized location-oriented weakly supervised
region proposal network is proposed to utilize high-level semantic layouts from the category-agnostic segment anything
model to distinguish object boundaries. Lastly, we introduce a proposal-concept synchronized multiple-instance network, i.e., object mining and refinement with visual-semantic
alignment, to discover objects matched to the text embeddings of concepts. Extensive experiments on Pascal VOC
and MS COCO demonstrate that the proposed WSOVOD
achieves new state-of-the-art compared with previous WSOD
methods in both close-set object localization and detection tasks. Meanwhile, WSOVOD enables cross-dataset and
open-vocabulary learning to achieve on-par or even better performance than well-established fully-supervised openvocabulary object detection (FSOVOD).

(a) Paradigm comparisons.

(b) Qualitative comparisons.

Figure 1: Vanilla WSOD is confined to detecting known categories from the training set, e.g., Person, and Horse. The
proposed WSOVOD is generalized to unseen categories,
e.g., Flag, and Fence. WSOVOD outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art WSOD methods and achieves on-par or even
better performance than FSOVOD.

Introduction
In the past decades, the artificial intelligence community has
witnessed great progress in object detection. In particular,
large amount of human-annotated datasets significantly promotes the prosperity and progress of fully-supervised object detection (FSOD), such as Faster RCNN (Ren et al.
2015), YOLO (Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi
2017), Detr (Carion et al. 2020) and their variants (Zhu et al.
2021; Zheng et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021). Nevertheless,
the laborious and lavish collection of instance-level annotations has severely barricaded the applicability of FSOD

in practical application with large-scale categories. By excavating image-level category supervision that indicates the
presence or absence of an object, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) has attracted much attention recently
since image-level annotations are widely available in easilycollected classification-like datasets.
Unfortunately, a de facto limitation of the existing WSOD
methods (Tang et al. 2017, 2018; Kim et al. 2020) stems
from their detectors only concentrating on few categories

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3404

