The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Investigating the Effectiveness of Task-Agnostic Prefix Prompt
for Instruction Following
Seonghyeon Ye1 , Hyeonbin Hwang1 , Sohee Yang1,2 ,
Hyeongu Yun3 , Yireun Kim3 , Minjoon Seo1
1

KAIST
2
UCL
3
LG AI Research
seonghyeon.ye@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
In this paper, we present our finding that prepending a TaskAgnostic Prefix Prompt (TAPP) to the input improves the
instruction-following ability of various Large Language Models (LLMs) during inference. TAPP is different from canonical
prompts for LLMs in that it is a fixed prompt prepended to
the beginning of every input regardless of the target task for
zero-shot generalization. We observe that both base LLMs (i.e.
not fine-tuned to follow instructions) and instruction-tuned
models benefit from TAPP, resulting in 34.58% and 12.26%
improvement on average, respectively. This implies that the
instruction-following ability of LLMs can be improved during
inference time with a fixed prompt constructed with simple
heuristics. We hypothesize that TAPP assists language models
to better estimate the output distribution by focusing more
on the instruction of the target task during inference. In other
words, such ability does not seem to be sufficiently activated
in not only base LLMs but also many instruction-fine-tuned
LLMs.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated the ability to follow user instructions through approaches such as
instruction tuning or reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) (Sanh et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2022c; Ouyang et al. 2022; Min et al. 2022a; Chung
et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022; Askell et al. 2021).
However, previous work mainly has focused on fine-tuningbased approaches to enhance the instruction-following ability
of LLMs where the model is fine-tuned on various tasks with
instructions, requiring multiple backpropagation processes
and necessitating access to the model weights which limits
its applicability to proprietary models.
In this paper, we present and analyze our finding that
prepending a Task-Agnostic Prefix Prompt (TAPP) that is determined by simple heuristics during inference significantly
enhances the instruction-following ability of LLMs across
various tasks for both open-sourced and proprietary models
(Zhang et al. 2022; Brown et al. 2020; Wang and Komatsuzaki 2021; Black et al. 2022). Specifically, TAPP consists
of multiple cross-task demonstrations where each demonstration is a concatenation of an instruction, input, and output

instance of a task. Note that TAPP is different from canonical task-specific prompts in that it is a fixed prefix prompt
that is prepended regardless of the target task for zero-shot
generalization.
We first observe that TAPP significantly enhances the
instruction-following performance of various base LLMs
that are not fine-tuned to follow instructions. Notably, even
smaller LLMs with TAPP outperform much larger language
models without TAPP, such as the 6B-sized GPT-J with
TAPP outperforming 30 times larger 175B-sized GPT-3
Davinci without TAPP. Second, we show that applying
TAPP on top of instruction-fine-tuned LLMs also improves
the performance, boosting the performance of one of the
strongest instruction-following LLMs (text-davinci-003) by
9.3%. This indicates that the effect of TAPP during inference is complementary to the effect of instruction fine-tuning.
Moreover, we demonstrate that prepending TAPP to target
task demonstrations also improves performance, implying
that TAPP also enhances few-shot in-context learning during
inference.
Our analysis shows that TAPP performs best when the
prefix prompt consists of demonstrations of classification
tasks that include explicit answer choice in the instruction
(e.g., expression of “agent” or “customer” in Figure 1). This
holds true even when the target task is a generation task,
which contrasts with the findings of the previous studies that
it is crucial to retrieve a set of prompts that are similar to the
target task (Rubin, Herzig, and Berant 2021; Liu et al. 2022).
We also observe that the performance does not degrade significantly even if the input distribution of each demonstration
of TAPP is corrupted. Based on these two observations, we
hypothesize that during inference of TAPP, LLMs learn the
correspondence between the answer choice included in instruction and the output of each demonstration of TAPP.
Through this hypothesis, we suggest that the role of TAPP is
to help LLMs focus on the target instruction to better estimate
the output distribution of the target task. This also implies
that this ability does not seem to be sufficiently activated in
both base LLMs and instruction-tuned LLMs, leaving further
investigation as future work.

Related Works
Inference-time Task Adaptation In-context learning is
one of the most widely known gradient-free task adaptation

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19386

