The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Simple and Practical Method for Reducing
the Disparate Impact of Differential Privacy
Lucas Rosenblatt, Julia Stoyanovich, Christopher Musco
New York University
{lucas.rosenblatt, stoyanovich, cmusco}@nyu.edu

Abstract

(Ji, Lipton, and Elkan 2014) and even deep learning (Abadi
et al. 2016) techniques.
However, DP1 can be in tension with algorithmic equity,
where, unlike for privacy, there is no “gold standard” definition, and where potential harms are murky and plentiful
(Corbett-Davies and Goel 2018; Mitchell et al. 2021). The
2020 Census, for example, was criticized over concerns that
DP techniques would have adverse impacts on estimating
demographic proportions (Ruggles et al. 2019) and on redistricting (Kenny et al. 2021). In fact, much attention has been
paid lately to disparities in performance of DP mechanisms
in a variety of settings, and to potential harms resulting from
such disparities (Fioretto et al. 2022). Many of these works
demonstrate disparities in performance for different demographic groups within the data (Bagdasaryan, Poursaeed,
and Shmatikov 2019; Ganev, Oprisanu, and De Cristofaro
2022). In-line with recent literature, we broadly refer to such
disparities as the disparate impact of DP.
As a concrete example, consider the problem of DP data
synthesis. Suppose we have a data set X that can be split
into k disjoint groups G1 ∪ . . . ∪ Gk = X, each of which
might contain individuals in the intersection of several protected classes. A concern could be that a private data synthesis method run on X does not faithfully represent the data
distribution for some of these groups, which can lead to technical bias (Friedman and Nissenbaum 1996) — in the sense
of disparities in accuracy, appropriately measured — when
machine learning (ML) models or statistics are fit to the synthetic data (Ganev, Oprisanu, and De Cristofaro 2022).

Differentially private (DP) mechanisms have been deployed
in a variety of high-impact social settings (perhaps most notably by the U.S. Census). Since all DP mechanisms involve
adding noise to results of statistical queries, they are expected
to impact our ability to accurately analyze and learn from
data, in effect trading off privacy with utility. Alarmingly, the
impact of DP on utility can vary significantly among different
sub-populations. A simple way to reduce this disparity is with
stratification. First compute an independent private estimate
for each group in the data set (which may be the intersection of several protected classes), then, to compute estimates
of global statistics, appropriately recombine these group estimates. Our main observation is that naive stratification often
yields high-accuracy estimates of population-level statistics,
without the need for additional privacy budget. We support
this observation theoretically and empirically. Our theoretical
results center on the private mean estimation problem, while
our empirical results center on extensive experiments on private data synthesis to demonstrate the effectiveness of stratification on a variety of private mechanisms. Overall, we argue
that this straightforward approach provides a strong baseline
against which future work on reducing utility disparities of
DP mechanisms should be compared.

Introduction
Two moral and legal imperatives, data privacy and algorithmic equity, have received significant recent research attention. For ensuring data privacy, differential privacy (DP) has
emerged as a gold standard technique (Dwork, Roth et al.
2014). Academics and practitioners alike use DP algorithms
to solve problems with sensitive data; notably, big tech companies like Google, Microsoft and Apple rely on differential
privacy for protecting customer data (Erlingsson, Pihur, and
Korolova 2014; Ding, Kulkarni, and Yekhanin 2017; Cormode et al. 2018). One recent high-profile use of DP was
in the 2020 United States Census, which includes statistical disclosures with data for millions of Americans (Bureau
2021; Christ, Radway, and Bellovin 2022; Groshen and Goroff 2022; Hawes 2020). Additionally, a wide variety of popular algorithms have DP versions, from fundamental statistical methods (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014), to machine learning

Contributions With the above example in mind, our paper analyzes a baseline approach to address the disparate
impact of DP mechanisms: stratification. We note that general stratification-based methods are fundamental in statistics and may already be used by practitioners in privatizing
data; however, we do not know of any work that formally
employs stratification to address the disparate impact of DP.
In particular, we could simply run a DP mechanism separately on G1 , . . . , Gk and report the results. If we have access to publicly available estimates of the size of each group,
we could then take a weighted combination of the results to
get a statistical estimate, or to generate DP synthetic data, for
the global population. For example, we might fit data synthe-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

21554

DP will mean “differential privacy” or “differentially private.”

