The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Modeling Continuous Motion for 3D Point Cloud Object Tracking
Zhipeng Luo1,2 * , Gongjie Zhang1 , Changqing Zhou3 ,
Zhonghua Wu3 , Qingyi Tao3 , Lewei Lu3 , Shijian Lu1†
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
Black Sesame Technologies
3
SenseTime Research
zhipeng001@e.ntu.edu.sg, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Crop

Backbone
Template

The task of 3D single object tracking (SOT) with LiDAR
point clouds is crucial for various applications, such as autonomous driving and robotics. However, existing approaches
have primarily relied on appearance matching or motion modeling within only two successive frames, thereby overlooking
the long-range continuous motion property of objects in 3D
space. To address this issue, this paper presents a novel approach that views each tracklet as a continuous stream: at
each timestamp, only the current frame is fed into the network to interact with multi-frame historical features stored
in a memory bank, enabling efficient exploitation of sequential information. To achieve effective cross-frame message
passing, a hybrid attention mechanism is designed to account
for both long-range relation modeling and local geometric
feature extraction. Furthermore, to enhance the utilization
of multi-frame features for robust tracking, a contrastive sequence enhancement strategy is proposed, which uses ground
truth tracklets to augment training sequences and promote
discrimination against false positives in a contrastive manner.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
outperforms the state-of-the-art method by significant margins on multiple benchmarks.

Shared

Previous Frame

Appearance
Matching
Prediction

Backbone
Current Frame

（a) Matching-based Paradigm

Previous Frame

Backbone

Motion
Modeling
Segmentation

Current Frame

Prediction

(b) Motion-centric Paradigm
Memory Bank
…
Update
Backbone

Current Frame

Fetch
Spatial-Temporal
Relation Modeling
Prediction

(c) StreamTrack (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison of 3D single object tracking
paradigms. (a) The matching-based paradigm extracts features from a cropped template and a search region, and
object localization is performed via appearance matching.
(b) The motion-centric paradigm takes concatenated point
cloud frames as input and estimates relative motion based
on segmented objects. (c) Our proposed StreamTrack only
takes the current frame as input, while historical features are
fetched from a memory bank, allowing for the exploitation
of multi-frame continuous motion for robust tracking.

Introduction
The rapid advancement of LiDAR technology has sparked a
growing interest in point cloud-based vision solutions over
recent years. 3D single object tracking (SOT) based on point
clouds is a fundamental task that holds enormous potential for various applications, including autonomous driving
and robotics. Nevertheless, 3D SOT remains a challenging
and open problem owing to the inherent properties of point
clouds, such as point sparsity, partial observation, and lack
of texture information. The development of effective 3D
SOT solutions continues to be an active research focus.
Most existing 3D SOT approaches (Giancola, Zarzar, and
Ghanem 2019; Qi et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Hui et al.
2021; Zhou et al. 2022; Hui et al. 2022) follow the prevalent
paradigm of appearance matching (Fig. 1(a)), which originated from their 2D counterparts (Tao, Gavves, and Smeul-

ders 2016; Guo et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019). Such matchingbased methods perform feature matching between a cropped
template and a search region to locate target objects but
are prone to errors in cases of fast movement, occlusion,
and misleading objects with similar appearances. Recently, a
new motion-centric paradigm (Zheng et al. 2022) (Fig. 1(b))
has been proposed, which utilizes concatenated point clouds
from two successive frames as input to preserve the motion connection. It performs motion estimation based on
segmented foreground points to predict the relative motion

* Work done at S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4026

