The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Noise-Free Optimization in Early Training Steps for Image Super-resolution
MinKyu Lee, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{bluelati98, jaepilheo}@g.skku.edu

Abstract

based on pairs of HR images and corresponding downscaled
LR images. Here, with fair assumptions on the distribution
of image spaces and empirical results (Lim et al. 2017), the
majority decision of the objective function is narrowed down
as the pixel-wise L1 loss. However, although this basic training scheme is the predominant choice, its use and limitations
have not been thoroughly investigated, particularly with regard to the ill-posed nature of image super-resolution.
In this paper, we aim to analyze the underlying components of vanilla training in the context of SISR tasks and systematically develop the current training process. We start our
analysis by decomposing the original HR image into two key
components: optimal centroid and inherent noise. Given the
ill-posed nature of image SR (Hyun and Heo 2020; Lugmayr
et al. 2020), we define the optimal centroid as the expectation over multiple potential HR images that downsamples
to an identical LR image instance. Additionally, we define
the inherent noise term as the residual between the HR image sample and the optimal centroid, which is a fundamental
component underlying in each HR image instance.
Our findings are that vanilla training neglects the ill-posed
nature of inverse problems, which results as a residual noise
term per sample. Consequently, the overall training procedure becomes highly dependent on each HR image sample
within a mini-batch, leading to noisy and unstable training,
especially in early training steps.
In order to tackle this issue, we take the ill-posed nature of
SR into account and formulate a noise-free objective, which
simplifies as minimizing the L1 distance between the network’s estimation and the expectation over all possible HR
samples (i.e., the true centroid term). However, since direct
usage of this objective is impossible due to the intractability
of the centroid term, we utilize a surrogate objective that can
effectively act as a substitute for the intractable objective.
Specifically, we estimate the true centroid by an empirical
centroid obtained from pretrained SR networks and define a
tractable objective for noise-free optimization. Further, we
show that Knowledge Distillation (KD) can be understood
as a specific case of this noise-free optimization, but with
apparent flaws: spatial inconsistency. We make a quick fix
for the shortcomings of KD and construct a noise-free training objective that optimizes directly towards the empirical
centroid while being both tractable and spatially aligned.
It turns out that the proposed objective can lead to well-

Recent deep-learning-based single image super-resolution
(SISR) methods have shown impressive performance whereas
typical methods train their networks by minimizing the pixelwise distance with respect to a given high-resolution (HR)
image. However, despite the basic training scheme being the
predominant choice, its use in the context of ill-posed inverse
problems has not been thoroughly investigated. In this work,
we aim to provide a better comprehension of the underlying constituent by decomposing target HR images into two
subcomponents: (1) the optimal centroid which is the expectation over multiple potential HR images, and (2) the inherent noise defined as the residual between the HR image
and the centroid. Our findings show that the current training
scheme cannot capture the ill-posed nature of SISR and becomes vulnerable to the inherent noise term, especially during
early training steps. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel
optimization method that can effectively remove the inherent noise term in the early steps of vanilla training by estimating the optimal centroid and directly optimizing toward
the estimation. Experimental results show that the proposed
method can effectively enhance the stability of vanilla training, leading to overall performance gain. Codes are available
at github.com/2minkyulee/ECO.

1

Introduction

With the drastic development of deep-learning-based techniques, recent single image super-resolution (SISR) methods
have shown promising performance against previous methods. Here, the two primary objectives of SISR are; achieving
precise reconstruction at the pixel level (known as fidelityoriented methods); and producing visually appealing (Mittal, Soundararajan, and Bovik 2012; Zhang et al. 2018a)
images (referred to as perceptual-quality-oriented methods).
While perceptual-quality-oriented methods have become increasingly popular in recent years, fidelity-oriented methods
still remain a mainstream of research due to the high demand
for reliable reconstruction. Accordingly, we limit our focus
to fidelity-oriented methods in this paper.
Typically, modern fidelity-oriented SISR networks adopt
a very simple training strategy. In most cases, the only objective is to optimize the likelihood of the predicted image
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2920

