The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transitivity-Preserving Graph Representation Learning
for Bridging Local Connectivity and Role-Based Similarity
Van Thuy Hoang, O-Joun Lee*
Department of Artificial Intelligence, The Catholic University of Korea
{hoangvanthuy90, ojlee}@catholic.ac.kr

Abstract
7

2

Graph representation learning (GRL) methods, such as graph
neural networks and graph transformer models, have been
successfully used to analyze graph-structured data, mainly focusing on node classification and link prediction tasks. However, the existing studies mostly only consider local connectivity while ignoring long-range connectivity and the roles
of nodes. In this paper, we propose Unified Graph Transformer Networks (UGT) that effectively integrate local and
global structural information into fixed-length vector representations. First, UGT learns local structure by identifying the local substructures and aggregating features of the
k-hop neighborhoods of each node. Second, we construct
virtual edges, bridging distant nodes with structural similarity to capture the long-range dependencies. Third, UGT
learns unified representations through self-attention, encoding structural distance and p-step transition probability between node pairs. Furthermore, we propose a self-supervised
learning task that effectively learns transition probability to
fuse local and global structural features, which could then
be transferred to other downstream tasks. Experimental results on real-world benchmark datasets over various downstream tasks showed that UGT significantly outperformed
baselines that consist of state-of-the-art models. In addition,
UGT reaches the third-order Weisfeiler-Lehman power to distinguish non-isomorphic graph pairs.

1

8

5

3

9

6
4

10

Figure 1: The Laplacian positional encoding cannot fully
capture the similarity between the surrounding structure of
adjacent nodes. Two adjacent nodes, ‘1’ and ‘3’, have different initial positional encodings even though they are structurally similar.

power to capture similarity between local structures. Some
recent graph transformers (e.g., GT (Dwivedi and Bresson
2021) and SAN (Kreuzer et al. 2021)) apply graph theorybased structural features (e.g., Laplacian Eigenvectors) as
positional encodings (PEs) to assist the model distinguish
isomorphic substructures. However, although the PEs could
assign distinguishable vector representations to substructures of individual nodes, they did not fully consider the
structural similarity between the substructures. Node representations should be strongly correlated with their substructure similarity from the first iteration (layer) in order for the
model to understand connectivity between neighbours and
not just aggregate their feature vectors. In Figure 1, we assign the initial PEs to two nodes ‘1’ and ‘3’ with Laplacian Eigenvectors. Then, their vector representations would
be treated as different representations even though they are
structurally similar. This false signal can be a serious barrier to representation learning of graph structure and eventually reduce the performance of models. Second, GNN aggregators and self-attention lack the power to learn global
structural information. GNN variants, like GCN (Kipf and
Welling 2017), GAT (Velickovic et al. 2018), and GATv2
(Brody, Alon, and Yahav 2022), compose node embeddings
based on only neighbours’ features. Similarly, graph transformer models learn vector representations by encoding features of node pairs and substructures within k-hop distance
using self-attention (Chen, O’Bray, and Borgwardt 2022).
Although graph transformers have relatively larger aggre-

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) and graph transformers have
effectively solved graph analysis tasks, such as node classification and link prediction (Kipf and Welling 2017; Dwivedi
and Bresson 2021). GNNs learn representations by iteratively aggregating features of neighbouring nodes with uniform or attentional weights (Kipf and Welling 2017; Brody,
Alon, and Yahav 2022; Hoang et al. 2023a). Unlike GNNs,
graph transformer models learn node representations using self-attention, encoding pair-wise connections between
nodes, and have shown better performance than variants of
GNNs (Dwivedi and Bresson 2021).
While the existing models have been applied in various
domains, GNNs and graph transformers still have three inherent limitations. First, graph transformer models lack the
* Corresponding author: O-Joun Lee (Tel.: +82-2-2164-5516)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12456

