The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Modal Discussion Transformer: Integrating Text, Images and Graph
Transformers to Detect Hate Speech on Social Media
Liam Hebert, Gaurav Sahu, Yuxuan Guo, Nanda Kishore Sreenivas,
Lukasz Golab, Robin Cohen
University of Waterloo
liam.hebert@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

and are influenced by other comments within the discussion
thread. For example, a seemingly innocuous comment such
as “That’s gross!” can become hateful in a discussion about
immigration or minority issues.
Ongoing research to address these weaknesses includes
multi-modal transformers such as VilT (Kim, Son, and Kim
2021) that combine images and text for a richer representation of comments. Still, they do not account for the contextual nature of hate speech. Hebert, Golab, and Cohen (2022)
model discussion context with graph neural networks, but
they do not discuss how to integrate the interpretation of images within hateful social media discussions. Furthermore,
the sequential nature of the proposed architecture prevents
text embeddings from being grounded to other comments in
a graph. The initial semantic content encoded by a comment
embedding may differ when considered with different sets
of comments versus in isolation.
To overcome the limitations of existing methods, we propose the Multi-Modal Discussion Transformer (mDT) to
holistically encode comments with multi-model discussion
context for hate speech detection. To evaluate our work, we
also present a novel dataset, HatefulDiscussions, containing
complete multi-modal discussion graphs from various Reddit communities and a diverse range of hateful behaviour.
We compare mDT against comment-only and graph methods and conduct an ablation study on the various components of our architecture. We then conclude by discussing
the potential for our model to deliver social value in online
contexts by effectively identifying and combating anti-social
behaviour in online communities. We also propose future
work towards more advanced multi-modal solutions that can
better capture the nuanced nature of online behaviour.
To summarize our contributions: 1) We propose a novel
fusion mechanism as the core of mDT that interweaves
multi-modal fusion layers with graph transformer layers, allowing for multi-modal comment representations actively
grounded in the discussion context. 2) We propose a novel
graph structure encoding specific to the conversational structure of social media discussions. 3) We introduce a dataset of
8266 annotated discussions, totalling 18359 labelled comments, with complete discussion trees and images to evaluate the effectiveness of mDT. Our work focuses on Reddit, which consists of branching tree discussions. Our codebase, datasets and further supplemental can be found at

We present the Multi-Modal Discussion Transformer (mDT),
a novel method for detecting hate speech on online social networks such as Reddit discussions. In contrast to traditional
comment-only methods, our approach to labelling a comment
as hate speech involves a holistic analysis of text and images
grounded in the discussion context. This is done by leveraging graph transformers to capture the contextual relationships
in the discussion surrounding a comment and grounding the
interwoven fusion layers that combine text and image embeddings instead of processing modalities separately. To evaluate our work, we present a new dataset, HatefulDiscussions,
comprising complete multi-modal discussions from multiple
online communities on Reddit. We compare the performance
of our model to baselines that only process individual comments and conduct extensive ablation studies.

Introduction
Social media have democratized public discourse, enabling users worldwide to freely express their opinions and
thoughts. As of 2023, the social media giant Meta has
reached 3 billion daily active users across its platforms
(Meta 2023). While this level of connectivity and access to
information is undeniably beneficial, it has also resulted in
the alarming rise of hate speech (Das et al. 2020). This pervasive spread of hateful rhetoric has caused significant emotional harm to its targets (Vedeler, Olsen, and Eriksen 2019),
triggered social divisions and polarization (Waller and Anderson 2021), and has caused substantial harm to the mental
health of users (Wachs, Gámez-Guadix, and Wright 2022).
There is an urgent need for a comprehensive solution to automate identifying hate speech as a critical first step toward
combatting this alarming practice.
Initially, automated hate speech detection models were
limited to text-only approaches such as HateXplain (Mathew
et al. 2021), which classify the text of individual comments.
Such methods have two significant weaknesses. First, social
media comments have evolved to include images, which can
influence the context of the accompanying text. For instance,
a comment may be innocuous, but including an image may
transform it into a hateful remark. Second, hate speech is
contextual. Social media comments are often conversational
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22096

