The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Meta-Reinforcement Learning via Exploratory Task Clustering
Zhendong Chu1 , Renqin Cai2 , Hongning Wang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
2
Meta
zc9uy@virginia.edu, renqincai@meta.com, hw5x@virginia.edu

Abstract

can be broadly shared across all tasks. However, heterogeneity among tasks is not rare in practice. It therefore dwarfs
simple sharing of global knowledge, but instead imposes
subtle structures for identifying relatedness among tasks at a
finer granularity, e.g., groups of tasks. For instance, the general skills required for the Go game and Gomoku game are
related, such as familiarity with the board layout and stone
colors. But to achieve mastery in either game, policies must
acquire and internalize game-specific knowledge/rules to effectively navigate subsequent matches. For example, experience about competing against different human players in Go
games can be shared within, but not over to Gomoku games.
This heterogeneity motivates us to formulate a more delicate
but also more general meta-RL setting where tasks are originated from various but a finite number of distributions, i.e.,
tasks are clustered. Hence, knowledge that benefits learning in new tasks becomes cluster-specific. We refer to this as
structured heterogeneity among tasks, and propose to explicitly model it to facilitate cluster-level knowledge sharing1 .
Structured heterogeneity among tasks has been studied
in supervised meta-learning (Yao et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2023); but it is a lot more challenging to be handled in metaRL, where the key bottleneck is how to efficiently discover
task relatedness in a population of RL tasks. Different from
supervised learning tasks where static task-specific data is
available for task relatedness inference before any learning starts, observations about RL tasks are collected by an
agent’s interactions with the task environment. As a result,
successfully adapting an RL policy to a new task depends
on accurate profiling of the task, which however is elicited
by the policy itself. Task inference becomes a major bottleneck of sample efficiency in meta-RL (Liu et al. 2021).
Previous methods (Duan et al. 2016; Chu et al. 2023) focus
on task embedding learning under the uni-modal task distribution assumption, which are inefficient to infer clustered
tasks. But structured heterogeneity provides new opportunities for efficient task inference: instead of directly identifying the new task, the coarse-grained cluster membership can
be first inferred with a few observations; within the located
task cluster, task inference can be performed in a designated
search space, i.e., divide-and-conquer task inference.

Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) aims to quickly
solve new RL tasks by leveraging knowledge from prior
tasks. Previous studies often assume a single-mode homogeneous task distribution, ignoring possible structured heterogeneity among tasks. Such an oversight can hamper effective exploration and adaptation, especially with limited
samples. In this work, we harness the structured heterogeneity among tasks via clustering to improve meta-RL, which
facilitates knowledge sharing at the cluster level. To facilitate exploration, we also develop a dedicated cluster-level
exploratory policy to discover task clusters via divide-andconquer. The knowledge from the discovered clusters helps to
narrow the search space of task-specific policy learning, leading to more sample-efficient policy adaptation. We evaluate
the proposed method on environments with parametric clusters (e.g., rewards and state dynamics in the MuJoCo suite)
and non-parametric clusters (e.g., control skills in the MetaWorld suite). The results demonstrate strong advantages of
our solution against a set of representative meta-RL methods.

Introduction
Conventional reinforcement learning (RL) is notorious for
its high sample complexity, which often requires tremendous amount of interactions with an environment to learn
a performing policy for a new task (Huai et al. 2020; Yao,
Cai, and Wang 2021). Inspired by the learning process of humans, meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) is proposed
to quickly learn new tasks by leveraging knowledge shared
by related tasks (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Duan et al.
2016; Wang et al. 2016). The key research question in metaRL is task modeling for identifying transferable knowledge
among tasks. For example, Finn, Abbeel, and Levine (2017)
proposed to learn a set of shared meta parameters which are
used to initialize the local policy when a new task arrives.
Duan et al. (2016) and Wang et al. (2016) trained an RNN
encoder to characterize prior tasks according to the interaction history in those tasks.
Little attention has been paid to the structures in the transferable knowledge resulted from task distributions. Aforementioned methods implicitly assume tasks follow a unimodal distribution, and thus the knowledge, once identified,

1

We do not assume the knowledge in different clusters is exclusive, and thus each cluster can still contain overlapping knowledge,
e.g., motor skills in locomotion tasks.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11633

