The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Angle Robustness Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Navigation in GNSS-Denied Scenarios
Yuxin Wang1 , Zunlei Feng1 , Haofei Zhang1 , Yang Gao1 , Jie Lei2 , Li Sun3 * , Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University
Zhejiang University of Technology
3
Ningbo Innnovation Center, Zhejiang University
{yuxinwang, zunleifeng, haofeizhang, roygao, lsun, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

as cargo transportation, package delivery, and crop cultivation. Existing point-to-point navigation can be grouped into:
classification-based and matching-based methods.
The former classifies the acquired image IK into a category with a specific position. Then, the direction guidance is computed by the category position and the ideal
end point. However, flight deviations commonly occur as
a result of wind and other disturbances. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the UAV in the deviated position flies with the
direction guidance (denoted by the red dash line with an
arrowhead). Following this guidance can result in cumulative position errors or even a wrong flight route. The latter
matches the acquired image IK in the deviated position with
a set of candidate images {I ∗ } within a specific area near
the ideal position. Then, the direction guidance is computed
by the matched position and the ideal end point. Although
the matching-based approach has improved accuracy compared to classification-based method, it still has limitations
including the requirements for significant storage space and
time-consuming matching operations. Moreover, Figure 1
(b) shows that incorrect matching will lead to a wrong flight
direction (denoted by the red dash line with an arrowhead).
In sum, the aforementioned techniques are two-stage methods that firstly predict the position and then calculate the direction angle. Due to the disturbances in realistic scenarios,
both of them are not efficient in solving flight deviation.
In this paper, we propose a novel angle robustness navigation paradigm, aimed at effectively addressing flight deviation caused by disturbances in realistic environments. As
depicted in Figure 1 (c), in contrast to the traditional twostage methods, the proposed paradigm directly predicts the
angle based on historical frames, in order to adaptively find
the correct direction. Specifically, an angle robustness navigation model that incorporates several key modules is put
forward. The Adaptive Feature Enhance Module extracts
sequential visual features from previous images, while the
Cross-knowledge Attention-guided Module integrates path
semantic information within the embedding sequences. To
enhance robustness against environmental disturbances, Robust Activation Module is presented as an additional component of the Robust Task-oriented Head Module.
Furthermore, we collect a new dataset termed as
UAV AR368 and design the Simulation Flight Testing Instrument (SFTI) using Google Earth. The SFTI is a testing

Due to the inability to receive signals from the Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) in extreme conditions,
achieving accurate and robust navigation for Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) is a challenging task. Recently
emerged, vision-based navigation has been a promising and
feasible alternative to GNSS-based navigation. However, existing vision-based techniques are inadequate in addressing
flight deviation caused by environmental disturbances and inaccurate position predictions in practical settings. In this paper, we present a novel angle robustness navigation paradigm
to deal with flight deviation in point-to-point navigation tasks.
Additionally, we propose a model that includes the Adaptive Feature Enhance Module, Cross-knowledge Attentionguided Module and Robust Task-oriented Head Module to
accurately predict direction angles for high-precision navigation. To evaluate the vision-based navigation methods, we
collect a new dataset termed as UAV AR368. Furthermore,
we design the Simulation Flight Testing Instrument (SFTI)
using Google Earth to simulate different flight environments,
thereby reducing the expenses associated with real flight testing. Experiment results demonstrate that the proposed model
outperforms the state-of-the-art by achieving improvements
of 26.0% and 45.6% in the success rate of arrival under ideal
and disturbed circumstances, respectively.

Introduction
The Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) is a remotely controlled unmanned aircraft equipped with sensors and Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS). Typically, UAVs rely
on GNSS for precise positioning and continuous adjustment
of flight angles towards the end point. However, various factors, such as environmental conditions (e.g., buildings, and
mountains), weather conditions (e.g., rain, snow, fog), and
magnetic interference often result in UAVs receiving weak
or no signals from GNSS. Recently, vision-based navigation
has emerged as a promising alternative to GNSS-dependent
navigation, thanks to the constant availability of scene images and affordable image acquisition equipment.
The point-to-point navigation is a typical method in
vision-based navigation, serving crucial applications such
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10386

