The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SUF: Stabilized Unconstrained Fine-Tuning for Offline-to-Online
Reinforcement Learning
Jiaheng Feng1 , Mingxiao Feng1 , Haolin Song1 , Wengang Zhou1,2 , Houqiang Li1,2
1

2

EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{fengjiaheng, fmxustc, hlsong}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

dilemma in offline-to-online RL. The optimal fine-tuning approach is to remove offline constraints in the online phase
(Wu et al. 2022a), thereby facilitating the exploration and
promoting efficient improvements. However, previous studies (Nair et al. 2020; Zhang, Xu, and Yu 2022) have observed
severe policy collapse at the initial stage of unconstrained
fine-tuning, which is usually unacceptable in practice (Beeson and Montana 2022). As even short-lived policy collapse
can lead to immature or dangerous actions, resulting in irreversible damage to the environment or the agent. To the best
of our knowledge, the problem of policy collapse during unconstrained fine-tuning has not been well addressed.
To skirt around such policy collapse, previous methods
retain part (Zheng et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023; Beeson
and Montana 2022) or whole (Mark et al. 2022) of offline
constraints, carefully adjust constraint strength for different
tasks (Zhao et al. 2022) or introduce alternative constraints
(Luo et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023). However, existing constraints hinder the exploration of the environment and the efficiency of fine-tuning. Simultaneously, many complex techniques have been imposed in offline-to-online RL, including density estimation network (Lee et al. 2022; Guo et al.
2023), ensembled networks (Mark et al. 2022; Zheng et al.
2023; Zhao et al. 2022), and model-based method (Mao et al.
2022), resulting in increased complexity and limited adaptability.
In this work, we introduce a novel perspective to circumvent the efficiency-stability dilemma: eliminating policy collapse without imposing constraints. We note that such policy
collapse arises from the mismatch between unconstrained
fine-tuning and conventional RL training framework. Typically, the update-to-data (UTD) ratio (the number of parameter updates per environment step) is set to 1 for both
the value network (critic) and policy network (actor). However, the exploratory unconstrained objective leads to significant distribution shift, which exceeds the ability of value fitting, resulting in excessive value bias on out-of-distribution
(OOD) data. Simultaneously, such frequent policy updates
exacerbate the risk of policy being misguided. To this end,
we introduce an effective framework for unconstrained finetuning, which involves increasing the Critic UTD to expedite the fitting of the value network and decreasing the Actor UTD to improve the accuracy of policy updates. However, previous studies (Chen et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022) in

Offline-to-online reinforcement learning (RL) provides a
promising solution to improving suboptimal offline pretrained policies through online fine-tuning. However, one efficient method, unconstrained fine-tuning, often suffers from
severe policy collapse due to excessive distribution shift. To
ensure stability, existing methods retain offline constraints
and employ additional techniques during fine-tuning, which
hurts efficiency. In this work, we introduce a novel perspective: eliminating the policy collapse without imposing constraints. We observe that such policy collapse arises from the
mismatch between unconstrained fine-tuning and the conventional RL training framework. To this end, we propose Stabilized Unconstrained Fine-tuning (SUF), a streamlined framework that benefits from the efficiency of unconstrained finetuning while ensuring stability by modifying the Update-ToData ratio. With just a few lines of code adjustments, SUF
demonstrates remarkable adaptability to diverse backbones
and superior performance over state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated great success across various tasks, including board games (Silver
et al. 2017) and video games (Mnih et al. 2015). However, online RL demands extensive environmental interactions initialized from a random policy (Sutton and Barto
2018), which may be impractical in realistic scenarios for
expense or safety concerns (Nair et al. 2020; Zheng et al.
2023; Zhang, Xu, and Yu 2022). Offline RL provides a
practical solution by learning from a pre-collected dataset
(Levine et al. 2020). However, the performance of offline
policy is heavily limited by the quality and state-action space
coverage of the dataset (Jin, Yang, and Wang 2021). Recent
studies (Zheng et al. 2023; Zhang, Xu, and Yu 2022) investigate offline-to-online RL as a promising solution to improving suboptimal offline policies through online fine-tuning.
Unfortunately, ensuring both efficient and stable finetuning remains a main challenge in offline-to-online RL,
which can be attributed to the inherent conflict between exploring for improvements and exploiting for maintaining the
learned behaviors (Mark et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2023). In
this paper, we term this challenge as the efficiency-stability
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11961

