The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Parallel Beam Search Algorithms for
Domain-Independent Dynamic Programming
Ryo Kuroiwa, J. Christopher Beck
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, ON M5S 3G8
ryo.kuroiwa@mail.utoronto.ca, jcb@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract

CABS in practice (Kuroiwa and Beck 2023c). Beam search
has been parallelized for specific combinatorial optimization
problems (Frohner et al. 2023), but DIDP is more general.
We propose three parallel beam search algorithms and
develop corresponding multi-thread DIDP solvers. The experimental results show that our solvers achieve significant
speedup and performance improvement compared to CABS
and find the new best solutions for two instances of the traveling salesperson problem with time windows. In addition,
our solvers outperform multi-thread MIP and CP solvers in
four of six combinatorial optimization problems tested.

Domain-independent dynamic programming (DIDP), a
model-based paradigm based on dynamic programming, has
shown promising performance on multiple combinatorial optimization problems compared with mixed integer programming (MIP) and constraint programming (CP). The current
DIDP solvers are based on heuristic search, and the stateof-the-art solver, complete anytime beam search (CABS),
uses beam search. However, the current DIDP solvers cannot utilize multiple threads, unlike state-of-the-art MIP and
CP solvers. In this paper, we propose three parallel beam
search algorithms and develop multi-thread implementations
of CABS. With 32 threads, our multi-thread DIDP solvers
achieve 9 to 39 times speedup on average and significant performance improvement over the sequential solver, finding the
new best solutions for two instances of the traveling salesperson problem with time windows. In addition, our solvers
outperform multi-thread MIP and CP solvers in four of the
six combinatorial optimization problems evaluated.

Domain-Independent Dynamic Programming
Domain-independent dynamic programming (DIDP) is
a paradigm for combinatorial optimization problems
(Kuroiwa and Beck 2023b) in which a problem is described
by a formalism called dynamic programming description
language (DyPDL), based on a state transition system. In
this paper, we focus on a subset of DyPDL that has been
used in previous work (Kuroiwa and Beck 2023b,c).
A DyPDL model is a tuple (V, S 0 , T , B, C, h). A state is
defined by values of state variables V. Each state variable
has a type: set, element, or numeric. A set variable takes a
subset of a given set, an element variable takes an element of
a given set, and a numeric variable takes a number (integer in
this paper). We denote the value of a state variable v in state
S by S[v]. A transition τ ∈ T is applicable in state S if S
satisfies the preconditions of τ . The set of applicable transitions in S is denoted by T (S). When τ is applied, S transitions to another state S[[τ ]] according to the effects of τ with
the cost of wτ (S) ≥ 0, where wτ is a function called the cost
expression. Preconditions, effects, and cost expressions are
described by expressions, mathematical operations on state
variables. For example, a transition τ may have an effect
U ← U \ {j} on a set variable U and effect i ← j on an
element variable i with precondition j ∈ U and cost expression cij . A solution is a sequence of transitions that makes
the target state S 0 transition to a base state S ∗ , which satisfies one of the base cases B, denoted by ∃B ∈ B, S ∗ |= B.
In addition, each state S resulting from applying a transition
in a solution must satisfy the state constraints C, denoted by
S |= C. An S-solution is a sequence of transitions satisfying
the above conditions starting from S. Base cases and state
constraints are also described by expressions. The cost of

Introduction
Domain-independent dynamic programming (DIDP) has
been proposed as a model-based paradigm for combinatorial
optimization (Kuroiwa and Beck 2023b). In DIDP, a problem is formulated as a declarative dynamic programming
model, and the model is solved by a general-purpose solver.
Previous work has shown that DIDP solvers using heuristic
search outperform existing model-based paradigms, mixedinteger programming (MIP) and constraint programming
(CP), in multiple problems (Kuroiwa and Beck 2023b,c).
The state-of-the-art DIDP solver uses complete anytime
beam search (CABS) (Zhang 1998), which is based on beam
search. However, the current DIDP solvers cannot utilize
multiple threads, unlike state-of-the-art MIP and CP solvers.
Parallel heuristic search has been studied in previous
work. For best-first search algorithms, multi-thread and distributed parallel algorithms have been proposed (Burns et al.
2010; Kishimoto, Fukunaga, and Botea 2013; Jinnai and
Fukunaga 2017; Kuroiwa and Fukunaga 2019, 2020). They
can be used to parallelize CAASDy (Kuroiwa and Beck
2023b), a DIDP solver based on best-first search. However,
CAASDy is not an anytime solver and is outperformed by
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20743

