The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

KeDuSR: Real-World Dual-Lens Super-Resolution via Kernel-Free Matching
Huanjing Yue1 , Zifan Cui1 , Kun Li2 , Jingyu Yang1 *
1

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
{huanjing.yue, cuizifan, lik, yjy}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

wide-angle lens sacrifices resolution to increase the FoV,
while the telephoto lens has a smaller FoV but higher resolution. Therefore, dual-lens (or dual-camera) SR is proposed
(Wang et al. 2021), where the telephoto camera serves as the
reference to super-resolve the wide-angle camera by transferring the matched reference details to the LR, as shown in
Fig. 1. However, only the center region (namely the overlapped FoV area) of the LR image has reference content,
with differences in viewpoints and colors. Meanwhile, it is
difficult for the corner region 1 of the LR image to find similar contents from the reference due to the large resolution
gap (as shown in Fig. 1) between the telephoto and wideangle cameras. Therefore, the key question for real duallens SR is how to improve the matching and warping performance between LR and Ref when they have large resolution
gaps and different FoV?
The matching problem has been widely explored in
RefSR and dual-lens SR. Previous RefSR methods (Yang
et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021) are conducted
with synthesized LR (namely the down-sampled version of
the HR) images from CUFED5 dataset, and the matching
is conducted between HR↓ (namely LR) and Ref↓ (or Ref).
However, when the HR and Ref are captured with different
focal lengths, the resolution gap still exists. Similarly, DCSR
(Wang et al. 2021) also utilizes synthesized pairs, namely
that the original LR and the reference image are downsampled to generate the training triples, namely {LR↓, Ref↓,
LR}, where the original LR serves as the ground truth. The
matching is conducted between LR↓ and Ref↓↓. However,
the simple downsampling operation cannot simulate the resolution gap between LR and Ref since they are captured by
different focal lengths, as shown in Fig. 1. SelfDZSR (Zhang
et al. 2022b) directly performs matching between Ref and
auxiliary-LR features, which also did not pay attention to
the resolution gap. Different from them, we did not perform
matching between the features of Ref↓ and LR. We propose
a kernel-free matching strategy by matching between LRcorner and LR-center features, which perfectly avoids the
resolution gap problem. In this way, our method also has a
good generalization ability.

Dual-lens super-resolution (SR) is a practical scenario for reference (Ref) based SR by utilizing the telephoto image (Ref)
to assist the super-resolution of the low-resolution wide-angle
image (LR input). Different from general RefSR, the Ref in
dual-lens SR only covers the overlapped field of view (FoV)
area. However, current dual-lens SR methods rarely utilize these specific characteristics and directly perform dense
matching between the LR input and Ref. Due to the resolution gap between LR and Ref, the matching may miss the
best-matched candidate and destroy the consistent structures
in the overlapped FoV area. Different from them, we propose to first align the Ref with the center region (namely the
overlapped FoV area) of the LR input by combining global
warping and local warping to make the aligned Ref be sharp
and consistent. Then, we formulate the aligned Ref and LR
center as value-key pairs, and the corner region of the LR
is formulated as queries. In this way, we propose a kernelfree matching strategy by matching between the LR-corner
(query) and LR-center (key) regions, and the corresponding
aligned Ref (value) can be warped to the corner region of
the target. Our kernel-free matching strategy avoids the resolution gap between LR and Ref, which makes our network
have better generalization ability. In addition, we construct
a DuSR-Real dataset with (LR, Ref, HR) triples, where the
LR and HR are well aligned. Experiments on three datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms the second-best
method by a large margin. Our code and dataset are available at https://github.com/ZifanCui/KeDuSR.

Introduction
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) (Liang et al. 2021;
Yang, Liu, and Yang 2023) aims to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) input,
which is challenging due to the limited available information. In contrast, Reference-based SR (RefSR) introduces a
similar high-resolution reference image (Ref) to assist the
reconstruction process and has achieved better results. However, the development of RefSR is constrained since obtaining similar Ref for a given LR in real scenarios is difficult.
Fortunately, modern smartphones are equipped with multiple cameras of different fields of view (FoV), where the

1

We divide the LR image into two parts, where the overlapped
FoV region is named as the center region and the remaining regions
in the LR are named as corner region.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6881

