The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupling Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Gaussian Task Contexts and Skills
Hongcai He1 , Anjie Zhu1 , Shuang Liang1 , Feiyu Chen1,2 , Jie Shao1,2 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, China
{hehongcai,anjiezhu}@std.uestc.edu.cn, {shuangliang,chenfeiyu,shaojie}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

2022; Rakelly et al. 2019; Pertsch, Lee, and Lim 2020).
Task contexts are related to the vital statistical information
of tasks, which are obtained from past trajectories generated
by agents. Additionally, when meeting an unseen target task,
task contexts that are extracted from its trajectories will enable agents to acquire its information and achieve adaptation to the unseen target task (Nam et al. 2022; Rakelly et al.
2019). On the other hand, skills represent the means of useful behaviors that can solve subtasks. As temporal behaviors,
skills can be learned from various forms of data and can be
transferred to new tasks and even new environment configurations. Moreover, a series of skills for solving different
subtasks can be combined to achieve solutions to complex
tasks (Nam et al. 2022; Pertsch, Lee, and Lim 2020).
However, most offline meta-RL methods suffer from
poor generalization issues, hindering them to achieve robust
adaptation to unseen target tasks. This is due to the limited prior experience, which is caused by the coupled exploration and learning processes of continuous latent space.
More specifically, exploration and learning processes are interconnected for extracting prior experience from continuous latent space. Insufficient exploration in the initial stage
often leads to limited learning, which in turn results in inadequate exploration in subsequent stages. This ultimately
results in both the exploration and learning processes being limited to a small portion of the entire continuous latent
space of prior experience, leading to sub-optimal decisions
(Campos et al. 2020).
Moreover, the existing methods (Chebotar et al. 2021;
Lynch et al. 2019; Pertsch, Lee, and Lim 2020; Pong et al.
2022; Nam et al. 2022) suffer from another limitation as they
just model task contexts and/or skills as continuous latent
spaces without considering their inherent characteristics. A
task corresponds to a series of similar task contexts, since
agents usually generate diverse trajectories resulting from
variations in their execution processes and levels of success.
For example, in the maze navigation tasks, agents can start
from a fixed point and take different paths to the specified
endpoint. However, failing to consider the relationships between task contexts of the same and different tasks will result in unclear and ambiguous learning. In addition, there are
a series of similar skills in the continuous latent space due to
the similarity between subtasks. For example, in the kitchen
manipulation tasks, opening the door of the microwave and

Offline meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) methods,
which adapt to unseen target tasks with prior experience, are
essential in robot control tasks. Current methods typically
utilize task contexts and skills as prior experience, where
task contexts are related to the information within each task
and skills represent a set of temporally extended actions for
solving subtasks. However, these methods still suffer from
limited performance when adapting to unseen target tasks,
mainly because the learned prior experience lacks generalization, i.e., they are unable to extract effective prior experience from meta-training tasks by exploration and learning of
continuous latent spaces. We propose a framework called decoupled meta-reinforcement learning (DCMRL), which (1)
contrastively restricts the learning of task contexts through
pulling in similar task contexts within the same task and pushing away different task contexts of different tasks, and (2) utilizes a Gaussian quantization variational autoencoder (GQVAE) for clustering the Gaussian distributions of the task
contexts and skills respectively, and decoupling the exploration and learning processes of their spaces. These cluster
centers which serve as representative and discrete distributions of task context and skill are stored in task context codebook and skill codebook, respectively. DCMRL can acquire
generalizable prior experience and achieve effective adaptation to unseen target tasks during the meta-testing phase. Experiments in the navigation and robot manipulation continuous control tasks show that DCMRL is more effective than
previous meta-RL methods with more generalizable prior experience.

Introduction
Current offline meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL)
methods have been widely adopted across various domains
and produced notable results, particularly regarding the
robot control task (Nam et al. 2022; Rakelly et al. 2019).
These meta-RL methods acquire prior experience from a series of tasks during the meta-training phase and then employ the prior experience to the unseen target tasks which
have implicit relationships with the training tasks during the
meta-testing phase. There are two frequently utilized forms
of prior experience, task contexts and skills (Nam et al.
* Corresponding author: Jie Shao.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12358

