The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Aleth-NeRF: Illumination Adaptive NeRF with Concealing Field Assumption
Ziteng Cui1,2 , Lin Gu3,1 , Xiao Sun2 * , Xianzheng Ma4 , Yu Qiao2 , Tatsuya Harada1,3
1

The University of Tokyo
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
RIKEN AIP
4
University of Oxford
(cui, harada)@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, lin.gu@riken.jp, (sunxiao, maxianzheng)@pjlab.org.cn, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Therefore, this paper aims to slightly modify vanilla NeRF
for under & over-exposure scenes. As shown in Fig. 1(c, d),
the proposed, Aleth-NeRF, renders normal-light novel views
despite the severe input images.
The rendering process in NeRF (Fig. 1(b)) is similar to
the viewer-centered emission theory held by ancient Greek.
Emission theory ignores the incident light but postulates visual rays emitted from the eye travel in straight lines and
interacts with objects to form the visual perception. Therefore, the darkness of an entity is solely caused by the particles between the object and the eye. In other words, all objects are visible by default unless concealed. Inspired by this
worldview, we assume a simple but NeRF-friendly concept
that it is the concealing fields (gray particle in Fig. 1(c)) in
viewing direction that attenuates the emission and makes the
viewer see a low-light scene. This is in contrast to the standard NeRF setting where the density of air (white particle in
Fig. 1(a)) is usually zero. Introducing the Concealing Field,
which assigns the air particles with transmittance value allows NeRF to accurately estimate the colour and density of
objects (yellow particles in Fig. 1(c)) in low-light conditions,
therefore when removing the concealing fields, or Aletheia
(αληθεια) 1 , we are able to render novel views with normallight. On the contrary, for the over-exposed scene, deliberately adding the concealing fields in rendering stage could
correct the exposure.
Our proposed method Aleth-NeRF takes low-light &
over-exposure images as inputs to train the model and learn
the volumetric representation jointly with concealing fields.
As shown in Fig.1(b), we jointly train NeRF with concealing
fields between the object and viewer. For the low light scenario, we remove the concealing fields during the rendering
stage (Fig. 1(c)). When dealing with over-exposure images,
Aleth-NeRF would add concealing fields to suppress overly
bright (Fig. 1(d)). Our contributions are summarized as follow:

The standard Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) paradigm employs a viewer-centered methodology, entangling the aspects of illumination and material reflectance into emission solely from 3D points. This simplified rendering approach presents challenges in accurately modeling images
captured under adverse lighting conditions, such as low light
or over-exposure. Motivated by the ancient Greek emission
theory that posits visual perception as a result of rays emanating from the eyes, we slightly refine the conventional
NeRF framework to train NeRF under challenging light conditions and generate normal-light condition novel views unsupervisedly. We introduce the concept of a “Concealing
Field,” which assigns transmittance values to the surrounding air to account for illumination effects. In dark scenarios,
we assume that object emissions maintain a standard lighting level but are attenuated as they traverse the air during
the rendering process. Concealing Field thus compel NeRF
to learn reasonable density and colour estimations for objects even in dimly lit situations. Similarly, the Concealing
Field can mitigate over-exposed emissions during rendering
stage. Furthermore, we present a comprehensive multi-view
dataset captured under challenging illumination conditions
for evaluation. Our code and proposed dataset are available
at https://github.com/cuiziteng/Aleth-NeRF.

Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) has
been demonstrated to effectively understand 3D scenes from
2D images and generate novel views. However, the formulation of NeRF and its follow-up variants assume captured images are under normal light, often failing to work
under low-light (Mildenhall et al. 2021) or over-exposure
scenarios. This is because vanilla NeRF is viewer-centered
which models the amount of light emission from a location
to the viewer without disentangling illumination and material (Fig. 1(a)) (Lyu et al. 2022). As a result, the NeRF algorithm interprets a dark scene as insufficient radiation of
the 3D object particles, violating the estimation of the object’s material and geometry. In practical applications, images are often taken under challenging lighting conditions.

• We propose Aleth-NeRF, that trains under low-light &
over-exposure conditions and generates novel views under normal-light. Inspired by ancient Greek philosophy,
we naturally extend the transmittance function in vanilla
NeRF by modelling concealing fields between the ob-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
normally translated as ”unconcealedness”, ”disclosure” or ”revealing” (Heidegger, Stambaugh, and Schmidt 2010)

1435

