The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SHAP@k: Efficient and Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) Identification of
Top-k Features
Sanjay Kariyappa, Leonidas Tsepenekas, Freddy Lécué, Daniele Magazzeni
JPMorganChase AI Research
{sanjay.kariyappa, leonidas.tsepenekas, freddy.lecue, daniele.magazzeni}@jpmorgan.com

Abstract
The SHAP framework provides a principled method to explain
the predictions of a model by computing feature importance.
Motivated by applications in finance, we introduce the Top-k
Identification Problem (TkIP) (and its ordered variant TkIPO), where the objective is to identify the subset (or ordered
subset for TkIP-O) of k features corresponding to the highest
SHAP values with PAC guarantees. While any sampling-based
method that estimates SHAP values (such as KernelSHAP
and SamplingSHAP) can be trivially adapted to solve TkIP,
doing so is highly sample inefficient. Instead, we leverage the
connection between SHAP values and multi-armed bandits
(MAB) to show that both TkIP and TkIP-O can be reduced to
variants of problems in MAB literature. This reduction allows
us to use insights from the MAB literature to develop sampleefficient variants of KernelSHAP and SamplingSHAP. We
propose KernelSHAP@k and SamplingSHAP@k for solving
TkIP; along with KernelSHAP-O and SamplingSHAP-O to
solve the ordering problem in TkIP-O. We perform extensive
experiments using several credit-related datasets to show that
our methods offer significant improvements of up to 40⇥ in
sample efficiency and 39⇥ in runtime.

1

Introduction

The ability to explain the predictions of ML models is of
critical importance in highly regulated industries, where laws
provide right to explanations for people who are adversely
impacted by algorithmic decision making. Specifically in
finance, regulations like Fair Credit Reporting Act (Congress
1970) and Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Congress 1974)
require a rejected loan/credit application (i.e. adverse action) to be explained to the borrower, by providing reasons
for why the application was rejected (e.g., low credit score,
high debt-to-income ratio, recent delinquencies, etc.). Owing
to its principled formulation, the SHAP framework (Lundberg and Lee 2017) is the defacto choice for explaining
model predictions in credit-risk assesment models (Bhatt
et al. 2020). While exact computation of SHAP values is
computationally intractable, sampling-based techniques like
KernelSHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017) and SamplingSHAP
provide a practical alternative to compute approximate SHAP
values. Additionally, recent works have developed methods
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

to quantify the approximation error of such sampling-based
techniques, by providing confidence intervals (CIs) for the
estimated SHAP values (Covert and Lee 2020).
Motivated by applications in finance, we introduce two
new problems with the following objectives:
1. Top-k Identification Problem (TkIP): Identify an
unordered set of k features associated with the k highest SHAP values with PAC guarantees1 .
2. Ordered Top-k Identification Problem (TkIP-O): Identify
an ordered set of k features associated with the k highest
SHAP values with PAC guarantees.
TkIP and TkIP-O are motivated by an important real-world
use-case of processing credit/loan applications, where the
lender is required to provide a list of up to four specific principal reasons or features that contributed to the model’s prediction (i.e. explanations) in the event of an adverse decision/action taken; this is standard practice by credit/loan issuers to
comply with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Congress
1974). While there are no prior works that solve TkIP/TkIPO specifically, there is a recent prior work (Kolpaczki, Bengs,
and Hüllermeier 2021) that has looked at solving a variant of
TkIP with a fixed sample budget. However, this work does
not provide PAC guarantees for its solution and it does not
solve the ordering problem introduced in TkIP-O.
Naive baseline. We show that existing sampling-based
methods like Kernel/SamplingSHAP can be straightforwardly adapted to solve TkIP/TkIP-O. We design a naive
stopping condition that provides PAC solutions by requiring
the CI-widths for all features to fall below a threshold. While
this provides valid solutions for TkIP/TkIP-O, we show that
this naive baseline requires a large number of samples, emphasizing the need for sample-efficient methods.
Connection to MAB. We develop a sample-efficient solution for TkIP by observing that this problem can be reduced
to a stricter variant of the Explore-m problem in multi-arm
bandits (MAB), where given d arms with an unknown distribution of payoffs, the goal is to find a subset of m-best
arms with the highest expected payoffs. Here, the features
are analogous to arms and the SHAP value of each feature is
analogous to the expected payoff of each arm.
Similarly, TkIP-O is related to the ordering problem in
MAB, where given a set of d arms, the goal is to sort them
1

13068

Formal definitions of PAC guarantees are provided in Section 3.

