The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identification of Causal Structure with Latent Variables Based on Higher Order
Cumulants
Wei Chen1 , Zhiyi Huang1 , Ruichu Cai1,2 * , Zhifeng Hao1,3 , Kun Zhang4,5
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
4
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
{chenweidelight, huangzhiyichn, cairuichu}@gmail.com, zfhao@gdut.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu
Abstract

L

Causal discovery with latent variables is a crucial but challenging task. Despite the emergence of numerous methods
aimed at addressing this challenge, they are not fully identified to the structure that two observed variables are influenced by one latent variable and there might be a directed
edge in between. Interestingly, we notice that this structure
can be identified through the utilization of higher-order cumulants. By leveraging the higher-order cumulants of nonGaussian data, we provide an analytical solution for estimating the causal coefficients or their ratios. With the estimated
(ratios of) causal coefficients, we propose a novel approach
to identify the existence of a causal edge between two observed variables subject to latent variable influence. In case
when such a causal edge exits, we introduce an asymmetry
criterion to determine the causal direction. The experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

L

λ1

λ2

λ1

X

Y

X

(a)

λ2
η

Y

(b)

Figure 1: A causal structure with two observed variables X
and Y affected by one latent variable L, where λ1 , λ2 and η
represent the causal strength between L and X, L and Y , X
and Y , respectively.

et al. 2006; Kummerfeld and Ramsey 2016; Huang et al.
2022), and Generalized Independence Noise (GIN) condition (Xie et al. 2020, 2022) to identify the relationships
between latent variables and observed variables. By utilizing the non-Gaussianity, PraceLiNGAM (Tashiro et al.
2014), MLCLiNGAM (Chen et al. 2021) and RCD (Maeda
and Shimizu 2020) can only identify some causal structure among observed variables that are not directly affected by the latent variables. However, the above approaches fail to identify the structures given in Figure 1.
Although lvLiNGAM leverages the Overcomplete Independence Component Analysis technique (ICA) (Eriksson and
Koivunen 2004; Lewicki and Sejnowski 2000), it is hard to
obtain an optimal result, which would lead to wrong causal
relations. In summary, how to fully identify the causal relationships between two observed variables influenced by one
latent variable is still an open problem.
To overcome the aforementioned challenge, two problems should be considered: 1) How to detect whether there
exists a causal edge between two observed variables? 2)
Furthermore, when such an edge exists, how to determine
its direction? Fortunately, we notice that certain types of
non-Gaussianity can be measured by higher-order cumulants, which can also capture some data distribution information (Hyvärinen, Karhunen, and Oja 2001). Thus, utilizing higher-order cumulants can yield additional information
to address the aforementioned issues.
To address the first problem, we find that some specific
combinations of higher-order joint cumulants of two observed variables can be used to detect whether there exists

Introduction
Inferring causal relationships between observed variables
with latent variables is of significant importance and has
been applied in many fields (Sachs et al. 2005; Wang and
Drton 2020; Tramontano, Monod, and Drton 2022; Morioka
and Hyvarinen 2023). The Latent Variables Linear NonGaussian Acyclic Model (LvLiNGAM) (Hoyer et al. 2008b;
Entner and Hoyer 2011; Tashiro et al. 2014) is one of
the most prominent approaches for this problem. Notably,
LvLiNGAM can be transformed into a canonical model,
wherein each latent variable is the cause of a minimum of
two children and has no parents (Hoyer et al. 2008b). Therefore, the identification of the structure involving one latent
variable and two observed variables (as shown in Figure 1)
is one of the fundamental problems in causal discovery.
Various methods are proposed to identify the causal
structure with latent variables. One of the typical methods is based on conditional independence tests, such as
FCI (Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 1995) and its variants (Colombo et al. 2012), but they can only identify
up to Markov equivalent class. Under the measurement
assumption, some approaches use rank constraints (Silva
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20353

