The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Limitations of Face Image Generation
Harrison Rosenberg* , Shimaa Ahmed* , Guruprasad Ramesh* ,
Kassem Fawaz, Ramya Korlakai Vinayak
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
University of Wisconsin–Madison
hrosenberg@ece.wisc.edu, {ahmed27,viswanathanr,kfawaz}@wisc.edu, ramya@ece.wisc.edu

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved widespread
popularity due to their unprecedented image generation capability. In particular, their ability to synthesize and modify human faces has spurred research into using generated
face images in both training data augmentation and model
performance assessments. In this paper, we study the efficacy and shortcomings of generative models in the context
of face generation. Utilizing a combination of qualitative
and quantitative measures, including embedding-based metrics and user studies, we present a framework to audit the
characteristics of generated faces conditioned on a set of social attributes. We applied our framework on faces generated
through state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion models. We
identify several limitations of face image generation that include faithfulness to the text prompt, demographic disparities,
and distributional shifts. Furthermore, we present an analytical model that provides insights into how training data selection contributes to the performance of generative models.
Our survey data and analytics code can be found online at
https://github.com/wi-pi/Limitations of Face Generation

Figure 1: Samples of the non-celebrities dataset using Realism model for four demographic groups: ‘East Asian Male’,
‘Black Female’, ‘Indian Male’, and ‘White Female’. ‘Source’
refers to images generated from Realism using the prompt
template. The second to sixth columns show transformed
images when an attribute is applied to ‘Source’ using SEGA.

Introduction
Text-to-image (TTI) diffusion models have become popular
due to their unprecedented image-generation capability. Taking a textual prompt as input, these models generate realistic
images which align with user intentions. Their ability to synthesize and modify human faces has spurred research into
using generated face images in training data augmentation
and model performance assessments (Dixit et al. 2017; Trabucco et al. 2023). For example, face recognition systems
can benefit from synthetic datasets that exhibit more demographic diversity than existing natural datasets (Smith et al.
2023; Friedrich et al. 2023).
This work analyzes the quality of synthetic datasets for facial recognition applications and whether they exhibit demographic disparities. Achieving this objective requires generating a large set of identities belonging to diverse demographic
groups and generating multiple (different) faces for each identity. Existing diffusion models are incapable of meeting this
objective for two reasons. First, aligning the generated faces
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14838

with the provided prompt is challenging (Tsaban and Passos
2023; Brack et al. 2023). Second, generating multiple faces
with the same identity in a one-shot fashion is typically infeasible (Tsaban and Passos 2023; Brack et al. 2023). Limited
research exists in this space. Previous works either optimize
the diffusion model to a particular demographic group, generate faces without a notion of identity, or limit their objectives
to frequency analysis of the demographics of the generated
images (Perera and Patel 2023).
In this work, we propose a new framework to generate
synthetic face images, as shown in fig. 1. Our face-generation
pipeline takes as input demographic attributes, applies custom
prompts to generate identities for each demographic attribute,
and utilizes image editing models (Brack et al. 2023) to
generate diversified faces for each identity. The resulting
dataset, which we manually verify, resembles a natural face
image dataset, albeit demographically balanced by design.
We then apply a three-pronged approach to assess the
synthetic face image dataset’s quality through face verification (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015), quantitative

