The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decomposing Semantic Shifts for Composed Image Retrieval
Xingyu Yang1,2 * , Daqing Liu3 , Heng Zhang4 , Yong Luo1,2† , Chaoyue Wang3 , Jing Zhang5
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China,
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China,
3
JD Explore Academy, JD.com, China,
4
Gaoling School of Artifical Intelligence, Renmin University of China, China,
5
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia,
{yangxingyu2021,luoyong}@whu.edu.cn, liudq.ustc@gmail.com, zhangheng@ruc.edu.cn,
chaoyue.wang@outlook.com, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Change color of blue
car to red.

Composed image retrieval is a type of image retrieval task
where the user provides a reference image as a starting point
and specifies a text on how to shift from the starting point
to the desired target image. However, most existing methods focus on the composition learning of text and reference
images and oversimplify the text as a description, neglecting the inherent structure and the user’s shifting intention
of the texts. As a result, these methods typically take shortcuts that disregard the visual cue of the reference images.
To address this issue, we reconsider the text as instructions
and propose a Semantic Shift Network (SSN) that explicitly decomposes the semantic shifts into two steps: from the
reference image to the visual prototype and from the visual
prototype to the target image. Specifically, SSN explicitly
decomposes the instructions into two components: degradation and upgradation, where the degradation is used to picture the visual prototype from the reference image, while the
upgradation is used to enrich the visual prototype into the final representations to retrieve the desired target image. The
experimental results show that the proposed SSN demonstrates a significant improvement of 5.42% and 1.37% on
the CIRR and FashionIQ datasets, respectively, and establishes a new state-of-the-art performance. Code is available
at https://github.com/starxing-yuu/SSN.

Text as a description

(b)

Text as an instruction

No colored

of
or .
ol red
e c to
ng ar
ha c
C lue
b

1

(a)

to red

(c)

Figure 1: (a) gives an example of the CIR task. (b) shows
existing works treat text as a description connecting the reference image and target image. They follow the paradigm
of Ir + L ↔ It . (c) gives a brief illustration of our idea.
We propose to consider the text as an instruction, inheriting
the property of human language to express semantic shifts.
With text instructions, the reference image is first degraded
into visual prototypes and then enriched into the final representations to retrieve. This process can be described as

Introduction

L−

L+

Ir −→ Ir0 −→ It .

Composed Image Retrieval (Vo et al. 2019) (CIR) is an
emerging image retrieval task in that the users can provide
a multi-modal query composed of a reference image and a
text. Different from the traditional image retrieval (Weinzaepfel et al. 2022) where the users must provide the exact same image of the desired result or text-to-image retrieval (Wang et al. 2019) where the users should describe
the target in a detailed language, as shown in Figure 1a,
CIR relax the requirement of input thus the users can simply
provide an example image that similar to the desired image as reference, and then describe the difference from the

reference to the target. Despite their diverse model architectures (Kim et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2021), the essence of
this task is to fully understand the user’s intent conveyed by
the reference image and the language and then find the most
similar image from all candidates. Thanks to the development of vision features (Radford et al. 2021) and language
representations (Devlin et al. 2019), we can accomplish the
CIR task with more flexible free-form languages, including
changing one specific attribute of one object and adding or
removing some objects.
However, capturing the user’s intentions is still a challenging problem because the instruction text is far different

* Contribution during internship at JD Explore Academy.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6576

