The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Learning in Polyhedral Games via Best-Response Oracles*
Darshan Chakrabarti1 , Gabriele Farina2 , Christian Kroer1
1

Columbia University
2
MIT
dc3595@columbia.edu, gfarina@mit.edu, ck2945@columbia.edu

Abstract

FP was shown to converge (Robinson 1951), but its convergence rate can, in the worst case, scale quite poorly with the
number of actions available to each player (Daskalakis and
Pan 2014). It is then natural to ask what are the best convergence guarantees that can be obtained for the computation
of Nash equilibria in two-player zero-sum games or coarse
correlated equilibria in multiplayer games when agents are
learning through a best-response oracle.

We study online learning and equilibrium computation in
games with polyhedral decision sets, a property shared
by normal-form games (NFGs) and extensive-form games
(EFGs), when the learning agent is restricted to utilizing a
best-response oracle. We show how to achieve constant regret
in zero-sum games and O(T 1/4 ) regret in general-sum games
while using only O(log t) best-response queries at a given
iteration t, thus improving over the best prior result, which
required O(T ) queries per iteration. Moreover, our framework
yields the first last-iterate convergence guarantees for self-play
with best-response oracles in zero-sum games. This convergence occurs at a linear rate, though with
√a condition-number
dependence. We go on to show a O(1/ T ) best-iterate convergence rate without such a dependence. Our results build on
linear-rate convergence results for variants of the Frank-Wolfe
(FW) algorithm for strongly convex and smooth minimization
problems over polyhedral domains. These FW results depend
on a condition number of the polytope, known as facial distance. In order to enable application to settings such as EFGs,
we show two broad new results: 1) the facial distance for poly√
topes of the form {x ∈ Rn
≥0 | Ax = b} is at least γ/ k
where γ is the minimum value of a nonzero coordinate of
a vertex in the polytope and k ≤ n is the number of tight
inequality constraints in the optimal face, and 2) the facial
distance for polytopes of the form Ax = b, Cx ≤ d, x ≥ 0
where x ∈ Rn , C ≥ 0 is a√nonzero integral matrix, and
d ≥ 0, is at least 1/(∥C∥∞ n). This yields the first such
results for several problems, such as sequence-form polytopes,
flow polytopes, and matching polytopes.

1

In the online learning community, methods based only on
best-response oracles are special cases of methods based on a
linear minimization oracle (LMO), which can be queried for
points that minimize a linear objective over the feasible set.
Such methods are known as projection-free methods because
they avoid potentially expensive projections onto the feasible
set. Projection-free online learning algorithms might perform
multiple LMO calls per iteration, so our paper and related
literature are concerned not only with the number of iterations
T of online learning but also the total number of LMO calls,
which we will denote by N . Because LMOs for polyhedral
decision sets essentially correspond to best-response oracles
(BROs), we will use these two terms interchangeably.
Follow the Perturbed Leader (FTPL) (Kalai and Vempala
2005) was the first such algorithm. When used by both play√
ers in two-player zero-sum games, it yields a O(1/ T )
convergence rate to Nash equilibrium, with a single LMO
call in each iteration. More recently, Suggala and Netrapalli (2020) proposed an optimistic variant of FTPL (OFTPL);
OFTPL achieves a O(1/T ) rate of convergence to Nash equilibrium but requires O(T
√ ) LMO calls per iteration, thus corresponding to a O(1/ N ) rate as a function of the total
number of LMO calls. Online Frank-Wolfe (OFW) (Hazan
and Kale 2012) is another projection-free algorithm, based
on the well-studied Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm (Frank and
Wolfe 1956). While it does not require multiple calls to an
LMO, it can only achieve a O(T −1/3 ) rate for
√two-player
zero-sum games. We aim to break the O(1/ N ) barrier
in terms of convergence towards two-player zero-sum equilibria and beyond. We focus on the setting of polyhedral
games, a class containing both normal-form and extensiveform games. Our primary contribution is an online learning
method which enjoys O(1/T ) average individual regret in
zero-sum games and O(1/T 3/4 ) average individual regret
in general-sum games while only requiring O(log t) LMO

Introduction

Learning in games is a well-studied framework in which
agents iteratively refine their strategies through repeated interactions with their environment. One natural way for agents
to iteratively refine their strategies is by best-responding. This
idea can be applied in many forms, the simplest and earliest
instance of which was fictitious play (FP) (Brown 1951). This
algorithm involves the agent observing the strategies played
by the opponent and then playing a strategy that corresponds
to the best response to the average of the observed strategies.
* The full version of this paper (including appendices) can be
found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03696.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9564

