The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalizable Fourier Augmentation for Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Huihui Song1∗ , Tiankang Su1∗† , Yuhui Zheng1,2 , Kaihua Zhang1 , Bo Liu3 , Dong Liu4
1

B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
College of Computer, Qinghai Normal University, Xining 810016, China
3
Walmart Global Tech, Sunnyvale, CA, 94086, USA
4
Netflix Inc, Los Gatos, CA, 95032, USA
tiankangsu@gmail.com
Abstract

The performance of existing unsupervised video object segmentation methods typically suffers from severe performance
degradation on test videos when tested in out-of-distribution
scenarios. The primary reason is that the test data in realworld may not follow the independent and identically distribution (i.i.d.) assumption, leading to domain shift. In this
paper, we propose a Generalizable Fourier Augmentation (GFA) method during training to improve the generalization ability of the model. To achieve this, the GFA performs Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) over the intermediate spatial domain features in each layer to yield corresponding frequency representations, including amplitude components (encoding scene-aware styles such as texture, color, contrast of the
scene) and phase components (encoding rich semantics). We
produce a variety of style features via Gaussian sampling to
augment the training data, thereby improving the generalization capability of the model. To further improve the crossdomain generalization performance of the model, we design
a phase feature update strategy via exponential moving average using phase features from past frames in an online update
manner, which could help the model to learn cross-domaininvariant features. Extensive experiments show that the proposed GFA achieves the state-of-the-art performance on popular benchmarks.

Figure 1: Bottom: Training samples include motorcycle and
mouse categories while the seen test sample motorcycle
with different scene styles suffers from “scene shift” and
the unseen test sample worm undergoes “semantic shift”.
To reduce both types of distribution shifts, our Generalizable Fourier Augmentation (GFA) augments the features in
the frequency domain by sampling the amplitudes from a
Gaussian distribution while online updating the phase components across different domains, which helps the model to learn style-rich and cross-domain-invariant features
that are effective to improve model generalization capability
(i.e., Top: Information stored In Weights (IIW) (Wang et al.
2022)) vs. accuracy measured by J &F commonly used in
UVOS between our GFA and the state-of-the-art methods).

Introduction
Given a video sequence, unsupervised video object segmentation (UVOS) (Zhou et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2021; Tokmakov,
Alahari, and Schmid 2017; Zhang et al. 2021) aims to locate and segment the primarily moving foreground targets
without any prior knowledge. This task setting is the same
as zero-shot learning in which the test instances may not
be seen during training (Chen et al. 2020). UVOS has been
widely applied in a variety of practical applications such as
visual tracking , autonomous driving and video surveillance.
The existing UVOS methods (Zhang et al. 2021; Ren et al.
2021) are trained and tested by the samples with an implicit assumption that they are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.), i.e., both training and test data are indistribution samples. Despite the demonstrated success, in
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

practical applications, the UVOS models (Chen et al. 2020;
Yue et al. 2021) often suffer from the out-of-distribution
(OOD) test samples due to the zero-shot task setting, which

†

4918

