The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Semantic Complete Scene Forecasting from a 4D Dynamic Point Cloud Sequence
Zifan Wang* 1,3 , Zhuorui Ye* 1,3 , Haoran Wu* 1,3 , Junyu Chen1,3 , Li Yi†1,2,3
1
Tsinghua University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
{wzf22,yezr21,wuhr20,junyu-ch21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ericyi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

future observation. The observation only provides a partial view of the dynamic scene, insufficient for a robot to
perform low-level tasks like grasping and obstacle avoidance (Song et al. 2017) that require complete geometric understanding. Also, the raw future point cloud lacks semantic meaning, crucial for high-level tasks like object retrieval.
Therefore, we propose a new task named Semantic Complete Scene Forecasting (SCSF) in this work. Given previous N frames of an egocentric 4D dynamic point cloud sequence, the task is to predict the complete scene along with
its semantic labels corresponding to the next future frame.
The SCSF problem is challenging since it requires both
future forecasting and semantic scene completion(Song
et al.), or more intuitively, completing and segmenting something unknown. Previous works on point cloud forecasting(Ilg et al.; Dosovitskiy et al.) formulate it as a flow prediction problem where future frames are treated as the deformation of earlier partial observations. They cannot provide
a complete scene understanding which is crucial for occlusion inference or robot decision-making. On the other hand,
works on semantic scene completion(Roldao, De Charette,
and Verroust-Blondet) consider only static scenes. Previous
research treated forecasting and completion as two separate
problems and no works exploited their connections deeply.
Our key observation is that future forecasting and semantic scene completion are synergetic to each other and
can lead to huge gains mutually if modeled properly. On
one hand, future forecasting models the underlying scene
dynamics and improves motion understanding. Such understanding allows aggregating multiple observations across
time for a more complete geometric understanding. On the
other hand, a complete scene understanding allows future
forecasting to focus on the object movements without bothering with sampling noise or occlusion variations faced by
traditional point cloud forecasting methods. Thus semantic
scene completion can greatly improve future forecasting and
provide a comprehensive understanding of the scene.
Based on the observation, we jointly solve the forecasting and the semantic completion in 4D. We struggle to answer three questions: How can we forecast the complete
future scene with high resolution? How can we leverage
the multi-frame partial observations to solve the completion task? How can we leverage the prior of empty and occluded space, which is usually ignored in point cloud fore-

We study a new problem of semantic complete scene forecasting (SCSF) in this work. Given a 4D dynamic point cloud
sequence, our goal is to forecast the complete scene corresponding to the future next frame along with its semantic labels. To tackle this challenging problem, we properly model
the synergetic relationship between future forecasting and
semantic scene completion through a novel network named
SCSFNet. SCSFNet leverages a hybrid geometric representation for high-resolution complete scene forecasting. To leverage multi-frame observation as well as the understanding of
scene dynamics to ease the completion task, SCSFNet introduces an attention-based skip connection scheme. To ease the
need to model occlusion variations and to better focus on the
occluded part, SCSFNet utilizes auxiliary visibility grids to
guide the forecasting task. To evaluate the effectiveness of
SCSFNet, we conduct experiments on various benchmarks
including two large-scale indoor benchmarks we contributed
and the outdoor SemanticKITTI benchmark. Extensive experiments show SCSFNet outperforms baseline methods on multiple metrics by a large margin, and also prove the synergy
between future forecasting and semantic scene completion.
The project page with code is available at scsfnet.github.io.

1

Introduction

Visual forecasting has aroused a wide spectrum of interests in the computer vision community, especially for RGB
videos(Zhang et al. 2019; Hu and Wang 2019; Luc et al.
2020; Gao et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020). Recently point cloud
sequence forecasting (Wen et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2020; Deng
and Zakhor 2020a; Weng et al. 2021; Mersch et al. 2022;
Wang and Tian 2022) has also obtained many attention.
Forecasting the future geometric observation can help an intelligent agent plan its behavior accordingly, which in turn
greatly benefits a wide range of downstream applications in
autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality.
Existing works on point cloud forecasting (Wen et al.
2022; Sun et al. 2020; Deng and Zakhor 2020a; Weng et al.
2021; Mersch et al. 2022) mostly focus on forecasting raw
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5867

