The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ConditionVideo: Training-Free Condition-Guided Video Generation
Bo Peng1,2 * , Xinyuan Chen2† , Yaohui Wang2 , Chaochao Lu2 , Yu Qiao2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{pengbo,chenxinyuan,wangyaohui,luchaochao,qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn
2

Abstract

training workload, although an optimization process is still
necessary. Text2Video (Khachatryan et al. 2023) proposes
training-free generation, however, the generated video fails
to simulate natural background dynamics. Consequently, the
question arises: How can we effectively utilize image generation models without any optimization process and embed
controlling information as well as modeling dynamic backgrounds for video synthesis?
We propose ConditionVideo, a training-free conditionalguided video generation method that utilizes off-the-shelf
text-to-image generation models to generate realistic videos
without any fine-tuning. Specifically, aiming at generating dynamic videos, our model disentangles the representation of motion in videos into two distinct components:
conditional-guided motion and scenery motion, enabling the
generation of realistic and temporally consistent frames.
By leveraging this disentanglement, we propose a pipeline
that consists of a UNet branch and a control branch, with
two separate noise vectors utilized in the sampling process.
Each noise vector represents conditional-guided motion and
scenery motion, respectively. To further enforce temporal consistency, we introduce sparse bi-directional spatialtemporal attention (sBiST-Attn) and a 3D control branch that
leverages bi-directional adjacent frames in the temporal dimension to enhance conditional accuracy. Our ConditionVideo method outperforms the baseline methods in terms of
frame consistency, conditional accuracy, and clip score.
Our key contributions are as follows. (1) We propose ConditionVideo, a training-free video generation method that
leverages off-the-shelf text-to-image generation models to
generate conditional-guided videos with realistic dynamic
backgrounds. (2) Our method disentangles motion representation into conditional-guided and scenery motion components via a pipeline that includes a U-Net branch and
a conditional-control branch. (3) We introduce sparse bidirectional spatial-temporal attention (sBiST-Attn) and a 3D
conditional-control branch to improve conditional accuracy
and temporal consistency.

Recent works have successfully extended large-scale text-toimage models to the video domain, producing promising results but at a high computational cost and requiring a large
amount of video data. In this work, we introduce ConditionVideo, a training-free approach to text-to-video generation
based on the provided condition, video, and input text, by
leveraging the power of off-the-shelf text-to-image generation methods (e.g., Stable Diffusion). ConditionVideo generates realistic dynamic videos from random noise or given
scene videos. Our method explicitly disentangles the motion representation into condition-guided and scenery motion components. To this end, the ConditionVideo model is
designed with a UNet branch and a control branch. To improve temporal coherence, we introduce sparse bi-directional
spatial-temporal attention (sBiST-Attn). The 3D control network extends the conventional 2D controlnet model, aiming
to strengthen conditional generation accuracy by additionally leveraging the bi-directional frames in the temporal domain. Our method exhibits superior performance in terms of
frame consistency, clip score, and conditional accuracy, outperforming compared methods. For the project website, see
https://pengbo807.github.io/conditionvideo-website/

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based models (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021;
Song et al. 2021; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Sohl-Dickstein
et al. 2015) demonstrates impressive results in large-scale
text-to-image (T2I) generation (Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia
et al. 2022; Gafni et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022). Much
of the existing research proposes to utilize image generation
models for video generation. Recent works (Singer et al.
2023; Blattmann et al. 2023; Hong et al. 2023) attempt to
inflate the success of the image generation model to video
generation by introducing temporal modules. While these
methods reuse image generation models, they still require
a massive amount of video data and training with significant amounts of computing power. Tune-A-Video (Wu et al.
2022b) extends Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) with
additional attention and a temporal module for video editing by tuning one given video. It significantly decreases the

2

* Work done as an intern at Shanghai AI Lab.

2.1

†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

Diffusion Models

Image diffusion models have achieved significant success in
the field of generation (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song,

4459

