The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TD2 -Net: Toward Denoising and Debiasing for Dynamic Scene Graph Generation
Xin Lin1 * , Chong Shi1 , Yibing Zhan2 , Zuopeng Yang1 * , Yaqi Wu1 , Dacheng Tao3
1

Guangzhou University
JD Explore Academy
3
The University of Sydney
linxin94@gzhu.edu.cn, {shichong, winnerwu}@e.gzhu.edu.cn, zybjy@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{yzpeng44, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Dynamic scene graph generation (SGG) focuses on detecting
objects in a video and determining their pairwise relationships. Existing dynamic SGG methods usually suffer from
several issues, including 1) Contextual noise, as some frames
might contain occluded and blurred objects. 2) Label bias,
primarily due to the high imbalance between a few positive
relationship samples and numerous negative ones. Additionally, the distribution of relationships exhibits a long-tailed
pattern. To address the above problems, in this paper, we
introduce a network named TD2 -Net that aims at denoising
and debiasing for dynamic SGG. Specifically, we first propose a denoising spatio-temporal transformer module that enhances object representation with robust contextual information. This is achieved by designing a differentiable Top-K object selector that utilizes the gumbel-softmax sampling strategy to select the relevant neighborhood for each object. Second, we introduce an asymmetrical reweighting loss to relieve
the issue of label bias. This loss function integrates asymmetry focusing factors and the volume of samples to adjust the
weights assigned to individual samples. Systematic experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
TD2 -Net over existing state-of-the-art approaches on Action
Genome databases. In more detail, TD2 -Net outperforms the
second-best competitors by 12.7 % on mean-Recall@10 for
predicate classification.

Time

(a) Contextual noise
3 positive labels :
not look at
in front of
holding
23 negative labels

(b) Label bias

Figure 1: (a) Contextual noise. A significant proportion of
objects may be occluded or affected by camera motion blur.
(b) Label bias. As shown in the left example of two objects,
the quantity of positive relationship labels is significantly
less than that of negative ones, causing a negative-positive
imbalance. Furthermore, as shown in the right tabular, the
distribution of relationships exhibits a long-tailed trend.

et al. 2021; Nag et al. 2023; Feng et al. 2023) in dynamic SGG predominantly utilize transformers (Vaswani
et al. 2017) for context modeling to acquire spatial-temporal
information of objects or predicates. Furthermore, some
methods employ strategies such as temporal prior inference (Wang et al. 2022), uncertainty-aware learning, and
memory-guided training (Nag et al. 2023) to achieve unbiased dynamic SGG.
However, as shown in Figure 1, the current dynamic SGG
still faces two main problems. Firstly, there is the issue of
contextual noise, as videos consist of noisy and correlated
sequences of frames (Buch et al. 2022). A significant fraction of objects may be occluded or affected by camera motion blur, as depicted in Figure 1(a). When acquiring contextual information for objects or relationships, the irrelevant objects may introduce redundant or erroneous information, leading to unnecessary computational overhead and reducing the accuracy of the model’s predictions. Secondly,
there is the problem of label bias. As depicted in Figure 1(b),
the predicate classes in standard datasets exhibit two types

Introduction
A scene graph is a graph-structured representation that uses
nodes to represent objects and edges to represent relationships in an image. It provides a practical approach for scene
understanding, serving as a bridge between visual and language modalities, and is widely applied in various fields
such as image captioning (Yang et al. 2020), image retrieval
(Johnson et al. 2015), and visual question answering (Yang
et al. 2020). While the development of scene graph generation (SGG) of images has been satisfactory, research on dynamic scene graph generation of videos is still in its infancy.
Dynamic SGG aims to detect the objects for each frame
and the relationships among them. Such a detailed and
structured video understanding is akin to how humans
perceive real-world activities. Existing approaches (Cong
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3495

