The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

G–LIME: Statistical Learning for Local Interpretations of Deep Neural Networks
Using Global Priors (Abstract Reprint)
Xuhong Li1 , Haoyi Xiong1 , Xingjian Li1 , Xiao Zhang2 , Ji Liu1 , Haiyan Jiang1 , Zeyu Chen1 , Dejing
Dou1
2

1
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Li, Xiong, Li, Zhang, Liu, Jiang, Chen, and Dou
(2023).

Abstract
To explain the prediction result of a Deep Neural Network
(DNN) model based on a given sample, LIME [1] and its
derivatives have been proposed to approximate the local behavior of the DNN model around the data point via linear surrogates. Though these algorithms interpret the DNN
by finding the key features used for classification, the random interpolations used by LIME would perturb the explanation result and cause the instability and inconsistency
between repetitions of LIME computations. To tackle this
issue, we propose G-LIME that extends the vanilla LIME
through high-dimensional Bayesian linear regression using
the sparsity and informative global priors. Specifically, with
a dataset representing the population of samples (e.g., the
training set), G-LIME first pursues the global explanation
of the DNN model using the whole dataset. Then, with a
new data point, -LIME incorporates an modified estimator of ElasticNet-alike to refine the local explanation result
through balancing the distance to the global explanation and
the sparsity/feature selection in the explanation. Finally, GLIME uses Least Angle Regression (LARS) and retrieves
the solution path of a modified ElasticNet under varying
-regularization, to screen and rank the importance of features [2] as the explanation result. Through extensive experiments on real world tasks, we show that the proposed
method yields more stable, consistent, and accurate results
compared to LIME.

References
Li, X.; Xiong, H.; Li, X.; Zhang, X.; Liu, J.; Jiang, H.; Chen,
Z.; and Dou, D. 2023. G-LIME: Statistical learning for local
interpretations of deep neural networks using global priors.
Artificial Intelligence, 314: 103823.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22705

