The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalized Bradley-Terry Models for Score Estimation from Paired Comparisons
Julien Fageot1,2 , Sadegh Farhadkhani2 , Lê-Nguyên Hoang1,3 , and Oscar Villemaud1,2
1

Tournesol Association
2
EPFL
3
Calicarpa
julien.fageot@gmail.com, sadegh.farhadkhani@epfl.ch, len@tournesol.app, oscar.villemaud@epfl.ch

Abstract

outperforms a particularly bad alternative, while it is only
slightly better than a third alternative.
Transforming comparisons into scores is not straightforward, especially when the comparisons are noisy. Typically,
better sport teams are sometimes unfortunate, and end up
losing against less competitive teams, which is sometimes
called the “beauty of sport”. In other applications, the comparative judgments may vary because they are made by different individuals, or simply because it is hard for humans
to remain consistent in their sequential judgments.

Many applications, e.g. in content recommendation, sports, or
recruitment, leverage the comparisons of alternatives to score
those alternatives. The classical Bradley-Terry model and its
variants have been widely used to do so. The historical model
considers binary comparisons (victory/defeat) between alternatives, while more recent developments allow finer comparisons to be taken into account. In this article, we introduce a
probabilistic model encompassing a broad variety of paired
comparisons that can take discrete or continuous values. We
do so by considering a well-behaved subset of the exponential family, which we call the family of generalized BradleyTerry (GBT) models, as it includes the classical Bradley-Terry
model and many of its variants. Remarkably, we prove that all
GBT models are guaranteed to yield a strictly convex negative log-likelihood. Moreover, assuming a Gaussian prior on
alternatives’ scores, we prove that the maximum a posteriori (MAP) of GBT models, whose existence, uniqueness and
fast computation are thus guaranteed, varies monotonically
with respect to comparisons (the more A beats B, the better
the score of A) and is Lipschitz-resilient with respect to each
new comparison (a single new comparison can only have a
bounded effect on all the estimated scores). These desirable
properties make GBT models appealing for practical use. We
illustrate some features of GBT models on simulations.

Contributions
In this paper, we introduce and analyze a natural and wellbehaved family of probabilistic models that convert observed comparisons into individual scoring. Essentially, our
family of models, which we call the generalized BradleyTerry (GBT) family, is obtained by considering a subset of
the exponential family of particular interest. Interestingly,
a practitioner then merely needs to define how they expect
two equally good alternatives to be compared, to effortlessly
construct a unique model of our family. We show that the
GBT family generalizes the well-known and widely studied Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry 1952) (which
is limited to binary comparisons in its historical version), as
well as other more recent models (Guo et al. 2012; Kristof
et al. 2019). In fact, we highlight the generality of our
GBT models by briefly analyzing multiple noteworthy instances, including the K-nary-GBT, the Gaussian-GBT, the
Uniform-GBT, and the Poisson-GBT.
Remarkably, as our key contribution, we prove that, given
a Gaussian Bayesian prior on alternatives’ scores, all GBT
models are guaranteed to yield several desirable properties. Namely, first, all yield a strongly convex negative
log-posterior, which means that the maximum-a-posteriori
(MAP) can be quickly computed by any optimizer for
strongly convex losses. Second, we prove that the MAP
scores vary monotonically with the comparisons. This guarantees that alternatives will always be incentivized to “win
comparisons” by as large of a margin as possible. Finally,
we prove that the MAP scores are Lipschitz-resilient to each
new comparison, thereby guaranteeing that any outlier comparison will only have a limited impact on the estimated
scores. This is especially important in the context of online
applications, where misclicks are extremely common.

Introduction
In many settings, alternatives are rather compared than individually scored. Typically, in chess, football, tennis, judo, or
cycling, individuals and teams compete against one another.
Similarly, students and job candidates are arguably easier to
compare, rather than to assess directly. In fact, comparative
judgments are implicitly performed all the time in online applications, as users often have to select content, applications,
or products to consume or purchase, within a set of proposed
alternatives. However, ranking all (or a subset of top) alternatives is often demanded. Many sport competitions identify
a current number-one player or team, job candidates are ordered for hiring procedures and recommendation AIs must
select a handful of content to recommend. Such rankings are
often produced based on scoring inferred from comparisons.
Scores also allow to reflect the fact that an alternative vastly
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20379

