The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hyperbolic Graph Diffusion Model

1

Lingfeng Wen1 , Xuan Tang2 , Mingjie Ouyang1 ,
Radius
Number ofNumber
Xiangxiang Shen1 , Jian Yang3 , Daxin Zhu4
, Mingsong
Chen201of, points2
Xian Wei1 *
0
0

160 and Application,
MoE Engineering Research Center of Hardware/Software 1
Co-design 60
Technology
2
120
200
East China Normal University
180
464
2
School of Communication and Electronic Engineering,34East China
Normal
University
240 4 1543
3
School of Geospatial Information, Information Engineering University,
China; 4610
Quanzhou Normal University
5
300
xwei@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
5000

Abstract
Number of points

Diffusion generative models (DMs) have achieved promising
results in image and graph generation. However, real-world
graphs, such as social networks, molecular graphs, and traffic
graphs, generally share non-Euclidean topologies and hidden
hierarchies. For example, the degree distributions of graphs
are mostly power-law distributions. The current latent diffusion model embeds the hierarchical data in a Euclidean space,
which leads to distortions and interferes with modeling the
distribution. Instead, hyperbolic space has been found to be
more suitable for capturing complex hierarchical structures
due to its exponential growth property. In order to simultaneously utilize the data generation capabilities of diffusion
models and the ability of hyperbolic embeddings to extract latent hierarchical distributions, we propose a novel graph generation method called, Hyperbolic Graph Diffusion Model
(HGDM), which consists of an auto-encoder to encode nodes
into successive hyperbolic embeddings, and a DM that operates in the hyperbolic latent space. HGDM captures the crucial graph structure distributions by constructing a hyperbolic
potential node space that incorporates edge information. Extensive experiments show that HGDM achieves better performance in generic graph and molecule generation benchmarks,
with a 48% improvement in the quality of graph generation
with highly hierarchical structures.

Euclidean
Hyperbolic

4000
3000
2000
1000
0

0

1

2

Radius

3

4

5

Figure 1: The number of points in 2D hyperbolic and Euclidean space that can be placed at radius r from the center
point while maintaining a distance of at least s = 0.1 from
each other.

graphs into Euclidean space may produce distortions (Linial,
London, and Rabinovich 1995). Especially for the graphs
of drug molecules, changes in a few atoms or chemical
bonds can have a significant effect on the properties of the
molecules (Thornber 1979). On the contrary, it has been
found that the capacity of hyperbolic spaces grows exponentially (Munzner 1997) (see Figure 1). This property makes
hyperbolic spaces well-suited for embedding tree-like or
scale-free graphs (Chen et al. 2022). It has been observed
that the complex hierarchical structures in hyperbolic embedding space become more prominent and easier to be captured (Mathieu et al. 2019; Nickel and Kiela 2018). Some
existing hyperbolic graph neural networks (Wu et al. 2021;
Liu, Nickel, and Kiela 2019) show excellent performance in
graph representation learning tasks such as node classification and edge prediction. Yang et al. (2022a,b) also demonstrate superior performance over Euclidean methods in predicting long-tail items of user-item interaction for collaborative filtering in recommendation systems.
Furthermore, regarding generative models, diffusion
models have achieved amazing results in synthesizing images (Rombach et al. 2022). The diffusion model perturbs
the data distribution gradually during the forward diffusion
process and then learns to recover the data distribution from
noise through the reverse diffusion process. The Latent Diffusion Model (Rombach et al. 2022) embeds images into

Introduction
Graph representation learning and graph generation are important machine learning tasks that have wide applications
in fields such as social networks, drug discovery, and recommendation systems. While real-world graphs, such as social networks, molecular graphs, user-item interactions, and
traffic graphs, generally have non-Euclidean topologies and
hidden hierarchies (Asif et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2017; Fan
et al. 2019), e.g., the degree distribution of the nodes are
mostly power-law distributions (Adamic et al. 2001). It is
common practice in graph representation learning to embed node representations into Euclidean space (Chen et al.
2020). However, the polynomially growing capacity of Euclidean space struggles to maintain the intrinsic distances
of the huge number of nodes located in long-tailed regions
and differentiate between them. Therefore, embedding these
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15823

