The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DGC LUSTER: A Neural Framework for Attributed Graph Clustering via
Modularity Maximization
Aritra Bhowmick1 , Mert Kosan2 * , Zexi Huang2 , Ambuj Singh2 , Sourav Medya3
1

New York University
University of California, Santa Barbara
3
University of Illinois, Chicago
aritra.bhowmick@nyu.edu, mertkosan@gmail.com, zexihuang.phd@gmail.com, ambuj@ucsb.edu, medya@uic.edu
2

Abstract

GNN-based Clustering: Recently, there have been several attempts that use the power of deep learning in the form
of Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Velickovic et al. 2017)
for graph clustering. GNNs provide a powerful tool in graphbased machine learning that is successful in many diverse
prediction tasks (Zhang and Chen 2018; Ying et al. 2018b,a),
by incorporating the graph topology node features or attributes. For GNN-based graph clustering, MGAE (Wang
et al. 2017) marginalizes the corrupted node features to
learn representations via a graph encoder and applies spectral clustering. Another graph autoencoder based approach
has been proposed in (Park et al. 2019). To improve the efficiency of clustering, contrastive learning methods have been
used recently as well (Liu et al. 2023; Kulatilleke, Portmann,
and Chandra 2022; Xia et al. 2021). For more neural methods on deep graph clustering, we refer the readers to this
recent survey (Yue et al. 2022).

Graph clustering is a fundamental and challenging task in
the field of graph mining where the objective is to group
the nodes into clusters taking into consideration the topology of the graph. It has several applications in diverse domains spanning social network analysis, recommender systems, computer vision, and bioinformatics. In this work, we
propose a novel method, DGC LUSTER, which primarily optimizes the modularity objective using graph neural networks
and scales linearly with the graph size. Our method does not
require the number of clusters to be specified as a part of the
input and can also leverage the availability of auxiliary node
level information. We extensively test DGC LUSTER on several real-world datasets of varying sizes, across multiple popular cluster quality metrics. Our approach consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating significant performance gains in almost all settings.

Introduction and Related Work
Neural Modularity Maximization: One of the initial
methods to optimize modularity via deep learning for graph
clustering is proposed by Yang et al. (2016). They design a nonlinear reconstruction method based on graph autoencoders, which also incorporate constraints among node
pairs. Wu et al. (2020) propose a method that obtains a spatial proximity matrix by using the adjacency matrix and the
opinion leaders in the social network. The spatial eigenvectors of the proximity matrix are applied subsequently to optimize modularity. Mandaglio, Amelio, and Tagarelli (2018)
is another study that incorporates the modularity metric for
community detection and graph clustering. Choong, Liu,
and Murata (2018); Bhatia and Rani (2018) try to find communities without predefined community structure. Choong,
Liu, and Murata (2018) propose a generative model for community detection using a variational autoencoder. Bhatia and
Rani (2018) firstly analyze the possible number of communities in the graph, then fine-tune it using modularity. Later
on, Sun et al. (2021) use a graph neural network that optimizes modularity and attributes similarity objectives. Another related work in this domain is the method DMoN
by Tsitsulin et al. (2023). This method designs an architecture to encode cluster assignments and then formulate a
modularity-based objective function for optimizing these assignments.

Graph clustering is a fundamental problem in network analysis and plays an important role in uncovering structures
and relationships between the nodes or entities in a graph.
It has numerous applications in several domains such as
community detection in social networks (Newman 2006a),
identifying functional modules in biological systems (Wang
et al. 2010), image segmentation in computer vision (Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher 2004), and recommender systems
(Moradi, Ahmadian, and Akhlaghian 2015). The primary
goal of graph clustering is to group nodes with similar characteristics or functions while maintaining a clear distinction
between different clusters.
Node Attributes: While traditional graph clustering
methods primarily rely on graph topology such as modularity maximization (Newman 2006b; Newman and Girvan
2003), recent research (Wang et al. 2017) has recognized the
importance of incorporating node attributes in the clustering
process, offering a more comprehensive approach for grouping nodes. Node attributes provide additional information
associated with each node and provide contextual insights
that can improve the accuracy in the clustering process.
* Work done prior to joining Visa Research.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11069

