The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Detection and Defense of Unlearnable Examples
Yifan Zhu1,3 , Lijia Yu2,3 , Xiao-Shan Gao1,3 *
1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China
zhuyifan@amss.ac.cn, yulijia@ios.ac.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn

Abstract
Privacy preserving has become increasingly critical with the
emergence of social media. Unlearnable examples have been
proposed to avoid leaking personal information on the Internet by degrading the generalization abilities of deep learning
models. However, our study reveals that unlearnable examples are easily detectable. We provide theoretical results on
linear separability of certain unlearnable poisoned dataset and
simple network-based detection methods that can identify all
existing unlearnable examples, as demonstrated by extensive
experiments. Detectability of unlearnable examples with simple networks motivates us to design a novel defense method.
We propose using stronger data augmentations coupled with
adversarial noises generated by simple networks, to degrade
the detectability and thus provide effective defense against
unlearnable examples with a lower cost. Adversarial training
with large budgets is a widely-used defense method on unlearnable examples. We establish quantitative criteria between
the poison and adversarial budgets, which determine the existence of robust unlearnable examples or the failure of the
adversarial defense.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the most powerful machine learning method, driving significant advances
across numerous fields. However, the security of deep learning remains a major concern. One of the most serious security
threats is data poisoning, where an attacker can manipulate
the training data intentionally to cause deep models to malfunction. For example, by injecting triggers during the training phase, backdoor attacks (Chen et al. 2017; Gu et al. 2019)
will cause malfunctions or enable attackers to achieve specific objectives when triggers are activated. Another type of
data poisoning attack is availability attacks (Biggio, Nelson,
and Laskov 2012; Koh and Liang 2017; Lu, Kamath, and Yu
2022), aiming to reduce the generalization capability of deep
learning models by modifying the features and labels of the
training data. Recently, unlearnable data poisoning attacks
(Huang et al. 2020a; Wang, Wang, and Wang 2021) were
proposed, which can modify features of all training data with
a small poison budget to generate unlearnable examples.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17211

Privacy preserving has become increasingly eye-catching
in recent years, especially in face recognition (Shan et al.
2020; Cherepanova et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2022). Unlearnable
examples were designed initially for the “let poisons be kind”
(Huang et al. 2020a; Wang, Wang, and Wang 2021) approach
to privacy preservation, allowing individuals to slightly modify their personal data to make them unlearnable without
losing the semantics.
While unlearnable examples have been shown to be highly
effective at deceiving victims into thinking that their deep
learning models have been trained successfully by achieving
high validation accuracy, this paper demonstrates that unlearnable examples can be detected with relative ease. Specifically, we propose two effective methods to detect whether
a given dataset has been poisoned by unlearnable data poisoning attacks. It was experimental observed in (Yu et al.
2021) that unlearnable poisons are linearly separable. In this
paper, we further prove that for certain random or region
class-wise poisons, the poisoned datasets rather than poisons
are also linearly separable if the dimension of data is sufficiently large. Based on these theoretical findings, we propose
the Simple Networks Detection algorithm, which leverages
linear models or simple two-layer networks to detect poisoned data. Additionally, we have experimentally observed
that poisons are immune to large bias shifts. Based on this
observation, we propose another detection algorithm called
Bias-shifting Noise Test, which introduces a large bias to each
training data, to destroy their original features while retaining the injected poison features. The resulting difference can
be used to detect the existence of poisons. Our experiments
on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and TinyImageNet demonstrate
that all the major unlearnable examples can be effectively
detected by both algorithms.
Furthermore, the detectability of unlearnable examples
has inspired us to develop a defense strategy that focuses on
degrading them. We achieve this through the use of data augmentations and adversarial noises that make these examples
undetectable by simple networks. By using stronger data augmentations and a two-layer neural network (NN) to generate
stronger noises, we demonstrate that it becomes much more
difficult to generate unlearnable examples. Experiments have
shown that our defense method is highly effective against unlearnable examples, which can even outperform adversarial
training regimes and state-of-the-art defense methods.

