The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Discriminative Noise Guidance for
Image Forgery Detection and Localization
Jiaying Zhu∗ , Dong Li* , Xueyang Fu† , Gang Yang, Jie Huang, Aiping Liu, Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China
{zhujy53, dongli6, yg1997, hj0117}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu, aipingl, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
This study introduces a new method for detecting and localizing image forgery by focusing on manipulation traces within
the noise domain. We posit that nearly invisible noise in RGB
images carries tampering traces, useful for distinguishing and
locating forgeries. However, the advancement of tampering
technology complicates the direct application of noise for
forgery detection, as the noise inconsistency between forged
and authentic regions is not fully exploited. To tackle this,
we develop a two-step discriminative noise-guided approach
to explicitly enhance the representation and use of noise inconsistencies, thereby fully exploiting noise information to
improve the accuracy and robustness of forgery detection.
Specifically, we first enhance the noise discriminability of
forged regions compared to authentic ones using a de-noising
network and a statistics-based constraint. Then, we merge a
model-driven guided filtering mechanism with a data-driven
attention mechanism to create a learnable and differentiable
noise-guided filter. This sophisticated filter allows us to maintain the edges of forged regions learned from the noise. Comprehensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that
our method can reliably detect and localize forgeries, surpassing existing state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: We process the forged image using denoising networks with different standard deviations (CBDNet (Guo
et al. 2019) trained with noise with standard deviations of
15, 25, and 50), and then extract the noise separately. For
this image, the denoiser of 25 standard deviation can help to
obtain discriminative noise. (Best viewed on screen.)

achieving significant results. For instance, RGB-N (Zhou
et al. 2018) leverages noise features extracted from a steganalysis rich model filter layer to identify the noise inconsistency between authentic and tampered regions. SPAN (Hu
et al. 2020) extracts anomalous local noise features from
noise maps using CNNs to differentiate heterologous regions. MVSS-Net (Chen et al. 2021) learns multi-view features by utilizing both noise views and boundary artifacts.
These methods directly build the end-to-end mapping of
noise features to masks and adopt fusion strategies to integrate RGB and noise information to enhance forgery detection accuracy. However, as tampering and post-processing
techniques evolve, the difference between the two regions in
the noise domain becomes less noticeable or even hidden.
Given these findings, we propose that explicitly learning and leveraging noise inconsistencies can further improve
IFDL performance. Therefore, we introduce a novel twostep noise-guided scheme. The first step involves training
a noise extractor to explicitly enlarge the noise distribution
difference between authentic and forged regions. We use a
denoising network followed by a Bayar convolution (Wu,
AbdAlmageed, and Natarajan 2019) to construct the noise
extractor, optimized using a statistics-based constraint. The
rationale for using a denoiser stems from the observation

Introduction
Forged images present risks in numerous areas, such as
copyright watermark removal, fake news generation, and
even evidence falsification in court (Zhang et al. 2023a,b;
Lin et al. 2023). Consequently, image forgery detection
and localization (IFDL) is of paramount importance. However, with the widespread use of techniques like GAN (Isola
et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017), VAE (Kingma and Welling
2013; Van Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017), and homogeneous
manipulation (Cong et al. 2022; Ling et al. 2021), the manipulation traces of forged images become visually invisible, making IFDL challenging. Thus, it is crucial to devise
effective methods for accurate manipulation trace capture.
Conversely, the noise distribution of authentic and forged
regions is inconsistent (Zhou et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2022a),
leading to manipulation traces in the noise domain. Many
researchers have used this noise information to aid IFDL,
* Co-first authors contributed equally, † corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7739

