The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Double-Layer Hybrid-Label Identification Feature Selection
for Multi-View Multi-Label Learning
1,2

3

Pingting Hao , Kunpeng Liu , Wanfu Gao

1,2 *

1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97201 USA
haopingting@jlu.edu.cn, kunpeng@pdx.edu, gaowf@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

Multi-view multi-label feature selection aims to select informative features where the data are collected from multiple
sources with multiple interdependent class labels. For fully
exploiting multi-view information, most prior works mainly
focus on the common part in the ideal circumstance. However, the inconsistent part hidden in each view, including
noises and specific elements, may affect the quality of mapping between labels and feature representations. Meanwhile,
ignoring the specific part might lead to a suboptimal result,
as each label is supposed to possess specific characteristics
of its own. To deal with the double problems in multi-view
multi-label feature selection, we propose a unified loss function which is a totally splitting structure for observed labels
as hybrid labels that is, common labels, view-to-all specific
labels and noisy labels, and the view-to-all specific labels further splits into several specific labels of each view. The proposed method simultaneously considers the consistency and
complementarity of different views. Through exploring the
feature weights of hybrid labels, the mapping relationships
between labels and features can be established sequentially
based on their attributes. Additionally, the interrelatedness
among hybrid labels is also investigated and injected into the
function. Specific to the specific labels of each view, we construct the novel regularization paradigm incorporating logic
operations. Finally, the convergence of the result is proved after applying the multiplicative update rules. Experiments on
six datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
our method compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: An illustration to describe the multi-view multilabel problem. The webpage can be represented from different views such as video, text and audio. The red one represents the noisy label and the green one is owned by all views.

ture selection, which makes the model cost-effective and
provides accurate data representation (Lin et al. 2022; Cui
et al. 2021).
Currently, the basic assumption in traditional MVML
methods is that the relevant label of each instance has been
annotated precisely (Zhu, Li, and Zhang 2015). Rather than
the ideal circumstance, the noises actually exist among annotations for labels. Meanwhile, the fact is that the label of
each view is not completely identical in real-world scenarios. As an illustration, a webpage may contain three distinct
types of views, comprising video, text, and audio, together
with several labels provided by annotators. For instance, the
music style can be roughly labeled as “Pop”, which should
in fact be labeled as “JAZZ”. While “tranquility” is a shared
label among all three types of views, “guitar” is exclusively
relevant to the audio view and is not applicable to the video
or text views.
Distinct from unsupervised learning, accurately incorporating labeled data into the learning process remains a fundamental challenge in the context of multi-view multi-learning
problem. Existing methods aim to refrain from imposing
the basic assumption while simultaneously addressing the
issue of the label noise. The consistency part is effectively
acquired through dimension reduction to the label matrix
(Zhang et al. 2020b), or considers the relation between labels to filter the noises (Liu et al. 2023a). Consequently, the

Introduction
Multi-view multi-label learning has attracted much attention
with the rapid growth of the data source (Fu et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023b). It is an extension of multi-label learning from
a single view to many views (at least two views). From the
perspective of information completeness, multi-view multilabel learning possesses advantages due to its rich semantic
content. However, the explosive data brings more noisy, irrelevant and redundant features (Luo et al. 2017; Chang and
Yang 2016). Thus, the task about how to explore the informative features is still urgent in the field of multi-view multilabel learning (MVML), namely multi-view multi-label fea*

correponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12295

