The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attention-Induced Embedding Imputation for Incomplete Multi-View Partial
Multi-Label Classification
Chengliang Liu1 , Jinlong Jia1 , Jie Wen1∗ , Yabo Liu1 , Xiaoling Luo2 , Chao Huang3 , Yong Xu1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
liucl1996@163.com, jjlong ls@163.com, jiewen pr@126.com, yaboliu.ug@gmail.com, xiaolingluoo@outlook.com,
huangchao 08@126.com, laterfall@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

tion solely relies on features extracted from a single perception, leading to noticeable limitation in feature awareness.
Incorporating multi-view learning into multi-label classification can effectively mitigate this limitation. As a result,
a composite multi-view multi-label classification (MvMLC)
task has emerged. In recent years, many MvMLC models
based on traditional machine learning or deep neural network (DNN) have demonstrated promising performance.
However, in real-world scenarios, it is common to encounter incomplete multi-view data, which poses a great
challenge for the design of MvMLC models (Liu et al.
2023b). For example, subtitles and audio are often missing
in many ancient video archives. Likewise, multi-label information may also be partially available in various scenarios
due to the costliness and vulnerability of manual annotation. And we name the complex composite task “incomplete
multi-view partial multi-label classification (iMvPMLC)” in
our paper. Besides, according to research conducted by Liu
et al., it has been observed to some extent that incomplete
views have a greater negative impact on the performance of
MvMLC than the incompleteness of label information at the
same missing ratio (Liu et al. 2023a). Therefore, we will pay
more attention to the missing-view imputation in this paper.
Many approaches have been proposed to tackle the incompleteness issue. Some researchers tried to impute the
missing instances in the kernel space by the complete kernel sub-matrix (Trivedi et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2019), or combined missing data imputation and downstream tasks to a
unified framework (Liu et al. 2020, 2018). Another route
to handle the incomplete views is to introduce prior missing information to skip the unknown views, utilizing only
the available data for the classification task, which has also
shown promising results (Liu et al. 2023d,a). However, compared with ‘skip’ or imputation in kernel space, direct recovery of missing data has always been a challenging task
with high modeling difficulty and unlimited potential (Liu
et al. 2023c). Furthermore, considering that the high-level
features extracted by DNN have stronger semantic information (Luo et al. 2023; Fang et al. 2023a), we propose to complete the missing instances in the embedding space, which
also avoids the redundancy and noise prevalent in the original data.
To sum up, we propose a novel model called Attention-

As a combination of emerging multi-view learning methods and traditional multi-label classification tasks, multiview multi-label classification has shown broad application
prospects. The diverse semantic information contained in
heterogeneous data effectively enables the further development of multi-label classification. However, the widespread
incompleteness problem on multi-view features and labels
greatly hinders the practical application of multi-view multilabel classification. Therefore, in this paper, we propose an
attention-induced missing instances imputation technique to
enhance the generalization ability of the model. Different
from existing incomplete multi-view completion methods,
we attempt to approximate the latent features of missing instances in embedding space according to cross-view joint attention, instead of recovering missing views in kernel space
or original feature space. Accordingly, multi-view completed
features are dynamically weighted by the confidence derived
from joint attention in the late fusion phase. In addition,
we propose a multi-view multi-label classification framework
based on label-semantic feature learning, utilizing the statistical weak label correlation matrix and graph attention network to guide the learning process of label-specific features.
Finally, our model is compatible with missing multi-view and
partial multi-label data simultaneously and extensive experiments on five datasets confirm the advancement and effectiveness of our embedding imputation method and multi-view
multi-label classification model.

Introduction
Multiple photos taken from different perspectives of the observed object provide a more comprehensive perception, surpassing the limited viewpoint offered by a single perspective (Xu et al. 2023; Fang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023e).
Combining data from different media can help compensate
for the limitations and incompleteness found in individual
forms of data (Li and He 2020; Xu et al. 2019). With the
explosive growth of multi-view data, multi-view learning
demonstrates immense potential in empowering various traditional tasks (Xu et al. 2022a,b; Li, Wan, and He 2021; Liu
et al. 2023f). For instance, traditional multi-label classifica* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13864

