The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Point Deformable Network with Enhanced Normal Embedding
for Point Cloud Analysis
Xingyilang Yin1 , Xi Yang1 * , Liangchen Liu1 , Nannan Wang1 , Xinbo Gao2
1

Xidian University
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
yxyl@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {yangx, nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn, lcliu79xidian@gmail.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recently MLP-based methods have shown strong performance in point cloud analysis. Simple MLP architectures are
able to learn geometric features in local point groups yet
fail to model long-range dependencies directly. In this paper, we propose Point Deformable Network (PDNet), a concise MLP-based network that can capture long-range relations with strong representation ability. Specifically, we put
forward Point Deformable Aggregation Module (PDAM) to
improve representation capability in both long-range dependency and adaptive aggregation among points. For each query
point, PDAM aggregates information from deformable reference points rather than points in limited local areas. The
deformable reference points are generated data-dependent,
and we initialize them according to the input point positions. Additional offsets and modulation scalars are learned
on the whole point features, which shift the deformable reference points to the regions of interest. We also suggest estimating the normal vector for point clouds and applying Enhanced Normal Embedding (ENE) to the geometric extractors
to improve the representation ability of single-point. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on various benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our PDNet.

(a) kNN

(b) ball query

(c) deformable

Figure 1: Comparison of grouping methods. (a) kNN: query
point (orange point) and its k-nearest (k=3) neighbors (blue
points). (b) ball query: query point and its neighbors in local
region (red circle). (c) query point and its deformable reference points (blue points) located in non-local regions. The
green points and purple arrows represent the initial reference
points generated on all point positions and their learnable
offsets conditioned on the whole point features, respectively.

clouds. The following PointMetaBase (Lin et al. 2023) further modifies PointNeXt with explicit position encoding
and MLP before grouping operation. Although the existing
MLP-based approaches show strong generalization ability
in various tasks, they ignore modeling long-range dependencies. As illustrated in Figure 1(a) and 1(b), the previous
MLP-based methods (Qi et al. 2017b; Ma et al. 2022; Qian
et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023) only focus on aggregating information in local point groups constructed by kNN or ball
query, which fails to learn features from a long distance.
However, capturing long-range relations has been demonstrated to be crucial in understanding global shape context
(Wang et al. 2018; Lai et al. 2022).
To solve the aforementioned problem, we need to explore aggregating information from distant regions for each
query point. In the literature on processing images, learning
deformable convolution filters has been shown effective in
various challenging vision tasks due to adaptive spatial aggregation in long-range and more informative regions (Dai
et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2019, 2020; Wang et al. 2023). This
motivates us to design the deformable mechanism for point
clouds. In contrast to the images that have structured 2D
grids, point clouds are sparse and unstructured data. Thus
naive implementation of deformable mechanisms suited for
images can not directly apply to point clouds. To alleviate it,
KPConv (Thomas et al. 2019) first introduces a deformable
mechanism to point clouds. It adopts pseudo-grid convolu-

Introduction
Point cloud analysis receives great interest due to numerous 3D data acquisition devices applied in various areas,
such as autonomous driving and robotics. Unlike images that
have regular 2D grids, point clouds are inherently sparse,
unordered, and unstructured data. Thus directly processing
point clouds is challenging. Recently, MLP-based methods
have obtained significant performance with simple components. PointNeXt (Qian et al. 2022) revisits the classical
PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b) and improves it with modern
training and scaling strategies. PointNeXt makes enormous
improvements compared to the PointNet++ and even outperforms dedicated designed convolution-based (Xu et al.
2021a), graph-based (Zhou et al. 2021), and powerful point
transformers methods (Zhao et al. 2021; Lai et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2022). This reveals that concise MLP modules
can already describe the local geometric properties of point
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6738

