The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Neighborhood Propagation Kernel Layers
for Semi-supervised Node Classification
Sonny Achten, Francesco Tonin, Panagiotis Patrinos, Johan A. K. Suykens
KU Leuven, Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT),
STADIUS Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing and Data Analytics
{sonny.achten, francesco.tonin, panos.patrinos, johan.suykens}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract

and Morris 2020). An additional advantage of kernel machines is that they have strong foundations in learning theory
and have clear and interpretable optimization (Vapnik 1998;
Schölkopf and Smola 2002; Suykens et al. 2002). A drawback however, is that they do not benefit from hierarchical
representation learning as deep learning methods do.
In recent years, a new branch of research emerged that relates the training of infinitely wide neural networks to kernel
methods (Nikolentzos et al. 2018; Belkin, Ma, and Mandal
2018), gaining understanding in the generalization capabilities of highly parameterized neural networks. While extensions exist for graph learning (Du et al. 2019), these are studied for graph level tasks (e.g. graph classification), and the
effectiveness on using kernels in a message passing scheme
for node level tasks remains an open question. This work
therefore uses multiple kernel functions (i.e., one for each
layer) where the node representations are aggregated and
implicitly transformed into an infinite-dimensional feature
space, and aims to study the effectiveness of this approach
for semi-supervised node classification.
While GNNs typically employ a regression-based core
model, we utilize an unsupervised core model. Specifically,
our model incorporates unsupervised message-passing levels based on Kernel Principal Component Analysis (kernel
PCA), and a semi-supervised layer based on a weighted version of kernel PCA, i.e. Kernel Spectral Clustering (KSC).
This approach is motivated to address real-world problems
where few labels are available, leading to improved performance compared to existing methods. Kernel methods are
used in their dual form, where they directly learn node representations. In fact, unlike typical parametric GNNs that
learn parameters, our method directly learns H, the matrix
of node embeddings. This allows greater modelling flexibility, where node representations can be used for a variety of
tasks, including classification with varying levels of supervision and clustering. This adaptability makes our method a
versatile tool for node tasks in applications.

We present a deep Graph Convolutional Kernel Machine
(GCKM) for semi-supervised node classification in graphs.
The method is built of two main types of blocks: (i) We introduce unsupervised kernel machine layers propagating the
node features in a one-hop neighborhood, using implicit node
feature mappings. (ii) We specify a semi-supervised classification kernel machine through the lens of the Fenchel-Young
inequality. We derive an effective initialization scheme and
efficient end-to-end training algorithm in the dual variables
for the full architecture. The main idea underlying GCKM is
that, because of the unsupervised core, the final model can
achieve higher performance in semi-supervised node classification when few labels are available for training. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework.

Introduction
Semi-supervised node classification has been an important
research area for several years. In many real-life applications, one has structured data for which the entire graph
can be observed (e.g., a social network where users are represented as nodes and the relationships between users as
edges). However, the node labels can only be observed for
a small subset of nodes. The learning task is then to predict
the label of unsupervised nodes, given the node attributes of
all nodes and the network structure of the graph. In many
cases, exploiting the information in a local neighborhood
can boost performance (e.g., friends in the social network
are likely to share the same preferences). In recent years,
graph neural networks (GNNs) have rapidly transformed the
field of learning on graphs. Their performance follows from
their ability to effectively propagate the node information
through the network iteratively and from end-to-end training (Hamilton 2020; Bacciu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021).
More traditionally, kernel-based methods such as support
vector machines were the standard in graph learning tasks
because of the possibility to use a kernel function that represents pairwise similarities between two graphs as the dot
product of their embeddings, without the need to explicitly
know these potentially high-dimensional embeddings (i.e.,
the ”kernel-trick”) (Ghosh et al. 2018; Kriege, Johansson,

Contributions We introduce a deep Graph Convolutional
Kernel Machine (GCKM) for node classification made of
multiple shallow layers with non-parametric aggregation
functions. Our main contributions are the following.
• We propose an architecture consisting of multiple unsupervised kernel machine layers for one-hop node aggre-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10766

