The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Value at Adversarial Risk: A Graph Defense Strategy against Cost-Aware Attacks
Junlong Liao1 * , Wenda Fu1 * , Cong Wang2 , Zhongyu Wei1 , Jiarong Xu1†
1

Fudan University
Peking University
jlliao22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {wdfu20,zywei,jiarongxu}@fudan.edu.cn, wangcong@gsm.pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2020). In social networks, spammers can camouflage their
social links to evade detection algorithms (Waniek et al.
2018). Such attacks can undermine the performance of
GNNs, resulting in severe financial losses and deteriorated
user experience. Therefore, ensuring the robustness of GNN
models against attacks is a crucial concern for graph-based
learning.
Approaching safer and more reliable GNNs, existing efforts to improve robustness mainly fall into two categories.
The first line of research focuses on enhancing the GNN
model itself, aiming to learn more robust GNNs through adversarial or constrained training (Arghal, Lei, and Bidokhti
2022; Dai et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019, 2022b) or modifying
GNN architectures (Geisler, Zügner, and Günnemann 2020;
Zhang and Zitnik 2020; Chen et al. 2021). The second line of
research centers on pre-processing input graphs before feeding them to the GNN model (Said, De Luca, and Albayrak
2010; Entezari et al. 2020).
However, few extant works consider the fact that, in realworld scenarios, nodes and edges in graphs are naturally
protected in a sense that attacking them incurs certain costs.
In practice, defenders can intervene in attacks by assigning
customized levels of protection to each node or edge based
on their importance or vulnerability. If the cost of proceeding with such actions is prohibitively high due to customized
protection for each user, the attacker’s efforts could fail. For
example, in a communication network, where nodes represent devices, and an edge is created if two devices have communication traffic. Defenders can allocate varying levels of
protection measures on each device in the network to prevent attacks, e.g., (1) firewalls with stringent rules such as
permitting access only from trusted IP addresses, and (2)
access control measures like role-based access control or
multi-factor authentication.
In this manner, we are among the first to view the defense problem from a cost-aware perspective: assigning security levels to nodes and edges in a way that maximizes
the costs borne by attackers. Methods from this perspective
ideally prevent attacks from occurring if costs are properly
assigned, which differs from the existing defensive methods
that react to attacks after they occur.
An imminent yet significant challenge is how to allocate
proper costs to each node of an input graph. There are some
heuristic methods for cost allocations: Since research sug-

Deep learning methods on graph data have achieved remarkable efficacy across a variety of real-world applications,
such as social network analysis and transaction risk detection. Nevertheless, recent studies have illuminated a concerning fact: even the most expressive Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) are vulnerable to graph adversarial attacks. While
several methods have been proposed to enhance the robustness of GNN models against adversarial attacks, few have
focused on a simple yet realistic approach: valuing the adversarial risks and focused safeguards at the node level. This
empowers defenders to allocate heightened security level to
vulnerable nodes, while lower to robust nodes. With this
new perspective, we propose a novel graph defense strategy RisKeeper, such that the adversarial risk can be directly
kept in the input graph. We start at valuing the adversarial
risk, by introducing a cost-aware gradient-based graph adversarial attack that takes into account not only cost avoidance and compliance with cost budgets but also addresses the
challenges posed by discrete graph data. Subsequently, we
present a learnable approach to ascertain the ideal security
level for each individual node by solving a bi-level optimization problem. Through extensive experiments on four realworld datasets, we demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance surpassing state-of-the-art methods. Our
in-depth case studies provide further insights into vulnerable
and robust structural patterns, serving as inspiration for practitioners to exercise heightened vigilance.

Introduction
Graph-structured data has gained significant prevalence
across diverse domains, such as social networks (Wu et al.
2022), financial transactions (Dou et al. 2020), knowledge
graphs (Zhang et al. 2022) and drug molecular topology design (Jiang et al. 2020). Analyzing such data often involves
the utilization of graph neural networks (GNNs). However,
the effectiveness and reliability of GNNs can be compromised by adversarial attacks in various forms.
For instance, in financial transaction networks, adversarial accounts can inject deceptive transactions to poison the
training data of GNN to pretend legitimacy (Dou et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13763

