The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stability Analysis of Switched Linear Systems with Neural Lyapunov Functions
Virginie Debauche1 , Alec Edwards2 , Raphaël M. Jungers1 , Alessandro Abate2 ,
1
ICTEAM Institute, UCLouvain, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
virginie.debauche@uclouvain.be, alec.edwards@worc.ox.ac.uk , raphael.jungers@uclouvain.be,
alessandro.abate@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

the particular properties of the considered control system.
Indeed, a prime advantage of neural networks is that they
can be deployed in an unknown setting and on complex systems, such as Cyber-Physical Systems, where classical control techniques would require verifying technical properties
(such as Lipschitz continuity, linearity, or passivity) that are
out of hand in practice.
A main paradigm along these lines is a situation where
a neural network is constructed from observed trajectories,
and its input-ouput relation is interpreted as a Lyapunov
function for the system. Our work falls within this paradigm.
However, a crucial limitation of neural techniques is that
they rarely come with guarantees; that is, the obtained network is tailored to satisfy the properties of a Lyapunov function on the observed trajectories, but very little is known
about its generalisation properties out of the sample set. In
safety-critical application, one needs generalisation guarantees, where the observed performance of the Lyapunov function is guaranteed to hold for the whole universe, not only
the sampled set. Even more, Lyapunov functions must have
specific properties, which might be violated by the obtained
neural network (think simply of positive definiteness).
In this work, we are primarily interested in understanding
this (potential) gap between high performance on the sampled set, and behaviour on the true system. For this purpose,
our strategy is to study this approach on a family of complex,
but still well-understood systems, for which alternative computational techniques have been developed, so that one can
compare the performance of neural networks, both in terms
of computational performance and in terms of accuracy. In
this paper we focus on switched systems.
Switched systems have attracted massive research efforts
in Systems and Control, because they provide a relatively
simple framework for representing many complex engineering applications. As a few examples, they have been used
in bipedal robotics (Hurmuzlu, Génot, and Brogliato 2004),
in image processing (Jungers 2009, Chapter 5), or multihop
control networks (Alur et al. 2011). Closer to AI, switched
systems have been used to model Q-learning algorithms
(Lee and He 2020), and techniques developed for classification have been used in switched system identification (Lauer
and Bloch 2008).
In particular, we focus on the stability analysis problem
for switched systems, which is encapsulated by the notion of

Neural-based, data-driven analysis and control of dynamical systems have been recently investigated and have shown
great promise, e.g. for safety verification or stability analysis. Indeed, not only do neural networks allow for an entirely
model-free, data-driven approach, but also for handling arbitrary complex functions via their power of representation
(as opposed to, e.g. algebraic optimization techniques that
are restricted to polynomial functions). Whilst classical Lyapunov techniques allow to provide a formal and robust guarantee of stability of a switched dynamical system, very little
is yet known about correctness guarantees for Neural Lyapunov functions, nor about their performance (amount of data
needed for a certain accuracy).
We thus formally introduce neural Lyapunov functions for the
stability analysis of switched linear systems: we benchmark
them on this paradigmatic problem, which is notoriously difficult (and in general Turing-undecidable), but which admits
recently-developed technologies and theoretical results. Inspired by switched systems theory, we provide theoretical
guarantees on the representative power of neural networks,
leveraging recent results from the ML community. We additionally experimentally display how neural Lyapunov functions compete with state-of-the-art results and techniques,
while admitting a wide range of improvement, both in theory and in practice. This study intends to improve our understanding of the opportunities and current limitations of
neural-based data-driven analysis and control of complex dynamical systems.

Introduction
The interaction between Lyapunov theory and learning has
motivated emerging research in recent years. For instance,
(Berkenkamp et al. 2017) or (Fazlyab, Morari, and Pappas
2021) employ Lyapunov approaches to certify safety conditions in AI-based systems. Other works (among which the
present one), motivated by the great performance of neural networks in many computational technologies, tackle the
other direction and use AI techniques in order to learn Lyapunov functions (Chang, Roohi, and Gao 2020; Abate et al.
2021; Dawson et al. 2021; Farsi et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2023). They provide promising proofs of concept for automated, data-driven control solutions that are agnostic of
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21010

