The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LF-ViT: Reducing Spatial Redundancy in Vision Transformer for Efficient
Image Recognition
Youbing Hu1 , Yun Cheng2 * , Anqi Lu1 , Zhiqiang Cao1 , Dawei Wei3 , Jie Liu1 , Zhijun Li1 *
1

AIoT Lab, Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Swiss Data Science Center, Zurich, Switzerland
3
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University
youbing@stu.hit.edu.cn, yun.cheng@sdsc.ethz.ch, luanqi@stu.hit.edu.cn
zhiqiang cao@stu.hit.edu.cn, weidawei58@gmail.com, {jieliu, lizhijun os}@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

dimensional tokens using linear mappings (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021). Following this, the self-attention mechanism
facilitates interactions between these tokens, thereby handling essential computer vision operations. However, the use
of ViT for image analysis results in substantial computational overhead, which increases quadratically with the number of tokens (Liu et al. 2021). Although ViT exhibits outstanding efficacy during training and inference with highresolution images (Touvron et al. 2021a), its computational
demands surge considerably with rising input image resolutions. This notable increase hampers the viability of deploying ViT models on resource-limited edge devices and
Internet of Things (IoT) systems (Ignatov et al. 2019).
To optimize the computational efficiency of ViT, researchers have proposed several optimization strategies and
extension methods (Xu et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022; Yin
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2021b; Peng et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021). For example, DVT (Wang et al.
2021b) cascades multiple ViTs with increasing tokens and
then leverages an early exit policy to decide the token number of each image. CF-ViT (Chen et al. 2023) introduces a
two-stage network inference approach. In the coarse stage,
the input image is divided into shorter patch sequences to
enable computationally efficient classification. When recognition is inadequate, meaningful patches are pinpointed, and
subsequently subject to finer partition during the fine stage.
However, most of these methods focus on excavating redundant tokens in ViT, without fully utilizing the inherent spatial redundancy of high-resolution images to reduce computational costs.
In this paper, we seek to reduce the computational cost
introduced by high-resolution input images in ViT. Our motivation stems from the fact that not all regions in an image are task-relevant, resulting in significant spatial redundancy during image recognition. We train Deit-S (Touvron
et al. 2021a) with images of different resolutions and report top-1 accuracy and FLOPs in Table 1, in which, with
a 4.2× improvement in computational cost, the image resolution using 224×224 is only obtained with an accuracy advantage of 6.5%. This indicates that a large amount of spatial redundancy exists in the image. In fact, GFNet (Wang
et al. 2020) has demonstrated that only a small portion of
an image, such as the head of a dog or the wings of a bird,

The Vision Transformer (ViT) excels in accuracy when handling high-resolution images, yet it confronts the challenge
of significant spatial redundancy, leading to increased computational and memory requirements. To address this, we
present the Localization and Focus Vision Transformer (LFViT). This model operates by strategically curtailing computational demands without impinging on performance. In
the Localization phase, a reduced-resolution image is processed; if a definitive prediction remains elusive, our pioneering Neighborhood Global Class Attention (NGCA)
mechanism is triggered, effectively identifying and spotlighting class-discriminative regions based on initial findings. Subsequently, in the Focus phase, this designated region is used from the original image to enhance recognition. Uniquely, LF-ViT employs consistent parameters
across both phases, ensuring seamless end-to-end optimization. Our empirical tests affirm LF-ViT’s prowess: it remarkably decreases Deit-S’s FLOPs by 63% and concurrently amplifies throughput twofold. Code of this project is
at https://github.com/edgeai1/LF-ViT.git.

Introduction
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) is currently the most
popular architecture in natural language processing (NLP)
tasks, attracting the attention of an increasing number of researchers. Within the computer vision community, the success of the vision transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021)
has been remarkable and its influence continues to expand.
The transformer architecture is built upon the self-attention
mechanism, enabling efficient capture of long-range dependencies between different regions in input images. This capability has led to the widespread application of transformers in tasks such as image classification (Chen, Fan, and
Panda 2021; Han et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021;
Touvron et al. 2021a; Wu et al. 2021), object detection (Carion et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021), and semantic segmentation (Li et al. 2022b; Wang et al. 2023).
The predominant ViT architecture relies predominantly on segmenting a 2D image into sequentially arranged patches and transforming these patches into one* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2274

