The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Few-Shot Neural Radiance Fields under Unconstrained Illumination
SeokYeong Lee1,2 , JunYong Choi1,2 , Seungryong Kim2 , Ig-Jae Kim1,3,4 , Junghyun Cho1,3,4
1

Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul
2
Korea University, Seoul
3
AI-Robotics, KIST School, University of Science and Technology
4
Yonsei-KIST Convergence Research Institute, Yonsei University
{shapin94, happily, drjay, jhcho}@kist.re.kr seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new challenge for synthesizing novel view images in practical environments with limited input multi-view images and varying lighting conditions. Neural radiance fields (NeRF), one of the pioneering
works for this task, demand an extensive set of multi-view
images taken under constrained illumination, which is often unattainable in real-world settings. While some previous
works have managed to synthesize novel views given images with different illumination, their performance still relies on a substantial number of input multi-view images. To
address this problem, we suggest ExtremeNeRF, which utilizes multi-view albedo consistency, supported by geometric alignment. Specifically, we extract intrinsic image components that should be illumination-invariant across different
views, enabling direct appearance comparison between the
input and novel view under unconstrained illumination. We
offer thorough experimental results for task evaluation, employing the newly created NeRF Extreme benchmark—the
first in-the-wild benchmark for novel view synthesis under
multiple viewing directions and varying illuminations.

Two sets of sparse inputs with varying illuminations

NeRF-W (CVPR’21)

RegNeRF (CVPR’22)

ExtremeNeRF (Ours)

Figure 1: Few-shot view synthesis results on few inputs with
varying illuminations. Our ExtremeNeRF demonstrates reliable results in comparison to baseline methods for two specific scenarios: NeRF under varying illuminations (NeRFW) and few-shot view synthesis (RegNeRF).

Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) have
recently made a substantial impact on 3D vision. Through
optimizing a multi-layered perceptron (MLP) for mapping
3D point locations to color and volume density, NeRF significantly outperforms prior works (Lombardi et al. 2019;
Sitzmann, Zollhöfer, and Wetzstein 2019; Mildenhall et al.
2019) in novel view synthesis.
However, what if only a few images collected from the internet or mobile phones taken under unconstrained illumination conditions are available? In most cases, NeRF-based
novel view synthesis under such a practical environment is
often limited since it 1) requires a massive amount of data
for reliable synthesis results, and 2) assumes constrained illumination conditions among input views to encode a viewdependent color. These are key drawbacks for practical usage of NeRF, as they disable view synthesis on images that
were casually collected or captured in daily life.
NeRF-W (Martin-Brualla et al. 2021) pioneered view
synthesis with inputs under varying illumination, enabling novel view synthesis from internet-collected tourism

images (Snavely, Seitz, and Szeliski 2006). Subsequent
work (Chen et al. 2022) enables appearance hallucination
of the synthesized image given unconstrained image collections, by learning a view-consistent appearance of the scene.
However, these works are hindered by the limited number
of input images (see Fig. 1). Moreover, previous works that
deal with few-shot view synthesis (Yu et al. 2021; Jain, Tancik, and Abbeel 2021; Kim, Seo, and Han 2022; Niemeyer
et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2022; Yang, Pavone, and Wang 2023)
are often hindered by the illumination variation due to the
characteristic of NeRF that learns radiance dependent on
viewing direction and illumination.
In this paper, we address the problem of novel view synthesis of scenes given only sparse input images taken under
unconstrained illumination, for the first time. Our proposed
method, dubbed ExtremeNeRF, leverages intrinsic decomposition to mitigate the problem. The color of the scene referred to as albedo, plays an essential role in maintaining
consistency regardless of changes in viewing direction or illumination conditions (see Fig. 2).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2938

