The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NavGPT: Explicit Reasoning in Vision-and-Language Navigation
with Large Language Models
Gengze Zhou1 , Yicong Hong2 , Qi Wu1 *
1

The University of Adelaide
The Australian National University
{gengze.zhou, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, mr.yiconghong@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Trained with an unprecedented scale of data, large language
models (LLMs) like ChatGPT and GPT-4 exhibit the emergence of significant reasoning abilities from model scaling.
Such a trend underscored the potential of training LLMs
with unlimited language data, advancing the development of
a universal embodied agent. In this work, we introduce the
NavGPT, a purely LLM-based instruction-following navigation agent, to reveal the reasoning capability of GPT models in complex embodied scenes by performing zero-shot
sequential action prediction for vision-and-language navigation (VLN). At each step, NavGPT takes the textual descriptions of visual observations, navigation history, and future explorable directions as inputs to reason the agent’s current status, and makes the decision to approach the target. Through
comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate NavGPT can
explicitly perform high-level planning for navigation, including decomposing instruction into sub-goals, integrating commonsense knowledge relevant to navigation task resolution,
identifying landmarks from observed scenes, tracking navigation progress, and adapting to exceptions with plan adjustment. Furthermore, we show that LLMs is capable of
generating high-quality navigational instructions from observations and actions along a path, as well as drawing accurate top-down metric trajectory given the agent’s navigation
history. Despite the performance of using NavGPT to zeroshot R2R tasks still falling short of trained models, we suggest adapting multi-modality inputs for LLMs to use as visual navigation agents and applying the explicit reasoning of
LLMs to benefit learning-based models. Code is available at:
https://github.com/GengzeZhou/NavGPT.

Figure 1: The architecture of NavGPT. NavGPT synergizes
reasoning and actions in LLMs to perform zero-shot Visionand-Language Navigation following navigation system principles. It interacts with different visual foundation models
to adapt multi-modality inputs, handle the length of history with a history buffer and a summarizer, and aggregate
various sources of information through a prompt manager.
NavGPT parses the generated results from LLMs (LLM
Thoughts and LLM Action) to move to the next viewpoint.
for learning interdisciplinary and generalizable knowledge.
Furthermore, by accessing unlimited language data, significant emergent abilities (Wei et al. 2022a) are observed when
scaling up the model, resulting in a remarkable enhancement
in the reasoning capabilities when solving problems across
wide domains. Consequently, training an LLM with unlimited language data is seen as a viable pathway toward realizing a universal embodied agent.
This insight has spurred the integration of LLMs into
vision-and-language navigation (VLN) (Anderson et al.
2018), an exploratory task toward achieving real-world
instruction-following embodied agents. The latest research
attempt to leverage GPT models (OpenAI 2023; Brown et al.
2020) to benefit navigation. For example, using LLMs as a
parser for diverse language input (Shah et al. 2023) — extracting landmarks from instruction to support visual matching and planning, or leveraging LLMs’ commonsense reasoning abilities (Zhou et al. 2023; Dorbala, Mullen Jr, and
Manocha 2023) to incorporate prior knowledge of interobject correlations to extend agents’ perception and facilitate the decision making. However, we notice that the rea-

Introduction
Amid the remarkable advances in large language model
(LLM) training (Touvron et al. 2023; Brown et al. 2020;
Chowdhery et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2021;
Bubeck et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023), we note a shift towards
integrating LLMs into embodied robotics tasks such as SayCan (Ahn et al. 2022) and PaLM-E (Driess et al. 2023). This
trend stems from two primary considerations: the scale of
training data and the scale of models. First, the development of techniques for processing textual information provides an abundant source of natural language training data
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7641

