The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressive Distillation Based on Masked Generation Feature Method for
Knowledge Graph Completion
Cunhang Fan1 , Yujie Chen1 , Jun Xue1 , Yonghui Kong1 , Jianhua Tao2,3* , Zhao Lv1*
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for lnformation Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{cunhang.fan, kjlz}@ahu.edu.cn, {e22201148, e21201068, e22201093}@stu.ahu.edu.cn, jhtao@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

information in the real world continues to grow. Therefore,
for the automatic construction of KGs, knowledge graph
completion techniques are crucial.
Existing knowledge graph completion (KGC) tasks can
generally be divided into two categories: structure-based and
description-based methods. Structure-based methods use the
topology and triple structure information of the knowledge
graph to represent feature vectors of entity relationships, including TransE(Bordes et al. 2013), ConvE(Dettmers et al.
2018), and R-GCN(Schlichtkrull et al. 2018). Descriptionbased methods, use pre-trained language models and introduce semantic descriptions of entities and relations to
learn representations, such as commonly used models like
KG-BERT (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2017), PKGC (Lv et al.
2022), and LP-BERT (Li et al. 2022). It is evident that with
the rise of pre-trained language models (PLM), descriptionbased methods have gradually taken the lead. By utilizing
entity and relation semantic descriptions as auxiliary information and deeply mining the potential knowledge in PLM,
description-based methods solve the problem of inductive
KGC tasks that structure-based methods cannot handle,
while achieving significant improvements in transductive
KGC tasks. However, while description-based approaches
improve performance, they also bring with them the problems of large model parameter numbers and high computational costs, limiting their application in downstream tasks
such as real-time recommendation systems etc. Therefore,
model lightweighting is essential.
Knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015),
which involves the transfer of latent knowledge from a large
teacher model to a small student model using soft labels,
is a common method for model compression. It has been
widely applied in the fields of computer vision (Zhao et al.
2022) and speech recognition (Kurata and Audhkhasi 2018).
In the field of KGC, there are also related research works
(Zhu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021b) that employ ensemble
models consisting of multiple structure-based KGC models as multi-teacher models to transfer knowledge to student
models in order to reduce embedding dimensions. However,
to our knowledge, description-based KGC method does not
have a corresponding knowledge distillation method, nor
can structure-based KGC distillation strategy be directly applied to the description-based KGC method, because intuitively the model architectures of the description-based KGC

In recent years, knowledge graph completion (KGC) models based on pre-trained language model (PLM) have shown
promising results. However, the large number of parameters
and high computational cost of PLM models pose challenges
for their application in downstream tasks. This paper proposes a progressive distillation method based on masked generation features for KGC task, aiming to significantly reduce
the complexity of pre-trained models. Specifically, we perform pre-distillation on PLM to obtain high-quality teacher
models, and compress the PLM network to obtain multigrade student models. However, traditional feature distillation suffers from the limitation of having a single representation of information in teacher models. To solve this problem, we propose masked generation of teacher-student features, which contain richer representation information. Furthermore, there is a significant gap in representation ability
between teacher and student. Therefore, we design a progressive distillation method to distill student models at each grade
level, enabling efficient knowledge transfer from teachers to
students. The experimental results demonstrate that the model
in the pre-distillation stage surpasses the existing state-ofthe-art methods. Furthermore, in the progressive distillation
stage, the model significantly reduces the model parameters
while maintaining a certain level of performance. Specifically, the model parameters of the lower-grade student model
are reduced by 56.7% compared to the baseline.

Introduction
Knowledge
graphs
(KGs)
are
graph-structured
knowledge bases, typically composed of triples
(head entity, relation, tail entity), abbreviate as
(h, r, t). Well known are YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2007), Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), Wikidata
(Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014) etc. KGs have proved to
be useful in various downstream tasks such as intelligent
question answering (Jia et al. 2021; Saxena, Tripathi, and
Talukdar 2020), recommendation systems (Wang et al.
2019; Cao et al. 2019), semantic search (Xiong, Power, and
Callan 2017; Berant and Liang 2014) etc. Despite the significant advances that KGs have made for various applications,
they still suffer from the problem of incompleteness as the
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8380

