The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Get a Head Start: On-Demand Pedagogical Policy Selection in Intelligent Tutoring
Ge Gao1 , Xi Yang2 , Min Chi1
1

Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University
2
IBM Research
ggao5@ncsu.edu, xi.yang@ibm.com, mchi@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is broadly employed in humaninvolved systems to enhance human outcomes. Off-policy
evaluation (OPE) has been pivotal for RL in those realms
since online policy learning and evaluation can be high-stake.
Intelligent tutoring has raised tremendous attentions as highly
challenging when applying OPE to human-involved systems,
due to that students’ subgroups can favor different pedagogical
policies and the costly procedure that policies have to be induced fully offline and then directly deployed to the upcoming
semester. In this work, we formulate on-demand pedagogical
policy selection (ODPS) to tackle the challenges for OPE in intelligent tutoring. We propose a pipeline, E DU P LANNER, as a
concrete solution for ODPS. Our pipeline results in an theoretically unbiased estimator, and enables efficient and customized
policy selection by identifying subgroups over both historical
data and on-arrival initial logs. We evaluate our approach on
the Probability ITS that has been used in real classrooms for
over eight years. Our study shows significant improvement on
learning outcomes of students with E DU P LANNER, especially
for the ones associated with low-performing subgroups.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is extensively investigated in
human-involved systems, such as healthcare and education,
to facilitate decision-making process and enhance human
outcomes. In the realm of modern education, intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) have been used worldwide to enhance
students’ engagement and improve learning outcomes (Chi
et al. 2011; VanLehn 2006), where RL has been employed
to induce automatic pedagogical policies (Liu et al. 2022;
Zhou et al. 2022). Off-policy evaluation (OPE), which estimates the performance of target policies using historical
data collected under a (different) behavior policy (Chandak
et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022, 2023a,b; Nie et al. 2022), has
been pivotal for RL in human-involved systems, since online
policy learning and evaluation can be high-stake. However,
OPE, or off-policy selection (OPS) that selects policies based
on OPE estimations (Yang et al. 2022), for ITS is highly challenging and prior works noted that directly applying some
OPE/OPS methods can even lead to ineffective policy selection (Rowe, Mott, and Lester 2014; Shen and Chi 2016). That
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12136

can be caused by two natures in real-world classrooms: (i)
Prior works generally select the policies targeting the entire
population by maximizing the OPE estimations, which may
not fit the education domain well, where subgroups exist
among students and can perform diversely under heterogeneous policies (Gao et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2020b); (ii) The
entire process of deploying a policy is costly, where policies
have to be induced fully offline and then directly deployed
to the next semester. And only a small set of policies can
be deployed due to the expensive recruitment of participants
and safety concern. There is an urgent need for effective and
efficient OPS in ITS.
In the context of ITS, the task of providing customized
policies for each student can be formulated as the on-demand
pedagogical policy selection (ODPS) problem, as illustrated
in Figure 1, where the ODPS decides a policy to be deployed
to each student from a small set of candidate policies that
are trained using historical data, given the initial log of the
student. ODPS is distinguished from typical OPS in three
aspects: (i) OPS generally assumes only historical data is
available, while ODPS can observe the initial log from each
student, which makes it possible for ODPS to capture the
specific needs from each student; (ii) OPS usually assumes
selecting models or tuning hyperparameters with unlimited
times during policy training (Kumar et al. 2022; Nie et al.
2022), while it is extremely inefficient for ODPS to retrain
and evaluate a large number of candidate policies due to
the expert sanity check on each policy, which is required
and operated by independent departments or institutions for
safety and ethics concerns and considered as ‘black-box’;
(iii) The major goal of prior OPS approaches is to select
the best policy over the entire population, while ODPS aims
to real-timely decide the best policy for each student who
arrives the ITS depending on the initial log of the student.
In this work, we propose an on-demand policy selector,
named E DU P LANNER, to provide tailored policies for different subgroups, as opposed to existing off-policy selection
works that aim to select a single policy over the entire population. Specifically, we propose a novel subgroup partitioning
technique, which only requires the initial states as inputs.
It can efficiently capture various user behaviors, which is
especially valuable in real-world scenarios where subgrouping based on prior knowledge is time-consuming and laborintensive. Moreover, given limited data access in real-world

