The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Transferability for Cross-Domain Trajectory Prediction
via Neural Stochastic Differential Equation
Daehee Park, Jaewoo Jeong, Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{bag2824, jeong207, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-agent trajectory prediction is crucial for various practical applications, spurring the construction of many large-scale
trajectory datasets, including vehicles and pedestrians. However, discrepancies exist among datasets due to external factors
and data acquisition strategies. External factors include geographical differences and driving styles, while data acquisition strategies include data acquisition rate, history/prediction
length, and detector/tracker error. Consequently, the proficient
performance of models trained on large-scale datasets has limited transferability on other small-size datasets, bounding the
utilization of existing large-scale datasets. To address this limitation, we propose a method based on continuous and stochastic representations of Neural Stochastic Differential Equations
(NSDE) for alleviating discrepancies due to data acquisition
strategy. We utilize the benefits of continuous representation
for handling arbitrary time steps and the use of stochastic representation for handling detector/tracker errors. Additionally,
we propose a dataset-specific diffusion network and its training framework to handle dataset-specific detection/tracking
errors. The effectiveness of our method is validated against
state-of-the-art trajectory prediction models on the popular
benchmark datasets: nuScenes, Argoverse, Lyft, INTERACTION, and Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD). Improvement in performance gain on various source and target dataset
configurations shows the generalized competence of our approach in addressing cross-dataset discrepancies.

(a) nuScenes

(b) Argoverse

(c) WOMD

Figure 1: Unique uncertainty manifested across each trajectory prediction dataset due to discrepancy in data acquisition
strategy. The red dotted line and darkgreen solid line represent past and future trajectories. The two main sources of discrepancy are time step configuration difference and tracklet
noise. Tracklet errors are uniquely shown as lateral position
error in nuScenes, ID switch in Argoverse, and longitudinal
position error in WOMD, all of which our framework handles in a dataset-wise exclusive manner.

nuScenes
Argoverse
WOMD
TrajNet++

Introduction
Trajectory prediction stands as one of the most crucial challenges to corroborate the safety of autonomous driving systems. Its objective of predicting future trajectories allows autonomous agents to respond optimally to actively changing
environments. As a response, a number of large-scale trajectory datasets such as nuScenes, Argoverse, WOMD, Lyft,
INTERACTION, and TrajNet++ have been established (Caesar et al. 2020; Chang et al. 2019; Zhan et al. 2019; Houston
et al. 2021; Ettinger et al. 2021; Kothari, Kreiss, and Alahi
2021) to pursue a data-driven approach towards constructing
a reliable motion forecasting system (Li et al. 2021; Tang
et al. 2021; Bae and Jeon 2023; Wu et al. 2023; Ge, Song,
and Huang 2023; Shi et al. 2022; Liang et al. 2021).

History
(s)

Prediction
horizon (s)

Frequency
(Hz)

Training
size

2
2
1
3.2

6
3
8
4.8

2
10
10
2.5

30k
200k
500k
250k

Table 1: Various temporal configurations during data acquisition across trajectory datasets. These discrepancies - 1)
past/future time length and 2) data acquisition rate - severely
limit cross-dataset transferability.

One well-known issue with data-driven models is their
limited performance when discrepancies in data distributions are manifested between training and test data. Therefore, to construct a trajectory prediction system on a specific
environment, the optimal way is to collect data from that
environment. However, recent models require abundant data
for optimal performance, which require a cumbersome pro-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10145

