The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

T2I-Adapter: Learning Adapters to Dig Out More Controllable Ability for
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Chong Mou* 1,2 , Xintao Wang†2 , Liangbin Xie∗2,3,4 , Yanze Wu2 , Jian Zhang†1 ,
Zhongang Qi2 , Ying Shan2
1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
3
University of Macau
4
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology
{eechongm, xintao.alpha, wuyanze123}@gmail.com, lb.xie@siat.ac.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn,
{zhongangqi, yingsshan}@tencent.com
Abstract
Text

Condition

Pre-trained
T2I Model
+

…

The incredible generative ability of large-scale text-to-image
(T2I) models has demonstrated strong power of learning
complex structures and meaningful semantics. However, relying solely on text prompts cannot fully take advantage of
the knowledge learned by the model, especially when flexible and accurate controlling (e.g., structure and color) is
needed. In this paper, we aim to “dig out” the capabilities that
T2I models have implicitly learned, and then explicitly use
them to control the generation more granularly. Specifically,
we propose to learn low-cost T2I-Adapters to align internal knowledge in T2I models with external control signals,
while freezing the original large T2I models. In this way, we
can train various adapters according to different conditions,
achieving rich control and editing effects in the color and
structure of the generation results. Further, the proposed T2IAdapters have attractive properties of practical value, such
as composability and generalization ability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our T2I-Adapter has promising generation quality and a wide range of applications. Our code is
available at https://github.com/TencentARC/T2I-Adapter.

Image

T2I-Adapters

Plug-and-play. Not affect original network topology and generation ability
Simple and small. ~77M parameters and ~300M storage
Flexible. Various adapters for different control conditions
Composable. Several adapters to achieve multi-condition control
Generalizable. Can be directly used on customed models

Figure 1: Our T2I-Adapter has several attractive properties
to provide external guidance to pre-trained text-to-image
models while not affecting their original generation ability.

Introduction

pipeline also lacks flexible user control capability that can
guide the generated images to realize users’ ideas accurately.
For an unprofessional user, the generated results are usually uncontrolled and unstable. For example, the recently
proposed Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al. 2022) can
not perform well in some imaginative scenarios, e.g., “A
car with flying wings” and “A banana and two apples on a
plate” as shown in Fig. 2. We believe that this does not mean
that T2I models do not have the ability to generate such
structures, just that the text cannot provide accurate structure guidance in random generation. In this paper, we are
curious about whether it is possible to “dig out” the capabilities that T2I models have implicitly learned, especially the
high-level structure and semantic capabilities, and then explicitly use them to control the generation more accurately.
Recently, some works provide guidance in T2I generation by efficient network tuning, such as Lora (Ryu 2023)
inspired by rank decomposition (Hu et al. 2021) in NLP,
DreamBooth (Ruiz et al. 2023) for generating specific char-

Thanks to the training on massive data and huge computing
power, text-to-image (T2I) generation (Saharia et al. 2022;
Rombach et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2022; Ramesh et al.
2021; Ding et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021; Ramesh et al.
2022a; Gafni et al. 2022), which aims to generate images
conditioned on a given text/prompt, has demonstrated strong
generation ability. The generation results usually have rich
textures, clear edges, reasonable structures, and meaningful
semantics. This phenomenon potentially indicates that T2I
models can actually capture information of different levels
in an implicit way.
Although promising synthesis quality can be achieved, it
heavily relies on well-designed prompts (Liu and Chilton
2022; Pavlichenko and Ustalov 2022), and the generation
* Interns in ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4296

