The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Dynamic GCN with Cross-Representation Distillation for Event-Based Learning
Yongjian Deng1 4 , Hao Chen2 * , Youfu Li3
1
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
4
Engineering Research Center of Intelligence Perception and Autonomous Control, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn, haochen303@seu.edu.cn, meyfli@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Recent advances in event-based research prioritize sparsity
and temporal precision. Approaches learning sparse pointbased representations through graph CNNs (GCN) become
more popular. Yet, these graph techniques hold lower performance than their frame-based counterpart due to two issues:
(i) Biased graph structures that don’t properly incorporate
varied attributes (such as semantics, and spatial and temporal
signals) for each vertex, resulting in inaccurate graph representations. (ii) A shortage of robust pretrained models. Here
we solve the first problem by proposing a new event-based
GCN (EDGCN), with a dynamic aggregation module to integrate all attributes of vertices adaptively. To address the second problem, we introduce a novel learning framework called
cross-representation distillation (CRD), which leverages the
dense representation of events as a cross-representation auxiliary to provide additional supervision and prior knowledge
for the event graph. This frame-to-graph distillation allows us
to benefit from the large-scale priors provided by CNNs while
still retaining the advantages of graph-based models. Extensive experiments show our model and learning framework are
effective and generalize well across multiple vision tasks.

Video frames

(a) Event data

Accuracy

Goal

(b) Number of Parameters

Figure 1: (a) Visual comparison between outputs from traditional cameras and event cameras. (b) Recognition accuracy
vs model complexity (#Params) of our approach (EDGCN
w/o and w/ CRD) on the N-Caltech dataset. The circle areas
are proportional to the computational complexity (FLOPs).

mantic, space distance, and temporal cues) to determine vertices’ neighbors. (2) How to facilitate event graph learning
without relying on additional data.
Properly handling the neighborhood relations of vertices
is key to achieving accurate event graph representations.
Previous works in this direction usually follow traditional
3D vision methods and try to define neighborhoods by better
handling spatio-temporal coordinates, such as unifying the
value ranges of spatial-temporal coordinates (Bi et al. 2020;
Deng et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021) or dynamically updating coordinates (Xie et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2020a). Fig. 2 shows
that these methods have difficulty in effectively modeling
discontinuous event streams caused by motion stagnation or
occlusion. To this end, we introduce a simple yet effective
graph construction strategy that define vertex neighborhoods
considering all attributes in a learnable manner. We introduce an Event-based Dynamic Aggregation Layer (EDAL)
that has multi-attribute joint learning branches for defining
neighborhood integration strategies. We also include a rebalanced design that uses only coordinates for vertices’ attentive aggregation, allowing the model to better judge the
motion state of vertices.
To enhance the learning of event-based graph models,
we borrow the valuable prior knowledge in well-pretrained
CNNs to facilitate the event graph model. We propose

Introduction
Event cameras hold high dynamic range, low power consumption, and high temporal resolution while maintaining data non-redundancy advantages. However, the effective
representation and learning of event data (as shown in Fig.
1) is still a topic of ongoing research.
Event data representation methods can be divided into two
categories: frame-based methods that sacrifice data sparsity and motion precision to make event data compatible
with pre-trained CNNs, and point-based methods that protect the sparsity and temporal structure of event streams.
However, due to discrepancies among different event attributes (i.e., spatial, temporal coordinates, and semantics)
and limited labeled data, existing point-based methods suffer from biased graph representation or inadequate training.
To fully leverage the inherent advantages of event cameras, we aim to address two key problems of current pointbased solutions: (1) how to deal with diverse attributes (se* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1492

