The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PointAttN: You Only Need Attention for Point Cloud Completion
Jun Wang1 , Ying Cui1 , Dongyan Guo1 * , Junxia Li2 , Qingshan Liu2 , Chunhua Shen3
1
Zhejiang University of Technology
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
3
Zhejiang University
{wangj, cuiying, guodongyan}@zjut.edu.cn
junxiali99@163.com, qsliu@nuist.edu.cn, chunhuashen@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Point cloud completion referring to completing 3D shapes
from partial 3D point clouds is a fundamental problem for
3D point cloud analysis tasks. Benefiting from the development of deep neural networks, researches on point cloud
completion have made great progress in recent years. However, the explicit local region partition like kNNs involved in
existing methods makes them sensitive to the density distribution of point clouds. Moreover, it serves limited receptive
fields that prevent capturing features from long-range context
information. To solve the problems, we leverage the crossattention and self-attention mechanisms to design novel neural network for point cloud completion with implicit local
region partition. Two basic units Geometric Details Perception (GDP) and Self-Feature Augment (SFA) are proposed
to establish the structural relationships directly among points
in a simple yet effective way via attention mechanism. Then
based on GDP and SFA, we construct a new framework with
popular encoder-decoder architecture for point cloud completion. The proposed framework, namely PointAttN, is simple, neat and effective, which can precisely capture the structural information of 3D shapes and predict complete point
clouds with detailed geometry. Experimental results demonstrate that our PointAttN outperforms state-of-the-art methods on multiple challenging benchmarks. Code is available
at: https://github.com/ohhhyeahhh/PointAttN

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of point cloud completion. Our
PointAttN can produce high-quality complete shape with accurate geometric details.

ture extractor PointNet (Charles et al. 2017) and its variant
PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017) are widely taken as the encoders
in the mainstream methods (Tchapmi et al. 2019; Huang
et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2021a; Xiang et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2021). Consequently, the idea of kNN (or its variant ball
query) is introduced to build the local spatial relationships
among points for local feature learning. The parameter of
kNN is fixed and set empirically induced by the density of
the point clouds. However, the densities of different point
clouds are different, and even within the same point cloud,
the points are not uniformly distributed in different local region. Thus, using the fixed parameter to process point clouds
is far from ideal, which makes it hard to depict a general
local geometric structure of points in local regions. In order to learn the structural features and long-range correlations among local regions, PointTr (Yu et al. 2021) proposes to adopt Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) to build
an encoder-decoder architecture. SeedFormer (Zhou et al.
2022) further integrates seed features into the generation
process of PointTr with a new shape representation. Wang
et al.(Wang et al. 2022a) investigate grouping local features
to improve the performance of completion. FBNet (Yan et al.
2022) proposes to reuse the high-level information for lowlevel feature learning via a feedback network, and leverages a cross transformer to build the connections between
the present and subsequent features. SnowflakeNet (Xiang
et al. 2021) focuses on the decoding process and introduces
skip-transformer to integrate the spatial relationships across
different levels of decoding. The attention mechanism with
Transformer architecture in these methods has shown benefits on capturing the structure features in point clouds. However, kNNs are still used in these methods to capture the
geometric relation in the point cloud.

Introduction
Point cloud completion is the task of estimating a complete
shape of an object from its incomplete observation. It plays
an important role in 3D computer vision since the raw data
captured by existing 3D sensors are usually incomplete and
sparse due to factors such as occlusion, limited sensor resolution and light reflection. The unordered and unstructured
point cloud data makes the task a challenging problem.
Benefiting from the recent advances of deep learning,
point cloud completion has achieved remarkable progress.
Current popular point cloud completion methods (Wang
et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2021b; Huang et al. 2021; Alliegro
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b; Sun et al. 2022) mainly revolve around the design of an encoder-decoder architecture
for complete point clouds generation. The famous point fea* Corresponding author: Dongyan Guo
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5472

