The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HISR: Hybrid Implicit Surface Representation for Photorealistic 3D Human
Reconstruction
Angtian Wang1 * , Yuanlu Xu2 , Nikolaos Sarafianos2 , Robert Maier2 , Edmond Boyer2 , Alan Yuille1 ,
Tony Tung2
2

1
Johns Hopkins University
Meta Reality Labs Research

Abstract

to help recover better geometries has been demonstrated in
e.g., (Yariv et al. 2020, 2021; Oechsle, Peng, and Geiger
2021).
Our experiments show that concurrent SDF-based representations lack the ability to model fine structures and highfrequency regions of humans (e.g., hair and complex cloth
patterns). While NeRF-like representations are too sensitive
to noise and misalignment, and tend to generate large amount
of floating volumes on the final reconstruction. Such differences potentially stem from, first, the nature of implicit
representation with distance fields which provides a smooth
transition from positive to negative values across the surface
boundary. SDFs are thus less likely to produce floating volumes, which requires change of the surface direction in high
frequency. Second, the Eikonal loss ∥∇Φ(x)∥ − 1, which
further enforces the smoothness of object boundaries, and
reduces therefore the sharpness and floating volumes.
Previous works (Oechsle, Peng, and Geiger 2021; Yariv
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021) attempt to combine SDF and
NeRF by replacing density fields with SDFs and employing
SDF-to-density functions, while performing volume rendering by sampling the entire space. These approaches offer
advantages such as enforcing surface smoothness through
geometry regularization and enabling training without a segmentation mask. However, we observe that such models lose
the crucial capability of NeRF models to capture intricate
geometries, like hair strands, and struggle to converge under
challenging scenarios. In this paper, we propose a complementary approach that retains the strengths of both SDF and
NeRF models by carefully controlling the model’s behavior according to different body parts, allowing for improved
performances and the ability to capture detailed geometries.
In this paper, we propose a new neural rendering framework for multi-view reconstruction of real humans. We use
the signed distance field (SDF) to model shape surfaces and
introduce a novel volume rendering scheme to learn a twolayer implicit surface-based representation. Specifically, by
introducing a density distribution induced by the SDF, we can
perform volume rendering to learn an implicit SDF representation and thus obtain both an accurate surface representation,
benefiting from the neural SDF model, and a robust network
training in the presence of abrupt depth changes, as enabled
by the volume rendering. We performed in-depth quantitative
evaluations of our Hybrid Implicit Surface Representation

Neural reconstruction and rendering strategies have demonstrated state-of-the-art performances due, in part, to their ability to preserve high level shape details. Existing approaches,
however, either represent objects as implicit surface functions
or neural volumes and still struggle to recover shapes with
heterogeneous materials, in particular human skin, hair or
clothes. To this aim, we present a new hybrid implicit surface
representation to model human shapes. This representation
is composed of two surface layers that represent opaque and
translucent regions on the clothed human body. We segment
different regions automatically using visual cues and learn
to reconstruct two signed distance functions (SDFs). We perform surface-based rendering on opaque regions (e.g., body,
face, clothes) to preserve high-fidelity surface normals and volume rendering on translucent regions (e.g., hair). Experiments
demonstrate that our approach obtains state-of-the-art results
on 3D human reconstructions, and also shows competitive
performances on other objects.

Introduction
Realistic and accurate reconstruction of geometry and appearance of digital humans has received significant attention over
the past few years with applications ranging from creating
vivid characters to virtual assistants in customer service, and
social telepresence (Lombardi et al. 2018).
Exist techniques recover the geometry and appearance of
humans from images (e.g., using multi-view stereo, shapefrom-X). Following the introduction of NeRF (Mildenhall
et al. 2020), which employs a neural network to capture color
and opacity in a 3D volume, methods using neural radiance
fields have gained significant popularity over the past few
years. The NeRF network learns to estimate the radiance
optimally from any viewpoint, resulting in images with photorealism. However, NeRF and the related works struggle to
accurately capture fine-level surface details and may generate
erroneous discrete floating volumes. Signed distance fields
(SDF) (Park et al. 2019a), that model the closest distances
to surfaces, have been proposed as an alternative to opacity in implicit shape representations. Their advanced ability
* The work is done during Angtian Wang’s internship at Meta.
The corresponding author is Yuanlu Xu.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5298

