The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Are You Concerned about Limited Function Evaluations: Data-Augmented Pareto
Set Learning for Expensive Multi-Objective Optimization
Yongfan Lu, Bingdong Li * , Aimin Zhou
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, School of Computer Science and Technology,
and Key Laboratory of MEA (Ministry of Education), East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
51255901053@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {bdli, amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

To address these challenges, multi-objective Bayesian
optimization (MOBO) (Laumanns and Ocenasek 2002), a
generalization of single-objective BO (Močkus 1975a) to
EMOPs, has shown to be a promising approach. Bayesian
Optimization (BO) is a highly effective global optimization strategy that has demonstrated tremendous success in
handling black-box optimization problems (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch 1998; Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012).
The primary concept behind BO is to construct surrogate
models based on probability, which approximate the blackbox functions and employ acquisition functions to explore
globally optimal solutions. Multi-objective Bayesian Optimization (MOBO) combines the principles of Bayesian
optimization and multi-objective optimization. One popular MOBO strategy is random scalarization, which maps
the multi-objective problem into a group of single-objective
problems. Another effective strategy is based on efficient
acquisition functions, such as the expected hypervolume
improvement (EHVI) (Couckuyt, Deschrijver, and Dhaene
2014) and predictive entropy search (PES) (Hoffman and
Ghahramani 2015).

Optimizing multiple conflicting black-box objectives simultaneously is a prevalent occurrence in many real-world applications, such as neural architecture search, and machine
learning. These problems are known as expensive multiobjective optimization problems (EMOPs) when the function
evaluations are computationally or financially costly. Multiobjective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) offers an efficient
approach to discovering a set of Pareto optimal solutions.
However, the data deficiency issue caused by limited function evaluations has posed a great challenge to current optimization methods. Moreover, most current methods tend to
prioritize the quality of candidate solutions, while ignoring
the quantity of promising samples. In order to tackle these
issues, our paper proposes a novel multi-objective Bayesian
optimization algorithm with a data augmentation strategy that
provides ample high-quality samples for Pareto set learning
(PSL). Specifically, it utilizes Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to enrich data and a dominance prediction
model to screen out high-quality samples, mitigating the
predicament of limited function evaluations in EMOPs. Additionally, we adopt the regularity model to expensive multiobjective Bayesian optimization for PSL. Experimental results on both synthetic benchmarks and real-world applications demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms several
state-of-the-art and classical algorithms.

However, the data deficiency issue caused by limited
function evaluations still poses a great challenge to the current MOBO methods. Most current methods tend to prioritize the quality of candidate solutions while ignoring the
quantity of promising samples. Moreover, it is often the case
that the search space expands exponentially as the dimensionality of decision variables increases (Tian et al. 2021),
which further worsens the data deficiency issue. As a result,
most MOBO algorithms for EMOPs are confined to smallscale variables, typically no more than 10 dimensions, due to
the limitations imposed by function evaluations. For example, in the DGEMO experiment (Konakovic Lukovic, Tian,
and Matusik 2020), the number of decision variables varies
between 2 and 7, while in both the PSL-MOBO (Lin et al.
2022) and qNEHVI (Daulton, Balandat, and Bakshy 2021)
experiments, the number of decision variables does not exceed 6. Concerning PSL-MOBO, a recently proposed Pareto
set learning based MOBO, the preference learning and surrogate model can be quite unstable in expensive scenarios. Such instability leads to significant deviations between
the approximate Pareto set and the true Pareto set. In other
words, the quality of the approximate Pareto set is highly dependent on the accuracy of the surrogate model prediction

Introduction
Expensive multi-objective optimization problems (EMOPs)
are commonly seen in various real-world applications
(Jablonka et al. 2021; Baia et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2023). These problems typically entail conflicting objectives and costly evaluations, such as antenna structure design (Ding et al. 2019), clinical drug trials (Yu, Ramakrishnan, and Meinzer 2019), and neural network structure search
(Lu et al. 2019), etc. For example, sampling all designs of 11
configuration options for x264 in software configuration tuning can cost up to 1,536 hours (Chen and Li 2021). Consequently, the number of function evaluations is severely limited due to time/financial budget. Furthermore, it is desirable
to discover a set of optimal solutions (Pareto optimal set)
rather than a single one, which imposes further difficulty.
* Corresponding Author: bdli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14202

