The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task Contamination: Language Models May Not Be Few-Shot Anymore
Changmao Li, Jeffrey Flanigan
University of California, Santa Cruz
changmao.li@ucsc.edu, jmflanig@ucsc.edu

Abstract

100

1

Percentage larger than majority baseline

Large language models (LLMs) offer impressive performance
in various zero-shot and few-shot tasks. However, their success in zero-shot or few-shot settings may be affected by task
contamination, a potential limitation that has not been thoroughly examined. This paper investigates how zero-shot and
few-shot performance of LLMs has changed chronologically
over datasets released over time, and over LLMs released over
time. Utilizing GPT-3 series models and several other recent
open-sourced LLMs, and controlling for dataset difficulty, we
find that datasets released prior to the LLM training data creation date perform surprisingly better than datasets released
post the LLM training data creation date. This strongly indicates that, for many LLMs, there exists task contamination
on zero-shot and few-shot evaluation for datasets prior to the
LLMs’ training data creation date. Additionally, we utilize
training data inspection, training data extraction, and a membership inference attack, which reveal further evidence of task
contamination. Importantly, we find that for tasks with no possibility of task contamination, LLMs rarely demonstrate statistically significant improvements over simple majority baselines, in both zero and few-shot settings.

zero-shot
few-shot
zero-shot stat. sig.
few-shot stat. sig.

80

60

40

20

0

datasets prior

datasets post

Figure 1: Percentage of datasets with accuracy higher than
the majority baseline for datasets released prior and post
LLM training data collection date, for both zero-shot (blue,
left) and few-shot (green, right). Results are across all models and all datasets. On datasets released post training data
collection date for the LLM, the LLM is much less likely to
improve upon the simple majority baseline. Stat. sig. (darker)
is the percent of datasets for which the performance above
majority baseline is significant at the 99% confidence level.

Introduction

Recently there has been much interest in few-shot methods,
in particular in-context learning (ICL, Brown et al. 2020)
with large language models. In-context learning has the benefit of yielding excellent performance while requiring very
little data, sometimes relying on only a few examples for
the task. These promising results have led to an explosion
of work on in-context learning methods across a wide variety of tasks (Schick and Schütze 2021a,b; Poesia et al. 2022;
Hu et al. 2022b), including prompt tuning methods (Qin and
Eisner 2021; Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021), chain-ofthought methods (Wei et al. 2022; Wang, Deng, and Sun
2022; Wang et al. 2023; Aiyappa et al. 2023), tool-based
methods (Schick et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023).
However, along with this explosion of work in ICL, many
have raised concerns about data contamination (Brown et al.
2020; Jacovi et al. 2023), that is, prior knowledge of data
or a task which is thought to be unseen by the model. Data
contamination can happen in multiple ways. One common

contaminant is test data contamination, the inclusion of
test data examples and labels in the pre-training data. Another contaminant for zero or few-shot methods, which we
call task contamination, is the inclusion of task training examples in the pre-training data, effectively making the evaluation no longer zero or few-shot.1
Simply evaluating the scope of this contamination is difficult to do (Magar and Schwartz 2022; Jacovi et al. 2023).
1
Zero-shot evaluation is evaluation where a model has seen zero
examples for the task. Few-shot, or 𝑁-shot, where 𝑁 is a small
number, is where the model has seen 𝑁 examples for the task. Prior
work has sometimes defined zero-shot for multi-class classification
as predicting classes that have never been seen during training, but
most recent work does not use this definition.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18471

