The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Diverse Perspective Learning
with Selection over Multiple Temporal Poolings
Jihyeon Seong* 1 , Jungmin Kim* 1 , Jaesik Choi1, 2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
2
INEEJI, South Korea
{jihyeon.seong, aldirl7, jaesik.choi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Global-Temporal-Pooling (GTP), Static-Temporal-Pooling
(STP), and Dynamic-Temporal-Pooling (DTP) (Lee, Lee,
and Yu 2021). We refer to each distinct pooling mechanism as a perspective based on the segmentation types. However, we discovered that the most effective temporal pooling varies depending on the characteristics of the time series
data, and there is no universally dominant pooling method
for all datasets (Esling and Agon 2012). This underlines the
necessity for a learnable pooling approach adaptable to each
data sample’s characteristics.
In this paper, we propose Selection over Multiple Temporal Poolings (SoM-TP). SoM-TP is a learnable ensemble
pooling method that dynamically selects heterogeneous temporal poolings through an attention mechanism (Vaswani
et al. 2017). Aligned with our observation that a more
suitable pooling exists for each data sample, a simple ensemble weakens the specified representation power (Lee
et al. 2017). Therefore, SoM-TP applies advanced ensemble
learning, motivated by Multiple Choice Learning (MCL),
that selects the best among the multiple pooling outputs
(Guzmán-rivera, Batra, and Kohli 2012).
MCL is a selection ensemble that generates M predictions from multiple instances, computes the oracle loss for
the most accurate prediction, and optimizes only the best
classifier. Capitalizing on the advantage of deep networks
having access to intermediate features, SoM-TP ensembles
diverse pooling features in a single classifier. To achieve
non-iterative optimization, SoM-TP dynamically selects the
most suitable pooling method for each data sample through
attention, which is optimized by Diverse Perspective Learning Network (DPLN) and perspective loss. DPLN is a subnetwork that utilizes all pooling outputs, and the perspective
loss reflects DPLN’s result to make a regularization effect.
Finally, the CNN model based on SoM-TP forms fine representations through diverse pooling selection, allowing it to
capture both the ‘global’ and ‘local’ features of the dataset.
Recognizing the crucial role of pooling in selecting the
most representative values from encoded features in CNNs,
we have chosen CNNs as the suitable model for our study.
We apply our new selection ensemble pooling to Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCNs) and Residual Networks
(ResNet), which show competitive performances in TSC
as a CNN-based model (Wang, Yan, and Oates 2017; Ismail Fawaz et al. 2019). SoM-TP outperforms the exist-

In Time Series Classification (TSC), temporal pooling methods that consider sequential information have been proposed.
However, we found that each temporal pooling has a distinct mechanism, and can perform better or worse depending
on time series data. We term this fixed pooling mechanism
a single perspective of temporal poolings. In this paper, we
propose a novel temporal pooling method with diverse perspective learning: Selection over Multiple Temporal Poolings
(SoM-TP). SoM-TP dynamically selects the optimal temporal pooling among multiple methods for each data by attention. The dynamic pooling selection is motivated by the ensemble concept of Multiple Choice Learning (MCL), which
selects the best among multiple outputs. The pooling selection by SoM-TP’s attention enables a non-iterative pooling
ensemble within a single classifier. Additionally, we define a
perspective loss and Diverse Perspective Learning Network
(DPLN). The loss works as a regularizer to reflect all the
pooling perspectives from DPLN. Our perspective analysis
using Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) reveals the
limitation of a single perspective and ultimately demonstrates
diverse perspective learning of SoM-TP. We also show that
SoM-TP outperforms CNN models based on other temporal
poolings and state-of-the-art models in TSC with extensive
UCR/UEA repositories.

Introduction
Time Series Classification (TSC) is one of the most valuable
tasks in data mining, and Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) with global pooling shows revolutionary success on
TSC (Längkvist, Karlsson, and Loutfi 2014; Ismail Fawaz
et al. 2019). However, global pooling in TSC poses a significant challenge, as it disregards the fundamental characteristic of time series data, which is the temporal information, by
compressing it into a single scalar value (Lecun et al. 1998;
Yu et al. 2014). To tackle this issue, temporal pooling methods were introduced, which preserve the temporal nature of
the time series at the pooling level (Lee, Lee, and Yu 2021).
Temporal pooling involves employing operations such
as ‘maximum’ (MAX) and ‘average’ (AVG), categorized
by segmentation types: ‘no segment,’ ‘uniform,’ and ‘dynamic.’ These segmentation types correspond respectively to
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8948

