The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Content Filtering with Inattentive Information Consumers*
Ian Ball1 , James Bono2 , Justin Grana3 , Nicole Immorlica4 , Brendan Lucier4 , Aleksandrs Slivkins5
1

MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
Microsoft, 1 Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052, USA.
3
Edge & Node, remote only.
4
Microsoft Research, 1 Memorial Dr, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
5
Microsoft Research, 300 Lafayette St, New York, NY 10012, USA.
justin@edgeandnode.com, slivkins@microsoft.com.
2

Abstract

examine the email more carefully, do a quick web search for
known malicious patterns, ask an acquaintance’s opinion, or
even attempt to reach the purported sender by other means.
A social media user could carefully check the argumentation in a given post, or consult reputable sources. However,
such measures incur substantial costs in time, effort and attention. In particular, the literature on “attention economy”
documents that attention in the digital sphere is a scarce resource (Hendricks and Vestergaard 2019). We will refer to
these costs as information costs2 .
Due to information costs, consumers tend to strategically
alter their behavior in response to the (perceived) filter quality. When consumers perceive that a filter is poor, either allowing too much malicious content or censoring too much,
they abandon the platform (a risk acknowledged by major
platforms for email, social media and news (D’Onfro 2018)).
When the filter is exceptional, consumers take content at
face value (Sterrett et al. 2019). In the “middle ground,” the
filter is imperfect and consumers choose whether/how to examine the content to determine its quality.3
The considerable investment in improving content filters
and consumers’ strategic allocation of scarce attention motivates three salient questions:
(Q1) Can the benefits of an increase in filter quality be
crowded out by reduced consumer attention in response to
the increase in filter quality?
(Q2) If the filter’s payoffs do not depend on the consumer’s
information costs, what inefficiencies (i.e. sub-optimal equilibria) arise and how can they be abated?
(Q3) How does the interaction between the filter and consumer change when the attacker strategically crafts its attack
in anticipation of this interaction? How does this affect the
cost-benefit tradeoff for improving the filter quality?
To answer these questions, we model content filtering as

I We develop a model of content filtering as a game between
the filter and the content consumer, where the latter incurs
information costs for examining the content. Motivating examples include censoring misinformation, spam/phish filtering, and recommender systems acting on a stream of content. When the attacker is exogenous, we show that improving the filter’s quality is weakly Pareto improving, but has no
impact on equilibrium payoffs until the filter becomes sufficiently accurate. Further, if the filter does not internalize the
consumer’s information costs, its lack of commitment power
may render it useless and lead to inefficient outcomes. When
the attacker is also strategic, improvements in filter quality
may decrease equilibrium payoffs.

1

Introduction

Content filtering is a crucial and widely-applied tool for improving the experience of information consumers. Email filters automatically sort normal, malicious and spam messages, increasing security and saving users from manually
sorting mail (Gangavarapu, Jaidhar, and Chanduka 2020;
Chae et al. 2017; Bhowmick and Hazarika 2018). Information aggregators and social media platforms have deployed
content filters that censor non-credible and potentially deceptive claims (Aldwairi and Alwahedi 2018; Kumar and
Geethakumari 2014). Recommender systems learn consumers’ preferences to save them from having to sift through
unwanted content (Bagher, Hassanpour, and Mashayekhi
2017; Wei, Moreau, and Jennings 2003; Bergemann and Ozmen 2006).1 Despite major efforts to improve content filters,
information consumers remain susceptible to malicious or
illegitimate content, e.g., they click on phishing messages
(Blythe, Petrie, and Clark 2011; Benenson, Gassmann, and
Landwirth 2017) and fall victim to misinformation (Roozenbeek et al. 2020; Pennycook and Rand 2019).
Consumers can take measures to avoid the malicious content. For example, a recipient of a suspicious email could

1
Our model is most relevant to recommender systems that process a stream of items such as new event announcements: e.g., new
concerts for a music app, or new properties for a real estate app.
2
An alternative term, attention costs, is also well-established.
3
An ironic example: a conference serves as a filter for academic
publications, and its reputation (i.e., perceived filter quality) is often used to evaluate the merit of a scientific claim (Sangster 2015).

* All proofs are in the full version, at arXiv:2205.14060.

JG and IB were affiliated with Microsoft during this research.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9485

