The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Almost Envy-Free Allocations of Indivisible Goods or Chores with Entitlements
Max Springer1 , MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi2 , Hadi Yami3
2

1
University of Maryland, Department of Mathematics, College Park MD
University of Maryland, Department of Computer Science, College Park MD
3
Microsoft Corporation, Redmond WA
{mss423, hajiagha}@umd.edu, hayami@microsoft.com

Abstract

Two such relaxations that we examine in the present work
are envy-free up to one good (EF1) and envy-free up to any
good (EFX). An allocation of indivisible items is EF1 if any
possible envy of an agent for the share of another agent
can be resolved by removing some good from the envied
share. (Lipton et al. 2004) and (Budish 2010) provide polynomial time algorithms for an EF1 allocation for any number of agents. An allocation is said to be EFX if no agent
envies another agent after the removal of any item from
the other agent’s bundle. Theoretically, this notion is strictly
stronger than EF1 and as a result, despite significant effort,
the existence of EFX allocations is still unknown. (Plaut and
Roughgarden 2018) described the first approximate EFX results with later improvements by (Amanatidis, Markakis,
and Ntokos 2020) and (Farhadi et al. 2021). With respect to
chore division, the literature is more scarce: the first discrete
and bounded envy-free protocol for any number of agents
was not proposed until 2018 (Dehghani et al. 2018).
In both the good and chore division problems, the literature noted above is restricted to the case where each agent’s
perspective is weighted equally. However, more recently, the
generalization has been proposed where agents have a valuation (or cost in the case of chores) associated with each
item as well as an “entitlement” or weighting (Aziz, Chan,
and Li 2019; Babaioff, Ezra, and Feige 2021; Chakraborty
et al. 2020; Farhadi et al. 2019). This problem setting captures significantly more characteristics of real-world fair division issues than that of the equal entitlement case.
To further emphasize this natural problem, consider the
recent example that arose during the height of the COVID19 pandemic. When a vaccine was in production, producers were faced with the question of how to fairly distribute
doses in a manner that respects all parties while also mitigating further spread of the virus. In this context, it is not
enough to just give each nation an equal share of the supply – we must now take into account population densities
and each nation’s medical infrastructure among a plethora of
other factors. This naturally gives rise to agent weightings
that, as we will show in the paper, result in a considerable
complication of the fair allocation problem.

We here address the problem of fairly allocating indivisible
goods or chores to n agents with weights that define their entitlement to the set of indivisible resources. Stemming from
well-studied fairness concepts such as envy-freeness up to
one good (EF1) and envy-freeness up to any good (EFX) for
agents with equal entitlements, we present, in this study, the
first set of impossibility results alongside algorithmic guarantees for fairness among agents with unequal entitlements.
Within this paper, we expand the concept of envy-freeness
up to any good or chore to the weighted context (WEFX
and XWEF respectively), demonstrating that these allocations are not guaranteed to exist for two or three agents. Despite these negative results, we develop a WEFX procedure
for two agents with integer weights, and furthermore, we devise an approximate WEFX procedure for two agents with
normalized weights. We further present a polynomial-time algorithm that guarantees a weighted envy-free allocation up to
one chore (1WEF) for any number of agents with additive
cost functions. Our work underscores the heightened complexity of the weighted fair division problem when compared
to its unweighted counterpart.

Introduction
The notion of a fair allocation of resources has been a fundamental problem in the field of economics and, more recently,
computer science (Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and Maudet 2016;
Brams and Taylor 1995; Peterson and Su 2002, 2009;
Pikhurko 2000; Procaccia 2009; Robertson and Webb 1998).
This idea of fairness takes on many forms in a wide array of
application areas such as land division, divorce settlements,
or natural resource distributions.
One of the most well-established mathematical definitions
of fairness is envy-freeness. In an envy-free allocation each
agent prefers her share more than any other: for the case
of goods, she wants the most lucrative set of items whereas
for chores, we seek to minimize the cost distributed across
agents. However, envy-freeness is not necessarily obtainable
when dealing with a set of indivisible goods or chores, and
such an allocation is often difficult to compute. Hence, several relaxations of envy-freeness have been introduced.

Our Contributions
Although the existence of EFX allocations is a major open
problem in the field, we demonstrate that WEFX, the gener-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9901

