The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Modal Feature Distribution Calibration for Few-Shot Visual Question
Answering
Jing Zhang* † , Xiaoqiang Liu* , Mingzhe Chen, Zhe Wang†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, China
jingzhang@ecust.edu.cn, 2681332916lxq@gmail.com, ecustcmz@gmail.com, wangzhe@ecust.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot Visual Question Answering (VQA) realizes fewshot cross-modal learning, which is an emerging and challenging task in computer vision. Currently, most of the fewshot VQA methods are confined to simply extending few-shot
classification methods to cross-modal tasks while ignoring
the spatial distribution properties of multimodal features and
cross-modal information interaction. To address this problem, we propose a novel Cross-modal feature Distribution
Calibration Inference Network (CDCIN) in this paper, where
a new concept named visual information entropy is proposed to realize multimodal features distribution calibration
by cross-modal information interaction for more effective
few-shot VQA. Visual information entropy is a statistical
variable that represents the spatial distribution of visual features guided by the question, which is aligned before and
after the reasoning process to mitigate redundant information and improve multi-modal features by our proposed visual information entropy calibration module. To further enhance the inference ability of cross-modal features, we additionally propose a novel pre-training method, where the reasoning sub-network of CDCIN is pretrained on the base class
in a VQA classification paradigm and fine-tuned on the fewshot VQA datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our proposed CDCIN achieves excellent performance on fewshot VQA and outperforms state-of-the-art methods on three
widely used benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Visual information distribution of different inference stages. The shade of the color means that the information in that region is likely to be caught by the model.

The early joint embedding models (Fukui et al. 2016; Kim
et al. 2016; Ben-Younes et al. 2019) for VQA focused on the
fusion of multimodal features and cross-modal interactions,
most of which were realized through attention mechanism
(Yu et al. 2018; Kim, Jun, and Zhang 2018; Guo, Yao, and
Chu 2023) and graph neural network (Huang et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2019). These classical VQA methods are generally
trained on a large amount of labeled multimodal data and ignore the sparsity problem in most categories caused by the
diversity of multimodal data. As a machine learning method
that aims to recognize new concepts with few samples, fewshot learning caters to the characteristics of the VQA task
and trains an effective model with a small amount of labeled
data. For this reason, some methods (Dong et al. 2018; Yin
et al. 2021) are proposed, which attempt to apply few-shot
learning to solve few-shot cross-modal learning. However,
these methods cannot effectively deal with cross-modal information inference and constrain multimodal feature distribution, which limits the performance of few-shot VQA.
Cross-modal semantic inference is capable of facilitating joint reasoning based on correlation analysis between
modalities, which is important for few-shot VQA. For a
given image and question, the operation of few-shot VQA
can be divided into two steps: understanding and reasoning.
The performance of “inference” becomes crucial for answer
prediction when the process of “understanding” can be well
completed by existing encoders such as ViT (Dosovitskiy

Introduction
With the booming development of deep learning in recent
years, all kinds of Visual Language Processing (VLP) tasks
have attracted widespread attention from researchers, such
as image captioning (Pan et al. 2020), visual entailment
(Tran et al. 2022), Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Jiang
et al. 2020a; Penamakuri et al. 2023; Dancette et al. 2023)
and so on. As an important topic in VLP, VQA is a typical
cross-modal problem that needs to analyze visual content
and question semantics simultaneously. Currently, it is typically viewed as a classification problem where the goal is
to predict the accurate answer given a pair of images and
questions.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

It is on behalf of the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7151

