The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Zero-Sum Games between Mean-Field Teams:
Reachability-Based Analysis under Mean-Field Sharing
Yue Guan, Mohammad Afshari, Panagiotis Tsiotras
Georgia Institute of Technology
{yguan44, mafshari, tsiotras}@gatech.edu

Abstract

nent team to obtain tractable solutions, but these assumptions may not be valid. It is thus unclear whether one can
deploy techniques that are readily available in the largepopulation game literature.
The scalability challenge in large-population multi-agent
systems has been addressed for a specific class of games
known as the mean-field games (Huang, Malhamé, and
Caines 2006; Lasry and Lions 2007). The salient feature of
a mean-field game is that agents are weakly-coupled in their
dynamics and rewards through their state distribution (the
so-called mean-field). The interactions among agents can
then be approximated as the interaction between a typical
agent and the “mass” of infinitely many other agents. This
approximation technique has been extended to single-team
settings known as the mean-field team problem (Arabneydi
and Mahajan 2014). A dynamic programming decomposition is developed for this problem, where all agents within
the team deploy the same strategy prescribed by a fictitious
coordinator. However, in competitive team setting, although
one may restrict the strategies used by her/his team to be
identical, extending the same assumption to the opponent
team may lead to a substantial underestimation of the opponent’s capabilities and thus requires further justification.

This work studies the behaviors of two large-population
teams competing in a discrete environment. The team-level
interactions are modeled as a zero-sum game while the
agent dynamics within each team is formulated as a collaborative mean-field team problem. Drawing inspiration from
the mean-field literature, we first approximate the largepopulation team game with its infinite-population limit. Subsequently, we construct a fictitious centralized system and
transform the infinite-population game to an equivalent zerosum game between two coordinators. Via a novel reachability
analysis, we study the optimality of coordination strategies,
which induce decentralized strategies under the original information structure. The ϵ-optimality of the resulting strategies is established in the original finite-population game, and
the theoretical guarantees are verified by numerical examples.

Introduction
Multi-agent decision-making arises in many applications,
ranging from warehouse robots (Li et al. 2021) to organizational economics (Gibbons, Roberts et al. 2013). While
the majority of the literature formulates the problems within
either the cooperative or competitive setting, results on
mixed collaborative-competitive team behaviors are relatively sparse. In this work, we consider a competitive team
game, where two teams, each comprising a large number of
intelligent agents, compete at the team level, while agents
collaborate within each team. Such hierarchical interactions
hold significant relevance in domains such as military operations (Tyler et al. 2020) and other multi-agent systems
operating in adversarial environments (Shishika et al. 2022).
There are two major challenges when trying to solve such
competitive team problems:

Main Contributions
We address the two aforementioned challenges for the class
of discrete zero-sum mean-field team games (ZS-MFTGs),
which is an extension to the mean-field (single) team problems. Importantly, ZS-MFTG models competitive team behaviors and draws focus to the justifiable approximation of
the opponent team strategies.
We develop a dynamic program that constructs ϵ-optimal
strategies to the proposed large-population competitive team
problem. Notably, our approach finds an optimal solution
at the infinite-population limit and considers only identical
team strategies. This avoids both the so-called “curse of dimensionality” issue in multi-agent systems and the bookkeeping of individual strategies. Our main results provide a
sub-optimality bound on the exploitability for our proposed
solution in the original finite-population game, even when
the opponent team is allowed to use non-identical strategies.
Specifically, we show that the sub-optimality decreases at
the rate of O(N −0.5 ), where N is the size of the smaller
team.

1. Large-population team problems are computationally
challenging since the solution complexity increases exponentially with the number of agents, and, in general,
the team optimal control problems belong to the NEXP
complexity class (Bernstein et al. 2002).
2. Competitive team problems are conceptually challenging
due to the elusive nature of the opponent team. In particular, one may want to impose assumptions on the oppoCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9731

