The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CASE: Exploiting Intra-class Compactness and Inter-class Separability of Feature
Embeddings for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Shuai Feng * , Pengsheng Jin, Chongjun Wang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{shuaifeng, jps}@smail.nju.edu.cn, chjwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Numerous OOD detection methods (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016; Liang, Li, and Srikant 2017; Lee et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2020; Huang, Geng, and Li 2021) have relied on
employing off-the-shelf softmax cross-entropy (CE) loss to
produce embeddings that are sufficient for classifying ID
samples. However, this approach may not be optimally designed for OOD detection since it cannot guarantee high
levels of intra-class compactness and inter-class separability (Liu et al. 2016, 2017; Wang et al. 2018). The quality of
the learned features is generally correlated with these two
factors, where intra-class compactness measures how close
the features with the same label are to each other, and interclass separability measures how far away the features with
different labels are (Luo et al. 2019). When both intra-class
compactness and inter-class separability are maximized simultaneously, the learned features become more discriminative (Liu et al. 2016) and promote strong ID-OOD separability. Hence, optimizing these two factors is crucial for
developing effective OOD detection techniques.
In this paper, our high level idea is to establish the
correlation between OOD detection performance and embedding properties in distance-based representation space.
To achieve this goal, we propose an effective OOD detection method called CASE, which improves the intraclass Compactness And inter-class Separability of ID feature Embeddings. To formalize our approach, we introduce
two complementary losses. The first is the separability loss,
which maximizes the inter-class Euclidean distance to promote clear separation among different class centers. The
second is the compactness loss, which minimizes the intraclass Euclidean distance to encourage samples to cluster
near their respective class centers. By working in tandem,
these two losses help to produce more discriminative feature
embeddings that exhibit higher intra-class compactness and
higher inter-class separability in distance-based representation space. Overall, our proposed method provides a promising solution for improving OOD detection performance and
ID classification accuracy.
In particular, we emphasize the importance of a simple and efficient class center definition method in further
improving OOD detection performance. There are several
methods available for defining class centers (Kirchheim, Filax, and Ortmeier 2022). Some methods (Miller et al. 2021;
Feng et al. 2023) treat the class centers as constant parame-

Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs is critical for reliable machine learning, but deep neural networks often make
overconfident predictions, even for OOD inputs that deviate
from the distribution of training data. Prior methods relied on
the widely used softmax cross-entropy (CE) loss that is adequate for classifying in-distribution (ID) samples but not optimally designed for OOD detection. To address this issue,
we propose CASE, a simple and effective OOD detection
method by explicitly improving intra-class Compactness And
inter-class Separability of feature Embeddings. To enhance
the separation between ID and OOD samples, CASE uses a
dual-loss framework, which includes a separability loss that
maximizes the inter-class Euclidean distance to promote separability among different class centers, along with a compactness loss that minimizes the intra-class Euclidean distance
to encourage samples to be close to their class centers. In
particular, the class centers are defined as a free optimization parameter of the model and updated by gradient descent,
which is simple and further enhances the OOD detection performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of CASE, which reduces the average FPR95 by 37.11%
and improves the average AUROC by 15.89% compared to
the baseline method using a softmax confidence score on the
more challenging CIFAR-100 model.

Introduction
In the open world, machine learning models may encounter
out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs that deviate from the distribution of training data, also known as in-distribution (ID)
(Drummond and Shearer 2006; He et al. 2015; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2017). Such inputs can cause models
to make predictions with high confidence at test time, leading to unexpected and potentially harmful consequences.
For instance, in safety-critical applications like autonomous
driving, the driving system must alert the driver when it detects unusual scenes or objects that it cannot safely handle
(Yang et al. 2021). Similarly, a fraud detection system may
fail to identify a new type of fraud that it has not encountered
before (Phua et al. 2010), resulting in significant financial
losses. Therefore, OOD detection is crucial in ensuring the
reliability and safety of machine learning systems.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21081

