The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Amodal Scene Analysis via
Holistic Occlusion Relation Inference and Generative Mask Completion
Bowen Zhang1 , Qing Liu2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Yilin Wang2 , Liyang Liu1 , Zhe Lin2 , Yifan Liu1†
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
2
Adobe Research
{b.zhang,akide.liu,yifan.liu04}@adelaide.edu.au, {qingl,jianmzha,yilwang,zlin}@adobe.com

Abstract

things around and generate new RGB content (Zhan et al.
2020a; Zheng et al. 2021).
Many existing works try to solve amodal problems by extending traditional instance segmentation methods, such as
Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017) and DETR (Carion et al.
2020). In those methods, heads for amodal mask prediction are added to the instance segmentation model (Follmann et al. 2019; Qi et al. 2019; Xiao et al. 2021; Tran
et al. 2022). These methods treat amodal segmentation as an
object recognition task, and entangle instance segmentation
and amodal mask completion in a single framework. Consequently, the problem becomes too challenging and satisfying
results can hardly be obtained. In addition, these methods
only focus on amodal mask prediction and do not explicitly address the occlusion reasoning problem, which is an
essential part for amodal scene analysis. They also often use
mean Average Precision (mAP) as the main evaluation metric, which cannot reflect the mask quality or fidelity in many
cases. Furthermore, since these methods are often trained for
a set of predefined object classes, their application is strictly
constrained by the training data.
Another approach decouples amodal analysis from a perspective on object recognition. Taking instance masks of
visible regions as input, these methods interpret the occlusion relationship among the objects of interest and perform
amodal mask completion in a separate step (Yan et al. 2019a;
Ling et al. 2020; Zhan et al. 2020b; Nguyen and Todorovic
2021). These approaches focus more on amodal analysis and
can generally achieve better results for occlusion reasoning
and mask completion. However, current approaches in this
direction typically rely on a time-consuming process of pairwise object de-occlusion. The occlusion order reasoning is
based on mask completion results, making the overall performance unstable due to the difficulty of the amodal segmentation task. In addition, many prior works utilize a deterministic method to solve amodal mask completion, which
is limited in its ability to capture multiple potential and plausible shapes that may exist under occlusion.
In this work, we propose a new amodal scene analysis
framework based on the second approach, where we decouple the problem from object recognition. Since many existing works (Cheng et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2022; Li et al.
2022a) on instance and panoptic segmentation tasks already
achieved impressive performance, in this work we assume

Amodal scene analysis entails interpreting the occlusion relationship among scene elements and inferring the possible shapes of the invisible parts. Existing methods typically
frame this task as an extended instance segmentation or a
pair-wise object de-occlusion problem. In this work, we propose a new framework, which comprises a Holistic Occlusion
Relation Inference (HORI) module followed by an instancelevel Generative Mask Completion (GMC) module. Unlike
previous approaches, which rely on mask completion results for occlusion reasoning, our HORI module directly predicts an occlusion relation matrix in a single pass. This approach is much more efficient than the pair-wise de-occlusion
process and it naturally handles mutual occlusion, a common but often neglected situation. Moreover, we formulate
the mask completion task as a generative process and use a
diffusion-based GMC module for instance-level mask completion. This improves mask completion quality and provides
multiple plausible solutions. We further introduce a largescale amodal segmentation dataset which consists of highquality human annotations for amodal masks and occlusion
relations, including mutual occlusions. Experiments on the
newly proposed dataset and two public benchmarks demonstrate the advantages of our method on both efficient occlusion reasoning and plausible amodal mask completion. code
public available at https://github.com/zbwxp/Amodal-AAAI.

Introduction
Humans can naturally perceive the occlusion relationship
among multiple scene elements and infer the possible shapes
for the invisible parts, and this ability is known as amodal
perception (Nanay 2018; Mohan and Valada 2022; Zhu et al.
2017). In computer vision, amodal scene analysis has been
proposed to match the human intelligence (Li and Malik
2016), and this task can provide useful information for many
real-world applications. For example, occlusion reasoning
can facilitate risk assessment in AI systems, where existing methods are data-driven and may become less reliable
when applied on heavily occluded objects (Zhu et al. 2019;
Kortylewski et al. 2020). Amodal scene analysis can also
benefit image editing tasks. By decomposing the 2D scene
into layer-wise representations based on the predicted occlusion relationship and amodal shapes, users can easily move
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6997

