The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

I Prefer Not To Say: Protecting User Consent in Models with
Optional Personal Data
Tobias Leemann1, 2 , Martin Pawelczyk3 , Christian Thomas Eberle1 , Gjergji Kasneci2
1

University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
3
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
tobias.leemann@uni-tuebingen.de, martin.pawelczyk.1@gmail.com, ct.eberle@protonmail.ch, gjergji.kasneci@tum.de
2

required base
voluntary optional
feature
features
z }| {z}|{

Abstract
We examine machine learning models in a setup where individuals have the choice to share optional personal information with a decision-making system, as seen in modern
insurance pricing models. Some users consent to their data
being used whereas others object and keep their data undisclosed. In this work, we show that the decision not to share
data can be considered as information in itself that should
be protected to respect users’ privacy. This observation raises
the overlooked problem of how to ensure that users who protect their personal data do not suffer any disadvantages as a
result. To address this problem, we formalize protection requirements for models which only use the information for
which active user consent was obtained. This excludes implicit information contained in the decision to share data or
not. We offer the first solution to this problem by proposing the notion of Protected User Consent (PUC), which we
prove to be loss-optimal under our protection requirement.
We observe that privacy and performance are not fundamentally at odds with each other and that it is possible for a decision maker to benefit from additional data while respecting
users’ consent. To learn PUC-compliant models, we devise a
model-agnostic data augmentation strategy with finite sample
convergence guarantees. Finally, we analyze the implications
of PUC on challenging real datasets, tasks, and models.

features x1

sharer
Goal: obtain more
accurate predictions

undisclosed optional
feature

features x2

decision maker
Goal: make most accurate
predictions, respect legal
requirements

non-sharer
Goal: keep
information private,
no disadvantages

Figure 1: Overview of the relevant stakeholders. We consider a case where users can voluntarily provide information
on optional features or choose to leave them undisclosed.
The goals of sharers, non-sharers, and the decision maker
have to be reconciled.

To improve the pricing model, the insurance offers an additional service, a “companion fitness app”, through which
additional health data about the customer’s physical condition are collected. The customers decide whether to use the
app or not; alternatively, customers can sign up for a policy without consenting to use the app. The health data that
customers share may however influence the premium of the
insurance policy they receive. We refer to data that provide
additional, non-mandatory information beyond the base features as optional features. With fitness trackers and smartwatches rapidly gaining popularity (Reeder and David 2016;
Zimmer et al. 2020; Statista 2023), such systems are already
being deployed in practice, e.g., by major health insurance
firms in Australia (Henning 2022).
The outlined scenario is challenging as there are three
groups of stakeholders whose interests need to be reconciled: (1) The group of non-sharing individuals who do not
want to provide additional information, for instance due to
privacy concerns. We refer to them as non-sharers. For this
group, the decision maker does not want to or cannot force
them to provide the additional information for legal reasons.
Consequently, the non-sharers do not want the additional information to be considered in the decision making process;
in return, they are willing to sacrifice some accuracy, but
they do not want to face other systematic disadvantages. (2)

Introduction
While the day-to-day impact of automated data processing is steadily growing, modern regulations such as the
European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) (GDPR 2016) or the California Consumer Privacy
Act (CCPA) (OAG 2021) strive to give individuals more
control over their personal data. In light of these regulations,
we consider machine-learned classifiers in which individuals have the freedom to decide themselves on which data
they would like to provide to an automated decision system.
Such systems are increasingly being deployed (Henning
2022): As a running example, we consider a realistic usecase of health insurance pricing: Suppose in an automated
pricing model all potential customers are asked to fill out an
application form where they enter certain base features, for
instance information such as their state of residence and age.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21312

