The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Higher-Order Graph Convolutional Network with Flower-Petals Laplacians
on Simplicial Complexes
Yiming Huang1,2, * , Yujie Zeng1,2, * , Qiang Wu3,† , Linyuan Lü4,1,2,†
1

Yangtze Delta Region Institute (Huzhou), University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Research Institute of Electronic Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{yiming huang, yujie zeng}@std.uestc.edu.cn, {qiang.wu, linyuan.lv}@uestc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Graph neural networks (GNNs) can exploit the features
and topology of graphs simultaneously, thereby triggering
a wide-spreading research interest and endeavor in various graph learning tasks such as recommender systems and
new drug discovery. In particular, spectral GNNs have been
widely recognized for their rigorous mathematical theory.
Nevertheless, pairwise-graph-based GNNs fail to capture latent higher-order interactions prevalent in empirical systems,
and their expressive power was proved to be upper bounded
by Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test (Xu et al. 2019).
Simplicial complexes (SCs) and hypergraphs have
emerged to study higher-order interactions beyond conventional pairwise descriptors (Battiston et al. 2020). While
hypergraph learning has made fruitful progress (Gao et al.
2022), it typically ignores relations within the hyperedges, and the construction of hypergraphs is often underoptimized. The simplicial description is another potent tool
with elegant mathematical theories to draw from, paving a
middle ground between graphs and hypergraphs. It has been
found that SCs play a vital role in social contagion, synchronization, brain network analysis, etc.
Deep learning facilitated simplicial complex theory is a
fresh perspective and a promising research field. Several
simplicial GNNs have been proposed by simply replacing
the graph Laplacian with the Hodge Laplacian (Schaub et al.
2020). A simplicial WL test is proposed along with its neural version MPSN (Bodnar et al. 2021) based on the adjacency relations that Hodge theory defines. MPSN is proved
to be more powerful than vanilla GNNs under ideal conditions, implying the potential of extending graph representation learning to SCs.
In summary, pairwise GNNs fail to capture latent group
interactions prevalent in complex systems, and the expressive power of such models was proved to be upper bounded
by the WL-test. As an emerging and promising research
field, simplicial GNNs have initially shown their potential
to outperform pairwise GNNs. However, existing models are
limited by their high complexity and low flexibility.
In this paper, we introduce a novel higher-order flowerpetals (FP) representation based on two-step random walk
dynamics (Zeng et al. 2023b) between the flower core and
petals. This representation enables us to incorporate interactions among simplices of various orders into graph learn-

Despite the recent successes of vanilla Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on various tasks, their foundation on pairwise networks inherently limits their capacity to discern latent higher-order interactions in complex systems. To bridge
this capability gap, we propose a novel approach exploiting
the rich mathematical theory of simplicial complexes (SCs)
- a robust tool for modeling higher-order interactions. Current SC-based GNNs are burdened by high complexity and
rigidity, and quantifying higher-order interaction strengths remains challenging. Innovatively, we present a higher-order
Flower-Petals (FP) model, incorporating FP Laplacians into
SCs. Further, we introduce a Higher-order Graph Convolutional Network (HiGCN) grounded in FP Laplacians, capable of discerning intrinsic features across varying topological scales. By employing learnable graph filters, a parameter group within each FP Laplacian domain, we can identify
diverse patterns where the filters’ weights serve as a quantifiable measure of higher-order interaction strengths. The
theoretical underpinnings of HiGCN’s advanced expressiveness are rigorously demonstrated. Additionally, our empirical
investigations reveal that the proposed model accomplishes
state-of-the-art performance on a range of graph tasks and
provides a scalable and flexible solution to explore higherorder interactions in graphs. Codes and datasets are available
at https://github.com/Yiminghh/HiGCN.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous in representing irregular relations
in various scenarios. However, they are inherently constrained to modeling pairwise interactions exclusively (Battiston et al. 2020). Many empirical systems display group
interactions, going beyond pairwise connections, such as
social systems (Centola 2010), neuronal networks (Ganmor, Segev, and Schneidman 2011), and ecological networks
(Grilli et al. 2017). However, such higher-order interactions
can hardly be modeled or approximated by pairwise graphs.
In addition, it is still elusive how to quantify the higher-order
interaction strength, although many studies have demonstrated its existence (Battiston et al. 2021).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12653

