The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph-Based Prediction and Planning Policy Network (GP3Net) for Scalable
Self-Driving in Dynamic Environments Using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jayabrata Chowdhury 1 * , Venkataramanan Shivaraman 2 * , Suresh Sundaram 1 , PB Sujit 2
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhopal
jayabratac@iisc.ac.in, vshivaraman18@gmail.com, vssuresh@iisc.ac.in, sujit@iiserb.ac.in
2

Abstract
Recent advancements in motion planning for Autonomous
Vehicles (AVs) show great promise in using expert driver
behaviors in non-stationary driving environments. However,
learning only through expert drivers needs more generalizability to recover from domain shifts and near-failure scenarios due to the dynamic behavior of traffic participants
and weather conditions. A deep Graph-based Prediction and
Planning Policy Network (GP3Net) framework is proposed
for non-stationary environments that encodes the interactions
between traffic participants with contextual information and
provides a decision for safe maneuver for AV. A spatiotemporal graph models the interactions between traffic participants for predicting the future trajectories of those participants. The predicted trajectories are utilized to generate a
future occupancy map around the AV with uncertainties embedded to anticipate the evolving non-stationary driving environments. Then the contextual information and future occupancy maps are input to the policy network of the GP3Net
framework and trained using Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) algorithm. The proposed GP3Net performance is evaluated on standard CARLA benchmarking scenarios with domain shifts of traffic patterns (urban, highway, and mixed).
The results show that the GP3Net outperforms previous stateof-the-art imitation learning-based planning models for different towns. Further, in unseen new weather conditions,
GP3Net completes the desired route with fewer traffic infractions. Finally, the results emphasize the advantage of including the prediction module to enhance safety measures in nonstationary environments.

Figure 1: A typical intersection scenario with traffic lights,
pedestrians, and vehicles. The scenario has pedestrians and
vehicles moving on the desired path of AV. The figure has
colour coded markers to show the context.

speeds of different traffic participants also make it difficult
for AV to drive safely. A research finding on the United
States (Choi 2010) shows that wrong estimation of other
traffic participants’ speed is responsible for 8.4% of critical reasons for crashes. Also, another problem of driving
in an unstructured environment is that traffic pattern varies
with the cooperative/noncooperative behaviors of other traffic participants. By utilizing communication channels as described in (Bazzi et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2022), it becomes
possible to determine the intentions and objectives of fellow
traffic participants. This information simplifies the process
for AVs to make informed decisions regarding their actions.
However, vehicles use different communication protocols,
and ensuring reliable real-time communications between all
traffic participants is challenging. Hence, another way is to
model the interactions of traffic participants through time
and predict their future trajectories to understand their behaviors. An AV can make a safe decision in a non-stationary
environment if it can model the interactions better and predict the future trajectories of other surrounding vehicles. Depending on the future trajectories of others’, an AV can decide on a safe planning maneuver. Hence, there is a need to
develop a motion planning algorithm that can handle nonstationary environments using the intention understanding
from the predicted trajectories of other traffic participants.

Introduction
Motion planning for AVs still has a long way to go due to
the complexity of real-world driving environments, ensuring the safety and comfort of everyone. The AV must be able
to carefully plan its maneuvers in urban and highway environments with varying traffic dynamics set by cars, bikers,
pedestrians, and weather conditions. A typical intersection
scenario in an urban environment is shown in Fig.1. Various traffic participants’ different intentions and final goals
(as shown by arrows in Fig.1) make it challenging for AV
to safely and comfortably move to its destination. Variable
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11606

