The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Compact 3D Representations via Point Feature Enhancement Masked
Autoencoders
Yaohua Zha1,2 , Huizhen Ji1 , Jinmin Li1 , Rongsheng Li1 , Tao Dai3 * ,
Bin Chen4 , Zhi Wang1 , Shu-Tao Xia1,2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
chayh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

et al. 2023), masked autoencoder (MAE) based pre-training
methods (Pang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022b; Dong et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2022c; Qi et al. 2023), which aim to learn
latent 3D representations from vast unlabeled point clouds,
have received much attention, and can be categorized into
two classes, i.e., single-modal (Pang et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022b) and cross-modal (Dong et al. 2022; Guo, Li, and
Heng 2023; Zhang et al. 2022c; Qi et al. 2023) methods.
Among them, cross-modal MAE methods, leveraging insights from other modalities, have achieved remarkable performance by acquiring holistic 3D representations. However, these methods rely heavily on transferring knowledge
from massive pair images or texts, which are often unavailable in practice. Specifically, they utilize pre-trained image or language models to extract cross-modal knowledge,
along with techniques like projection or knowledge distillation for cross-modal knowledge transfer. Such complex operations require heavy computational cost and thus hinders
their applications in practice. As shown in Table 1, crossmodal methods like Recon (Qi et al. 2023) have obtained
performance gains by 5% on ScanObjectNN while requiring
5× pre-training parameters, compared to the single-modal
Point-MAE (Pang et al. 2022).
For these reasons, single-modal methods with solely point
clouds as input are preferred in real applications due to
their simplicity and efficiency (Table 1). However, existing single-modal methods rely heavily on the global random
masked point cloud (shown in Figure 1 (a)) generated by the
global random masking strategy to learn 3D representations,
which makes the model have robust global shape perception
but insufficient local detail representation. As shown in Table 2, such single-modal methods can work well on global
masked point cloud (GMPC), while failing in local masked
point cloud (LMPC), thus resulting in limited 3D representations for single-modal MAE models.
To learn compact 3D representations for point cloud, we
propose a simple yet highly effective Point Feature Enhancement Masked Autoencoders (Point-FEMAE), which
mainly consists of a global branch and a local branch to
capture latent global and local features, respectively. Specifically, during the pre-training stage, as illustrated in Figure
2 (a), we subject a complete point cloud to both global ran-

Learning 3D representation plays a critical role in masked autoencoder (MAE) based pre-training methods for point cloud,
including single-modal and cross-modal based MAE. Specifically, although cross-modal MAE methods learn strong 3D
representations via the auxiliary of other modal knowledge,
they often suffer from heavy computational burdens and
heavily rely on massive cross-modal data pairs that are often unavailable, which hinders their applications in practice.
Instead, single-modal methods with solely point clouds as
input are preferred in real applications due to their simplicity and efficiency. However, such methods easily suffer from
limited 3D representations with global random mask input.
To learn compact 3D representations, we propose a simple
yet effective Point Feature Enhancement Masked Autoencoders (Point-FEMAE), which mainly consists of a global
branch and a local branch to capture latent semantic features. Specifically, to learn more compact features, a shareparameter Transformer encoder is introduced to extract point
features from the global and local unmasked patches obtained by global random and local block mask strategies,
followed by a specific decoder to reconstruct. Meanwhile,
to further enhance features in the local branch, we propose a Local Enhancement Module with local patch convolution to perceive fine-grained local context at larger scales.
Our method significantly improves the pre-training efficiency
compared to cross-modal alternatives, and extensive downstream experiments underscore the state-of-the-art effectiveness, particularly outperforming our baseline (Point-MAE)
by 5.16%, 5.00%, and 5.04% in three variants of ScanObjectNN, respectively. Code is available at https://github.com/
zyh16143998882/AAAI24-PointFEMAE.

Introduction
Point cloud, as an efficient representation of 3D objects, has
been widely used in extensive applications like autonomous
driving, robotics, and the metaverse for its rich geometric,
shape, and structural details. Recently, with the rapid advancements of deep learning-based point cloud understanding (Qi et al. 2017a; Wang et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2023; Gao
* Corresponding author. (daitao.edu@gmail.com)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6962

