The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Any-Stereo: Arbitrary Scale Disparity Estimation for Iterative Stereo Matching
Zhaohuai Liang 1 , Changhe Li 2 *
1

2

School of Automation, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University of Science & Technology, Hefei 232001, China
techhuaier@gmail.com, changhe.lw@gmail.com

Abstract

Any-RAFT(ours)

RAFT-Stereo

Input

Due to unaffordable computational costs, the regularized disparity in iterative stereo matching is typically maintained at
a lower resolution than the input. To regress the full resolution disparity, most stereo methods resort to convolutions
to decode a fixed-scale output. However, they are inadequate
for recovering vital high-frequency information lost during
downsampling, limiting their performance on full-resolution
prediction. In this paper, we introduce AnyStereo, an accurate and efficient disparity upsampling module with implicit neural representation for the iterative stereo pipeline.
By modeling the disparity as a continuous representation over
2D spatial coordinates, subtle details can emerge from the
latent space at arbitrary resolution. To further complement
the missing information and details in the latent code, we
propose two strategies: intra-scale similarity unfolding and
cross-scale feature alignment. The former unfolds the neighbor relationships, while the latter introduces the context in
high-resolution feature maps. The proposed AnyStereo can
seamlessly replace the upsampling module in most iterative
stereo models, improving their ability to capture fine details
and generate arbitrary-scale disparities even with fewer parameters. With our method, the iterative stereo pipeline establishes a new state-of-the-art performance. The code is available at https://github.com/Zhaohuai-L/Any-Stereo.

×0.25(Raw)

×1(Full)

×4

Figure 1: Overview examples of iterative methods at each
stage on KITTI dataset. In RAFT-stereo (Lipson, Teed, and
Deng 2021), the raw disparity is upsampled to full size by
convolutions. For higher resolution, bilinear interpolation is
used for comparison. In our Any-RAFT, fine disparities are
decoded at arbitrary resolution by varying the upscale factor.

Introduction

operation on the disparity dimension. In this way, fine details
can be well recovered from the cost volume. However, the
high computational and memory consumption of 3D convolution hinders its application in high-resolution inputs.
Instead of regularizing the cost volume itself, recent work
has focused on iteratively updating the disparity map by retrieving correlations from the cost volume (Lipson, Teed,
and Deng 2021; Zhao et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023). These
iterative methods first construct a correlation volume with
multiple receptive fields using feature pairs. After that, an
update operator with GRU or LSTM is used to generate the
residual disparity based on the correlation, context features,
and current disparity map. By regularizing the 2D disparity
map rather than the expensive cost volume, iterative methods are efficient enough to process high resolution images.
However, the capacity of iterative methods to recover
fine depth details is constrained by upsampling from lowresolution disparity. The qualitative examples of the iterative methods at each stage are shown in Figure 1. For the

Estimating depth from cameras is a fundamental task in
many advanced vision applications such as augmented reality, autonomous driving, and 3D reconstruction. As a solution to this problem, stereo matching aims to identify the
correspondence between two images from calibrated cameras, which represents the 3D information in the scene as a
disparity map. The depth can be recovered from the cameraagnostic disparity map along with the intrinsics.
Motivated by the success of convolutional neural networks, learning-based stereo methods are proposed and have
shown impressive results on challenge regions. Most early
works focused on regularizing the 4D cost volume using 3D
convolution (Chang and Chen 2018; Guo et al. 2019). To
regress the disparity map, the regularized cost volume is upsampled to the original resolution, followed by a soft argmin
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3333

