The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

No Prejudice! Fair Federated Graph Neural Networks for Personalized
Recommendation
Nimesh Agrawal1 * , Anuj Kumar Sirohi2 * , Sandeep Kumar1,2 , Jayadeva1,2
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
nimeshagrawal84@gmail.com, aiz218324@iitd.ac.in, ksandeep@ee.iitd.ac.in, jayadeva@ee.iitd.ac.in
2

Abstract
Ensuring fairness in Recommendation Systems (RSs) across
demographic groups is critical due to the increased integration of RSs in applications such as personalized healthcare, finance, and e-commerce. Graph-based RSs play a crucial role
in capturing intricate higher-order interactions among entities. However, integrating these graph models into the Federated Learning (FL) paradigm with fairness constraints poses
formidable challenges as this requires access to the entire interaction graph and sensitive user information (such as gender, age, etc.) at the central server. This paper addresses the
pervasive issue of inherent bias within RSs for different demographic groups without compromising the privacy of sensitive user attributes in FL environment with the graph-based
model. To address the group bias, we propose F2 PGNN (Fair
Federated Personalized Graph Neural Network), a novel
framework that leverages the power of Personalized Graph
Neural Network (GNN) coupled with fairness considerations.
Additionally, we use differential privacy techniques to fortify privacy protection. Experimental evaluation on three publicly available datasets showcases the efficacy of F2 PGNN
in mitigating group unfairness by 47% ∼ 99% compared to
the state-of-the-art while preserving privacy and maintaining
the utility. The results validate the significance of our framework in achieving equitable and personalized recommendations using GNN within the FL landscape. Source code is at:
https://github.com/nimeshagrawal/F2PGNN-AAAI24

1

Figure 1: Disparity (group unfairness) in RMSE over two
user attributes for F2 PGNN when fairness budget, β = 0:
(Left) Gender (Right) Activity

to the server for aggregation. In recent years, FL has been
successfully used in various fields, including optical object detection, mobile edge computing, voice assistants for
smartphones, and Google keyboard query suggestion (Aledhari et al. 2020). These applications, however, face many
difficulties, including communication effectiveness, statistical and system heterogeneity, privacy, personalization, fairness etc. (Kairouz et al. 2021). The elimination of demographic bias based on sensitive attributes of clients such as
gender, race, age etc., in Federated Recommendation Systems (FRSs) is the main theme of this paper.
Many prior works (Islam et al. 2019; Yao and Huang
2017; Li et al. 2021a) mitigate unfairness in conventional
RSs, which call for exchanging private attributes with the
server and compromise privacy in federated settings. Contrary to this, training locally to achieve fairness in FRS without exposing user demographic information becomes exceptionally challenging. The backbone for existing FRS methods is Matrix Factorization (MF) (Chai et al. 2020), in which
the client updates user and item embeddings locally. In MF,
only explicit user-item interactions are catered for updating
embeddings; the implicit intricate interaction in the form of
a bipartite graph does not play any role. To further utilize
this graph structure in RSs data, the recent developments of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) paved the way to build a
GNN-based recommendation system (Wu et al. 2022b). Owing to its efficiency and inductive learning capability, GNNs
for RSs are found superior compared to other approaches
which are limited to transductive settings and cannot incorporate user attributes. GNNs can naturally encode implicit
collaborative interactions along with explicit structure en-

Introduction

Online recommendation systems (RSs) are used in various
platforms in the modern market, such as e-commerce, elearning, music and movie recommendation to targeted individuals/audiences (Sarwar et al. 2000). Traditional RSs collect user data on a centralized server, which entails serious
privacy and security issues. Machine learning (ML) models
can now be locally trained thanks to edge devices’ growing storage and processing capabilities. Due to this, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged, allowing clients to communicate updates with the server without actually sending
any data (McMahan et al. 2017). The server then suggests a
global model, which is shared with every client. Clients train
locally using their data and transmit the updated model back
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10775

