The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PPIDSG: A Privacy-Preserving Image Distribution Sharing Scheme with GAN in
Federated Learning
Yuting Ma1 , Yuanzhi Yao2 * , Xiaohua Xu1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Hefei University of Technology
ytma@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yaoyz@hfut.edu.cn, xiaohuaxu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

rameters and differential privacy (Abadi et al. 2016; Liao
et al. 2023) can prevent privacy leakage by introducing random noise. Gradient perturbation (Sun et al. 2021) aims to
perturb data representation to guarantee privacy. However,
the aforementioned methods of protecting sensitive data in
FL significantly increase computational overhead or sacrifice efficiency to safeguard sensitive data. Another possible
way is to encrypt training data (Chuman, Sirichotedumrong,
and Kiya 2019; Huang et al. 2020) without greatly affecting model accuracy. These solutions mentioned above all depend on sharing classifier parameters to fulfill the model aggregation against image reconstruction attacks in federated
learning. However, in addition to image reconstruction attacks, clients are vulnerable to membership inference attacks
and label inference attacks. These defenses ignore inference
attacks (Shokri et al. 2017; Geng et al. 2022) in federated
learning and cannot provide adequate security.
To further show the problem of privacy-preserving methods in FL, we first begin with a theoretical analysis of label
inference attacks and then apply these defenses to perform
attacks on a variety of datasets. Because FL mitigates overfitting after model aggregation, we next propose an upgraded
membership inference attack that integrates two shadow
models instead of a single model considering the server attacker can access model parameters as well as structures. We
also experimentally investigate the feasibility of image reconstruction attacks in FL after protection by defense methods. Extensive experiments and theoretical studies reveal
valuable observations into the relationship between privacy
leakage and trained classification model parameter sharing.
Motivated by these observations, we design PPIDSG, a
scheme that can defend against privacy leakage while maintaining model utility. Specifically, 1) How to realize privacy
protection while simultaneously resisting attacks? We leverage a block scrambling-based encryption algorithm to transform the original image domain into the target domain while
training the classifier locally; 2) How to enable federated
learning without uploading the classifier parameters? We
utilize a GAN to capture the target image distribution and
upload the generator parameters to share it; 3) How to maintain classification accuracy? We add an additional classification loss to our generator and introduce an independently
trained autoencoder to extract interesting features. To summarize, this paper makes the following contributions:

Federated learning (FL) has attracted growing attention since
it allows for privacy-preserving collaborative training on decentralized clients without explicitly uploading sensitive data
to the central server. However, recent works have revealed
that it still has the risk of exposing private data to adversaries. In this paper, we conduct reconstruction attacks and
enhance inference attacks on various datasets to better understand that sharing trained classification model parameters
to a central server is the main problem of privacy leakage in
FL. To tackle this problem, a privacy-preserving image distribution sharing scheme with GAN (PPIDSG) is proposed,
which consists of a block scrambling-based encryption algorithm, an image distribution sharing method, and local classification training. Specifically, our method can capture the
distribution of a target image domain which is transformed
by the block encryption algorithm, and upload generator parameters to avoid classifier sharing with negligible influence
on model performance. Furthermore, we apply a feature extractor to motivate model utility and train it separately from
the classifier. The extensive experimental results and security
analyses demonstrate the superiority of our proposed scheme
compared to other state-of-the-art defense methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/ytingma/PPIDSG.

Introduction
Federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017), which enables
clients to train their data locally and upload only model parameters to the server for model aggregation, undoubtedly
plays a significant role in autonomous driving (Xie et al.
2022), health care (Guo et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Jiang,
Wang, and Dou 2022), and other industries in recent years.
However, recent researches (Geng et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2022;
Yu et al. 2023; Zhu, Yao, and Blaschko 2023) demonstrate
that adversaries can utilize the parameter information uploaded by clients to carry out attacks, resulting in serious
privacy leakage problems.
Several strategies have been proposed to enhance security in the face of privacy threats, such as homomorphic
encryption (Phong et al. 2018; Jin et al. 2023) can use an
encryption algorithm that satisfies the homomorphic operation property of ciphertext to encrypt shared model pa* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14272

