The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Simple Weak Coresets for Non-decomposable Classification Measures
Jayesh Malaviya1 , Anirban Dasgupta1 , Rachit Chhaya2
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar
2
DA-IICT, Gandhinagar
malaviya_jayesh@iitgn.ac.in, anirbandg@iitgn.ac.in, rachit_chhaya@daiict.ac.in

Abstract
While coresets have been growing in terms of their application, barring few exceptions, they have mostly been limited
to unsupervised settings. We consider supervised classification problems, and non-decomposable evaluation measures
in such settings. We show that stratified uniform sampling
based coresets have excellent empirical performance that are
backed by theoretical guarantees too. We focus on the F1
score and Matthews Correlation Coefficient, two widely used
non-decomposable objective functions that are nontrivial to
optimize for, and show that uniform coresets attain a lower
bound for coreset size, and have good empirical performance,
comparable with “smarter” coreset construction strategies.

Introduction
In typical classification tasks, multiple objective functions are
often at stake— one is the (surrogate) classification objective
being optimized, and the other is the real measure of performance. This “real measure” is non-differentiable and, more
importantly, often a non-decomposable function over the set
of input points, i.e., it cannot be written as a sum over the
input points. Popular examples include F1 score, Matthews
Correlation Coefficient (MCC), area under the curve (AUCROC) measures, and various variants of combinations of
precision and recall measures e.g. H-mean, G-mean etc. In
spite of being non-differentiable and non-decomposable, such
classification measures are attractive since they help portray
the tradeoffs between precision and recall, help enable the
handling of mild to severe label imbalance, etc.
Such non-additive measures are generally optimized empirically by choosing a surrogate decomposable measure,
then optimizing the decision boundary threshold using grid
search. In recent years, a host of algorithms have been developed for optimizing the non-decomposable measures directly (Joachims 2005; Nan et al. 2012; Narasimhan, Kar,
and Jain 2015; Eban et al. 2017). However, the main drawback remains that the algorithms developed are often not very
efficient in practice and, thereby, remain harder to scale over
large datasets.
For decomposable loss functions, such as for regression
or matrix factorization, one way in which this complexity of

training has been circumvented is by constructing coresets—
summaries of the dataset that enable an optimizer to optimize
over the coreset only and give both a theoretically guaranteed as well as empirically satisfying performance for the
full data. The major tool for coreset creation remains importance sampling, and that relies crucially on the decomposability of the loss function in order to deduce the importance
weights. Indeed, in traditional classification coreset literature,
researchers have explored various coreset building mechanisms for logistic loss (Munteanu et al. 2018), SVM (Tukan
et al. 2021), etc. However, again the main catch is their evaluation and bounds focus on the decomposable surrogates such
as the logistic loss function, hinge loss function, etc. (Mai,
Musco, and Rao 2021). For non-decomposable performance
measures e.g. F1 score, MCC score, AUC etc. there does not
exist any such coreset creation mechanisms.
Our paper is the first step along this direction. In this
work, we show that for F1-score and MCC, applying stratified
uniform sampling is enough to obtain a (weak) coreset that
preserves the value of these measures up to a small additive
error for an interesting set of queries that contains the optimal.
We also show a lower bound for strong coresets for the F1
and the MCC scores, implying that we cannot do much better
than uniform sampling. We provide experimental evidence
of our results on real datasets and for various classifiers and
sampling techniques. Even though we formally prove our
bounds and theory for F1-score and MCC, it applies to most
contingency table-based measures.
Following are our main contributions:
1. We provide lower bounds against construction of strong
coresets for both MCC and F1 score measures.
2. We show that sampling uniformly from each class in a
stratified manner gives a weak coreset for the F1 score
and a weak coreset with a small additive error for MCC.
Here weak signifies that our coreset works for a set of
a large number of ’important’ classifiers, including the
optimal.
3. We provide empirical results for a number of different
classifiers and real data sets comparing uniform sampling
with other well-known sophisticated coreset construction
strategies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sections 2 and
3 give the necessary background and related work. Section

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14289

