The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

T-N ET: Weakly Supervised Graph Learning for Combatting Human Trafficking
Pratheeksha Nair1,2 , Javin Liu2 , Catalina Vajiac3 , Andreas Olligschlaeger4 , Duen Horng Chau5 ,
Mirela Cazzolato6 , Cara Jones7 , Christos Faloutsos3 , Reihaneh Rabbany1,2
1
McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
i3 LLC
5
Georgia Institute of Technology
6
University of Sao Paulo
7
Marinus Analytics
pratheeksha.nair@mail.mcgill.ca
2

Abstract

provide easy-to-use and low-risk platforms for the traffickers, allowing them to remain anonymous and operate on a
wide geographical range. Thus, monitoring these online escort markets is the key to combating human trafficking.
Generally, law enforcement officers scour through thousands of these online ads manually looking for suspicious
activity (e.g, keywords indicative of underage activity). They
then collect evidences and look for other connected ads and
phone numbers which is a tedious and time-consuming process. Thus, finding clues becomes a needle-in-the-haystack
problem making manual investigation very difficult.
To address this issue, text clustering and ranking based approaches have been proposed (Kulshrestha 2021; Lee et al.
2021) which not only make it easier to analyze the ads
but also facilitate their interactive visualizations (Nair et al.
2022; Vajiac et al. 2022). These approaches are based on
one critical insight on HT detection that traffickers tend to
almost entirely control the ad content for their victims. Consequently, ads posted by the same trafficker for multiple victims tend to be very similar (U.N 2021; Project 2014). However, these websites also contain ads posted by independent,
at-will sex workers and separating the two is non-trivial as
they look more-or-less the same. Moreover, there exist other
types of behaviour, or modus operandi (M.Os) as we call it,
such as massage parlors and spam – ads with false contact
information.
The exact motivation for spam is not clear but one hypothesis is that sometimes well-intentioned parties inject
fake ads into websites to discourage buyers from purchasing
sexual services. Another hypothesis is that traffickers may
pump fake ads into these websites to throw off investigators
and stay under the radar. Spam adds noise to the data affecting both manual investigation as well as machine learning approaches. Automating the identification of these activities is also challenging as labels are hard to acquire. Current
methods (Lee et al. 2021; Kulshrestha 2021) are helpful in
finding clustered activities but they do not characterize or
provide insights on the different type of M.Os.
Previous works on HT detection (Alvari, Shakarian, and
Snyder 2017; Dubrawski et al. 2015; Tong et al. 2017) were
based on binary classification of ads into HT vs non-HT.
These are limited in that 1) they study ads individually

Human trafficking (HT) for forced sexual exploitation, often described as modern-day slavery, is a pervasive problem
that affects millions of people worldwide. Perpetrators of this
crime post advertisements (ads) on behalf of their victims on
adult service websites (ASW). These websites typically contain hundreds of thousands of ads including those posted by
independent escorts, massage parlor agencies and spammers
(fake ads). Detecting suspicious activity in these ads is difficult and developing data-driven methods is challenging due
to the hard-to-label, complex and sensitive nature of the data.
In this paper, we propose T-N ET, which unlike previous solutions, formulates this problem as weakly supervised classification. Since it takes several months to years to investigate
a case and obtain a single definitive label, we design domainspecific signals or indicators that provide weak labels. T-N ET
also looks into connections between ads and models the problem as a graph learning task instead of classifying ads independently. We show that T-N ET outperforms all baselines on
a real-world dataset of ads by 7% average weighted F1 score.
Given that this data contains personally identifiable information, we also present a realistic data generator and provide the
first publicly available dataset in this domain which may be
leveraged by the wider research community.

Introduction
Human Trafficking (HT), defined as the recruitment, transportation and control of persons, typically through sexual
exploitation and forced labour (Canada 2023), is a problem
that affects over 6.3 million people worldwide in a year (Organization 2022). In majority of the cases, advertisements
(ads) are posted by traffickers on behalf of their victims
on adult service websites (ASW) (Thorn 2015; Crotty and
Bouché 2018) and an average pimp has control over 4 to 6
victims; many of whom report of having “no input into the
wording used in the advertisements” (Thorn 2015). For example, in a convicted case in British Columbia in 2014 (R.
v. Moazami), the trafficker solicited to illegally push 9 underage girls and 2 women into the trafficking industry advertising them through various escort websites. These websites
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22276

