The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Beyond Attention: Breaking the Limits of Transformer Context Length with
Recurrent Memory
Aydar Bulatov1 , Yuri Kuratov2,1 , Yermek Kapushev2 , Mikhail Burtsev3
1

Neural Networks and Deep Learning Lab, MIPT, Dolgoprudny, Russia
2
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
3
London Institute for Mathematical Sciences, London, UK
{bulatov.as, yurii.kuratov}@phystech.edu, mb@lims.ac.uk
Contributions 1. We expand application of RMT to
encoder-only and decoder-only pre-trained language models. Proposed segment wise curriculum learning allows to
fine-tune majority of pre-trained transformer based models
for processing potentially unlimited sequences.
2. To benchmark generalization capabilities of RMT we
propose a set of novel memory acquisition and retention
tasks scalable to extremely long sequences of million tokens.
3. We demonstrate the unparalleled ability of RMT to generalize memory operations, successfully detecting and storing information about facts for up to two million tokens. To
the best of our knowledge, this establishes a record for the
longest sequence task processed by any existing deep neural
network. Furthermore, we identify no technical limitations
that prevent further scaling.
4. We compare computational complexity of RMT vs.
other transformer models and demonstrate the significant advantage of RMT due to its linear scaling of inference operations and constant memory.
The code is available on GitHub1 . The paper version with
supplementary materials is available on arXiv2 .

Abstract
A major limitation for the broader scope of problems solvable by transformers is the quadratic scaling of computational
complexity with input size. In this study, we investigate the
recurrent memory augmentation of pre-trained transformer
models to extend input context length while linearly scaling
compute. Our approach demonstrates the capability to store
information in memory for sequences of up to an unprecedented two million tokens while maintaining high retrieval
accuracy. Experiments with language modeling tasks show
perplexity improvement as the number of processed input
segments increases. These results underscore the effectiveness of our method, which has significant potential to enhance
long-term dependency handling in natural language understanding and generation tasks, as well as enable large-scale
context processing for memory-intensive applications.

Introduction
Transformer-based models show their effectiveness across
multiple domains and tasks. The self-attention allows to
combine information from all sequence elements into
context-aware representations. However, global and local information has to be stored mostly in the same element-wise
representations. Moreover, the length of an input sequence
is limited by quadratic computational complexity of selfattention.
In this work, we propose and study a memory-augmented
segment-level recurrent Transformer (Recurrent Memory
Transformer or RMT). Memory allows to store and process
local and global information as well as to pass information
between segments of the long sequence with the help of
recurrence. We implement a memory mechanism with no
changes to Transformer model by adding special memory
tokens to the input or output sequence. Then Transformer
is trained to control both memory operations and sequence
representations processing.
In this study we show that by using simple token-based
memory mechanism introduced in (Bulatov, Kuratov, and
Burtsev 2022) can be combined with pretrained transformer
models like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and GPT-2 (Radford
et al. 2019) with full attention and full precision operations.

Related Work
Our work revolves around the concept of memory in neural
architectures. Memory has been a recurrent theme in neural network research, dating back to early works (McCulloch and Pitts 1943; Stephen 1956) and significantly advancing in the 1990s with the introduction of the Backpropagation Through Time learning algorithm (Werbos
1990) and Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) neural architecture (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). Contemporary memory-augmented neural networks (MANNs) typically utilize some form of recurrent external memory separate from the model’s parameters. Neural Turing Machines
(NTMs) (Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014) and Memory
Networks (Weston, Chopra, and Bordes 2015) are equipped
with storage for vector representations accessible through an
attention mechanism. Memory Networks (Weston, Chopra,
and Bordes 2015; Sukhbaatar et al. 2015) were designed to
enable reasoning through sequential attention over memory
content.
1

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

17700

https://github.com/booydar/t5-experiments/tree/aaai24
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11062

