The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LLMEval: A Preliminary Study on How to Evaluate Large Language Models
Yue Zhang1 * , Ming Zhang1 * , Haipeng Yuan1 , Shichun Liu1 , Yongyao Shi3
Tao Gui2 , Qi Zhang1† , Xuanjing Huang1
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Institute of Modern Languages and Linguistics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China
yuezhang.fdu@gmail.com, mingzhang23@m.fudan.edu.cn, {fdyhp49,liusc2020}@gmail.com, yyshi.23@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
{tgui,qz,xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Public Annotator†

Crowd-sourcing†

Automatic

Recently, the evaluation of Large Language Models has
emerged as a popular area of research. The three crucial
questions for LLM evaluation are “what, where, and how
to evaluate”. However, the existing research mainly focuses
on the first two questions, which are basically what tasks to
give the LLM during testing and what kind of knowledge
it should deal with. As for the third question, which is
about what standards to use, the types of evaluators, how to
score, and how to rank, there hasn’t been much discussion.
In this paper, we analyze evaluation methods by comparing
various criteria with both manual and automatic evaluation,
utilizing onsite, crowd-sourcing, public annotators and GPT4, with different scoring methods and ranking systems. We
propose a new dataset, LLMEval and conduct evaluations on
20 LLMs. A total of 2,186 individuals participated, leading
to the generation of 243,337 manual annotations and 57,511
automatic evaluation results. We perform comparisons and
analyses of different settings and conduct 10 conclusions
that can provide some insights for evaluating LLM in the
future. The dataset and the results are publicly available at
https://github.com/llmeval. The version with the appendix are
publicly available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07398.

Onsite Annotator†

Abstract

Studies
HELM(Liang et al. 2022)
✓
MMLU(Hendrycks et al. 2021)
✓
C-Eval(Huang et al. 2023)
✓
AGIEval(Zhong et al. 2023)
✓
BERTScore(Zhang et al. 2020)
✓
AlpacaFarm(Dubois et al. 2023)
✓
✓
Chatbot Arena(Zheng et al. 2023) ✓
✓
Ours‡
✓ ✓
✓
✓
†
Manual evaluation with different types of annotators
‡
Despite the type of annotator, our study also addresses
the problems of what criteria to use, how to score and
how to rank.

Table 1: Evaluation Methods employed in LLM Evaluations

Introduction

automatic evaluation. HELM(Liang et al. 2022) achieves
synthesized evaluation by combining a large number of
existing datasets. MMLU(Hendrycks et al. 2021) employs
multiple-choice questions for automated evaluation. CEval(Huang et al. 2023) is a Chinese benchmark similar
to MMLU. AGIEval(Zhong et al. 2023) utilizes both cloze
tasks and multi-choice question-answering tasks simultaneously. Approaches like BERTScore(Zhang et al. 2020)
assign scores to outputs of LLMs by employing another
LLM. As the capabilities of LLMs increasingly strengthen,
apart from automated evaluations, manual evaluations are
also an option. ChatBot Arena(Zheng et al. 2023) allows
public evaluator vote between two LLMs to rate them.
AlpacaFarm(Dubois et al. 2023) leverages API LLMs to
mimic manual evaluations as a low-cost replacement.
In a recent survey (Chang et al. 2023), three questions
are raised about LLM evaluation, “what, where and how
to evaluate”. “What to evaluate” is about determining
the tasks for the LLMs to execute during evaluation.
“Where to evaluate” discusses the knowledge domains in

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have
emerged as a highly significant and extensively explored
area of research. As the capabilities of these LLMs continue to advance, it becomes increasingly crucial to assess their performance and understand their limitations.
However, traditional metrics for generative models, for
example, BLEU(Papineni et al. 2002), ROUGE(Lin 2004),
WMD(Kusner et al. 2015), MoverScore(Zhao et al. 2019),
can only capture one or a few aspects of the model’s
capabilities.
Recent research has started to explore the measurement
of LLM from a more synthesized perspective. Those studies
can be divided into two categories, automatic and manual
evaluation, based on whether scores can be automatically
calculated. There have been numerous efforts to carry out
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19615

