The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Information Design for Congestion Games
with Unknown Demand
Svenja M. Griesbach1 , Martin Hoefer2 , Max Klimm1 , Tim Koglin2
1

Department of Mathematics, TU Berlin, Germany
Institute for Computer Science, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
{griesbach, klimm}@math.tu-berlin.de, {mhoefer, koglin}@em.uni-frankfurt.de
2

travel demand d > 0 strives to route from a designated source
vertex s ∈ V (e.g., a residential living area) to a designated
destination vertex t ∈ V (e.g., a city center). Each infinitesimally small player aims to minimize their private cost by
choosing a least-cost path from s to t. A so-called Wardrop
equilibrium is reached when no player has the incentive to
deviate from their chosen path since all other paths have either the same or even higher cost. It is a well-known fact
that a Wardrop equilibrium does not necessarily minimize
the overall travel time, and there is a substantial literature
that quantifies the loss in efficiency due to selfish behavior
(Dubey 1986; Roughgarden and Tardos 2002; Roughgarden
2003; Roughgarden and Tardos 2004; Correa, Schulz, and
Moses 2004, 2008; Dumrauf and Gairing 2006).
In order to achieve better equilibria, interventions through
network design (Marcotte 1986; Bhaskar, Ligett, and Schulman 2014; Gairing, Harks, and Klimm 2017; Roughgarden
2006) or mechanism design techniques such as tolls (Harks
et al. 2015; Fleischer, Jain, and Mahdian 2004; Hoefer, Olbrich, and Skopalik 2008; Larsson and Patriksson 1999;
Hearn and Ramana 1998; Bergendorff, Hearn, and Ramana
1997) have been studied extensively. These approaches, however, usually come with a high cost, e.g., for building or
remodeling road segments or for setting up a toll collection
system for highways. This paper, therefore, focuses on improving the emerging equilibrium by information design.
A significant source of uncertainty in traffic networks concerns the demand, i.e., information about the total amount
of traffic. Total traffic is highly fluctuating, even during a
single day. From a game-theoretic perspective, this implies
that the total volume of players in the routing game is not
fixed and not common knowledge. Such games with population uncertainty were first studied in a systematic way by
Myerson (1998), who considered games with atomic players
and multiple player types. Cominetti et al. (2022) draw a connection between the Poisson games of Myerson and atomic
congestion games where players participate independently at
random. Here we adapt the approach to non-atomic games.
The total volume of players in the game is drawn from a
probability distribution known to all players. Each player
observes whether they participate in the game or not, e.g.,
whether to drive to work in the morning (i.e., has type active)
or not (type inactive, e.g., due to illness or car malfunction).
When a player is inactive and does not participate, they re-

Abstract
We study a novel approach to information design in the standard traffic model of network congestion games. It captures
the natural condition that the demand is unknown to the users
of the network. A principal (e.g., a mobility service) commits to a signaling strategy, observes the realized demand and
sends a (public) signal to agents (i.e., users of the network).
Based on the induced belief about the demand, the users then
form an equilibrium. We consider the algorithmic goal of the
principal: Compute a signaling scheme that minimizes the
expected total cost of the induced equilibrium. We concentrate
on single-commodity networks and affine cost functions, for
which we obtain the following results. First, we devise a fully
polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for the case
that the demand can only take two values. It relies on several
structural properties of the cost of the induced equilibrium as
a function of the updated belief about the distribution of demands. We show that this function is piecewise linear for any
number of demands, and monotonic for two demands. Second,
we give a complete characterization of the graph structures
for which it is optimal to fully reveal the information about
the realized demand. This signaling scheme turns out to be
optimal for all cost functions and probability distributions
over demands if and only if the graph is series-parallel. Third,
we propose an algorithm that computes the optimal signaling
scheme for any number of demands whose time complexity is polynomial in the number of supports that occur in a
Wardrop equilibrium for some demand. Finally, we conduct
a computational study that tests this algorithm on real-world
instances.

Introduction
Traffic and congestion are key factors contributing to climate
change and air pollution. On the other hand, personal and
commercial traffic are fundamental for economic development and the modern way of life. This makes sound traffic
planning and improvement an indispensable prerequisite for
urban areas around the globe. A popular and successful model
for traffic planning are non-atomic congestion games. The
road network is represented by a graph G = (V, E) where
each edge e has a cost function ce that models the time needed
to traverse the edge and depends on the total flow on that edge.
In the single-commodity setting, a continuum of players with
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9722

