The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

All but One: Surgical Concept Erasing with Model Preservation in Text-to-Image
Diffusion Models
Seunghoo Hong* , Juhun Lee* , Simon S. Woo
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University, S. Korea
hoo0681@g.skku.edu, josejhlee@g.skku.edu, swoo@g.skku.edu

Abstract

Pretrained

Text-to-Image models such as Stable Diffusion have shown
impressive image generation synthesis, thanks to the utilization of large-scale datasets. However, these datasets may contain sexually explicit, copyrighted, or undesirable content,
which allows the model to directly generate them. Given that
retraining these large models on individual concept deletion
requests is infeasible, fine-tuning algorithms have been developed to tackle concept erasing in diffusion models. While
these algorithms yield good concept erasure, they all present
one of the following issues: 1) the corrupted feature space
yields synthesis of disintegrated objects, 2) the initially synthesized content undergoes a divergence in both spatial structure and semantics in the generated images, and 3) suboptimal training updates heighten the model’s susceptibility
to utility harm. These issues severely degrade the original
utility of generative models. In this work, we present a new
approach that solves all of these challenges. We take inspiration from the concept of classifier guidance and propose a surgical update on the classifier guidance term while constraining the drift of the unconditional score term. Furthermore,
our algorithm empowers the user to select an alternative to
the erasing concept, allowing for more controllability. Our
experimental results show that our algorithm not only erases
the target concept effectively but also preserves the model’s
generation capability.

Style

Object

Concept

a) Concept Erasing

Fine-tuned

Van Gogh Style
Dry brushing

=

Desktop
Laptop

=

Image of pig
Image of cow

=

b) Concept Purification
DDIM INVERSION

Introduction
Recently, large-scale text-to-image models have demonstrated a remarkable ability to synthesize photo-realistic images (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh et al.
2021). This rise in generative models was elicited by the
joint advancement of algorithms, computing resources, and
the curation of large-scale datasets such as LAION (Schuhmann et al. 2022). While these datasets offer rich features for
training large-scale models (Brown et al. 2020; Dosovitskiy
et al. 2020), many of them are curated with web-scraped material and, thus, lack the necessary preprocessing regarding
safety, privacy, and bias (Mehrabi et al. 2021). Moreover,
such datasets often contain sexually explicit content, copyrighted material, and personal images. Training generative
models using these sensitive data means that the model’s

Figure 1: Our method erases a concept while sustaining the
model’s utility. Additionally, our model can “purify” images
through DDIM inversion, which is currently hardly reproducible through other methods.

generative capability is derived from these same images, and
the model is capable of generating such inappropriate content partially or entirely.
To make things worse, due to the stochastic property and

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21143

