The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhanced Fine-Grained Motion Diffusion for Text-Driven Human Motion
Synthesis
Dong Wei1 , Xiaoning Sun1 , Huaijiang Sun1 * , Shengxiang Hu1 , Bin Li2 , Weiqing Li1 , Jianfeng Lu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Tianjin AiForward Science and Technology Co., Ltd., Tianjin, China
{csdwei, sunxiaoning, sunhuaijiang, hushengxiang, li weiqing, lujf}@njust.edu.cn, libin@aiforward.com

A person does swimming motion while standing.

Abstract
The emergence of text-driven motion synthesis technique
provides animators with great potential to create efficiently.
However, in most cases, textual expressions only contain general and qualitative motion descriptions, while lack fine depiction and sufficient intensity, leading to the synthesized motions that either (a) semantically compliant but uncontrollable
over specific pose details, or (b) even deviates from the provided descriptions, bringing animators with undesired cases.
In this paper, we propose DiffKFC, a conditional diffusion
model for text-driven motion synthesis with KeyFrames Collaborated, enabling realistic generation with collaborative and
efficient dual-level control: coarse guidance at semantic level,
with only few keyframes for direct and fine-grained depiction down to body posture level. Unlike existing inferenceediting diffusion models that incorporate conditions without
training, our conditional diffusion model is explicitly trained
and can fully exploit correlations among texts, keyframes and
the diffused target frames. To preserve the control capability of discrete and sparse keyframes, we customize dilated
mask attention modules where only partial valid tokens participate in local-to-global attention, indicated by the dilated
keyframe mask. Additionally, we develop a simple yet effective smoothness prior, which steers the generated frames towards seamless keyframe transitions at inference. Extensive
experiments show that our model not only achieves state-ofthe-art performance in terms of semantic fidelity, but more
importantly, is able to satisfy animator requirements through
fine-grained guidance without tedious labor.

Current text-driven motion diffusion model

Involving keyframes at inference

Ours

Figure 1: Top: Current text-driven motion diffusion models,
such as MDM (Tevet et al. 2023), may miss the short standing word and generate a total swimming motion. Middle: Directly imposing keyframe (golden) conditions at inference
fails to solve this problem, and results in heavy discontinuities. Bottom: Our collaborative dual-level control paradigm
produces the realistic motion towards animator expectations.
Recent surge of denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPMs) has significantly improved the generative quality
of text-to-motion synthesis (Zhang et al. 2022; Tevet et al.
2023; Dabral et al. 2023). However, the specific posture details are still uncontrollable for animators. Reaching animator expectations requires more than just semantic fidelity; it
involves realizing various intricate details that are difficult to
be explicitly expressed using free-form texts, which, unfortunately, are totally ignored in current models. Our research
shows that this problem can be effectively solved by incorporating only a few keyframes as direct and fine-grained
control, along with coarse textual guidance to establish a
collaborative dual-level control paradigm. Additionally, this
control paradigm allows for two incidental abilities that are
also lacking in current text-to-motion models: correction of
semantic misunderstanding and toleration on spelling errors.
Enabling fine-grained control over text-driven motion diffusion models is not trivial. Seemingly, an alternative way
is to perform local editing at inference stage, which can
be roughly divided into two strategies: inpainting (Lug-

Introduction
Applying human motion synthesis to film or game industries
(Van Welbergen et al. 2010) could greatly reduce the dependence on costly motion capture system. How to efficiently
generate high-quality motions towards animator needs becomes a key issue. In terms of efficiency, the technique of
text-driven motion synthesis has achieved initial success,
where textual descriptions are used to provide an overall,
coarse guidance at semantic level, under frameworks of
GANs (Ahn et al. 2018) or VAEs (Guo et al. 2022; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022), but the synthesized motions
often suffer from unrealistic behaviors, such as foot sliding.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5876

