The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TF-CLIP: Learning Text-Free CLIP for Video-Based Person Re-identification
Chenyang Yu1 , Xuehu Liu2 , Yingquan Wang1 , Pingping Zhang3 * , Huchuan Lu1,3,4
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
3
School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
4
Ningbo Institute, Dalian University of Technology, Ningbo, China
yuchenyang@mail.dlut.edu.cn;liuxuehu@whut.edu.cn;yingquan w95@mail.dlut.edu.cn;{zhpp, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Large-scale language-image pre-trained models (e.g., CLIP)
have shown superior performances on many cross-modal retrieval tasks. However, the problem of transferring the knowledge learned from such models to video-based person reidentification (ReID) has barely been explored. In addition,
there is a lack of decent text descriptions in current ReID
benchmarks. To address these issues, in this work, we propose
a novel one-stage text-free CLIP-based learning framework
named TF-CLIP for video-based person ReID. More specifically, we extract the identity-specific sequence feature as the
CLIP-Memory to replace the text feature. Meanwhile, we design a Sequence-Specific Prompt (SSP) module to update the
CLIP-Memory online. To capture temporal information, we
further propose a Temporal Memory Diffusion (TMD) module, which consists of two key components: Temporal Memory Construction (TMC) and Memory Diffusion (MD). Technically, TMC allows the frame-level memories in a sequence
to communicate with each other, and to extract temporal information based on the relations within the sequence. MD
further diffuses the temporal memories to each token in the
original features to obtain more robust sequence features. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method
shows much better results than other state-of-the-art methods
on MARS, LS-VID and iLIDS-VID.

A video of a

Text
Encoder
Visual
Encoder

Learnable

Wellaligned

(a) The CLIP embedding space
Training
Set

Visual
Encoder

Text

 X 1  X Num person. Encoder

Text
Encoder
CLIP-Memory

…

Stage 1

Visual
Encoder

Align

A video
of a
person.

Stage 2
(b) Two-stage CLIP-ReID training
Training
Examples
Align
Visual
Encoder

(c) Our one-stage TF-CLIP training

Figure 1: Comparison of CLIP-ReID and our one-stage textfree learning framework. (a) An illustration of the CLIP joint
embedding space. (b) Two-stage CLIP-ReID training. (c)
Our one-stage TF-CLIP training.

Recently, the outstanding Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has shown a great
capability of learning robust representations. Different from
traditional unimodal frameworks, CLIP is trained on largescale language-image pairs in a contrastive way. Apparently,
CLIP-based methods have achieved great success in video
domains (Ju et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2021; Wang, Xing, and Liu
2021; Ni et al. 2022). However, the transfer and adaptation
to video-based person ReID is not well explored. A major
challenge is that compared with other video tasks, video sequences in video-based person ReID only have integer index
labels, and there is no text labels. A straightforward solution
is to annotate the natural language descriptions for existing
video-based person ReID datasets. Unfortunately, it is both
time consuming and labour cost to annotate suitable text descriptions for fine-grained person videos.
To overcome these issues, inspired by recent prompt engineering researches, CLIP-ReID (Li, Sun, and Li 2022) is
proposed for image-based person ReID. As shown in Fig. 1
(b), CLIP-ReID fixes the text encoder and visual encoder
in the first training stage, and optimizes a set of learnable
text tokens to generate the label-specific text features. Then,
it uses the learned text features to update the visual encoder in the second training stage. Although CLIP-ReID has
achieved excellent performances, it does not consider the

Introduction
Video-based person Re-Identification (ReID) (Liu et al.
2021c; Xu et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2015) aims at re-identifying
specific persons from videos across non-overlapping cameras. Over the past decade, various approaches have been
proposed to solve this challenging task, including CNNbased methods (Zhang et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2019; Subramaniam, Nambiar, and Mittal 2019; Chen et al. 2018; Dai et al.
2019) and Transformer-based methods (Liu et al. 2021b;
Zhang et al. 2021a; Wu et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2023). However, existing works employ a unimodal framework, where
the video encoders are trained to predict a fixed set of predefined labels. Considering that the ReID task is in an open-set
setting, such closed-set training setting limits the robustness
of these methods.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6764

