The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Layer Collaboration in the Forward-Forward Algorithm
Guy Lorberbom1 * , Itai Gat2 * , Yossi Adi3 , Alexander Schwing4 , Tamir Hazan1
1
Technion
FAIR Team, Meta AI Research
3
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2

Abstract
Backpropagation, which uses the chain rule, is the de-facto
standard algorithm for optimizing neural networks nowadays.
Recently, as an alternative, the Forward-Forward algorithm
had been proposed. The algorithm optimizes neural nets layerby-layer, without propagating gradients throughout the network. Although such an approach has several advantages over
back-propagation and shows promising results, the fact that
each layer is being trained independently limits the optimization process. Specifically, it prevents the network’s layers from
collaborating to learn complex and rich features. In this work,
we study layer collaboration in the forward-forward algorithm.
We show that the current version of the forward-forward algorithm is suboptimal when considering information flow in the
network, resulting in a lack of collaboration between layers
of the network. We propose an improved version that supports layer collaboration to better utilize the network structure,
while not requiring any additional assumptions or computations. We empirically demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed
version when considering both information flow and objective
metrics. Additionally, we provide a theoretical motivation for
the proposed method, inspired by functional entropy theory.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been the backbone of
many state-of-the-art machine learning systems in recent
years. Their ability to learn complex representations from
large amounts of data has led to breakthroughs in many fields
such as image and speech recognition, natural language processing, and game playing (Lavin and Gray 2016; Bojarski
et al. 2016; Luss et al. 2019; Gat, Schwartz, and Schwing
2021; Morais et al. 2022; Rosenberg et al. 2021; Ophir et al.
2020; Clauset and Post 2019; Fedorov et al. 2020). One of
the key reasons for the success of deep neural networks is
the backpropagation algorithm, which is currently the most
widely used training paradigm.
Backpropagation (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986)
utilizes the chain-rule to compute gradients for minimization
of a loss function, which measures the discrepancy between
the predicted output and the desired result. The algorithm
starts with a forward pass through the network to compute the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14141

predicted output and then calculates the error between the prediction and the desired output. The error is then propagated
back through the network using the chain rule of calculus,
computing the gradient of the loss function with respect to
the network’s parameters, i.e., the weights and biases. These
gradients are then used to update the parameters via gradient
descent variants, reducing the loss function and subsequently
the error. This process is repeated until the network reaches
a satisfactory error on the training data. The chain rule presented challenges for a variety of model architectures. In very
deep networks, gradients of the loss function with respect to
the weights can become small, resulting in vanishing gradients. Moreover, the gradient can also become too large. Both
vanishing and exploding gradients lead to poor performance.
Recently, Hinton (2022) introduced the forward-forward
algorithm, which offers an alternative to the backpropagation training process by replacing the forward and backward
passes with two forward passes. The data that is forwarded
in the network is the sample itself (e.g., image, text) concatenated with a one-hot encoded vector that represents a
label. The first forward pass is done with positive data (i.e.,
data concatenated with the true label) and the second forward
pass is done with negative data (i.e., data concatenated with a
false label). The network then classifies whether a sample is
concatenated with its true label. An important aspect of the
forward-forward algorithm: the aforementioned optimization
process is performed separately for each layer.
In this work, we examine the dynamics of individual layers
during the forward-forward algorithm based training process.
Our findings indicate that, during training, the layers exhibit
a lack of effective intercommunication, which results in a
suboptimal level of collaboration. Based on this observation,
we propose a simple modification to the forward-forward
algorithm to enhance inter-layer communication during training. Our empirical results demonstrate that incorporating this
modification leads to a significant improvement in performance.
To further investigate this phenomenon, we analyze
forward-forward-based models through the lens of functional
entropy. We demonstrate that the forward-forward method implicitly maximizes the entropy within the network. Throughout this work, we analyze the dynamics of the entropy when
training a model using the forward-forward algorithm.
Our contributions: We begin by analyzing the layer collab-

