The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAME: Sample Reconstruction against Model Extraction Attacks
Yi Xie1 * , Jie Zhang2 , Shiqian Zhao2 , Tianwei Zhang2 , Xiaofeng Chen1†
1

Xidian University, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
xieyi@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {jie zhang, shiqian.zhao, tianwei.zhang}@ntu.edu.sg, xfchen@xidian.edu.cn
2

Classifier

Abstract

Sample Reconstruction

Density

While deep learning models have shown significant performance across various domains, their deployment needs extensive resources and advanced computing infrastructure. As
a solution, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) has
emerged, lowering the barriers for users to release or productize their deep learning models. However, previous studies have highlighted potential privacy and security concerns
associated with MLaaS, and one primary threat is model extraction attacks. To address this, there are many defense solutions but they suffer from unrealistic assumptions and generalization issues, making them less practical for reliable protection. Driven by these limitations, we introduce a novel
defense mechanism, SAME, based on the concept of sample
reconstruction. This strategy imposes minimal prerequisites
on the defender’s capabilities, eliminating the need for auxiliary Out-of-Distribution (OOD) datasets, user query history,
white-box model access, and additional intervention during
model training. It is compatible with existing active defense
methods. Our extensive experiments corroborate the superior
efficacy of SAME over state-of-the-art solutions. Our code is
available at https://github.com/xythink/SAME.

Density

Normal
Malicious

Log(Confidence)

Log(Reconstruction Loss)

Figure 1: Distributions of anomaly scores for the classifierbased detection (left) and our sample reconstruction-based
detection (right). The x-axis is in the logarithmic scale due
to its long-tailed distribution. We utilize MNIST as normal
query samples and employ KnockoffNets (with EMNISTdigits as the proxy set) to generate the malicious query samples. All samples undergo consistent preprocessing.

of model-extraction attacks is to locally recreate the target
model at a minimal cost, leveraging limited queries to the
openly deployed victim model. To achieve this goal, earlier works have proposed different strategies to generate the
query samples for efficient model stealing, including surrogate sample (Pal et al. 2020; Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz
2019), adversarial sample (Yu et al. 2020; Papernot et al.
2017), and synthetic sample (Barbalau et al. 2020; Truong
et al. 2021; Kariyappa, Prakash, and Qureshi 2021). These
attacks exhibit high effectiveness and efficiency across different threat environments, deep learning models, and tasks.
Many efforts have been made to mitigate model extraction attacks (Jiang et al. 2023). Among them, malicious sample detection is the mainstream strategy. The model owner
aims to distinguish the query samples used for model extraction from normal ones, and then reject them or return
obfuscated responses. However, the advance and diversity
of attack approaches pose several challenges in designing an
effective detector. First, some defenses, such as Prada (Juuti
et al. 2019), require keeping a record of each user’s queries
for anomaly detection. They become vulnerable when the
adversary launches a distributed attack (Yao et al. 2023).
Second, some approaches build machine learning classifiers to differentiate malicious and normal samples based on
their features or predicted confidence scores (Kariyappa and

Introduction
Deep learning models have demonstrated superior performance in various domains. Yet, they often demand significant resources, including vast training data, advanced computational capabilities, and rigorous parameter optimization
efforts. These requirements make deep learning models invaluable and expensive for adoption. Consequently, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) has garnered significant interest, offering users a simplified and cost-efficient
avenue to deploy sophisticated models.
Despite these advantages, a significant body of research
has also revealed the privacy and security risks of models deployed with MLaaS (Tramèr et al. 2016; Shokri et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023; Lou et al. 2021). Among
these, model-extraction attacks (Yu et al. 2020; Pal et al.
2020; Zhao et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022)
represent a prominent threat, posing a direct risk to the intellectual property rights of the model owner. The objective
* This work was done at NTU as a visiting student.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19974

