The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Paced Unified Representation Learning for Hierarchical Multi-Label
Classification
Zixuan Yuan1 , Hao Liu1 , Haoyi Zhou2 , Denghui Zhang3 , Xiao Zhang4 , Hao Wang5 , Hui Xiong1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Beihang University,
3
Stevens Institute of Technology,
4
Shandong Univerisity,
5
Alibaba Group
{zixuanyuan, xionghui}@hkust-gz.edu.cn, liu@ust.hk, haoyi@buaa.edu.cn, dzhang42@stevens.edu,
xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn, cashenry@126.com
Abstract

are hierarchically constructed as a taxonomy graph or a
tree (Giunchiglia and Lukasiewicz 2020; Yu et al. 2022).
Recent decades have witnessed numerous attempts (CesaBianchi et al. 2004; Cerri et al. 2016; Wehrmann, Cerri, and
Barros 2018; Giunchiglia and Lukasiewicz 2020) to develop
plausible HMLC solutions that are trained to respect the hierarchy or taxonomic constraint, i.e., any instance associated with a given set of subclasses must belong to their related superclasses (Wehrmann, Cerri, and Barros 2018). To
achieve this, most approaches require a repeated graph-level
exploration over class hierarchy at both training and inference times, thus making models hard to scale to large label
spaces (Patel et al. 2021). Furthermore, in many real-world
scenarios, the number of instances per class is highly sparse
at the bottom levels (Giunchiglia and Lukasiewicz 2020),
which inevitably causes the learning obstacles for these approaches to deliver satisfactory inference.
In this paper, we innovate new directions to tackle the
aforementioned problems, in terms of the encoding of classclass and class-instance relations, and the prioritizing of
instances’ learning orders. We detail our research insights
from the following two perspectives.
First, most studies are solely dependent on instance features to perform HMLC task, while treating the class-class
connectivity as hard criterion to ensure the constraint satisfaction. On the contrary, we find it worthwhile to exploit
rich semantic correlations between class nodes and data instance. For example, in Figure 1a, the instance “Ballet”
should be classified by the class “Dance” other than “Collecting” at the second level because of their strong semantic affiliation. Such affiliation can also be revealed from
their closeness in the latent space. Undoubtedly, associating “Dance” with “Ballet” can boost the success of nextlevel prediction by considering both class-class connectivity (e.g., “Dance”-“Choreography”) and class-instance relationship (e.g., “Ballet”-“Dance”). To implement the above
idea, one promising solution is to incorporate graph representation learning to project the class-class relations into latent space, and then integrate with instance features for final
prediction. However, the direct adoption of popular graph
learning schemes (e.g., GCN (Kipf and Welling 2016)) is
not well qualified to (i) learn a set of expressive class rep-

Hierarchical Multi-Label Classification (HMLC) is a wellestablished problem that aims at assigning data instances to
multiple classes stored in a hierarchical structure. Despite its
importance, existing approaches often face two key limitations: (i) They employ dense networks to solely explore the
class hierarchy as hard criterion for maintaining taxonomic
consistency among predicted classes, yet without leveraging
rich semantic relationships between instances and classes; (ii)
They struggle to generalize in settings with deep class levels, since the mini-batches uniformly sampled from different
levels ignore the varying complexities of data and result in
a non-smooth model adaptation to sparse data. To mitigate
these issues, we present a Self-Paced Unified Representation
(SPUR) learning framework, which focuses on the interplay
between instance and classes to flexibly organize the training process of HMLC algorithms. Our framework consists of
two lightweight encoders designed to capture the semantics
of input features and the topological information of the class
hierarchy. These encoders generate unified embeddings of instances and class hierarchy, which enable SPUR to exploit semantic dependencies between them and produce predictions
in line with taxonomic constraints. Furthermore, we introduce a dynamic hardness measurement strategy that considers both class hierarchy and instance features to estimate the
learning difficulty of each instance. This strategy is achieved
by incorporating the propagation loss obtained at each hierarchical level, allowing for a more comprehensive assessment of learning complexity. Extensive experiments on several empirical benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and
efficiency of SPUR compared to state-of-the-art methods, especially in scenarios with missing features.

Introduction
Hierarchical Multi-Label Classification (HMLC) problems
have been extensively studied in a wide range of domains,
e.g., functional genomics (Wehrmann, Cerri, and Barros
2018), image annotation (Dimitrovski et al. 2011), and text
classification (Lewis et al. 2004). As illustrated in Figure 1a,
the general focus of HMLC task is to assign objects with
correct labels from an enormous label space, where classes
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16623

