The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Distributed Manifold Hashing for Image Set Classification and Retrieval
Xiaobo Shen1 , Peizhuo Song1 , Yun-Hao Yuan2 , Yuhui Zheng3,4 *
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Yangzhou University
3
Qinghai Normal University
4
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
njust.shenxiaobo@gmail.com, 18362995367@139.com, yyhzbh@163.com, zhengyh@vip.126.com
V2

Abstract

V5

V6

V4

...

V1

Conventional image set methods typically learn from image
sets stored in one location. However, in real-world applications, image sets are often distributed or collected across different positions. Learning from such distributed image sets
presents a challenge that has not been studied thus far. Moreover, efficiency is seldom addressed in large-scale image set
applications. To fulfill these gaps, this paper proposes Distributed Manifold Hashing (DMH), which models distributed
image sets as a connected graph. DMH employs Riemannian
manifold to effectively represent each image set and further
suggests learning hash code for each image set to achieve efficient computation and storage. DMH is formally formulated
as a distributed learning problem with local consistency constraint on global variables among neighbor nodes, and can be
optimized in parallel. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that DMH achieves highly competitive accuracies in a distributed setting and provides faster
classification and retrieval than state-of-the-arts.

V7

V3

V8

V10

...
V9

Figure 1: Illustration of an example distributed image set
dataset, where a subset of image sets is stored in each node.

1998; Kim, Kittler, and Cipolla 2007), affine/convex hull
methods (Cevikalp and Triggs 2010; Hu, Mian, and Owens
2012), kernel methods (Ham and Lee 2008; Wang et al.
2012), Riemannian metric learning methods (Huang et al.
2015a,b). Based on these well-studied Riemannian metrics
(Arsigny et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2015a), a variety of image set methods (Huang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2023; Wang, Wu, and Kittler 2022) have been proposed to obtain nonlinear feature. Despite the success of existing image set methods, they often perform in a continuous
space, which in practice imposes severe challenges in terms
of storage and computation cost, particular for large-scale
datasets. Therefore, it is imperative to learn compact image
set representation, which remains relatively underexplored
and presents substantial challenges.
In real-world scenarios, e.g., surveillance applications,
image sets are often distributed or stored in various locations
(Yang et al. 2019; Verbraeken et al. 2021). The distributed
image sets can be viewed as an undirected network, as depicted in Figure 1. In this network, each node stores a subset
of image sets, and each edge denotes the neighborhood relationship between two nodes. A straightforward approach
to handle such distributed image sets is to first gather them
in one node and then apply conventional image set methods. However, data gathering inevitably results in prohibitive
communication and storage costs. Therefore, it is imperative to develop distributed image set methods, which has not
been studied thus before.
Hashing (Wang et al. 2018a; Gao et al. 2023; Kou et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2021) has gained increasing interests in
many large-scale applications. Its primary goal is to encode

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of multimedia technology, there
has been a surge in the amount of images captured from
cameras or surveillance videos. An image set is considered as a collection of images belonging to a specific object and offers more rich variability information about object
than a single-shot image. Image set tasks, e.g., classification, retrieval have attracted increasing attention (Wang et al.
2018b), and showed its great potential (Wang et al. 2012;
Huang et al. 2015b). These tasks utilize rich data available
in image sets to improve the performance of various applications, from object recognition to information retrieval.
Image set modeling is a critical component in image set
tasks, and various effective methods have been proposed,
such as affine or convex hull (Cevikalp and Triggs 2010),
linear subspace (Kim, Kittler, and Cipolla 2007), covariance
matrix (Wang et al. 2012). Given an image set representation, it becomes crucial to measure distance between two
sets. Existing image set methods can be broadly divided into
four categories based on representation and measurement:
linear subspace methods (Yamaguchi, Fukui, and Maeda
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4802

