The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Modeling Adaptive Inter-Task Feature Interactions via Sentiment-Aware
Contrastive Learning for Joint Aspect-Sentiment Prediction
†

Wei Chen1 , Yuxuan Liu2* , Zhao Zhang3 , Fuzhen Zhuang1,4 , Jiang Zhong2
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{chenwei23,zhuangfuzhen}@buaa.edu.cn, {liuyuxuan,zhongjiang}@cqu.edu.cn, zhangzhao2021@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Sentences

Aspect prediction (AP) and sentiment prediction (SP) are
representative applications in fine-grained sentiment analysis. They can be considered as sequential tasks, where
AP identifies mentioned aspects in a sentence, and SP infers fine-grained sentiments for these aspects. Recent models perform the aspect-sentiment prediction in a joint manner, but heavily rely on the feature interactions of aspect
and sentiment. One drawback is that they ignore correlation
strength varies between aspect features and sentiment features across different sentences, and employ a fixed feature
interaction strategy may limit effective knowledge transfer
across tasks. To tackle this issue, in this paper, we propose
an Adaptive Inter-task Feature Interaction framework, AIFI,
for joint aspect-sentiment prediction. Specifically, we introduce a novel contrast-based alignment method based on contrastive learning. Our approach considers the AP-specific and
SP-specific representations of a given sentence as a positive
pair, while representation of another random sentence serves
as a negative example. Moreover, we propose an inter-task
feature correlation network to predict the contrast strength,
which is determined by the temperature coefficient in the InfoNCE loss. This dynamic correlation adjustment enhances
model’s ability to capture proper feature interactions more
efficiently. Experimental results on three datasets validate the
effectiveness of our approach.

Sub-Task
AP

The Windows 7 seems
Windows 7
to be quite expensive.
seltzer
(2) I asked for seltzer
with lime
with lime, no ice.
(1)

The food is delicious –
from the specials to
(3) regular menu-fare,
the dishes are never a
disappointment.

SP

Correlation
Strength

Negative
Neutral

food

Positive

specials
regular
menu-fare
dishes

Positive
Positive
Positive

Figure 1: Examples of ALSA tasks from real-world datasets.
The aspects are framed by rectangles and opinion words are
marked in blue. And the greater the number of five-pointed
stars, the stronger the correlation.

directly from the context without predefined opinion terms.
In this study, we concentrate on jointly predicting aspects
and sentiments from the sentences, as shown in Figure 1.
The initial approach to ALSA is employing a two-stage
approach (Fan et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2019). Firstly, it accomplishes the AP and is subsequently followed by another
model to perform SP. Nevertheless, this strategy could potentially disrupt the interaction between aspects and sentiments and may also lead to error propagation problems.
Recent efforts aim to achieve the two sub-tasks cohesively, predicting aspects and corresponding sentiments
jointly or interactively through a unified methodology (Lin
and Yang 2020; Lv et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b; Zhang
et al. 2022c; Liang et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2023). These studies
have revealed a strong mutual implication between these two
sub-tasks, and have devised some interaction strategies to facilitate the knowledge exchange. One of the extensively researched and proven effective techniques in this field is regularization alignment approach (Chen et al. 2022b,a). It involves two key steps: first, encoding aspect- and sentimentspecific features for each task, and second, aligning these
task-specific features (i.e., maximize the similarity) within
the latent space. In this way, the aspect words simultaneously encode both aspect- and sentiment-related features,

Introduction
In comparison to traditional sentiment analysis tasks, aspectlevel sentiment analysis (ALSA) requires a more in-depth
examination of the context and the extraction of more detailed information (Liu 2012; Zhang et al. 2022b). ALSA
involves several sub-tasks: aspect prediction (AP), opinion
prediction (OP), and aspect term sentiment prediction (SP).
AP identifies aspects or features in the context (Lv et al.
2023), OP extracts expressions conveying sentiment about
the aspects (Liu et al. 2023), and SP determines the sentiments expressed towards each aspect (Liang et al. 2023).
Sometimes, opinion terms are not explicitly provided, requiring the ALSA system to predict aspects and sentiments
* This work is done during his internship at vivo.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17781

