The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discretization-Induced Dirichlet Posterior for Robust Uncertainty Quantification
on Regression
Xuanlong Yu1,2 , Gianni Franchi2 , Jindong Gu3 , Emanuel Aldea1
1

2

SATIE, Paris-Saclay University
U2IS, ENSTA Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
3
University of Oxford

Abstract

et al. 2015; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Lakshminarayanan,
Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Kendall and Gal 2017; Wen,
Tran, and Ba 2020; Franchi et al. 2022) have been proposed
to capture these two types of uncertainty. However, these
methods require extensive modifications to the underlying
model structure or more computational cost. Furthermore,
since DNNs are often designed as task-oriented, obtaining
uncertainty estimates by changing the structure of DNNs
might reduce main task performance.
As one of the most effective methods, Auxiliary Uncertainty Estimators (AuxUE) (Corbière et al. 2019; Yu,
Franchi, and Aldea 2021; Jain et al. 2021; Corbière et al.
2021; Besnier et al. 2021; Upadhyay et al. 2022; Shen et al.
2023) aim to obtain uncertainty estimates without affecting the main task performance. AuxUEs are DNNs that
rely on the main task models used for estimating the uncertainty of the main task prediction. They are trained using the input, output, or intermediate features of the pretrained main task model. In practice, the model inputs can
be distribution-shifted from the training set, such as samples
disturbed by noise (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019), or even
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) data. The pre-trained main task
models mainly exhibit aleatoric uncertainty in the outputs
given the In-Distribution (ID) inputs. Meanwhile, higher
epistemic uncertainty is expected to be raised when OOD
data is fed. A robust AuxUE is required in this case to provide robust aleatoric uncertainty estimates when facing InDistribution (ID) inputs and epistemic uncertainty estimates
when encountering OOD inputs. This can help to make
effective decisions under anomalies and uncertainty (Guo
et al. 2022), such as in autonomous driving (Arnez et al.
2020). To achieve robustness, disentangling the two types
of uncertainty becomes a prerequisite, aiding in improved
epistemic uncertainty estimation and a more robust aleatoric
uncertainty estimation solution.
For vision regression tasks, basic AuxUE addresses only
aleatoric uncertainty estimation (Yu, Franchi, and Aldea
2021). Recent works (Upadhyay et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2022)
aim to improve the generalization ability of the basic AuxUEs. In DEUP (Jain et al. 2021), the authors propose to add a
density estimator based on normalizing flows (Rezende and
Mohamed 2015) in the AuxUE, yet challenging to apply on
pixel-wise vision tasks. In the current context, both the robustness analysis and modeling of epistemic uncertainty are

Uncertainty quantification is critical for deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) in real-world applications. An Auxiliary Uncertainty Estimator (AuxUE) is one of the most effective means to estimate the uncertainty of the main task
prediction without modifying the main task model. To be
considered robust, an AuxUE must be capable of maintaining its performance and triggering higher uncertainties while
encountering Out-of-Distribution (OOD) inputs, i.e., to provide robust aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. However, for
vision regression tasks, current AuxUE designs are mainly
adopted for aleatoric uncertainty estimates, and AuxUE robustness has not been explored. In this work, we propose
a generalized AuxUE scheme for more robust uncertainty
quantification on regression tasks. Concretely, to achieve a
more robust aleatoric uncertainty estimation, different distribution assumptions are considered for heteroscedastic noise,
and Laplace distribution is finally chosen to approximate
the prediction error. For epistemic uncertainty, we propose a
novel solution named Discretization-Induced Dirichlet pOsterior (DIDO), which models the Dirichlet posterior on the
discretized prediction error. Extensive experiments on age estimation, monocular depth estimation, and super-resolution
tasks show that our proposed method can provide robust uncertainty estimates in the face of noisy inputs and that it can
be scalable to both image-level and pixel-wise tasks.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty quantification in deep learning has gained significant attention in recent years (Blundell et al. 2015;
Kendall and Gal 2017; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and
Blundell 2017; Abdar et al. 2021). Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) frequently provide overconfident predictions and
lack uncertainty estimates, especially for regression models
outputting single point estimates, affecting the interpretability and credibility of the prediction results.
There are two types of uncertainty in DNNs: unavoidable
aleatoric uncertainty caused by data noise, and reducible
epistemic or knowledge uncertainty due to insufficient training data (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021; Kendall and
Gal 2017; Malinin and Gales 2018). Disentangling and estimating them can better guide the decision-making based
on DNN predictions. Many seminal methods (Blundell
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6835

