The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Negative Pre-aware for Noisy Cross-Modal Matching
Xu Zhang1† , Hao Li1† , Mang Ye2 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{xuzhang.xoe, 18th.leolee, mangye16}@gmail.com

Captions

Co-training

Rectify
𝐷𝑁
Noise set
Existing solution
Training
Pre-aware

Captions
Select

𝑤

R@1

Cross-modal noise-robust learning is a challenging task since
noisy correspondence is hard to recognize and rectify. Due
to the cumulative and unavoidable negative impact of unresolved noise, existing methods cannot maintain a stable performance when the noise increases. In this paper, we present a
novel Negative Pre-aware Cross-modal (NPC) matching solution for large visual-language model fine-tuning on noisy
downstream tasks. It is featured in two aspects: (1) For noise
recognition and resistance, previous methods usually directly
filter out a noise subset, we propose to estimate the negative
impact of each sample. It does not need additional correction mechanisms that may predict unreliable correction results, leading to self-reinforcing error. We assign a confidence
weight to each sample according to its negative impact in
the training process. This adaptively adjusts the contribution
of each sample to avoid noisy accumulation. (2) For maintaining stable performance with increasing noise, we utilize
the memorization effect of DNNs by maintaining a memory
bank. Specifically, we apply GMM to select high-confident
clean samples as the memory entry, where the memory entry
is used to estimate the negative impact of each sample. Since
clean samples are easier distinguished by GMM with increasing noise, the memory bank can still maintain high quality at
a high noise ratio. Compared to the correction mechanism focusing on noise samples, memory bank-based estimation is
more robust, which makes the model performance stable on
noisy datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method significantly improves matching accuracy and performance stability at increasing noise ratio. Our approach also
surpasses the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. The
code is available at: https://github.com/ZhangXu0963/NPC.

𝐷𝐶

Retrieval

Clean set

𝑀𝐵
Memory bank NPC (Ours)
(a)

R@1

Abstract

Retrieval

1

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Existing solution vs NPC. (b) The variance of
R@1 of noise-robust learning and CLIP-based methods. A
lower variance indicates that the method is more robust in
the face of increasing noise.

These works have achieved promising performance by
training on large-scale datasets. However, it is expensive
to obtain a well-annotated dataset in practical scenarios.
The manual-annotated datasets, e.g., MSCOCO (Lin et al.
2014), Flickr30K (Young et al. 2014), and Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al. 2018), incorporate a significant number
of inaccurate descriptions, namely noisy correspondence.
Unlike noisy label in classification tasks, the noise here is
mismatched cross-modal pairs which is more difficult to
deal with, since involves both visual and textual modeling. Therefore, a series of approaches (Huang et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2023; Han et al. 2023) following the noiserectify paradigm have been developed to counter the negative impact of the noise. These methods typically filter out
the noise subset from the original training set, and address
the noise issue through label correction. Nevertheless, the
inherent flaw of the noise-rectify paradigm cannot maintain
the performance stability in the existence of severe noise.
As shown in Fig. 1(b), we compare the performance of different methods using R@1 metric, including noise-rectify
based approaches (Huang et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023), the
CLIP-based approaches (Radford et al. 2021; Chun 2023)
and our approach. We employ variance (var) of R@1 at
different noise ratio to illustrate the “performance stabil-

Introduction
Cross-modal matching aims to align different modalities
(e.g., text and image) within a common space and pair them
based on similarity score. With the explosion of multimedia data, cross-modal matching has gained traction in both
industry and academia, e.g., text-to-image generation (Zhou
et al. 2022; Ding et al. 2021), image captioning (Li et al.
2019b; Stefanini et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023), and visual
question answering (Lin et al. 2022; Lei et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author.
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.

7341

