The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

KD-Club: An Efficient Exact Algorithm with New Coloring-Based Upper Bound
for the Maximum k-Defective Clique Problem
Mingming Jin* , Jiongzhi Zheng* , Kun He†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

relaxation of the k-defective clique is between the clique and
the k-plex, i.e., a clique must be a k-defective clique, and a
k-defective clique must be a (k + 1)-plex. The clique problem has been well studied in the past decades. Recently, the
k-plex also attracted much attention (Chang, Xu, and Strash
2022; Wang et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2023), yet there are relatively few studies on the
k-defective clique (Chen et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022; Dai
et al. 2023) which also has wide applications, such as social network analysis (Jain and Seshadhri 2020), transportation (Sherali and Smith 2006), clustering (Yin et al. 2017),
and protein interaction prediction (Yu et al. 2006). In this
paper, we address the Maximum k-Defective Clique Problem (MDCP), which aims to find the maximum k-defective
clique in a given graph, and we focus on its exact solving.
Since the k-defective clique is a relaxation of the clique,
the difficulty of solving MDCP is as hard as finding the
maximum clique in a given graph, which is a famous NPhard problem. Some exact algorithms for MDCP have been
proposed, coming up with a series of efficient techniques,
such as reduction rules and upper bounds. For representative
methods, there are the generic RDS algorithm (Verfaillie,
Lemaı̂tre, and Schiex 1996; Gschwind, Irnich, and Podlinski 2018) and a branch-and-price framework (Gschwind
et al. 2021) for various relaxed clique problems, including
MDCP, and the most recent MADEC+ (Chen et al. 2021)
and KDBB (Gao et al. 2022) algorithms that proposed some
new upper bounds and reduction rules. As the state-of-theart exact algorithms for MDCP, both MADEC+ and KDBB
follow the branch-and-bound (BnB) framework (McCreesh,
Prosser, and Trimble 2017; Jiang et al. 2018).
A BnB algorithm for MDCP usually maintains a growing
partial solution S (i.e., a k-defective clique) and the corresponding candidate vertex set C. Reduction or pruning is
performed if the upper bound of the size of the maximum
k-defective clique containing S is no larger than the size
of the maximum k-defective clique found so far (i.e., lower
bound). Therefore, the quality of the upper bound greatly influences the algorithm’s efficiency. MADEC+ proposes an
upper bound based on graph coloring. Note that an independent set in a graph is a vertex set where any two distinct vertices are non-adjacent. MADEC+ uses graph coloring methods to assign each vertex color with the constraint
that adjacent vertices cannot be in the same color, so as to

Abstract
The Maximum k-Defective Clique Problem (MDCP) aims
to find a maximum k-defective clique in a given graph,
where a k-defective clique is a relaxation clique missing
at most k edges. MDCP is NP-hard and finds many realworld applications in analyzing dense but not necessarily
complete subgraphs. Exact algorithms for MDCP mainly follow the Branch-and-bound (BnB) framework, whose performance heavily depends on the quality of the upper bound on
the cardinality of a maximum k-defective clique. The stateof-the-art BnB MDCP algorithms calculate the upper bound
quickly but conservatively as they ignore many possible missing edges. In this paper, we propose a novel CoLoring-based
Upper Bound (CLUB) that uses graph coloring techniques to
detect independent sets so as to detect missing edges ignored
by the previous methods. We then develop a new BnB algorithm for MDCP, called KD-Club, using CLUB in both the
preprocessing stage for graph reduction and the BnB searching process for branch pruning. Extensive experiments show
that KD-Club significantly outperforms state-of-the-art BnB
MDCP algorithms on the number of solved instances within
the cut-off time, having much smaller search tree and shorter
solving time on various benchmarks.

Introduction
Investigating structured subgraphs is a practical task with
numerous demands in many optimization problems and realworld applications. The clique model is a famous and wellstudied structured subgraph where any two distinct vertices
are restricted to be adjacent. However, in many real-world
applications, such as biological networks (Yu et al. 2006),
social networks (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011),
and community detection (Conte et al. 2018; Yang et al.
2022), dense subgraphs need not be complete but allow
missing a few connections. Thus, many relaxations clique
structures, such as the quasi-clique (Brunato, Hoos, and Battiti 2007), k-plex (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011),
k-defective clique (Yu et al. 2006), etc., have been proposed.
Among these relaxations, the k-defective clique allows
missing at most k edges over a clique, and the k-plex allows
missing at most k − 1 edges for each vertex. Obviously, the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20735

