The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reverse Multi-Choice Dialogue Commonsense Inference with Graph-of-Thought
Li Zheng1 , Hao Fei2 , Fei Li1 * , Bobo Li1 , Lizi Liao3 , Donghong Ji1 , Chong Teng1
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
National University of Singapore
3
Singapore Management University
zhengli@whu.edu.cn, haofei37@nus.edu.sg, lifei csnlp@whu.edu.cn, boboli@whu.edu.cn,
lzliao@smu.edu.sg, dhji@whu.edu.cn, tengchong@whu.edu.cn
Why didn’t you come to the cinema last night?
I waited for you for a long time.

Abstract
With the proliferation of dialogic data across the Internet,
the Dialogue Commonsense Multi-choice Question Answering (DC-MCQ) task has emerged as a response to the challenge of comprehending user queries and intentions. Although prevailing methodologies exhibit effectiveness in addressing single-choice questions, they encounter difficulties
in handling multi-choice queries due to the heightened intricacy and informational density. In this paper, inspired by the
human cognitive process of progressively excluding options,
we propose a three-step Reverse Exclusion Graph-of-Thought
(ReX-GoT) framework, including Option Exclusion, Error
Analysis, and Combine Information. Specifically, our ReXGoT mimics human reasoning by gradually excluding irrelevant options and learning the reasons for option errors to
choose the optimal path of the GoT and ultimately infer the
correct answer. By progressively integrating intricate clues,
our method effectively reduces the difficulty of multi-choice
reasoning and provides a novel solution for DC-MCQ. Extensive experiments on the CICERO and CICEROv2 datasets
validate the significant improvement of our approach on DCMCQ task. On zero-shot setting, our model outperform the
best baseline by 17.67% in F1 score for the multi-choice
task. Most strikingly, our GPT3.5-based ReX-GoT framework achieves a remarkable 39.44% increase in F1 score.

Alice

Bob

I'm sorry, but I had something more important to
do yesterday evening, so I wasn't able to come.
But why not tell me?
I did. I called you many times, but you had
your mobile phone power off.
Oh, I didn't bring it with me because I left it
recharging at home.

I'm really sorry to have missed the film.
Target: I'm sorry, but I had something more important to
do yesterday evening, so I wasn't able to come.

What is or could be the cause of target ?
The speaker didn't go to the listener in the film
because he got a call from his office and needed
to get some work done.
B： The listener's family member died.
C： The listener went to feed turtles.
not need a long time
D： The listener enjoyed watching television more.
not an important thing
E： The listener had to send someone to the hospital.
A：

Figure 1: An example from the CICEROv2 dataset about dialogue commonsense reasoning.

Introduction
Commonsense knowledge is crucial for human cognition
and natural human-computer interactions, which encompasses our intuitive understanding of the world and ability to
reason. With the growth of social networks, commonsense
inference (Arabshahi et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Kuo and
Chen 2023) in dialogue has garnered noteworthy attention
as a burgeoning research domain in natural language processing (NLP). However, accurately understanding and interpreting speaker questions and intentions in dialogue poses
an essential challenge. To this end, the Dialogue Commonsense Multi-choice Question Answering task (Ghosal et al.
2022b) was proposed, defined as to select logical answers
from preset options based on dialogue’s history and context.
DC-MCQ task involve both single-choice and multichoice questions. While existing works (Wang et al. 2018;

Zhang et al. 2020; Ju et al. 2021) achieved promising results
in single-choice task, the performance in multi-choice task
remains unsatisfactory. Due to the intricate nature of multichoice task, the challenges of Option Saturation and Clue
Labyrinth burden current models. The option saturation
challenge refers to the uncertainty of the number of options,
which increases the difficulty of inference for the model. On
a parallel note, the clue labyrinth challenge involves analyzing the combination of different complex clues, which
includes intricate hidden information woven throughout the
question stem and answer options, and different clues of predicted information, just like the complexity of the labyrinth.
It demands enhanced information integration comprehension by the model. Hence, multi-choice questions are significantly more challenging than single-choice ones. As indicated by Ghosal et al. (2022a), the community recognizes
that attaining high accuracy with such questions is a potentially insurmountable task.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19688

