The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FeatWalk: Enhancing Few-Shot Classification through Local View Leveraging
Dalong Chen1,2 , Jianjia Zhang3 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2 , Ruixuan Wang1,2,4 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE, Guangzhou, China
3
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
chendlong3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangjj225@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, wangruix5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Few-shot learning is a challenging task due to the limited
availability of training samples. Recent few-shot learning
studies with meta-learning and simple transfer learning methods have achieved promising performance. However, the feature extractor pre-trained with the upstream dataset may neglect the extraction of certain features which could be crucial
for downstream tasks. In this study, inspired by the process
of human learning in few-shot tasks, where humans not only
observe the whole image (‘global view’) but also attend to
various local image regions (‘local view’) for a comprehensive understanding of detailed features, we propose a simple yet effective few-shot learning method called FeatWalk
which can utilize the complementary nature of global and local views, therefore providing an intuitive and effective solution to the problem of insufficient local information extraction from the pre-trained feature extractor. Our method can
be easily and flexibly combined with various existing methods, further enhancing few-shot learning performance. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets consistently
demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of our method.
The source code is available at https://github.com/exceefind/
FeatWalk.

Figure 1: Two exemplar visual attentions by a representative
few-shot learning method Good-Embed (Tian et al. 2020)
(Middle) and our method (Right). Our method can more effectively learn to leverage local features of image patches
(shown in dashed boxes) that are not well captured in the
image-level features, thereby obtaining more comprehensive
features.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated
excellent performance in various computer vision tasks. Its
success largely relies on adequate training samples to optimize a huge number of model parameters. However, sometimes training samples may be scarce due to certain difficulty or cost in data collection. In such cases, deep neural networks often suffer from severe overfitting to limited
training samples, leading to noticeable performance degradation. Therefore, how to achieve the superior model performance with very limited training samples, known as fewshot learning (FSL) (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2006; Lake
et al. 2011; Vinyals et al. 2016), has attracted strong research
interest.
Recently, various approaches have been proposed to
tackle the challenges of FSL. One is based on metalearning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Sung et al. 2018;
Vinyals et al. 2016), which simulates numerous similar FSL
scenarios using an upstream dataset and trains the model to

enhance its capability in learning from limited training data,
and then fine-tune the model with a small amount of data
to quickly adapt to the target downstream task (Jamal and
Qi 2019; Lee et al. 2019; Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman
2018). Built on meta-learning of a feature extractor, metricbased methods can be employed to estimate the similarity
between training and test samples for FSL (Allen et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2019a; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017). Metalearning approach often requires extensive episodic training to accomplish FSL tasks. From this perspective, transfer
learning approach is more desirable as simple pre-trained
models can be directly applied to a wider range of target
tasks. For instance, recent studies (Tian et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2022) have improved transfer learning by introducing selfdistillation and enhanced embeddings, achieving significant
performance gains in FSL.
In meta-learning or transfer learning, directly applying
models to few-shot learning tasks may encounter some potential challenges. In learning upstream tasks, models may
prioritize certain discriminative features and underestimate
the importance of some other features. However, these ne-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1019

