The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TimesURL: Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning for Universal Time Series
Representation Learning
Jiexi Liu1,2 , Songcan Chen1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{liujiexi, s.chen}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

(Denton et al. 2017; Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2012; Wang
and Gupta 2015; Pagliardini, Gupta, and Jaggi 2017; Chen
et al. 2020), its application to time series requires tailored
solutions. This is due to the high dimensionality and special
temporal characteristics of time series data, as well as the
need for diverse semantics information for different tasks.
To this end, we review the four main parts involved in
SSCL including 1) augmentation method for positive samples designing, 2) backbone encoder, 3) (hard) negative
pairs, and 4) SSCL loss for pretext tasks, and try to invest
efforts to explore more effective solutions for time series feature capturing in universal representation learning. Since the
backbone encoder has been extensively studied in time series encoder learning (Liu and Chen 2019; Zhou et al. 2021;
Wu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022a), our attention is primarily
directed toward the remaining three components.
First, most augmentation methods, when applied to time
series data, may introduce inappropriate inductive biases as
they directly borrow ideas from the fields of CV and NLP.
For example, Flipping (Luo et al. 2023) flip the sign of the
original time series that assumes the time series has symmetry between up and down directions. Nevertheless, this
may ruin the temporal variations, such as trend, and peak
valley, that are inherently present in the original time series. While permutation (Um et al. 2017) rearranges the order of segments in a time series to generate a new series,
under the assumption that the underlying semantic information remains unchanged by the different orders. However,
this disturbs the temporal dependencies, thereby impacting
the relationships between past and future timestamp information. Consequently, since valuable semantic information
of time series primarily resides in temporal variations and
dependencies, such augmentations are unable to capture the
appropriate features necessary for effective universal representation learning.
Then, the importance of hard negative sample selection
has been proved in other domains (Kalantidis et al. 2020;
Robinson et al. 2020), but is still underexplored in time
series literature. Due to the local smoothness and Markov
property, most time series segments can be considered as
easy negative samples. These segments tend to exhibit semantic dissimilarity with the anchor and contribute only minor gradients, thus failing to provide useful discriminative
information (Cai et al. 2020). Although the inclusion of a

Learning universal time series representations applicable to
various types of downstream tasks is challenging but valuable
in real applications. Recently, researchers have attempted to
leverage the success of self-supervised contrastive learning
(SSCL) in Computer Vision(CV) and Natural Language Processing(NLP) to tackle time series representation. Nevertheless, due to the special temporal characteristics, relying solely
on empirical guidance from other domains may be ineffective for time series and difficult to adapt to multiple downstream tasks. To this end, we review three parts involved in
SSCL including 1) designing augmentation methods for positive pairs, 2) constructing (hard) negative pairs, and 3) designing SSCL loss. For 1) and 2), we find that unsuitable
positive and negative pair construction may introduce inappropriate inductive biases, which neither preserve temporal
properties nor provide sufficient discriminative features. For
3), just exploring segment- or instance-level semantics information is not enough for learning universal representation. To
remedy the above issues, we propose a novel self-supervised
framework named TimesURL. Specifically, we first introduce
a frequency-temporal-based augmentation to keep the temporal property unchanged. And then, we construct double Universums as a special kind of hard negative to guide better contrastive learning. Additionally, we introduce time reconstruction as a joint optimization objective with contrastive learning to capture both segment-level and instance-level information. As a result, TimesURL can learn high-quality universal
representations and achieve state-of-the-art performance in 6
different downstream tasks, including short- and long-term
forecasting, imputation, classification, anomaly detection and
transfer learning.

Introduction
Time series data is ubiquitous in reality ranging from
weather and economics to transportation (Wu et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2022b; Shi et al. 2015). Learning informationrich and universal time series representations for multitype downstream tasks is a fundamental but unsolved problem. While self-supervised contrastive learning has exhibited great success in computer vision (CV), natural language
processing (NLP), and recently, other types of modalities
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13918

