The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hierarchical Multi-Marginal Optimal Transport for Network Alignment
Zhichen Zeng1 , Boxin Du2 , Si Zhang3 , Yinglong Xia3 , Zhining Liu1 , Hanghang Tong1
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Amazon
3
Meta
zhichenz@illinois.edu, boxin@amazon.com, sizhang@meta.com, yxia@meta.com, liu326@illinois.edu, htong@illinois.edu

Abstract
Finding node correspondence across networks, namely multinetwork alignment, is an essential prerequisite for joint learning on multiple networks. Despite great success in aligning
networks in pairs, the literature on multi-network alignment
is sparse due to the exponentially growing solution space
and lack of high-order discrepancy measures. To fill this gap,
we propose a hierarchical multi-marginal optimal transport
framework named H OT for multi-network alignment. To handle the large solution space, multiple networks are decomposed into smaller aligned clusters via the fused GromovWasserstein (FGW) barycenter. To depict high-order relationships across multiple networks, the FGW distance is generalized to the multi-marginal setting, based on which networks
can be aligned jointly. A fast proximal point method is further
developed with guaranteed convergence to a local optimum.
Extensive experiments and analysis show that our proposed
H OT achieves significant improvements over the state-of-theart in both effectiveness and scalability.

INTRODUCTION
In the era of big data, networks often originate from various domains. Joint learning on multiple networks has shown
promising results in various areas including high-order recommendation (Yan et al. 2022), fraud detection (Du et al.
2021) and fact checking (Liu et al. 2021). A critical steppingstone behind these tasks and many more is the multi-network
alignment problem, which aims to find node correspondence
across multiple networks.
To date, a multitude of pairwise network alignment methods have been developed based on the consistency principle (Singh, Xu, and Berger 2008; Koutra, Tong, and Lubensky 2013; Zhang and Tong 2016), node embedding (Li et al.
2019; Chu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021), and optimal transport (OT) (Maretic et al. 2019, 2022; Chen et al. 2020; Zeng
et al. 2023a) with superior performance, but this is not the
case for the multi-network setting due to two fundamental
challenges. First (discrepancy measure), most existing pairwise methods essentially optimize the pairwise discrepancy
(e.g., Frobenius norm (Zhang and Tong 2016), contrastive
loss (Chu et al. 2019), and Wasserstein distance (Maretic et al.
2020)) between one network and its aligned counterpart, but
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16660

a similar discrepancy measure for multi-network is lacking.
Second (algorithm), even equipped with a proper discrepancy
measure, an efficient algorithm is demanded to handle the significantly larger solution space of multi-network alignment,
compared with its pairwise counterpart.
Contributions. In this paper, we propose a novel method
named H OT to address the above challenges from the view
of multi-marginal optimal transport (MOT) (Pass 2015). To
jointly measure the discrepancy between multiple networks,
the fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) distance is generalized
to the multi-marginal setting, whose by-product, the optimal
coupling tensor, naturally serves as the alignment between
networks. To handle the large solution space, the problem is
decomposed into significantly smaller cluster-level and nodelevel alignment subproblems. Specifically, the cluster-level
alignment for multiple networks is obtained based on the
FGW barycenter. On top of that, the multi-marginal FGW
(MFGW) distance, together with a position-aware cost tensor
generated based on the unified random walk with restart
(RWR), is adopted for the node-level alignment. To achieve
fast solutions, we propose a proximal point method with
guaranteed convergence. Extensive experiments show that
H OT outperforms the best competitor by at least 12.0% on
plain networks in terms of high-order Hits@10, with up to
360× speedup in time complexity and 1000× reduction in
memory cost compared with the non-hierarchical solution.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first introduces the preliminaries and problem definitions, and then
formulate the optimization problem. We further present and
analyze the proposed algorithm, followed by extensive experiment results. Related work and conclusions are presented
afterwards.

PROBLEM DEFINITION
Notations
We use bold uppercase letters for matrices (e.g., A), bold
lowercase letters for vectors (e.g., s), calligraphic letters
for sets (e.g., C), bold calligraphic letters for tensors (e.g.,
C), and lowercase letters for scalars (e.g., α). The element
(i, j) of a matrix A is denoted as A(i, j), and the element
(i1 , i2 , . . . , iK ) of a tensor C is denoted as C(i1 , i2 , . . . , iK ).
The transpose of A is denoted by the superscript T (e.g., AT ).
We use Π(µ, ν) to denote the probabilistic coupling between

