The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Teaching Large Language Models to Translate with Comparison
Jiali Zeng, Fandong Meng, Yongjing Yin, Jie Zhou
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc
{lemonzeng,fandongmeng,yongjingyin,withtomzhou}@tencent.com

Abstract

few high-quality supervised instructions (Hendy et al. 2023;
Zeng et al. 2023; Jiao et al. 2023).
Instruction tuning is an efficient method for making LLMs
better aligned to the task descriptions preferred by humans
(Stiennon et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022; Chung et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2023). The only requirement is to collect taskspecific data, on which LLMs will be fine-tuned with the language modeling loss. However, optimizing for simple nexttoken prediction loss will cause models to overlook context
information, especially for low-capacity models. It is serious
for the tasks in which the specialized knowledge in context is
necessary for task completion (e.g., translation), and ignoring such knowledge on translation can lead to inadequacy
and hallucination. Therefore, there is a need to investigate
the limitations of LLMs and explore methods for improving
their performance in specialized tasks.
In this paper, we propose to Teach the language models
to learn translation wIth examples in coMparison, named
TIM, aiming to make full use of a small amount of highquality translation data. Based on the training data, we further construct two kinds of comparisons: output comparison
and preference comparison. Output comparison is used to
learn responses to different instructions for the same input.
Preference comparison is used to maximize the gap between
correct and incorrect translations. Specifically, to help identify specific areas where the model may be making errors,
we introduce an additional preference loss, which is originally used to learn reward models (Stiennon et al. 2020), as
regularization to penalize unexpected outputs.
We evaluate our proposed method on WMT22 and
FLORES-200 test sets (EN⇔DE, EN⇔ZH), and the improvement over the baselines shows the effectiveness of our
method. Our model shows better zero-shot translation performance and stability in prompt choice. Moreover, the performance of the models tuned by our TIM increases as the
model size increases, with the improvement being more pronounced in the case of smaller models. In particular, the
tuned LLaMA-2-13B (Touvron et al. 2023a) achieves top
1 on quality estimation without references in the EN⇔DE,
outperforming the dedicated models for quality estimation.

Open-sourced large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable efficacy in various tasks with instruction
tuning. However, these models can sometimes struggle with
tasks that require more specialized knowledge such as translation. One possible reason for such deficiency is that instruction tuning aims to generate fluent and coherent text that
continues from a given instruction without being constrained
by any task-specific requirements. Moreover, it can be more
challenging to tune smaller LLMs with lower-quality training data. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework using examples in comparison to teach LLMs to learn
translation. Our approach involves output comparison and
preference comparison, presenting the model with carefully
designed examples of correct and incorrect translations and
an additional preference loss for better regularization. Empirical evaluation on four language directions of WMT2022
and FLORES-200 benchmarks shows the superiority of our
proposed method over existing methods. Our findings offer a new perspective on fine-tuning LLMs for translation
tasks and provide a promising solution for generating highquality translations. Please refer to Github for more details:
https://github.com/lemon0830/TIM.

Introduction
Generative large language models, like GPT models, have
shown impressive performance in various NLP tasks (Brown
et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022), including machine translation (Hendy et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023), which opens up
new possibilities for building more effective translation systems. It is impractical to deploy such large models for the
translation task only, and using or tuning open-sourced generative language models has become an attractive research
direction. In this regard, researchers have explored strategies for example selection and instruction design through
In-Context Learning (ICL) (Lin et al. 2022; Agrawal et al.
2022). However, evaluations of open-sourced LLMs show
that they do not perform as well as strong multilingual supervised baselines in most translation directions (Zhu et al.
2023). Additionally, ICL can increase decoding latency due
to longer context. Based on these observations, researchers
suggest tuning relatively small LLMs for translation with a

Method
In brief, we tune generative language models to learn translation with output comparison and preference comparison in

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19488

