The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Tensorized Label Learning on Anchor Graph
Jing Li1 , Quanxue Gao1 * , Qianqian Wang1 , Wei Xia1
1

School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University
jinglxd@stu.xidian.edu.cn, qxgao@xidian.edu.cn, qqwang@xidian.edu.cn, xdweixia@gmail.com

Abstract

of Laplacian matrix, whose computational complexity are
O(V n2 ) and O(n3 ), respectively, where V and n are the
number of views and samples. Therefore, graph-based methods tend to fail when clustering large-scale multimedia data.
To tackle the aforementioned issues, several solutions
have been proposed, of which the anchor graph-based approach is a notable example (Liu, He, and Chang 2010; Li
et al. 2015; Kang et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021). Anchor
graph can represent the complex mechanisms of multimedia
data by modeling the relationship between n samples and
m anchors. Since the number of anchors is much smaller
than that of samples, the anchor graph-based approach can
reduce both the computational complexity and storage complexity compared to the graph-based approach. Hence, the
anchor-based approach is effective.
On the one hand, in order to get the labels of multimedia data from anchor graph, it usually has two ideas. The
first one is to perform post-processing on anchor graph to
get the final labels, which is time-consuming. Another is
to obtain clustering labels based on connected components,
but it is highly parameter dependent and difficult to ensure
K-connected components under certain parameter settings.
So, this idea is not suitable in practical applications. On the
other hand, in multimedia data clustering, leveraging complementary information across different data types is often
necessary to improve clustering performance. However, the
existing method based on anchor graph exploit the complementary information embedded in data with different types
pixel by pixel, which ignores the spatial structure information between different types of data, leading to sub-optimal
for label learning.
Based on the above arguments, we are concerned in this
paper with a novel label learning model with good interpretability for clustering. To be specific, considering that
anchor graph can reduce the computational complexity and
storage complexity compared to the full graph, we first construct anchor graph. Then, inspired by the excellent clustering interpretability of the orthogonal non-negative matrix factorization, we decompose the anchor graph of each
view into the products of two matrices with orthogonal nonnegative constraint, which in turn can directly obtain the soft
labels of clustering without any post-processing and further
reduces the computational complexity. To better explore the
complementary information of different views, inspired by

Graph-based multimedia data clustering has attracted much
attention due to the impressive clustering performance for arbitrarily shaped multimedia data. However, existing graphbased clustering methods need post-processing to get labels
for multimedia data with high computational complexity.
Moreover, it is sub-optimal for label learning due to the fact
that they exploit the complementary information embedded
in data with different types pixel by pixel. To handle these
problems, we present a novel label learning model with good
interpretability for clustering. To be specific, our model decomposes anchor graph into the products of two matrices
with orthogonal non-negative constraint to directly get soft
label without any post-processing, which remarkably reduces
the computational complexity. To well exploit the complementary information embedded in multimedia data, we introduce tensor Schatten p-norm regularization on the label tensor which is composed of soft labels of multimedia data. The
solution can be obtained by iteratively optimizing four decoupled sub-problems, which can be solved more efficiently with
good convergence. Experimental results on various datasets
demonstrate the efficiency of our model.

Introduction
Multimedia data we obtain are usually unlabeled and clustering multimedia data becomes a crucial step in its analysis. Therefore, multimedia data clustering is a hot research
direction. Multimedia data typically contains information
from diverse modalities, such as images, text and voice. By
considering data from different modalities as distinct viewpoints, we can apply multi-view clustering (MVC) techniques to uncover the latent value in multimedia data. Multimedia data clustering has attracted considerable attention in
recent years (Tao et al. 2017; Wu, Lin, and Zha 2019; Shu
et al. 2023), graph-based multimedia data clustering is one
of the representative methods (Zhou and Burges 2007; Saha
2013; Nie et al. 2016; Wang, Yang, and Liu 2019; Zhou,
Yang, and Gao 2022), which is widely used because the impressive clustering performance for arbitrarily shaped multimedia data. But the core idea behind the graph-based approach is to construct n × n graph and eigen-decomposition
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13537

