The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SAMFlow: Eliminating Any Fragmentation in Optical Flow with Segment
Anything Model
Shili Zhou, Ruian He, Weimin Tan* , Bo Yan*
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
slzhou19@fudan.edu.cn, rahe16@fudan.edu.cn, wmtan@fudan.edu.cn, byan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Optical Flow Estimation aims to find the 2D dense motion
field between two frames. Due to the limitation of model
structures and training datasets, existing methods often rely
too much on local clues and ignore the integrity of objects,
resulting in fragmented motion estimation. Through theoretical analysis, we find the pre-trained large vision models are
helpful in optical flow estimation, and we notice that the
recently famous Segment Anything Model (SAM) demonstrates a strong ability to segment complete objects, which
is suitable for solving the fragmentation problem. We thus
propose a solution to embed the frozen SAM image encoder
into FlowFormer to enhance object perception. To address
the challenge of in-depth utilizing SAM in non-segmentation
tasks like optical flow estimation, we propose an Optical
Flow Task-Specific Adaption scheme, including a Context
Fusion Module to fuse the SAM encoder with the optical
flow context encoder, and a Context Adaption Module to
adapt the SAM features for optical flow task with Learned
Task-Specific Embedding. Our proposed SAMFlow model
reaches 0.86/2.10 clean/final EPE and 3.55/12.32 EPE/F1all on Sintel and KITTI-15 training set, surpassing Flowformer by 8.5%/9.9% and 13.2%/16.3%. Furthermore, our
model achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Sintel
and KITTI-15 benchmarks, ranking #1 among all two-frame
methods on Sintel clean pass.

Figure 1: (a) Examples of fragmentation in optical flow estimation. We observe that SAM is able to segment the whole
object. Thus, we propose our SAMFlow to eliminate fragmentation. (b)Visualization of the context similarity with the
query point.

Introduction
Optical flow is a fundamental task in computer vision, which
estimates the pixel-level correspondences between frames.
As an important paradigm to exploit video temporal continuity, it has applications in many video-related downstream
tasks, such as frame interpolation (Huang et al. 2022b),
video inpainting (Gao et al. 2020) and action recognition
(Sun et al. 2018b). With the advent of advanced neural network architectures, many powerful optical flow estimation
models have been proposed (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Sun
et al. 2018a; Teed and Deng 2020; Jiang et al. 2021a; Huang
et al. 2022a).

Although leaps and bounds have been made, existing optical flow estimation methods are still limited by two factors:
1) Scarcity of well-labeled datasets. Since it is difficult
to obtain pixel-level motion annotations in the real world,
optical flow datasets are usually constructed using artificial
synthesis schemes. For example, some works (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2021) try to construct datasets from images and generate motions with simple 2D transformations.
At the same time, other works (Mayer et al. 2016; Gaidon
et al. 2016) generate datasets of virtual scenes with the 3D
rendering engine. Compared with natural scenes, these synthetic datasets have limited diversity and realism, resulting

* Corresponding author: Weimin Tan and Bo Yan. This work
is supported by NSFC (GrantNo.: U2001209 and 62372117) and
Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (21ZR1406600).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7695

