The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CoLAL: Co-learning Active Learning for Text Classification
Linh Le1 , Genghong Zhao2 , Xia Zhang3 , Guido Zuccon1 , Gianluca Demartini1
1
The University of Queensland
Neusoft Research of Intelligent Healthcare Technology, Co. Ltd.
3
Neusoft Corporation
linh.le,g.zuccon,g.demartini@uq.edu.au, zhaogenghong@neusoft.com, zhangx@neusoft.com
2

Abstract
In the machine learning field, the challenge of effectively
learning with limited data has become increasingly crucial.
Active Learning (AL) algorithms play a significant role in this
by enhancing model performance. We introduce a novel AL
algorithm, termed Co-learning (CoLAL), designed to select
the most diverse and representative samples within a training
dataset. This approach utilizes noisy labels and predictions
made by the primary model on unlabeled data. By leveraging
a probabilistic graphical model, we combine two multi-class
classifiers into a binary one. This classifier determines if both
the main and the peer models agree on a prediction. If they do,
the unlabeled sample is assumed to be easy to classify and is
thus not beneficial to increase the target model’s performance.
We prioritize data that represents the unlabeled set without
overlapping decision boundaries. The discrepancies between
these boundaries can be estimated by the probability that two
models result in the same prediction. Through theoretical analysis and experimental validation, we reveal that the integration
of noisy labels into the peer model effectively identifies target model’s potential inaccuracies. We evaluated the CoLAL
method across seven benchmark datasets: four text datasets
(AGNews, DBPedia, PubMed, SST-2) and text-based stateof-the-art (SOTA) baselines, and three image datasets (CIFAR100, MNIST, OpenML-155) and computer vision SOTA
baselines. The results show that our CoLAL method significantly outperforms existing SOTA in text-based AL, and is
competitive with SOTA image-based AL techniques.

Introduction
Active Learning (AL) is an approach to reduce the amount of
labels typically required to train models, thereby improving
training efficiency (Settles 2012; Ostapuk, Yang, and CudreMauroux 2019). The core challenge is to identify the most
beneficial instances to label at each round of the AL process.
Many AL strategies have been proposed to estimate the benefit of each instance on the learning process. The most common AL algorithm family is that of uncertainty-based algorithms, which estimate the “informativeness” of an instance
(Settles 2012). These algorithms select instances that the target model is most uncertain about (Siddhant and Lipton 2018;
Yoo and Kweon 2019; Linh et al. 2021; Ostapuk, Yang, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13337

Cudre-Mauroux 2019). Another AL family is distributionbased AL. These algorithms estimate the “representativeness”
of an instance (Sener and Savarese 2018; Gissin and ShalevShwartz 2019; Zhang and Plank 2021; Cui et al. 2022). Despite much progress made in this area, current AL methods
still struggle with instances close to the decision boundaries
by using the available labeled data. Training on limited labeled data often results in incomplete decision boundaries,
causing the model to make numerous erroneous predictions
on unlabeled data (Malach and Shalev-Shwartz 2017). This
implies that predictions for unlabeled instances made by the
target model are potentially incorrect even when the target
model predicts them with high confidence scores. This issue
happens as the learning patterns representative of unlabeled
data emerge with an insufficient probability or do not appear
at all in the labeled data distribution.
Thus, in this work we propose a method that can quantify
the decision boundaries for unlabeled training data, which are
yet unknown to the target model. These unknown decision
boundaries are created by defining a peer model, which is a
supervised model trained with noisy labels (i.e., predictions
from the target model for yet unlabeled data). The most beneficial regions identified with these decision boundaries are
calculated through a probabilistic graphical model. From this
model, two multi-class classifiers (classes from the training
data) are fused into a binary classifier indicating whether two
models have the same prediction or not. We assume that, if
the probability of having the same prediction is high, the
unlabeled instance is easy to classify and would not further
improve the performance of the target model if labelled. It
also means that, unlabeled instances representative of unlabeled training data which do not overlap with the decision
boundaries of labeled training data are preferred. We assume
that the disparity between decision boundaries can be interpreted through the probability that the two models share the
same predictions or the same decision boundaries.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1) We analyze the problem, observe it through a probability interpretation, and encapsulate it in the form of the loss function
to intuitively explain the region of interests of our AL; 2)
We present extensive experimental results aimed at assessing
the effectiveness of the proposed method. The experimental results show that our approach outperforms SOTA AL
baselines over four text and three image datasets.

