The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DiffSED: Sound Event Detection with Denoising Diffusion
Swapnil Bhosale1* , Sauradip Nag1* , Diptesh Kanojia1 , Jiankang Deng2 , Xiatian Zhu1
1

University of Surrey, UK
Imperial College London, UK
s.bhosale@surrey.ac.uk*, s.nag@surrey.ac.uk*
2

Abstract
Sound Event Detection (SED) aims to predict the temporal
boundaries of all the events of interest and their class labels,
given an unconstrained audio sample. Taking either the splitand-classify (i.e., frame-level) strategy or the more principled
event-level modeling approach, all existing methods consider
the SED problem from the discriminative learning perspective. In this work, we reformulate the SED problem by taking a generative learning perspective. Specifically, we aim to
generate sound temporal boundaries from noisy proposals in
a denoising diffusion process, conditioned on a target audio
sample. During training, our model learns to reverse the noising process by converting noisy latent queries to the groundtruth versions in the elegant Transformer decoder framework.
Doing so enables the model generate accurate event boundaries from even noisy queries during inference. Extensive
experiments on the Urban-SED and EPIC-Sounds datasets
demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms existing alternatives, with 40+% faster convergence in training.
Code: https://github.com/Surrey-UPLab/DiffSED.

Introduction
Sound event detection (SED) aims to temporally localize
sound events of interest (i.e., the start and end time) and recognize their class labels in a long audio stream (Mesaros
et al. 2021). As a fundamental audio signal processing task,
it has become the cornerstone of many related recognition
scenarios, such as audio captioning (Xu et al. 2021; Bhosale, Chakraborty, and Kopparapu 2023; Xie et al. 2023), and
acoustic scene understanding (Igarashi et al. 2022; Bear, Nolasco, and Benetos 2019).
In the literature, all existing SED methods can be grouped
into two categories namely, frame-level and event-level
approaches. Frame-level approaches classify each audio
frame/segment into event classes and then aggregate the
consecutive frame-level predictions to identify sound event
boundaries or endpoints (Miyazaki et al. 2020a; Lin et al.
2019). They are often heavily manually designed with
plenty of heuristics and data-specific parameter optimization, hence less scalable and reliable across different audio data. Event-level approaches, on the other hand, directly
model the temporal boundaries of sound events, taking into

Figure 1: Architectural comparison: (a) Conventional discriminative DETR-based Sound Event Detector Transformer (SEDT) (Ye et al. 2021) incorporates a single decoding step with clean queries. (b) Our diffusion-infused generative DETR-based Sound Event Detector (DiffSED) conducts multi-step decoding/denoising over noised queries.

account the correlation between frames, thereby eliminating
the mundane post-processing step and are more generalizable (Ye et al. 2021). In both approaches, existing methods
rely on proposal prediction by regressing the start and end
times of each, i.e., discriminative learning based.
Recently, generative learning models such as diffusion
models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020) have emerged strongly in computer vision. Conceptually, we draw an analogy between the SED problem
and image-based object detection (Duan et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2019). We consider the latest generative learning based
object detection approach (Chen et al. 2022b) represents a
new direction for designing detection models in general. Although conceptually similar to object detection, the SED

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

792

