The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Modeling Stereo-Confidence out of the End-to-End Stereo-Matching Network
via Disparity Plane Sweep
Jae Young Lee1 * , Woonghyun Ka2 * , Jaehyun Choi1 , Junmo Kim1
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
2
Hyundai Motor Company, Seoul, South Korea
{mcneato, chlwogus, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr, kwh950724@hyundai.com

Abstract

To deal with such ambiguous correspondences, stereoconfidence measurement has been utilized to identify
whether the results of stereo-matching methods are reliable
at each pixel. In the past, conventional approaches commonly measure confidence by analyzing the cost volume
obtained from stereo-matching methods. With the rise of
the recent deep learning paradigm, learning-based stereoconfidence approaches have also been widely studied leveraging various combinations of input modalities (Poggi et al.
2021a). Especially, in the case of LAF (Kim et al. 2019), it
was the first one among learning-based approaches to leverage the cost volume as an input modality, achieving stateof-the-art performance through tri-modal inputs. Both conventional and learning-based approaches have demonstrated
that the cost volume is an effective input cue among input
modalities. The cost profile in the cost volume provides information about how confident the stereo-matching method
is in its predictions by matching cost (or probability) for
each disparity plane shift. The cost volume can be further
utilized for tasks such as uncertainty estimations (Wang et al.
2022) and refinement of stereo-matching networks (Zeng
et al. 2023).
However, the cost volumes (or internal features) are being encapsulated within the stereo-matching network itself
due to the recent trend of stereo-matching networks operating in an end-to-end manner. Furthermore, especially in
safety-critical systems closely tied to the stereo-matching
networks, the architecture is kept confidential, and access to
its internal information is restricted to protect the network
from potential external threats (Wang et al. 2021; Wong,
Mundhra, and Soatto 2021; Cheng, Healey, and Wu 2021).
As a result, this prompts the necessity of the exploration of
estimating confidence without accessing the cost volumes
(or internal features) and from outside the stereo-matching
network (Poggi et al. 2020).
Unfortunately, the cost volume is an effective cue in
stereo-confidence estimation. Thus, in this paper, we aim
to quantify the level of matching ambiguity from the external stereo-matching method and achieve effects comparable to using the cost volume as an input without performance degradation. Furthermore, we intend to introduce the
proposed confidence as an alternative input of the cost volume to learning-based stereo-confidence methods, making
it suitable for use even in safety-critical systems. It can

We propose a novel stereo-confidence that can be measured
externally to various stereo-matching networks, offering an
alternative input modality choice of the cost volume for
learning-based approaches, especially in safety-critical systems. Grounded in the foundational concepts of disparity definition and the disparity plane sweep, the proposed stereoconfidence method is built upon the idea that any shift in
a stereo-image pair should be updated in a corresponding
amount shift in the disparity map. Based on this idea, the proposed stereo-confidence method can be summarized in three
folds. 1) Using the disparity plane sweep, multiple disparity
maps can be obtained and treated as a 3-D volume (predicted
disparity volume), like the cost volume is constructed. 2) One
of these disparity maps serves as an anchor, allowing us to
define a desirable (or ideal) disparity profile at every spatial
point. 3) By comparing the desirable and predicted disparity profiles, we can quantify the level of matching ambiguity
between left and right images for confidence measurement.
Extensive experimental results using various stereo-matching
networks and datasets demonstrate that the proposed stereoconfidence method not only shows competitive performance
on its own but also consistent performance improvements
when it is used as an input modality for learning-based stereoconfidence methods.

Introduction
Stereo-matching is a fundamental task in computer vision
that aims to estimate the depth information of a scene from
a pair of stereo images. Accurate depth estimation is essential for a wide range of applications, such as autonomous
driving, robotics, and augmented reality. Over decades, various stereo-matching methods have been proposed, ranging
from traditional methods based on hand-crafted features to
more recent learning-based methods. These methods typically generate the cost volume or feature maps to estimate
the disparity value for each pixel. Despite impressive results
achieved by recent learning-based stereo-matching methods,
they occasionally fail in ill-posed regions such as occlusion
boundaries, repeated patterns, textureless regions, and nonLambertian surfaces due to inherent ambiguities tied to the
correspondence problem (Zhou et al. 2020).
* Equal contribution. Alphabetical order.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2901

