The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedDAT: An Approach for Foundation Model Finetuning in Multi-Modal
Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Haokun Chen1,2 , Yao Zhang1,4 , Denis Krompass2 , Jindong Gu3 * , Volker Tresp1,4
1

LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Siemens AG, Munich, Germany
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, England
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany
{haokun.chen, denis.krompass}@siemens.com, yzhang@dbs.ifi.lmu.de
jindong.gu@outlook.com, volker.tresp@lmu.de
2

Abstract
Recently, foundation models have exhibited remarkable advancements in multi-modal learning. These models, equipped
with millions (or billions) of parameters, typically require a
substantial amount of data for finetuning. However, collecting and centralizing training data from diverse sectors becomes challenging due to distinct privacy regulations. Federated Learning (FL) emerges as a promising solution, enabling
multiple clients to collaboratively train neural networks without centralizing their local data. To alleviate client computation burdens and communication overheads, previous works
have adapted Parameter-efficient Finetuning (PEFT) methods
for FL. Hereby, only a small fraction of the model parameters
are optimized and communicated during federated communications. Nevertheless, most previous works have focused on
a single modality and neglected one common phenomenon,
i.e., the presence of data heterogeneity across the clients.
Therefore, in this work, we propose a finetuning framework
tailored to heterogeneous multi-modal FL, called Federated
Dual-Aadapter Teacher (FedDAT). Specifically, our approach
leverages a Dual-Adapter Teacher (DAT) to address data heterogeneity by regularizing the client local updates and applying Mutual Knowledge Distillation (MKD) for an efficient
knowledge transfer. FedDAT is the first approach that enables
an efficient distributed finetuning of foundation models for a
variety of heterogeneous Vision-Language tasks. To demonstrate its effectiveness, we conduct extensive experiments on
four multi-modality FL benchmarks with different types of
data heterogeneity, where FedDAT substantially outperforms
the existing centralized PEFT methods adapted for FL.

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the training procedure for
Visual Question Answering (VQA) in Federated Learning.

models, a substantial amount of data from diverse sectors
and application scenarios is typically required for extensive
finetuning. However, it becomes challenging to aggregate
all training data and perform centralized model finetuning.
For instance, collecting data from different clinical centers
across multiple countries becomes infeasible due to distinct
privacy regulations, such as GDPR in the EU and PDPA in
Singapore.
To address this problem, Federated Learning (FL)
emerges as a promising solution, which allows a shared
model to be collaboratively optimized using decentralized
data sources. In the classical FL approaches, e.g., FedAvg
(McMahan et al. 2017), the central server obtains the model
by iteratively averaging the optimized model weights uploaded from the active clients. FL offers several advantages,
including improved efficiency in client-server communication and enhanced data confidentiality, as it eliminates the
need for direct access to the client’s local dataset. FL provides promising solutions for various application areas, such
as healthcare (Sheller et al. 2020) and industry (Liu et al.
2020), where data privacy is crucial.
Despite its promising prospects, traditional FL is unsuitable for finetuning the entire foundation model. The optimization and transmission of billions of parameters would
impose significant client computation burdens and substantial communication overheads. To overcome this challenge,

Introduction
Recent works have shown the power of foundation models with millions (billions) of parameters (Zhou et al. 2023;
Du et al. 2022). These models, represented by Transfomers
(Vaswani et al. 2017), achieve promising results when finetuned for real-world multi-modal tasks, including Visual
Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015), Visual
Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) (Zellers et al. 2019), etc.
To improve the generalization ability of the foundation
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11285

