The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generalizable Task Representation Learning for Offline Meta-Reinforcement
Learning with Data Limitations
Renzhe Zhou, Chen-Xiao Gao, Zongzhang Zhang* , Yang Yu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{zhourz, gaocx}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

tion to relieving RL from costly online interactions, whereas
meta-RL (Duan et al. 2016; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017;
Rakelly et al. 2019; Zintgraf et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2021; Luo et al. 2022), which involves training policies over a wide range of tasks, significantly enhances the
generalization ability of the learned policies.
Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning (OMRL) (Li et al.
2020; Li, Yang, and Luo 2021; Dorfman, Shenfeld, and
Tamar 2021; Mitchell et al. 2021; Yuan and Lu 2022), as
an intersection of offline RL and meta-RL, is promising to
combine the good of both worlds. In OMRL, we are provided with datasets collected in various tasks which share
some similarity in the underlying structures in dynamics or
reward mechanisms, and aim to optimize the meta-policy.
The meta-policy is later tested in tasks drawn from the same
task distribution. Previous related methods (Li et al. 2020;
Li, Yang, and Luo 2021; Yuan and Lu 2022) often interpret the OMRL challenge as task representation learning and
meta-policy optimization. The former step aims to obtain indicative task representations from the dataset, while the latter optimizes a meta-policy on top of the learned representation. However, existing methods often assume a sufficient
number of training tasks as well as sufficient diversity of behavior policy that collects the datasets, which is not realistic
in real-world applications. We find that when the assumptions are not satisfied, the representations tend to overfit and
fail to generalize on unseen testing tasks.
In light of this, we propose a new approach to
Generalizable Task representations Learning (GENTLE) to
enable effective task recognition in the face of limitations in
training task quantity and behavior diversity. GENTLE follows the existing paradigm of OMRL and consists of two interleaving optimization stages: (1) task representation learning and (2) offline meta-policy optimization on top of the
learned representations. For (1), we introduce a novel structure, Task Auto-Encoder (TAE) to extract representations
from the context information. TAE is optimized to reconstruct the state transition and rewards on the probing data
rather than contrastive loss, which models the generative
structure of the environment and prevents the encoder from
overfitting to miscellaneous features when the number of
training tasks is limited. To alleviate TAE’s training from
overfitting to the behavior policy distribution, we augment
the training data via policy, dynamics, and reward relabeling,

Generalization and sample efficiency have been longstanding issues concerning reinforcement learning, and thus
the field of Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning (OMRL)
has gained increasing attention due to its potential of solving a wide range of problems with static and limited offline
data. Existing OMRL methods often assume sufficient training tasks and data coverage to apply contrastive learning to
extract task representations. However, such assumptions are
not applicable in several real-world applications and thus undermine the generalization ability of the representations. In
this paper, we consider OMRL with two types of data limitations: limited training tasks and limited behavior diversity
and propose a novel algorithm called GENTLE for learning
generalizable task representations in the face of data limitations. GENTLE employs Task Auto-Encoder (TAE), which
is an encoder-decoder architecture to extract the characteristics of the tasks. Unlike existing methods, TAE is optimized
solely by reconstruction of the state transition and reward,
which captures the generative structure of the task models and
produces generalizable representations when training tasks
are limited. To alleviate the effect of limited behavior diversity, we consistently construct pseudo-transitions to align the
data distribution used to train TAE with the data distribution encountered during testing. Empirically, GENTLE significantly outperforms existing OMRL methods on both indistribution tasks and out-of-distribution tasks across both the
given-context protocol and the one-shot protocol.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in scenarios where online interaction is consistently available, RL
is hampered from real-world applications such as healthcare and robotics controlling due to its sample complexity (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Wu and Zhang 2023) and inferior
generalization ability (Kirk et al. 2023). The past decade witnessed tremendous effort from researchers to pave the path
for RL toward real-world applications. For example, offline
RL (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019; Kumar et al. 2020;
Fujimoto and Gu 2021; Kostrikov, Nair, and Levine 2022;
Ran et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2024), which optimizes the policies with a pre-collected and static dataset, provides a solu* Zongzhang Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17132

