The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hard Regularization to Prevent Deep Online Clustering Collapse without Data
Augmentation
Louis Mahon1, 3 , Thomas Lukasiewicz2, 3
2

1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
Institute of Logic and Computation, Vienna University of Technology, Austria
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
louis.mahon@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

becoming available, as opposed to offline methods, which
are limited to fixed pre-defined datasets (Silva et al. 2013).
The disadvantage of online methods is that they are more
difficult to train. In particular, they run the risk of producing a degenerate solution where the large majority of data
points are concentrated in a small number of clusters. In
the extreme case, all points are placed into the same cluster. For example, an intuitive way to formulate a training
procedure for online deep clustering is to update both the
encoder network and the clustering parameters to make the
encoding of each point close to its cluster centroid and far
from other cluster centroids. (The clustering parameters are
e.g., the centroids in K-means or the first two moments in a
Gaussian mixture model.) However, this training objective is
trivially minimized by the encoder network mapping all data
points to the same point in feature space, where this point is
equal to one of the cluster centroids. Techniques for avoiding collapse we refer to as partition support. Several partition support methods have been proposed, but they mostly
require data augmentation (DA) (Zbontar et al. 2021; Cai
et al. 2021), and those that do not are often ad hoc and lack a
rigorous technical foundation (Caron et al. 2020; Deshmukh
et al. 2021). Additionally, they take the soft assignments as
a measure of partition collapse and propose to regularize the
soft assignments to make them more uniform. This paper focuses on deep clustering without DA, which is an advantage
because relying on DA limits a method to domains in which
sufficient prior knowledge to perform class-preserving augmentations is available. Additionally, we argue that soft assignments are not an accurate measure of collapse, and that
we should instead focus on hard assignments.
We propose a DA-free partition support by regularizing
hard assignments. Specifically, we consider the problem of
how to optimally assign each data point in a batch to the
most appropriate cluster. We express this problem probabilistically in a Bayesian framework, where the regularizing
element is captured by a prior across clusters. In the case of
equally-sized clusters, this can be uniform. We then use this
expression to derive a precise optimization objective, which
we also show to be equivalent, up to a small error term, to
the objective of maximizing the mutual information of the
cluster assignments and the data index. This objective itself
is too slow to solve exactly, but we devise a greedy approximation algorithm that can be implemented straightforwardly

Online deep clustering refers to the joint use of a feature extraction network and a clustering model to assign cluster labels to each new data point or batch as it is processed. While
faster and more versatile than offline methods, online clustering can easily reach the collapsed solution where the encoder
maps all inputs to the same point and all are put into a single cluster. Successful existing models have employed various techniques to avoid this problem, most of which require
data augmentation or which aim to make the average soft assignment across the dataset the same for each cluster. We propose a method that does not require data augmentation, and
that, differently from existing methods, regularizes the hard
assignments. Using a Bayesian framework, we derive an intuitive optimization objective that can be straightforwardly included in the training of the encoder network. Tested on four
image datasets and one human-activity recognition dataset, it
consistently avoids collapse more robustly than other methods and leads to more accurate clustering. We also conduct
further experiments and analyses justifying our choice to regularize the hard cluster assignments. Code is available at
https://github.com/Lou1sM/online hard clustering.

1

Introduction

Deep clustering refers to the combination of deep learning and clustering, where the data are first encoded with
a deep neural network to a feature space, and then clustering is performed in the feature space. Clustering models
can be classified as offline or online. Offline models process
the entire dataset, and then assign all cluster labels at once.
Online models, in contrast, assign a cluster label to each
data point, or each batch, as it is processed. Offline methods can produce more accurate clusterings (e.g., Mahon and
Lukasiewicz (2021); Niu, Shan, and Wang (2021) reaching
close to supervised performance), as they can leverage information from later data points when assigning cluster labels to earlier data points. However, they are more expensive
to train, as they must alternate between encoding the entire
dataset, or training the encoder for some number of epochs,
and clustering the encoded data. Online models, on the other
hand, can jointly encode and cluster, so are less computationally expensive. They are also more versatile, being applicable in real-world settings where new data is constantly
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14281

