The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TETRIS: Towards Exploring the Robustness of Interactive Segmentation
Andrey Moskalenko, Vlad Shakhuro, Anna Vorontsova, Anton Konushin,
Anton Antonov, Alexander Krapukhin, Denis Shepelev, Konstantin Soshin
Samsung Research
{andrey.mos, v.shakhuro, a.vorontsova, a.konushin, ant.antonov, a.krapukhin, d.shepelev, k.soshin}@samsung.com

Input image with clicks

Abstract
Interactive segmentation methods rely on user inputs to iteratively update the selection mask. A click specifying the
object of interest is arguably the most simple and intuitive
interaction type, and thereby the most common choice for
interactive segmentation. However, user clicking patterns in
the interactive segmentation context remain unexplored. Accordingly, interactive segmentation evaluation strategies rely
more on intuition and common sense rather than empirical
studies (e.g., assuming that users tend to click in the center
of the area with the largest error). In this work, we conduct a
real user study to investigate real user clicking patterns. This
study reveals that the intuitive assumption made in the common evaluation strategy may not hold. As a result, interactive
segmentation models may show high scores in the standard
benchmarks, but it does not imply that they would perform
well in a real world scenario. To assess the applicability of
interactive segmentation methods, we propose a novel evaluation strategy providing a more comprehensive analysis of a
model’s performance. To this end, we propose a methodology
for finding extreme user inputs by a direct optimization in a
white-box adversarial attack on the interactive segmentation
model. Based on the performance with such adversarial user
inputs, we assess the robustness of interactive segmentation
models w.r.t click positions. Besides, we introduce a novel
benchmark for measuring the robustness of interactive segmentation, and report the results of an extensive evaluation of
dozens of models.

Per click IoU

RITM-HRNet18-IT

RITM-HRNet18-IT

IoU heatmaps w.r.t.
all possible clicks positions

SAM-ViT-H

SAM-ViT-H

Figure 1: Single clicks made by different real users and
the respective quality achieved. Top left: real users (green
dots) do not click the way it is assumed in the standard
testing procedures (magenta dot). Top right: the quality of
two popular interactive segmentation models, a convolutional RITM (Sofiiuk, Petrov, and Konushin 2022) and a
transformer-based SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023), is widely
spread around the average score (visualized with colored
bars). Bottom: IoU heatmaps show that prediction quality
fluctuates heavily depending on an actual click position.

Introduction

in the common interactive segmentation benchmarks, clicks
are not put by real users but automatically generated based
on a history of interactions. Most existing methods 1) select a region with the largest error in the previous interaction
round, and 2) click in the furthest point from the boundaries
of this region. Hereinafter, we refer to this click generation
scheme as the baseline strategy.
However, our study of real user clicks reveals this straightforward strategy does not emulate user behavior adequately.
Besides, models tend to overfit to the baseline strategy, so
that the accuracy might be high, but even a slight change
of a click position causes a severe quality drop (Figure 1).
Thus, the real-usage quality of the tested models remains
unknown.
The evaluation protocols that assess quality for a single

Interactive segmentation methods are widely exploited for
object removal, object selection, large dataset collection,
medical image annotation and other tasks related to image labeling. Compared to conventional segmentation approaches, interactive methods provide higher quality masks
that satisfy user requests better. Arguably the most wellexplored, click-based interactive segmentation aims at selecting objects in an image according to multiple user input
clicks (either positive or negative), comprising a click trajectory. However, the real user evaluation of each novel approach, that implies comparing it with an ever-growing number of predecessors, is completely unfeasible. Respectively,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4287

