The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GSN: Generalisable Segmentation in Neural Radiance Field
Vinayak Gupta†1 , Rahul Goel2 , Sirikonda Dhawal2 , P. J. Narayanan2
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
vinayakguptapokal@gmail.com, {rahul.goel,dhawal.sirikonda}@research.iiit.ac.in, pjn@iiit.ac.in
2

view synthesis as multi-view interpolation. PixelNeRF introduced a scene-class prior and used a CNN to render novel
views. IBRNet used an MLP and a ray transformer to estimate radiance and volume density, collecting information
on the fly from multiple source views. MVSNeRF builds
on the work of MVSNet (Yao et al. 2018) to create a neural encoding volume based on the nearest source views.
GNT improves the IBRNet formulation to leverage epipolar constraints using attention-based view transformers and
ray transformers.
Radiance Fields are trained using a few dozen views of a
scene and “memorise” a specific scene. New views are generated from it using a volumetric rendering procedure. Generalised RF methods, on the other hand, learn the principles
of view generation using epipolar constraints and interpolation of proximate views. They are trained using views from
multiple scenes. Novel views of an unknown scene for any
camera pose are generated by directly interpolating a few
views. The distinction between learning a scene and learning a view-based rendering algorithm is significant.
Users are often interested in segmenting parts of the
captured 3D scene and manipulating them, besides new
view generation. Initial segmentation efforts like N3F (Tschernezki et al. 2022) and DFF (Kobayashi, Matsumoto, and
Sitzmann 2022) distilled a semantic field alongside a radiance field. More recent ISRF (Goel et al. 2023) leveraged
proximity in 3D space and the distilled semantic space for
interactive segmentation to extract good multi-view segmentation masks.
Can we combine semantics into the generalised Radiance Fields to facilitate semantic rendering along with view
generation of unseen scenes? In this paper, we extend the
GNT formulation to include different semantic features efficiently. This makes the generation of consistent semantic
features possible, along with generating new views of an
unknown scene on the fly. Our generalisable representation
can take advantage of semantic features like DINO (Caron
et al. 2021), CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), and SAM (Kirillov
et al. 2023), to facilitate more consistent segmentation of the
scene in new views. The key points about our method are :

Abstract
Traditional Radiance Field (RF) representations capture details of a specific scene and must be trained afresh on each
scene. Semantic feature fields have been added to RFs to facilitate several segmentation tasks. Generalised RF representations learn the principles of view interpolation. A generalised RF can render new views of an unknown and untrained
scene, given a few views. We present a way to distil feature
fields into the generalised GNT representation. Our GSN representation generates new views of unseen scenes on the fly
along with consistent, per-pixel semantic features. This enables multi-view segmentation of arbitrary new scenes. We
show different semantic features being distilled into generalised RFs. Our multi-view segmentation results are on par
with methods that use traditional RFs. GSN closes the gap
between standard and generalisable RF methods significantly.
Project Page: https://vinayak-vg.github.io/GSN/

Introduction
Capturing, digitising, and authoring detailed structures of
real-world scene settings is tedious. The digitised real-world
scenes open many applications in graphics and augmented
reality. Efforts to capture real-world scenes included special hardware setup (Narayanan, Rander, and Kanade 1998),
structure from motion (SfM) from unstructured collections
(Snavely, Seitz, and Szeliski 2006; Agarwal et al. 2009), and
recently to Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al.
2020). NeRF generates photo-realistic novel views using a
neural representation learned from a set of discrete images of
a scene. Follow-up efforts enhanced performance, reduced
memory, etc. (Kobayashi, Matsumoto, and Sitzmann 2022;
Huang et al. 2022; Müller et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022a).
Grid-based representations led to faster learning (FridovichKeil and Yu et al. 2022; Sun, Sun, and Chen 2022; Chen
et al. 2022a). These use scene-specific representations that
do not generalise to unseen scenes.
PixelNeRF (Yu et al. 2021), IBRNet (Wang et al. 2021b),
MVSNeRF (Chen et al. 2021) and GNT (Varma et al. 2023)
generalise RFs to unknown scenes by formulating novel

• Integrate semantic features into a generalised radiance
field representation deeply, facilitating the rendering of
per-pixel semantic features for each novel view. This is
done without retraining or fine-tuning to new scenes.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Work done during an internship at IIIT Hyderabad.

2013

