The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BBScore: A Brownian Bridge Based Metric for Assessing Text Coherence
Zhecheng Sheng* , Tianhao Zhang* , Chen Jiang* , Dongyeop Kang
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
{sheng136, zhan7594, jian0649, dongyeop}@umn.edu

Abstract
Measuring the coherence of text is a vital aspect of evaluating the quality of written content. Recent advancements
in neural coherence modeling have demonstrated their efficacy in capturing entity coreference and discourse relations,
thereby enhancing coherence evaluation. However, many existing methods heavily depend on static embeddings or focus
narrowly on nearby context, constraining their capacity to measure the overarching coherence of long texts. In this paper, we
posit that coherent texts inherently manifest a sequential and
cohesive interplay among sentences, effectively conveying the
central theme, purpose, or standpoint. To explore this abstract
relationship, we introduce the ”BBScore,” a novel referencefree metric grounded in Brownian bridge theory for assessing
text coherence. Our findings showcase that when synergized
with a simple additional classification component, this metric attains a performance level comparable to state-of-the-art
techniques on standard artificial discrimination tasks. We also
establish in downstream tasks that this metric effectively differentiates between human-written documents and text generated
by large language models under a specific domain. Furthermore, we illustrate the efficacy of this approach in detecting
written styles attributed to diverse large language models, underscoring its potential for generalizability. In summary, we
present a novel Brownian bridge coherence metric capable of
measuring both local and global text coherence, while circumventing the need for end-to-end model training. This flexibility
allows for its application in various downstream tasks.

Off Topic

Repetitive

Coherent

Figure 1: Utterance flow in latent space

Introduction
Text coherence is the quality of a written or spoken text that
makes it internally consistent, logical, and easily understandable to the reader or listener. It encompasses the flow and
connectivity of ideas, the logical progression of information,
and the smooth transition between sentences and paragraphs.
Evaluating the coherence of text requires the evaluator to
differentiate between a set of individual utterances and naturally flowing discourses such as co-references or grammatical
relationships (Wang and Guo 2014; Kehler 2022).
In linguistic theory, the evaluation of text coherence can
be performed at both the local and global levels (Agar and
Hobbs 1982; Glosser and Deser 1992; Kintsch and van Dijk
*

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14937

1978). Local coherence focuses on the interrelation of information within a specific unit of discourse and its connection
to the preceding unit. Conversely, global coherence refers
to the degree to which the various components of discourse
maintain a cohesive representation of the main topic. Despite
the emergence of neural coherence models, most prior works
focused on static representations of their local neighboring
texts. (Tien Nguyen and Joty 2017; Mesgar and Strube 2018;
Mesgar, Ribeiro, and Gurevych 2021; Jeon and Strube 2022)
This paper aims to capture global coherence from text, a
sequential and cohesive relationship among the sentences or
words, representing the main idea, goal, opinion, and other
pertinent aspects regarding a coherent text. This relationship
may vary across different situations, individuals, and even
over time for the same individual. To simplify this concept
and enhance its accessibility, we assume that this relationship
remains consistent within a fixed domain or dataset. Also,
we consider a coherent text should encompass the following
properties: (1) A main idea should be kept throughout the
text (2) Sentences near the beginning and ending part of the
article should emphasize the main idea and (3) Sentences
near the middle part can go a little bit far from the main idea,
but still be controlled.
We present a novel metric that can capture global text coherence using the Brownian bridge framework, which has
been used to analyze animal movements (Horne et al. 2007)
or long-text generation (Wang et al. 2023). Brownian bridges
serve as continuous-time stochastic models for movement,
where the probability of being in a particular area is conditioned on the starting and ending locations, the time elapsed
between those points, and the mobility or speed of movement
(Horne et al. 2007; Chow 2009). More specifically, we as-

