The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Generating Universal Adversarial Perturbations for Quantum Classifiers
Gautham Anil1 * , Vishnu Vinod1 * , Apurva Narayan2,3,4
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
2
University of British Columbia
3
University of Western Ontario
4
University of Waterloo
{gauthamga.gga,vishnuvinod2001}@gmail.com, apurva.narayan@uwo.ca
Abstract

methodologies (Biamonte et al. 2017; Lloyd, Mohseni,
and Rebentrost 2014; Rebentrost, Mohseni, and Lloyd
2014; Dallaire-Demers and Killoran 2018). Within QML,
parametrized quantum circuits (PQCs), recognized as a
quantum analogue of classical neural networks, have garnered significant attention in recent times (Cerezo et al.
2021; Benedetti et al. 2019). While the application domains
where QML can provide an advantage are being explored,
recent advances suggest that classification is a promising
candidate. (Huang et al. 2021). The rise in prominence of
PQC-based classifiers stems from their capacity to achieve
performance comparable to classical neural networks in
multiple use cases while utilizing far fewer parameters (Abbas et al. 2021; Schuld et al. 2020).
Classical machine learning classifiers are well-known to
be susceptible to adversarial attacks that severely degrade
performance (Xu et al. 2020; Akhtar and Mian 2018; Zhang
et al. 2020). Recent studies reveal that PQC-based classifiers too, are susceptible to adversarial attacks, mirroring the
vulnerabilities observed in classical settings (Liu and Wittek
2020; Lu, Duan, and Deng 2020). Akin to the classical ML ,
the existence of universal attacks has also been demonstrated
in the realm of quantum classifiers (Gong and Deng 2022).
In this work, we propose QuGAP (Quantum Generative Adversarial Perturbation), a framework to generate UAPs for
quantum classifiers. Our main contributions are:
• We theoretically demonstrate the existence of additive
UAPs for quantum classifiers used in the classification
of amplitude-encoded classical data.
• We propose a strategy for generating additive UAPs using classical generative models and conduct experiments
to validate the viability of the proposed approach.
• We propose a novel strategy for generating unitary UAPs
using explicit fidelity constraints. We empirically evaluate the performance of the proposed framework and
achieve state-of-the-art results.

Quantum Machine Learning (QML) has emerged as a
promising field of research, aiming to leverage the capabilities of quantum computing to enhance existing machine
learning methodologies. Recent studies have revealed that,
like their classical counterparts, QML models based on
Parametrized Quantum Circuits (PQCs) are also vulnerable
to adversarial attacks. Moreover, the existence of Universal
Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs) in the quantum domain has
been demonstrated theoretically in the context of quantum
classifiers. In this work, we introduce QuGAP: a novel framework for generating UAPs for quantum classifiers. We conceptualize the notion of additive UAPs for PQC-based classifiers and theoretically demonstrate their existence. We then
utilize generative models (QuGAP-A) to craft additive UAPs
and experimentally show that quantum classifiers are susceptible to such attacks. Moreover, we formulate a new method
for generating unitary UAPs (QuGAP-U) using quantum generative models and a novel loss function based on fidelity constraints. We evaluate the performance of the proposed framework and show that our method achieves state-of-the-art misclassification rates, while maintaining high fidelity between
legitimate and adversarial samples.

Introduction
Rapid advancements in the field of machine learning have
led to development of solutions to problems which were
previously intractable (Jordan and Mitchell 2015; LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015; He et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2023;
Silver et al. 2016). Concurrently, rapid advances are being
achieved in the domain of quantum computing. While development of fault-tolerant large-scale quantum computers
holds the potential to unravel solutions to classically hard
problems (Shor 1994; Cao et al. 2019), quantum computing
has applications even in the current NISQ (Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum) era (Preskill 2018; Lau et al. 2022;
Bharti et al. 2022).
A promising direction of research, termed quantum machine learning (QML) attempts to bridge the domains of
machine learning and quantum computing in an attempt
to leverage NISQ devices to enhance machine learning

Related Work
Adversarial Attacks on Neural Networks
The idea that carefully constructed adversarial samples,
which differ only slightly from the true samples, could
fool classical deep neural networks was first discussed in
(Szegedy et al. 2014). After the conception of this idea, a

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10891

