The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Reactive Spiking Graph Neural Network
Han Zhao1 , Xu Yang1 ∗ , Cheng Deng1 ∗ , Junchi Yan2
1

2

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{hzhao1698, xuyang.xd, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

2020; Rathi and Roy 2020; Fang et al. 2021; Wang, Cheng,
and Lim 2022; Lee, Delbruck, and Pfeiffer 2016; Wu et al.
2018; Jin, Zhang, and Li 2018; Neftci, Mostafa, and Zenke
2019), has emerged to simulate intermittent activities and
spiking communications in biological neurons, showing the
potential of low energy consumption and high biological fidelity. Thus, to enable GNNs to satisfy the low-energy and
high bio-fidelity, studying Spiking GNNs is necessary on
the ubiquitous large-scale graph data. Existing methods (Xu et al. 2021; Wang and Jiang 2022; Zhu et al. 2022) directly replace the conventional GNNs’ neurons with spiking
ones for processing the propagated graph, where these spiking neurons have consistent firing thresholds with the same
reactive state. According to the dynamic cognition observation that biological neurons have dynamic reactive states
on processing signals (Deco, Cruzat, and Kringelbach 2019;
Deco, Vidaurre, and Kringelbach 2021), such same-reactive
neurons may have not enough capacity in terms of biological functionality, and thus limit the expressive ability of the
model. In addition, insufficient long-range neighbor information can be captured with the few-step propagated graph,
leading to non-discriminative spiking graph results.
To address the above problems, we propose a Dynamic
Reactive Spiking Graph Neural Network that can sustain
high biological fidelity and efficiently capture long-range
neighbors. Under the guidance of the brain’s dynamic cognition, each neuron of our model would generate a unique
reactive state according to its optimizable threshold. During
optimization, the reactive dynamics between neurons can
be spontaneously explored for more biological fidelity, thus
generating more discriminative spiking outputs. In addition,
the graph positional spikes are learned and integrated adaptively into spiking outputs via our neurons, thereby excavating long-range neighbors more thoroughly. With the dynamic reactive mechanism and learnable positional integration,
the bio-fidelity and expressive ability of our model can finally be enhanced. The highlights of our work are:
1) We propose a dynamic reactive spiking graph neural
network that has powerful learning capability in high biological fidelity. 2) Guided by the reactive cognition in the
brain, we design dynamic reactive spiking neuron models with unique optimizable thresholds for spontaneously exploring the neurons’ reactive dynamics. 3) To sufficiently
excavate long-range neighbors and thus enhance the mod-

Spiking Graph Neural Networks are emerging tools for analyzing graph data along with low energy consumption and
certain biological fidelity. Existing methods directly integrate
same-reactive spiking neurons into graph neural networks for
processing propagated graphs. However, such same-reactive
neurons are not biological-functionality enough compared to
the brain’s dynamic-reactive ones, limiting the model’s expression. Meanwhile, insufficient long-range neighbor information can be excavated with the few-step propagated graph,
restricting discrimination of graph spiking embeddings. Inspired by the dynamic cognition in the brain, we propose a
Dynamic Reactive Spiking Graph Neural Network that can
enhance model’s expressive ability in higher biological fidelity. Specifically, we design dynamic reactive spiking neurons to process spiking graph inputs, which have unique optimizable thresholds to spontaneously explore dynamic reactive states between neurons. Moreover, discriminative graph
positional spikes are learned and integrated adaptively into
spiking outputs through our neurons, thereby exploring longrange neighbors more thoroughly. Finally, with the dynamic
reactive mechanism and learnable positional integration, we
can obtain a powerful and highly bio-fidelity model with low
energy consumption. Experiments on various domain-related
datasets can demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. Our
code is available at https://github.com/hzhao98/DRSGNN.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), reconciling the expressive
power of graphs with the learning capacity of deep neural
networks, have become powerful tools for analyzing ubiquitous graph data. During training and inference, existing
GNNs (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf
and Welling 2016; Chen et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020b,a)
commonly update graph features by transforming and aggregating topological neighbors under persistently active neurons. Unfortunately, such persistently active neurons would
consume high energy (Anthony, Kanding, and Selvan 2020);
meanwhile, GNNs have less biological fidelity due to noncompliance with biological neurons’ operating mechanism.
Recently, a novel generation of neural networks–Spiking
Neural Networks (SNNs) (Bellec et al. 2018; Cheng et al.
∗

The corresponding authors
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16970

