The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Multimodal, Multi-Task Adapting Framework
for Video Action Recognition
Mengmeng Wang1 , Jiazheng Xing1 , Boyuan Jiang2 , Jun Chen1 ,
Jianbiao Mei1 , Xingxing Zuo3∗ , Guang Dai4 , Jingdong Wang5 , Yong Liu1 *
1

Zhejiang University
Youtu Lab,Tencent
3
Technical University of Munich
4
SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China
5
Baidu Inc
{mengmengwang, jiazhengxing, junc, jianbiaomei}@zju.edu.cn, byronjiang@tencent.com
xingxing.zuo@tum.de, guang.gdai@gmail.com, wangjingdong@outlook.com, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recently, the rise of large-scale vision-language pretrained
models like CLIP, coupled with the technology of ParameterEfficient FineTuning (PEFT), has captured substantial attraction in video action recognition. Nevertheless, prevailing approaches tend to prioritize strong supervised performance at
the expense of compromising the models’ generalization capabilities during transfer. In this paper, we introduce a novel
Multimodal, Multi-task CLIP adapting framework named
M2 -CLIP to address these challenges, preserving both high
supervised performance and robust transferability. Firstly, to
enhance the individual modality architectures, we introduce
multimodal adapters to both the visual and text branches.
Specifically, we design a novel visual TED-Adapter, that performs global Temporal Enhancement and local temporal Difference modeling to improve the temporal representation capabilities of the visual encoder. Moreover, we adopt text encoder adapters to strengthen the learning of semantic label
information. Secondly, we design a multi-task decoder with
a rich set of supervisory signals to adeptly satisfy the need
for strong supervised performance and generalization within
a multimodal framework. Experimental results validate the
efficacy of our approach, demonstrating exceptional performance in supervised learning while maintaining strong generalization in zero-shot scenarios.

Figure 1: Performance Comparison: Zero-shot vs supervised
accuracy. The circle area represents the number of tunable
parameters, where models with better performance are positioned towards the right and upper side, with a small circle
area. Our M2 -CLIP achieves the best zero-shot performance
with very few tunable parameters.
capability and impressive generalization performance. The
most intuitive approach is to directly add temporal modeling to CLIP’s image encoder and then finetune the entire
network (Wang et al. 2023; Tu et al. 2023; Ni et al. 2022).
However, finetuning comes with a high computational cost
and may potentially impact the original generalization capabilities of CLIP. With the emergence of PEFT, researchers
have begun to explore freezing the original CLIP parameters
and introducing various adapters (Liu et al. 2023; Park et al.
2023) or prompts (Wasim et al. 2023; Ju et al. 2022), only
training the newly added parameters. Notably, PEFT has
motivated a reevaluation of the traditional unimodal video
classification framework. By directly utilizing CLIP’s visual
branch in conjunction with added adapters, coupled with a
Linear classification layer at the end, these approaches have
demonstrated impressive results in supervised scenarios (Lin

Introduction
Over the past few years, there has been a remarkable surge of
large-scale vision-language pre-trained models (VLM) like
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021), and
Florence (Yuan et al. 2021). As a result, researchers have
actively delved into methods to effectively adapt these large
models to their specific domains. In this paper, we focus
on transferring the influential CLIP model to the domain
of video action recognition, emphasizing its crucial role in
driving advancements in this field.
Undoubtedly, transferring knowledge from the powerful
CLIP holds great promise due to its robust representation
* Corresponding authors: Yong Liu and Xingxing Zuo.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5517

