The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Convolutional Channel-Wise Competitive Learning for the Forward-Forward
Algorithm
Andreas Papachristodoulou, Christos Kyrkou, Stelios Timotheou, Theocharis Theocharides
KIOS Research and Innovation Center of Excellence,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Cyprus
{papachristodoulou.andreas, kyrkou.christos, stimo, ttheocharides}@ucy.ac.cy

Abstract

2018). Deep neural networks, inherently susceptible to issues like local minima and gradient problems due to nonconvexity, face exacerbated challenges with BP’s opacity, prompting the need for additional mitigation strategies
(Lawrence and Giles 2000; Caruana, Lawrence, and Giles
2000; Tan et al. 2022). The limitations of BP have spurred
research into more biologically plausible and hardwareefficient alternatives (Shinozaki 2021).
To circumvent these constraints, several non-BP training
techniques have been proposed, including Predictive Coding
(Rao and Ballard 1999; Salvatori et al. 2022), Evolutionary Algorithms (Salimans et al. 2017), non-BP Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018), and Competitive Hebbian Learning (Miconi 2021). While these strategies demonstrate better handling of black-box models and
vanishing/exploding gradients, they are often computationally demanding, require substantial memory, and present
other limitations. A recent development in this domain is the
Forward-Forward algorithm (FF) (Hinton 2022), a non-BP
technique involving two forward passes - one with positive
(real) data, and the other with negative data. FF offers notable computational benefits in scenarios where the precise
details of the forward computation are not known without
the necessity of storing neural activities or interrupting for
error derivative propagation. It is particularly advantageous
for applications involving low-power analog hardware. Despite its advantages, the FF algorithm also exhibits slow convergence, inadequate performance on complex tasks, and the
necessity of generating negative data.
This paper presents an approach to enhance the ForwardForward Algorithm and overcome its shortcomings by concurrently extracting and separating features through Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Our framework results
in improved representation learning and expedited training.
Specifically, our main contributions are the following:
• Construct a layer-wise loss function that exploits
channel-wise competitive learning. It reformulates the
goodness function to eliminate the need for negative data
construction and empowers each CNN layer to function
as a standalone classifier.
• Introduce the Channel-wise Feature Separator and Extractor (CFSE) block that partitions the feature space via
channel-wise grouped convolutional layers and simultaneously enables the network to learn compositional fea-

The Forward-Forward (FF) Algorithm has been recently proposed to alleviate the issues of backpropagation (BP) commonly used to train deep neural networks. However, its current formulation exhibits limitations such as the generation
of negative data, slower convergence, and inadequate performance on complex tasks. In this paper we take the main ideas
of FF and improve them by leveraging channel-wise competitive learning in the context of convolutional neural networks for image classification tasks. A layer-wise loss function is introduced that promotes competitive learning and
eliminates the need for negative data construction. To enhance both the learning of compositional features and feature
space partitioning, a channel-wise feature separator and extractor block is proposed that complements the competitive
learning process. Our method outperforms recent FF-based
models on image classification tasks, achieving testing errors
of 0.58%, 7.69%, 21.89%, and 48.77% on MNIST, FashionMNIST, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 respectively. Our approach bridges the performance gap between FF learning and
BP methods, indicating the potential of our proposed approach to learn useful representations in a layer-wise modular fashion, enabling more efficient and flexible learning.
Our source code and supplementary material are available at
https://github.com/andreaspapac/CwComp.

Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have emerged as a ubiquitous tool for tackling a variety of machine intelligence
tasks. One of the most popular training algorithms for
ANNs, Backpropagation (BP), employs the chain rule of differentiation for backward propagation of error gradients, applicable to any differentiable loss function. With its flexibility to accommodate complex architectures involving multiple layers and non-linear activation functions, BP can manage large datasets and high-dimensional input spaces.
However, BP is not without its limitations. Its assumption of perfect knowledge of forward pass computations
contributes to the ’black-box’ nature of models, challenging interpretability and transparency. Additionally, its taskspecific feature learning limits model generalizability, requiring extensive labeled data and increasing susceptibility to adversarial attacks (Moraitis et al. 2022; Madry et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14536

