The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AltNeRF: Learning Robust Neural Radiance Field
via Alternating Depth-Pose Optimization
Kun Wang1 , Zhiqiang Yan1 , Huang Tian1 , Zhenyu Zhang2 , Xiang Li3 , Jun Li1 * and Jian Yang1 *
1

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Nanjing University, Suzhou Campus, China
3
Nankai University, China
{kunwang, Yanzq, tianhuang, xiang.li.implus, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, zhangjesse@foxmail.com
Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have shown promise in generating realistic novel views from sparse scene images. However, existing NeRF approaches often encounter challenges
due to the lack of explicit 3D supervision and imprecise camera poses, resulting in suboptimal outcomes. To tackle these
issues, we propose AltNeRF—a novel framework designed
to create resilient NeRF representations using self-supervised
monocular depth estimation (SMDE) from monocular videos,
without relying on known camera poses. SMDE in AltNeRF
masterfully learns depth and pose priors to regulate NeRF
training. The depth prior enriches NeRF’s capacity for precise scene geometry depiction, while the pose prior provides
a robust starting point for subsequent pose refinement. Moreover, we introduce an alternating algorithm that harmoniously
melds NeRF outputs into SMDE through a consistencedriven mechanism, thus enhancing the integrity of depth priors. This alternation empowers AltNeRF to progressively refine NeRF representations, yielding the synthesis of realistic
novel views. Extensive experiments showcase the compelling
capabilities of AltNeRF in generating high-fidelity and robust
novel views that closely resemble reality.

Figure 1: (a) We showcase that NeRF is prone to fitting incorrect geometry, by back-projecting a training view to point
cloud using estimated radiance and density. (b) We also
show how NeRF creation is affected by inaccurate poses, by
optimizing NeRF with COLMAP and our pose estimation.

Introduction

camera poses for constructing proper volumetric representations is a stumbling block in the face of pose inaccuracies or
noise. Such errors in the camera poses compound the optimization challenges for NeRF, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b).
Although existing methods have endeavored to tackle either of these issues, they remain encumbered by certain limitations. Firstly, some methods (Deng et al. 2022; Roessle
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023) leverage depth priors as an
explicit 3D supervision to prevent NeRF from fitting incorrect scene geometry. These methods derive depth priors
from structure-from-motion (SFM) methodologies or depth
estimation techniques, employing them as fixed constraints
for NeRF. However, these depth priors might not attain the
requisite accuracy, potentially skewing NeRF’s optimization
trajectory and yielding deteriorated performance. Secondly,
some methods (Wang et al. 2021d; Lin et al. 2021; Jeong
et al. 2021) alternative strategies undertake the joint optimization of NeRF and camera poses to remove the requirement for accurate camera poses. Nevertheless, this combined task encompasses a non-convex optimization conundrum that is acutely sensitive to the initialization of cam-

Neural rendering has achieved unprecedented progress on
the long-standing view synthesis task in computer vision research (Zhou et al. 2016; Kellnhofer et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2022; Li, Li, and Zhu 2023). A prominent exemplar of this
task is NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020), which captures the
continuous volumetric essence of real-world scenes using
multi-view images and precise camera poses, thereby generating lifelike new perspectives. However, NeRF often struggles with suboptimal outcomes that compromise novel view
synthesis and distort scene geometry. In this paper, we identify and address two primary causes for this issue. First,
NeRF solely hinges on 2D image supervision, which may
provide inadequate geometric constraints for textureless or
view-limited scenes. As evidenced in Fig. 1 (a), NeRF is
trapped into a suboptimal solution that manifests itself as incorrect scene geometry. Second, NeRF’s reliance on precise
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5508

