The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Computing the Why-Provenance for Datalog Queries via SAT Solvers
Marco Calautti1 , Ester Livshits2 , Andreas Pieris2,3 , Markus Schneider2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Milan
2
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus
marco.calautti@unimi.it, ester.livshits@ed.ac.uk, apieris@inf.ed.ac.uk, m.schneider@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

ent data-intensive applications. A well-established approach
for providing such explanations to query answers is the socalled why-provenance (Buneman, Khanna, and Tan 2001).
Its essence is to collect all the subsets of the input database
that as a whole can be used to derive a certain answer. More
precisely, for Datalog queries, the why-provenance of an answer tuple t̄ is obtained by considering all the possible proof
trees T of the fact Ans(t̄), with Ans being the answer predicate of the Datalog query in question, and then collecting
all the database facts that label the leaves of T . Recall that
a proof tree of a fact α w.r.t. a database D and a set Σ of
Datalog rules forms a tree-like representation of a way for
deriving α by starting from D and executing the rules occurring in Σ (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995).
Despite its wide acceptance, why-provenance for Datalog queries comes with two weaknesses: it is computationally very expensive, and it may provide counterintuitive
explanations. The first weakness is manifested by the fact
that, although why-provenance for Datalog queries has been
around for decades, only a couple of works have considered
implementing it for recursive queries (Zhao, Subotic, and
Scholz 2020; Esparza, Luttenberger, and Schlund 2014). An
attempt to change this state of affairs was made in (Elhalawati, Krötzsch, and Mennicke 2022) by focusing on the
more practical setting of computing the why-provenance of
a given query answer (a.k.a. on-demand why-provenance),
instead of computing the why-provenance for all the query
answers. Concerning the second weakness, it has been observed that there are proof trees that correspond to unnatural derivation processes, e.g., derivations where an atom is
derived from itself (Bourgaux et al. 2022). Now, an explanation witnessed via such an unnatural proof tree, might be
classified as a counterintuitive one as it does not correspond
to an intuitive derivation process that can be extracted from
the proof tree; this is further discussed in Section 3.
The main goal of this work is to tackle the two weaknesses
of why-provenance for Datalog queries discussed above. In
particular, we place our work in the more practical setting
of on-demand why-provenance, and target an efficient implementation that provides conceptually meaningful explanations for the given query answer. To this end, we introduce the novel class of unambiguous proof trees that correspond to conceptually meaningful derivation processes, unlike arbitrary proof trees, which in turn ensures the concep-

Explaining an answer to a Datalog query is an essential task
towards Explainable AI, especially nowadays where Datalog
plays a critical role in the development of ontology-based
applications. A well-established approach for explaining a
query answer is the so-called why-provenance, which essentially collects all the subsets of the input database that can
be used to obtain that answer via some derivation process,
typically represented as a proof tree. It is well known, however, that computing the why-provenance for Datalog queries
is computationally expensive, and thus, very few attempts can
be found in the literature. The goal of this work is to demonstrate how off-the-shelf SAT solvers can be exploited towards
an efficient computation of the why-provenance for Datalog
queries. Interestingly, our SAT-based approach allows us to
build the why-provenance in an incremental fashion, that is,
one explanation at a time, which is much more useful in a
practical context than the one-shot computation of the whole
set of explanations as done by existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Datalog has emerged in the 1980s as a logic-based query language from Logic Programming and has been extensively
studied since then (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995). The
name Datalog reflects the intention of devising a counterpart of Prolog for data processing. It essentially extends
the language of unions of conjunctive queries, which corresponds to the select-project-join-union fragment of relational algebra, with the important feature of recursion, much
needed to express some natural queries. Among numerous
applications, Datalog has been heavily used in the context
of ontological query answering. In particular, for several
important ontology languages based on description logics
and existential rules, ontological query answering can be reduced to the problem of evaluating a Datalog query (see,
e.g., (Eiter et al. 2012; Benedikt et al. 2022)), which in turn
enables the exploitation of efficient Datalog engines such as
Soufflé (Jordan, Scholz, and Subotic 2016), VLog (Urbani,
Jacobs, and Krötzsch 2016), RDFox (Nenov et al. 2015), and
DLV (Leone et al. 2006), to name a few.
As for any other query language, explaining why a result
to a Datalog query is obtained is crucial towards transparCopyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10459

