The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Once and for All: Universal Transferable Adversarial Perturbation against Deep
Hashing-Based Facial Image Retrieval
Long Tang, Dengpan Ye* , Yunna Lv, Chuanxi Chen, Yunming Zhang
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
{l tang, yedp}@whu.edu.cn, lvyunnaa@outlook.com, {chencx, zhangyunming}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

User’s ID Photo

Deep Hashing (DH)-based image retrieval has been widely
applied to face-matching systems due to its accuracy and efficiency. However, this convenience comes with an increased
risk of privacy leakage. DH models inherit the vulnerability to
adversarial attacks, which can be used to prevent the retrieval
of private images. Existing adversarial attacks against DH
typically target a single image or a specific class of images,
lacking universal adversarial perturbation for the entire hash
dataset. In this paper, we propose the first universal transferable adversarial perturbation against DH-based facial image
retrieval, a single perturbation can protect all images. Specifically, we explore the relationship between clusters learned
by different DH models and define the optimization objective of universal perturbation as leaving from the overall hash
center. To mitigate the challenge of single-objective optimization, we randomly obtain sub-cluster centers and further propose sub-task-based meta-learning to aid in overall optimization. We test our method with popular facial datasets and DH
models, indicating impressive cross-image, -identity, -model,
and -scheme universal anti-retrieval performance. Compared
to state-of-the-art methods, our performance is competitive
in white-box settings and exhibits significant improvements
of 10% − 70% in transferability in all black-box settings.

Social Platforms

Query

Adversary

........

Retr

ieve

........
Interest Job Health

User’s Daily Photos

(a)
(b)

Privacy Leakage

Query

Adversary

User

+

Protected ID
Photo

........

Privacy Protected

Wrong ID’s Photos

Figure 1: Illustrations of: (a) Risk of privacy leakage and (b)
Protecting privacy in facial image retrieval.

turn his personal profile, image source, and a series of retrieval similar images. The datasets used to train these tools
are typically extracted from various social media platforms
and contain a large number of daily photos. Malicious users
may exploit an ID photo of one user uploaded to LinkedIn to
retrieve a large number of other personal photos of him from
the database, thereby exposing his daily life, interests, hobbies, profession, and other personal information, as shown in
Fig. 1(a). These photos could potentially be used for fraudulent activities and other illicit behaviors. Therefore, privacy
protection issues are receiving heightened attention.
Simultaneously, it has been established that DH models
are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Prior investigations
have encompassed untargeted attacks (Yang et al. 2018;
Xiao, Wang, and Gao 2020), targeted attacks (Bai et al.
2020; Hu et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021), and transferable attacks (Xiao and Wang 2021) on DH models, demonstrating
promising outcomes through adversarial perturbations and
patches. Recent studies have even made advancements in attacking cross-modal retrieval (Li et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). These insights
inspire us to design adversarial examples to prevent the exposure of privacy held within the database, as shown in Fig.
1(b). Specifically, perturbations can be incorporated into the
images before users share images on social platforms. Con-

Introduction
In light of the rapid advancements of the Internet and Artificial Intelligence, novel technologies leveraging big data
are significantly changing conventional lifestyles. Some enterprises extract copious amounts of facial images from social media to train face-matching systems. Subsequently,
these systems are employed in various practical scenarios,
including but not limited to security surveillance, photo
management, facial attendance, and face-based access control, thereby substantially streamlining daily routines. Deep
Hashing (DH), renowned for its expeditious processing,
minimal storage requirements, and non-disclosure of image features, has garnered extensive utilization within facematching systems (Luo et al. 2023). Nevertheless, this
progress is accompanied by a concern regarding the exposure of private information. Existing open-source facematching tools can take a person’s image as input and re* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5136

