The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Hierarchical Prompt with Structured Linguistic Knowledge for
Vision-Language Models
Yubin Wang1 , Xinyang Jiang2 , De Cheng3 , Dongsheng Li2 , Cairong Zhao1 *
1

2

Tongji University
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Xidian University

Abstract

Instruction T
What does a flower water lily look like among all types of flowers?
……
How can you identify a flower water lily among all types of flowers?

Prompt learning has become a prevalent strategy for adapting
vision-language foundation models to downstream tasks. As
large language models (LLMs) have emerged, recent studies
have explored the use of category-related descriptions as input to enhance prompt effectiveness. Nevertheless, conventional descriptions fall short of structured information that
effectively represents the interconnections among entities or
attributes linked to a particular category. To address this limitation and prioritize harnessing structured knowledge, this
paper advocates for leveraging LLMs to build a graph for
each description to model the entities and attributes describing the category, as well as their correlations. Preexisting
prompt tuning methods exhibit inadequacies in managing
this structured knowledge. Consequently, we propose a novel
approach called Hierarchical Prompt Tuning (HPT), which
enables simultaneous modeling of both structured and conventional linguistic knowledge. Specifically, we introduce a
relationship-guided attention module to capture pair-wise associations among entities and attributes for low-level prompt
learning. In addition, by incorporating high-level and globallevel prompts modeling overall semantics, the proposed hierarchical structure forges cross-level interlinks and empowers the model to handle more complex and long-term relationships. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our HPT
shows strong effectiveness and generalizes much better than
existing SOTA methods. Our code is available at https://
github.com/Vill-Lab/2024-AAAI-HPT.

LLM
Instruction 𝑻′
Reconstruct the following
sentence into 4 parts: All
entities, All attributes,
Relationships between...

+

Descriptions
Water lily has circular
blooms, broad leaves, showy
flowers with multiple petals.
……

LLM

leaves

Entity

broad

Attribute
Entity-to-entity
relationship
Entity-to-attribute
relationship

Water lily
leaves

Structured
Graph

blooms flowers
showy

broad circular pedals

Figure 1: We input a few hand-written instructions into LLM
to generate human-like category-related descriptions along
with structured graphs based on each description.

Introduction
Vision-Language foundation models (VLMs) (Radford et al.
2021; Jia et al. 2021), trained on large-scale datasets of
image-text pairs, have made remarkable advancements in
learning transferable representations. To effectively explore
the potential of these powerful foundation models, prompt
tuning methods (Zhou et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Khattak
et al. 2023) aim to learn a set of continuous vectors known as
prompt vectors and incorporate them in the input space, endowing the pre-trained network with a powerful representation capability. However, when confronted with ambiguous
category names, models frequently struggle to make accurate judgments regarding the corresponding visual concepts,

leading to underwhelming performance. Therefore, utilizing
category names as text input without the assistance of linguistic knowledge seems to be a suboptimal choice. Recent
methods (Zhang et al. 2023; Pratt, Liu, and Farhadi 2022;
Menon and Vondrick 2022) have addressed this issue by using large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 (Brown
et al. 2020). They take hand-written templates as input and
generate human-like texts, containing rich linguistic knowledge that complements few-shot visual recognition.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to complement natural linguistic descriptions with a structured representation of knowledge. We assert that this structured knowledge is essential for prompt tuning. Specifically, the descriptions of a category with unstructured knowledge consist of key entities and attributes that define the category.

* Corresponding Author (zhaocairong@tongji.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5749

