The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Cross-Modal and Uni-Modal Soft-Label Alignment for Image-Text Retrieval
Hailang Huang1 , Zhijie Nie1,2 , Ziqiao Wang3 , Ziyu Shang4
1

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Shen Yuan Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{huanghl, niezj}@act.buaa.edu.cn, zwang286@uottawa.ca, ziyus1999@seu.edu.cn
Abstract
Image-Image
Alignment

𝐼!

=𝒓

𝑰𝒏

…

𝑰 𝟏,

𝐼#

A man riding a wave on
top of a surfboard.
Image-Text
𝑇!
Alignment
True Negative
A bunch of carrots
sitting on a table.
𝑇"
False Negative
A man riding a giant
foamy wave on a
surfboard.
𝑇#

Text-Text
Alignment
𝒔 𝑻𝒊 , 𝑻𝒋 = 𝒓 𝑻𝒊 , 𝑻𝒋

, 𝑻𝒏
𝒔 𝑰𝟏

𝒔 𝑰𝒊 , 𝑰𝒋 = 𝒓 𝑰𝒊, 𝑰𝒋

𝐼"

…

Current image-text retrieval methods have demonstrated impressive performance in recent years. However, they still
face two problems: the inter-modal matching missing problem and the intra-modal semantic loss problem. These problems can significantly affect the accuracy of image-text retrieval. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
method called Cross-modal and Uni-modal Soft-label Alignment (CUSA). Our method leverages the power of uni-modal
pre-trained models to provide soft-label supervision signals
for the image-text retrieval model. Additionally, we introduce
two alignment techniques, Cross-modal Soft-label Alignment
(CSA) and Uni-modal Soft-label Alignment (USA), to overcome false negatives and enhance similarity recognition between uni-modal samples. Our method is designed to be plugand-play, meaning it can be easily applied to existing imagetext retrieval models without changing their original architectures. Extensive experiments on various image-text retrieval
models and datasets, we demonstrate that our method can
consistently improve the performance of image-text retrieval
and achieve new state-of-the-art results. Furthermore, our
method can also boost the uni-modal retrieval performance
of image-text retrieval models, enabling it to achieve universal retrieval. The code and supplementary files can be found
at https://github.com/lerogo/aaai24 itr cusa.

Figure 1: Illustration of our approach. We use soft-labels
r(·, ·) generated by uni-modal teacher models as a supervisory signal to guide cross-modal alignment and uni-modal
alignment for image-text retrieval models.

two limitations: the inter-modal matching missing problem and the intra-modal semantic loss problem.
The inter-modal matching missing problem refers to the
situation where, during model training, samples that should
be matched are mistakenly treated as unmatched due to
contrastive learning techniques and random sampling, resulting in a decrease in model performance. As shown in
Figure 1, in a batch containing n image-text pairs, if the
image I1 is considered as the anchor, the traditional contrast learning used in most ITR methods treats the text T1
as the positive sample matched with it (hard-labels), and
all other texts Tj,j6=1 as negative samples, but text Tn is
matched with image I1 . Samples like Tn are called false
negative samples, and the noisy signals caused by such false
negative samples will weaken the performance of the ITR
model. All of the image-text pairs in Figure 1 are sampled
from the widely used MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014) dataset,
demonstrating the existence of the inter-modal matching
missing problem. This problem has also attracted the attention of other researchers (Parekh et al. 2021; Chun et al.
2021, 2022). (Parekh et al. 2021) published the first dataset
CrissCrossed Caption (CxC) with soft-labels to correct false
negative samples, but this dataset only focuses on scoring the similarity between texts, resulting in many missing

Introduction
Image-Text Retrieval (ITR) retrieves relevant samples from
one modality based on a query in another modality. It involves two sub-tasks, one is image-to-text retrieval, which
requires finding the most relevant caption in the text gallery
for an input image, and the other one is text-to-image retrieval, which requires finding the most relevant image in
the image gallery for an input query text. Most existing
ITR methods (Radford et al. 2021; Diao et al. 2021; Zeng
et al. 2023) adopt contrastive learning techniques, treating
one sample as an anchor and the corresponding sample in
the other modality as a positive sample, while the uncorrelated samples are considered negatives. These methods aim
to maximize the similarity between anchor and positive samples and minimize the similarity between anchor and negative samples for cross-modal retrieval. Although these ITR
methods have achieved impressive performance, they have
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18298

