The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Tangled Derivative Logic of Metric Spaces
David Fernández-Duque1 * and Yoàv Montacute2 *
1

University of Barcelona
University of Cambridge
fernandez-duque@ub.edu, yoav.montacute@cl.cam.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Dynamical systems are abstract models of interaction between space and time. They are often used in fields such
as physics and engineering to understand complex processes,
but due to their general nature, they have found applications
for studying computational processes, interaction in multiagent systems, machine learning algorithms and other computer science related phenomena. In the vast majority of applications, a dynamical system consists of the action of a
continuous ‘transition function’ on a metric space. In this
work, we consider decidable formal systems for reasoning
about such structures. Spatial logics can be traced back to the
1940’s, but our work follows a more dynamic turn that these
logics have taken due to two recent developments: the study
of the spatial (or ‘topological’) µ-calculus, and the integration of linear temporal logic with logics based on the Cantor
derivative. In this paper, we combine dynamic spatial logics
based on the Cantor derivative and the ‘next point in time’
operators with an expressively complete fixed point operator
to produce a combination of the spatial µ-calculus with linear
temporal logic. We show that the resulting logics are decidable and have a natural axiomatisation. Moreover, we prove
that these logics are complete for interpretations on the Cantor space, the rational numbers, and subspaces thereof.

Figure 1: Orbits around a centre of gravity

Reasoning about dynamical systems is highly relevant to
AI. We mention a few examples: Qualitative spatial reasoning is a branch of AI that aims to capture basic relations between regions in space in a way that is computationally efficient and thus suitable for applications (see (Cohn and Renz
2008; Stell 2019) for overviews). The region connection calculus (RCC8) (Egenhofer and Franzosa 1991; Randell, Cui,
and Cohn 1992) was introduced for geolocalisation applications, and is closely connected to modal logic (Wolter
and Zakharyaschev 2000). Modern-day applications such as
self-driving cars require the combination of dynamic and
spatial reasoning (for examples, see (Gabelaia et al. 2005)),
modelled via dynamical systems (see (Dickmanns, Mysliwetz, and Christians 1990; Hua et al. 2022)).
As models of ‘space’, we will work in the setting of metric spaces, which are sets of points whose mutual distance is
measurable. These spaces generalise the plane, or other Euclidean spaces, but also include some more unusual examples such as the Cantor set.1 Formally, these are structures
X = ⟨X, δ⟩, where X is any set and δ : X × X → [0, ∞) is
the ‘distance’ map satisfying δ(x, x) = 0, δ(x, y) = δ(y, x)
and δ(x, z) ≤ δ(x, y) + δ(y, z).
A discrete time dynamical system is a metric space
equipped with a transition function, representing movement.
Two recent developments have taken spatial logic into a
more ‘dynamic’ direction. The first is the development of
the spatial (or ‘topological’) µ-calculus (Baltag, Bezhanishvili, and Fernández-Duque 2021; Goldblatt and Hodkin-

Introduction
Our planet is orbited by a myriad of man-made satellites, whose movement must be predicted and controlled to
e.g. avoid collision with other objects. To this end, their position over time is modelled using our knowledge of physics,
and the mathematical structure governing this behaviour is
known as a dynamical system (Figure 1). Given the initial
position and momentum of a satellite, one may predict the
path it will take: it may be periodic, diverge into space or
crash into the earth. In such models, both space and time are
continuous, i.e. given by Euclidean spaces; however, they
can be approximated discretely for a better computational
treatment, or even be represented via finite relational structures (Example 1 and Figure 5). One can thus imagine satellites moving one ‘tick of the clock’ at a time, for a suitably
small time interval.

1
One can work in the even more general class of topological
spaces, as in e.g. (Fernández-Duque and Montacute 2023), but metric spaces are normally more adequate for applications regarding
physical space.

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10509

