The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Nearly Equitable Allocations beyond Additivity and Monotonicity
Siddharth Barman1 , Umang Bhaskar2 , Yeshwant Pandit2 , Soumyajit Pyne2
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai
barman@iisc.ac.in, umang@tifr.res.in, soumyajit.pyne@tifr.res.in, yeshwant.pandit@tifr.res.in
2

Abstract

bundles are the same and, hence, the agents are equally content (Dubins and Spanier 1961). If the agents have identical
valuations, then the two notions coincide.
Envy-freeness has received significant attention in classic fair division literature. It is known, for example, that
for additive valuations over divisible goods, an allocation
that maximizes the Nash social welfare (the product of the
agents’ values for their allocated bundles) is also envy-free
(Varian 1974).
The widely used platform Spliddit.org implements multiple methods to provide solutions for common fair division
problems (Goldman and Procaccia 2015). The platform uses
envy-freeness, in particular, as a fairness criterion for relevant applications.
Notably, equitability is a simpler construct to reason
about, since it requires fewer comparisons. To test an allocation for equitability, we only need each agent’s value for her
own bundle, rather than every agent’s value for every bundle.
Perhaps for this reason, equitable solutions are important
in practical applications of fair division. Experimental studies have noted that, in specific fair-division settings, users
tend to prefer equitable allocations over other notions of fairness (Herreiner and Puppe 2009).1 Further, in bargaining
experiments, equitability often plays a significant role in determining the outcome (Herreiner and Puppe 2010). Also in
Spliddit.org, for fairly dividing rent among housemates, equitability was noted to be important as a refining criterion,
following envy-freeness. The latest rent-division algorithm
used in Spliddit.org computes solutions that satisfy this supporting objective (Gal et al. 2017).2
The real-world significance of equitability is further highlighted by the case of divorce settlements. The two legal
means of dividing property in the United States are community property and equitable distribution (Kagan 2021). In
the community property rule, holdings are divided equally
among the divorcing couple and, hence, the rule induces an
envy-free division. Equitable distribution, on the other hand,
takes into account various factors (such as the employability and financial needs of each party) for dividing the as-

Equitability (EQ) in fair division requires that items be allocated such that all agents value the bundle they receive
equally. With indivisible items, an equitable allocation may
not exist, and hence we instead consider a meaningful analog, EQx, that requires equitability up to any item. EQx allocations exist for monotone, additive valuations. However,
if (1) the agents’ valuations are not additive or (2) the set of
indivisible items includes both goods and chores (positively
and negatively valued items), then prior to the current work it
was not known whether EQx allocations exist or not.
We study both the existence and efficient computation of EQx
allocations. (1) For monotone valuations (not necessarily additive), we show that EQx allocations always exist. Also, for
the large class of weakly well-layered valuations, EQx allocations can be found in polynomial time. Further, we prove that
approximately EQx allocations can be computed efficiently
under general monotone valuations. (2) For non-monotone
valuations, we show that an EQx allocation may not exist,
even for two agents with additive valuations. Under some
special cases, however, we show existence and efficient computability of EQx allocations. This includes the case of two
agents with additive valuations where each item is either a
good or a chore, and there are no mixed items.

1

Introduction

In the problem of fair division, a central planner (principal)
is tasked with fairly partitioning a set of items among interested agents. If the items are indivisible, which is our focus,
each item must be allocated integrally to an agent. Every
agent i has a valuation function vi that specifies agent i’s
value for each subset of items. Here, an item x could be a
‘good’, if every agent always values it positively, a ‘chore’, if
every agent always values it negatively, or ‘mixed’, if across
agents the value for item x can be both positive and negative.
What constitutes a fair allocation of items has no single
answer. Over the years, various notions have been studied in
depth (Moulin 2004). Possibly the most prominent among
them are envy-freeness and equitability. An allocation is said
to be envy-free if each agent prefers her own bundle of items
to the bundle allocated to anyone else (Foley 1966). An allocation is said to be equitable if agents’ values for their own

1

These prior works refer to equitability as inequality aversion.
Specifically, rent divisions that maximize the minimum value,
called maximin solutions, are nearly equitable. The latest algorithm
implemented in Spliddit.org finds rent divisions that satisfy envyfreeness and are also maximin.
2

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9494

