The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Transferable Adversarial Attacks for Object Detection
Using Object-Aware Significant Feature Distortion
Xinlong Ding1 , Jiansheng Chen1 * , Hongwei Yu1 , Yu Shang2 , Yining Qin1 , Huimin Ma1
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
dingxl22@xs.ustb.edu.cn, jschen@ustb.edu.cn, yuhongwei22@xs.ustb.edu.cn, shangy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
qinyn22@xs.ustb.edu.cn, mhmpub@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Transferable black-box adversarial attacks against classifiers
by disturbing the intermediate-layer features have been extensively studied in recent years. However, these methods
have not yet achieved satisfactory performances when directly applied to object detectors. This is largely because the
features of detectors are fundamentally different from that of
the classifiers. In this study, we propose a simple but effective method to improve the transferability of adversarial examples for object detectors by leveraging the properties of
spatial consistency and limited equivariance of object detectors’ features. Specifically, we combine a novel loss function and deliberately designed data augmentation to distort
the backbone features of object detectors by suppressing significant features corresponding to objects and amplifying the
surrounding vicinal features corresponding to object boundaries. As such the target object and background area on the
generated adversarial samples are more likely to be confused by other detectors. Extensive experimental results show
that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art black-box
transferability for untargeted attacks on various models, including one/two-stage, CNN/Transformer-based, and anchorfree/anchor-based detectors.

Figure 1: Adversarial examples crafted on FasterRCNN by
our method effectively suppress the significant features and
amplify the vicinal ones in both surrogate and target models.
High-brightness areas correspond to high-value features.

Introduction

possible queries in practice. Consequently, transfer-based attacks have been proposed, employing white-box attacks on a
local surrogate model and leveraging adversarial examples’
transferability to attack the target model.
Traditional white-box attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017;
Madry et al. 2017) often suffer from overfitting to the source
model, resulting in poor transferability to other black-box
models. Various methods have been proposed to address this
issue, including input transformation based (Xie et al. 2019;
Dong et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020), gradient optimization
based (Dong et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2020),
and model ensemble based (Dong et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2017; Xiong et al. 2022). Moreover, rather than directly manipulating the output layer, attacking the intermediate layers (Zhou et al. 2018; Naseer et al. 2018; Ganeshan, BS, and
Babu 2019; Lu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b; Zhang et al.
2022a,b) has shown great potential for crafting more transferable adversarial examples recently.

Deep neural networks have shown remarkable performance
in real-world applications, yet concerns arise due to their
vulnerability to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2014).
Adversarial attacks are crucial for evaluating the robustness
of models and can be categorized in either white-box or
black-box manner based on the level of attacker knowledge.
Generally speaking, black-box attacks are more challenging
and realistic for practical applications, as attackers usually
cannot fully access the model’s structure and parameters.
One approach to implement black-box adversarial attacks
is to estimate gradients from queried data, known as querybased attacks (Brendel, Rauber, and Bethge 2018; Ilyas et al.
2018; Tramèr et al. 2017; Uesato et al. 2018). However,
these attacks are often constrained by the limited number of
* Corresponding author
Code is available at https://github.com/wakuwu/OSFD
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1546

