The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimistic Value Instructors for Cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Chao Li1 , Yupeng Zhang2 , Jianqi Wang3 , Yujing Hu4 ∗ , Shaokang Dong1 , Wenbin Li1 , Tangjie Lv4 ,
Changjie Fan4 , Yang Gao1 *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hangzhou, China
3
Meituan, Beijing, China
4
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, Hangzhou, China
chaoli1996@smail.nju.edu.cn, huyujing@corp.netease.com, gaoy@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning, decentralized agents hold the promise of overcoming the combinatorial
explosion of joint action space and enabling greater scalability. However, they are susceptible to a game-theoretic pathology called relative overgeneralization that shadows the optimal joint action. Although recent value-decomposition algorithms guide decentralized agents by learning a factored
global action value function, the representational limitation
and the inaccurate sampling of optimal joint actions during
the learning process make this problem still. To address this
limitation, this paper proposes a novel algorithm called Optimistic Value Instructors (OVI). The main idea behind OVI
is to introduce multiple optimistic instructors into the valuedecomposition paradigm, which are capable of suggesting
potentially optimal joint actions and rectifying the factored
global action value function to recover these optimal actions. Specifically, the instructors maintain optimistic value
estimations of per-agent local actions and thus eliminate the
negative effects caused by other agents’ exploratory or suboptimal non-cooperation, enabling accurate identification and
suggestion of optimal joint actions. Based on the instructors’
suggestions, the paper further presents two instructive constraints to rectify the factored global action value function to
recover these optimal joint actions, thus overcoming the RO
problem. Experimental evaluation of OVI on various cooperative multi-agent tasks demonstrates its superior performance
against multiple baselines, highlighting its effectiveness.

70

i

reward(a , a )

N

M

60
50
40

iN

30
20

j

iM

10

6
4

0
−6

2
−4

0
−2

0

aj

−2
2

4

−4
6

i

a

−6

Figure 1: The relative overgeneralization pathology in a twoagent cooperative stage game.

agent’s local information demonstrates greater scalability in
practice (Claus and Boutilier 1998).
Although decentralized agents allow for scalable learning
of the joint coordinated policy by combining all agents’ decentralized policies, they are susceptible to a game-theoretic
pathology known as relative overgeneralization (RO). This
issue hinders agents from selecting the optimal joint actions.
RO occurs when a sub-optimal Nash Equilibrium in the joint
action space is preferred over an optimal Nash Equilibrium,
which is because each agent’s local action in the sub-optimal
equilibrium is a better choice when matched with arbitrary
actions of other collaborative agents (Wei and Luke 2016).
For example, we consider a two-agent cooperative stage
game. As depicted in Figure 1, the axes ai and aj respectively represent actions that agents i and j may select, and
the axis reward (ai , aj ) denotes the joint reward after selecting the joint action (ai , aj ). One can observe that the
joint action M has higher reward than N . However, when
agent j selects its action uniformly, the sub-optimal local
action iN has better average local value estimation than the
optimal ones iM and thus agent i tends to select action iN ,
leading to a sub-optimal joint action.
The RO problem primarily stems from the limited information available to decentralized agents, as their decentralized value estimations of local coordinated actions may
be biased by other agents’ exploratory or sub-optimal noncooperative action selections. One promising approach to al-

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has made significant progress in various real-world multiagent tasks, including traffic signal control (Wang et al.
2020b), autonomous vehicles (Cao et al. 2012), sensor networks (Zhang and Lesser 2011), and robot swarm (Huang
et al. 2020). However, learning effective coordinated policies for agents in these complex multi-agent tasks remains
a major challenge. The scalability problem is a significant
hurdle as the joint action space grows exponentially with the
number of agents. Consequently, a centralized agent fails to
address the combinatorial explosion of all agents’ joint action space, while a decentralized agent conditioned on each
* Corresponding authors: Yujing Hu, Yang Gao
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17453

