The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TR-DETR: Task-Reciprocal Transformer for Joint Moment Retrieval and
Highlight Detection
Hao Sun1,2,3 * , Mingyao Zhou1,2,3 * , Wenjing Chen4† , Wei Xie1,2,3†
1

Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Smart Learning,
Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
2
School of Computer Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
3
National Language Resources Monitoring and Research Center for Network Media,
Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
4
School of Computer Science, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, China
haosun@ccnu.edu.cn, zhoumingyao@mails.ccnu.edu.cn, chenwenjing@hbut.edu.cn, XW@mail.ccnu.edu.cn
Abstract

of user needs, MR&HD based on user-provided natural language queries is extremely challenging.
The goal of MR is to precisely search for semantically
related moments from whole videos guided by natural language queries (Li et al. 2022). The common pipeline of MR
involves several steps. Firstly, pre-trained networks are utilized to extract features from the input video and text. Subsequently, cross-modal interaction is performed based on the
extracted features to obtain the query relevance score of the
candidate moment or the frame-level start-end probability
of the relevant moment (Zhang et al. 2023). HD based on
queries strives to assign highlight scores to each video clip
based on considering the user needs (Guo et al. 2022). Existing methods (Liu et al. 2022b; Xiong and Wang 2023) utilize transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) or graph neural networks (Scarselli et al. 2008) to perform single-modal feature
encoding or cross-modal interaction.
Due to the task similarity between MR and HD based on
queries, and the commonality between their methods involving multi-modal feature extraction, feature interaction, etc.,
some works (Lei, Berg, and Bansal 2021; Lin et al. 2023)
have devoted to designing various multi-task networks for
joint MR&HD. For example, Moment-DETR (Lei, Berg,
and Bansal 2021) pioneers the application of DETR (Carion et al. 2020) for joint MR&HD. QD-DETR (Moon et al.
2023) introduces a query-dependent video representation
module, making moment predictions reliant on user queries.
MH-DETR (Xu et al. 2023) introduces a pooling operation
into the encoder and incorporates a cross-modality interaction module to fuse visual and query features. In these methods, two isolated task heads are added after the shared multimodal feature extraction and feature interaction modules for
joint MR&HD. These methods generally focus on improving the discrimination of multi-modal feature extraction and
feature interaction through a multi-task learning scheme,
achieving good performance. However, the reciprocity between MR and HD tasks is ignored.
For MR, the highlight scores from HD based on userprovided queries can be utilized to assist in eliminating
query-irrelevant clips, thereby boosting moment retrieval accuracy. In turn, for HD based on queries, the results of mo-

Video moment retrieval (MR) and highlight detection (HD)
based on natural language queries are two highly related
tasks, which aim to obtain relevant moments within videos
and highlight scores of each video clip. Recently, several
methods have been devoted to building DETR-based networks to solve both MR and HD jointly. These methods simply add two separate task heads after multi-modal feature extraction and feature interaction, achieving good performance.
Nevertheless, these approaches underutilize the reciprocal relationship between two tasks. In this paper, we propose a
task-reciprocal transformer based on DETR (TR-DETR) that
focuses on exploring the inherent reciprocity between MR
and HD. Specifically, a local-global multi-modal alignment
module is first built to align features from diverse modalities into a shared latent space. Subsequently, a visual feature refinement is designed to eliminate query-irrelevant information from visual features for modal interaction. Finally,
a task cooperation module is constructed to refine the retrieval pipeline and the highlight score prediction process by
utilizing the reciprocity between MR and HD. Comprehensive experiments on QVHighlights, Charades-STA and TVSum datasets demonstrate that TR-DETR outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/mingyao1120/TR-DETR.

Introduction
With the ubiquity of digital devices and the expansion of
the Internet, the number and variety of videos are rapidly
increasing (Foo et al. 2023). How to quickly search out the
desired moments from massive videos (called moment retrieval, MR) (Gao et al. 2017) and efficiently browse videos
(called highlight detection, HD) (Molino and Gygli 2018)
according to the needs of users has attracted widespread
attention. In practical applications, user needs can be expressed in natural language queries (Wang et al. 2022). Due
to the complexity of video content as well as the diversity
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4998

