The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revisiting Graph-Based Fraud Detection in Sight of Heterophily and Spectrum
Fan Xu3 , Nan Wang1 * , Hao Wu3 , Xuezhi Wen1 , Xibin Zhao2 * , Hai Wan2
1
School of Software, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
IAT, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{markxu, wuhao2022}@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
{wangnanbjtu, 22126399}@bjtu.edu.cn; {zxb, wanhai}@tsinghua.edu.cn

2

Abstract

constructed fraud graph, as a deep neural network for graph
representation learning, Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Jin
et al. 2021) has been demonstrated to be effective in this
task. Specifically, GNN employs neural modules to aggregate neighbor information and update node representations,
enabling the discrimination of fraudulent entities.
However, fraud detection scenarios are inherently heterophily (Zhu et al. 2021), i.e., target nodes (like node 5
in Figure 1) and their direct neighbors are prone to different class labels or features. In practical applications, fraudulent entities may use benign entities as springboards to
perform high-order interactions with multi-hop neighbors
to accomplish fraudulent actions or transmit fraudulent information, e.g., fraud node 3 and 6 are two-hop neighbors in Figure 1. For instance, in financial transaction networks (Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra 2015), fraudsters often use
non-fraudulent users to conduct transactions.
Due to the existence of heterophily, the performance of
conventional graph neural network is unsatisfactory. This is
because vanilla GNN is naturally a low-pass filter, which
forces the representation of adjacent nodes to be similar
during the information aggregation process. Then it may
destroy the discriminative information of anomaly nodes.
Furthermore, in the domain of fraud detection, heterophily
graph datasets exhibit highly imbalanced class distribution
properties. This phenomenon results in anomaly nodes being submerged in normal nodes, which manifests as high homophily of normal nodes and high heterophily of anomaly
nodes. This is also called the common camouflage problem (Zhang et al. 2023) in fraud detection scenarios. Moreover, current semi-supervised fraud detection methods based
on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) suffer from limitations
in terms of label utilization. These approaches typically
learn node representations through a message passing mechanism, extract node embeddings from the final layer of the
network, and incorporate label information during the training process. Evidently, these approaches overlook the intricate high-order associations between node label information, node characteristics, and their contextual surroundings.
The current paramount concern entails addressing the heterophily issue within the context of extreme category imbalance. The advanced methods can be divided into two
types. The first type of the methods is to design a new message aggregation mechanism (Xu et al. 2023) to simultane-

Graph-based fraud detection (GFD) can be regarded as a challenging semi-supervised node binary classification task. In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNN) have been widely
applied to GFD, characterizing the anomalous possibility of
a node by aggregating neighbor information. However, fraud
graphs are inherently heterophilic, thus most of GNNs perform poorly due to their assumption of homophily. In addition, due to the existence of heterophily and class imbalance
problem, the existing models do not fully utilize the precious
node label information. To address the above issues, this paper proposes a semi-supervised GNN-based fraud detector
SEC-GFD. This detector includes a hybrid filtering module
and a local environmental constraint module, the two modules are utilized to solve heterophily and label utilization
problem respectively. The first module starts from the perspective of the spectral domain, and solves the heterophily
problem to a certain extent. Specifically, it divides the spectrum into various mixed-frequency bands based on the correlation between spectrum energy distribution and heterophily.
Then in order to make full use of the node label information, a
local environmental constraint module is adaptively designed.
The comprehensive experimental results on four real-world
fraud detection datasets denote that SEC-GFD outperforms
other competitive graph-based fraud detectors. We release our
code at https://github.com/Sunxkissed/SEC-GFD.

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet, various fraudulent entities emerge in fraud activities, and the huge losses
caused by this have attracted continuous attention from industry, academia and state agencies (Wang et al. 2018;
Pourhabibi et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2021).
For instance, fraudulent behaviors aimed at online payment
have caused huge property losses to clients; and fraudulent
or malicious comments on websites may bring negative effects on merchants and consumers.
In recent years, graph-based fraud detection methods (Hooi et al. 2017; Qin et al. 2022) have been widely used
in practical applications. Using entities in fraud scenarios as
nodes and interactions between entities as edges, graph-level
fraud detection can be achieved. Furthermore, based on the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9214

