The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Axiomatization of OWL 2 EL Ontologies from Data
by Means of Formal Concept Analysis
Francesco Kriegel
Theoretical Computer Science, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
francesco.kriegel@tu-dresden.de

Abstract

Moreover, DLs and ontologies have found extensive applications in healthcare and life sciences. The Systematized
Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT,
or SCT) is an ontology that represents medical terms used in
electronic health records, such as clinical findings, symptoms, and diagnoses. It is employed in clinical decision
support systems to assist healthcare professionals in making accurate diagnoses, suggesting appropriate treatments,
and predicting outcomes based on patient-specific information. The Gene Ontology (GO), the world’s largest source
of information on the functions of genes, is a foundation for
computational analysis of large-scale molecular biology and
genetics experiments in biomedical research.
Among the different DLs, the EL family (Baader, Brandt,
Lutz 2005, 2008) stands out as a lightweight option. EL is
designed to strike a balance between expressivity and computational complexity, making it an ideal choice for applications where scalability and latency are crucial. It offers a
more restricted set of constructs compared to other DLs, but
can thus handle large-scale ontologies efficiently. The Web
Ontology Language includes it as the profile OWL 2 EL.
Every DL ontology is subdivided into two parts. The
ABox consists of factual statements about specific individuals or objects in the domain, such as assignment of individuals to concepts and linkage between individuals by roles.
The TBox defines concepts and their hierarchy, roles and
their characteristics, and constraints or rules that govern all
individuals in the domain. By separating ABox and TBox, a
DL ontology provides a clear distinction between instancelevel and schema-level knowledge. This separation enables
reusing the same TBox across different ABoxes, which in
turn promotes scalability and maintainability, as changes in
the TBox are propagated to all associated ABoxes.
SCT and GO are formulated in EL. For instance, SCT
contains the TBox statement

We present an FCA-based axiomatization method that produces a complete OWL 2 EL TBox (the terminological part of
an OWL 2 EL ontology) from a graph dataset in at most exponential time. We describe technical details that allow for efficient implementation as well as variations that dispense with
the computation of extremely large axioms, thereby rendering the approach applicable albeit some completeness is lost.
Moreover, we evaluate the prototype on real-world datasets.

Introduction
Description Logics (DLs) (Baader, Horrocks, Lutz, Sattler
2017) are formal languages used in knowledge-based systems that reason and make inferences about complex domains, particularly where precision and explainability are
essential. By representing knowledge as ontologies built
with DLs, these systems can perform automated reasoning
to answer queries and thereby assist in making decisions
based on the encoded knowledge. DLs are fundamental to
the Semantic Web (Hitzler, Krötzsch, Rudolph 2010), a vision of the World Wide Web where information is represented in a machine-readable format. They provide the logical underpinning for the Web Ontology Language (OWL),
which is widely used in the Semantic Web to enable better
interoperability across different applications, domains, and
natural languages.
In e-commerce, DL ontologies can be used to categorize
products into different classes and sub-classes based on their
attributes, features, and properties. This enables efficient
search and navigation for users on e-commerce platforms,
such as eBay and Alibaba (Shi, J. Chen, Dong, Khan, Liang,
Zhou, Wu, Horrocks 2023). In finance, where accuracy and
explicability are crucial, the DL formalism enables clear and
unambiguous representation of financial concepts, such as
assets, liabilities, investments, and transactions. Two examples are the Financial Regulation Ontology (FRO), and the
Financial Industry Business Ontology (FIBO). Another example is the Dow Jones Knowledge Graph (Horrocks, Olivares, Cocchi, Motik, Roy 2022), which does not use DLs
but similar Semantic Web technologies such as SHACL (Bogaerts, Jakubowski, Van den Bussche 2022).

Common cold
⊑ Disease ⊓ ∃causative agent.Virus
⊓ ∃finding site.Upper respiratory tract structure
⊓ ∃pathological process.Infectious process
which is a concept inclusion (CI) and expresses that a common cold (the premise) is a disease that has as pathological
process an infectious process, is caused by a virus, and can
be found in the upper respiratory tract (the conclusion). We

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10597

