The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploring Base-Class Suppression with Prior Guidance for
Bias-Free One-Shot Object Detection
Wenwen Zhang1 , Yun Hu2 , Hangguan Shan1 , Eryun Liu1 *
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, China
{wenwenzhang, hshan, eryunliu}@zju.edu.cn, huyun@shanghaitech.edu.cn

One-shot object detection (OSOD) aims to detect all object
instances towards the given category specified by a query image. Most existing studies in OSOD endeavor to establish effective cross-image correlation with limited query information, however, ignoring the problems of the model bias towards the base classes and the generalization degradation on
the novel classes. Observing this, we propose a novel algorithm, namely Base-class Suppression with Prior Guidance
(BSPG) network to achieve bias-free OSOD. Specifically, the
objects of base categories can be detected by a base-class
predictor and eliminated by a base-class suppression module (BcS). Moreover, a prior guidance module (PG) is designed to calculate the correlation of high-level features in
a non-parametric manner, producing a class-agnostic prior
map with unbiased semantic information to guide the subsequent detection process. Equipped with the proposed two
modules, we endow the model with a strong discriminative
ability to distinguish the target objects from distractors belonging to the base classes. Extensive experiments show that
our method outperforms the previous techniques by a large
margin and achieves new state-of-the-art performance under
various evaluation settings.

Target Image

Weight-shared
Backbone

Target Feature

Abstract

Prediction
Features
Correlation
and Metric

Query Feature
Query Image

(a) Existing one-shot object detection frameworks
Base-class Predictor
High-level
Features Extraction
and Correlation
Target Feature

Target Image

Query Image

Weight-shared
Backbone

1

Prediction
Base-class
Prior Map Suppression

Features
Correlation
and Metric

Query Feature

(b) Our base-class suppression with prior guidance network

Figure 1: Comparison between existing frameworks and
ours. Existing models mostly exhibit a preference for familiar base class (e.g., person) rather than novel objects specified by the query image (e.g., horse). We propose a baseclass suppression module to eliminate base-class distractors,
and a non-parametric prior guidance module to generate a
class-agnostic prior map to guide the detection process.

Introduction
Benefiting from the flourishing of deep convolutional neural
networks, object detection has made tremendous progress
over the past few years (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016;
He et al. 2017). Nevertheless, most of the advanced methods heavily rely on large-scale labeled datasets (Deng et al.
2009; Lin et al. 2014), and they may struggle with new applications where novel-class objects are not witnessed during
the training phase. In light of the powerful cognitive ability
of humans to recognize new objects with only a few examples, few-shot learning (FSL) has emerged as a promising
technique (Vinyals et al. 2016; Sung et al. 2018). FSL constructs models that can generalize to new classes with limited annotated data, offering a potential solution for object
detection in scenarios involving novel-class objects.
In this paper, we undertake the application of FSL in
the field of object detection, termed one-shot object detection (OSOD), where the model aims to detect all instances

of the given category specified by only one query image
patch. In recent years, the field of few-shot object detection has thrived (Fan et al. 2020a; Chen et al. 2021; Han
et al. 2022), in which prevalent approaches often incorporate transfer-learning, meta-learning, and metric-learning to
deal with the task. Most existing works in OSOD adopt the
metric-learning paradigm and recognize new objects based
on the similarity metrics between image pairs without finetuning (Hsieh et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022b; Yang et al.
2022). However, they are generally dedicated to exploring effective cross-image feature correlation to better use
the limited information, neglecting the phenomenon of the
model bias towards the base classes and the generalization
degradation on the novel classes (Fan et al. 2021; Lang et al.
2022). Due to the extremely unbalanced distribution of base
and novel-class datasets, the learned model will inevitably

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7314

