The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Object Interaction Learning
with Counterfactual Dynamics Models
Jongwook Choi* 1 , Sungtae Lee* 2 , Xinyu Wang1 , Sungryull Sohn3 , Honglak Lee1,3
1

University of Michigan
Individual Researcher
3
LG AI Research
jwook@umich.edu, sytb135@gmail.com, honglak@eecs.umich.edu
2

Abstract

2021). Unsupervised learning often enables faster learning
and achieves better generalization performance when multiple tasks are given after the skill acquiral or pre-training
phase.
Despite a number of successes in unsupervised skill discovery (Eysenbach et al. 2018; Sharma et al. 2019; Park
et al. 2022) or task-agnostic exploration based on stateentropy maximization or diversity (Pathak et al. 2017; Burda
et al. 2019), relatively only a few attempts have been made
on environments and tasks with multiple entities (e.g. objects in robotics manipulation). In the context of robotics
manipulation or (discrete) entity-centric environments other
than locomotion or maze navigation environments, exploration can be quite challenging because of this nature of
multiple entities. One limitation of novelty-seeking exploration methods in the reward-free context is that exploration
would easily converge to a low-hanging fruit behavior where
exploration mostly focuses on one particular entity. For instance, in robotics manipulation environments, diversification or novelty seeking of the entire state can be easily dominated by that of the embodied agent itself (i.e., proprioceptive states) or some easy-to-control objects only, as observed
and reported in (Zhao et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2021; Park et al.
2022). More interesting primitive behaviors would be interactions between many objects, for more realistic and challenging multi-object tasks such as block stacking (Lee et al.
2021; Sancaktar, Blaes, and Martius 2022) or furniture assembly (Lee et al. 2019; Ghasemipour et al. 2022). Notably,
some recent works including (Sancaktar, Blaes, and Martius
2022; Cho, Kim, and Kim 2022) present reward-free exploration and skill learning in multi-object manipulation tasks.
In this work, we focus on learning a set of primitive skills
that enable interaction between different objects in a taskagnostic, unsupervised fashion. Roughly speaking, interaction between two objects can be described as an action or
event that occurs when two objects have a (mutual) effect
on each other. Our work leverages an inductive bias that an
interaction between objects learned in a task-agnostic manner can be a useful event and hence a useful primitive behavior for solving downstream tasks. Such object-object interactions (as well as agent-object interactions) are usually
sparse and difficult to reach with naive exploration, but at
the same time can be useful bottleneck states an agent would
want to explore and visit often to achieve bigger tasks. In

We present COIL (Counterfactual Object Interaction Learning), a novel way of learning skills of object interactions on
entity-centric environments. The goal is to learn primitive behaviors that can induce interactions without external reward
or any supervision. Existing skill discovery methods are limited to locomotion, simple navigation tasks, or single-object
manipulation tasks, mostly not inducing interaction between
objects. Unlike a monolithic representation usually used in
prior skill learning methods, we propose to use a structured
goal representation that can query and scope which objects
to interact with, which can serve as a basis for solving more
complex downstream tasks. We design a novel counterfactual
intrinsic reward through the use of either a forward model or
successor features that can learn an interaction skill between
a pair of objects given as a goal. Through experiments on
continuous control environments such as Magnetic Block and
2.5-D Stacking Box, we demonstrate that an agent can learn
object interaction behaviors (e.g., attaching or stacking one
block to another) without any external rewards or domainspecific knowledge.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable
progress at many application domains such as playing games
(Mnih et al. 2013; Vinyals et al. 2019), and robotics control (Andrychowicz et al. 2020), etc. Very often RL agents
are trained to specific tasks, with access to task-specific extrinsic rewards. A major drawback of task-specific training is that a proper reward function needs to be given, designed, and tuned so as to achieve desired behaviors, which
can be often time-consuming and limits scalability in practice. It is important to be able to solve the task with a very
sparse reward signal upon completion/failure of the task, or
even without any external task rewards. Unsupervised RL
such as task-agnostic exploration or pre-training of skills,
aiming at learning interesting or useful behaviors without
the use of task rewards or offline data, can provide better
initialization or useful macro-actions (skills or options) for
building a hierarchical agent to solve more complex and
difficult tasks (Eysenbach et al. 2018; Zhang, Yu, and Xu
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11570

