The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Multi-Task Sparse Representation Based on Fisher Information
Yayu Zhang1,3 , Yuhua Qian1 * , Guoshuai Ma2 , Keyin Zheng1 , Guoqing Liu1,3 , Qingfu Zhang3, 4
1

2

Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, North University of China, Taiyuan, Shanxi, 030051, China.
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
{zhang yayu93, jinchengqyh, maguoshuaixy}@126.com, {zhengkeyin1221, guoqingl1001}@163.com
qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

task 1

Multi-task learning deals with multiple related tasks simultaneously by sharing knowledge. In a typical deep multitask learning model, all tasks use the same feature space and
share the latent knowledge. If the tasks are weakly correlated or some features are negatively correlated, sharing all
knowledge often leads to negative knowledge transfer among.
To overcome this issue, this paper proposes a Fisher sparse
multi-task learning method. It can obtain a sparse sharing
representation for each task. In such a way, tasks share features on a sparse subspace. Our method can ensure that the
knowledge transferred among tasks is beneficial. Specifically,
we first propose a sparse deep multi-task learning model,
and then introduce Fisher sparse module into traditional deep
multi-task learning to learn the sparse variables of task. By alternately updating the neural network parameters and sparse
variables, a sparse sharing representation can be learned for
each task. In addition, in order to reduce the computational
overhead, an heuristic method is used to estimate the Fisher
information of neural network parameters. Experimental results show that, comparing with other methods, our proposed
method can improve the performance for all tasks, and has
high sparsity in multi-task learning.

task 2

task 1

task 2

multiple
decoders

feature
extractor
General Model
(a)

Sparse Model
(b)

Figure 1: The two modeling approaches of multi-task learning. The layers inside the red dotted box are task-sharing
layers. It can also be regarded as a feature extractor to obtain the feature representation shared by tasks. The layers at
the top of the model are task-specific layers. It decodes the
sharing feature to the task-specific feature space. The blue
block represents the tasks sharing parameters; The yellow
and red blocks are the task-specific parameters.

Introduction

As shown in Fig. 1(a), the architecture of the general
deep MTL model comprises a feature extractor and multiple decoders(Crawshaw 2020). The feature extractor learns
the nonlinear and high-dimensional representation of multiple tasks. Subsequently, the decoder maps the output of the
encoder to a task-specific representation space. This modeling approach is assumed that all tasks share identical dependencies and utilize a shared feature space. Nevertheless, this
assumption often falls short in real-world scenarios, where
correlations between latent features among tasks are sometimes limited. The inclusion of irrelevant shared information
during multi-task training can induce negative knowledge
transfer among tasks (Sun et al. 2020a). Thus, there arises
a necessity to explore novel modeling approaches that can
effectively address this aforementioned challenge.
Sparse modeling is assumed that all tasks share knowledge within a sparse subspace. This assumption can enhance the robustness and generalization capabilities of a
multi-task learner by eliminating negative correlations and
redundant features during training. Moreover, the acquired
sparse model effectively reduces storage demands and can

Human possess an extraordinary capacity for inducing and
transferring knowledge, enabling us to generalize and apply existing knowledge to new situations. However, conventional machine learning models have not adapted well to
challenges such as multi-task, multi-scenario and still lack
sufficient generalization ability. Taking inspiration from the
knowledge transfer mechanism observed in human cognition, the concept of transfer learning (Weiss, Khoshgoftaar,
and Wang 2016) has emerged as a novel learning paradigm.
This paradigm facilitates the transfer of knowledge among
tasks, resulting in expedited and effective model training,
often yielding superior performance outcomes. Multi-task
learning(MTL) (Caruana 1997) as a special case of transfer
learning, which combines multiple related tasks to train the
model together and improve the performance of all tasks.
During the training process, knowledge is adeptly transferred across tasks, forging a dynamic learning synergy.
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16899

