The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hypergraph Joint Representation Learning for Hypervertices and Hyperedges
via Cross Expansion
Yuguang Yan1 , Yuanlin Chen1 , Shibo Wang1 , Hanrui Wu2 , Ruichu Cai1,3 *
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Public Finance and Taxation with Big Data Application, Guangzhou, China
ygyan@gdut.edu.cn, {chenyaunlin27,wangshibo795,cairuichu}@gmail.com, hrwu@outlook.com
Abstract

co-authors (hypervertices), and two authors (hypervertices)
may have more than one collaborative paper (hyperedge).
Compared with standard graphs, hypergraph learning has
not been extensively explored. In order to borrow wellestablished graph approaches for hypergraphs, some expansion methods are proposed to transform a hypergraph structure into a graph structure, so that effective graph learning
methods such as graph convolutional networks (GCN) (Kipf
and Welling 2017) can be applied directly. Clique expansion
and star expansion are two frequently used expansion approaches (Dong, Sawin, and Bengio 2020). However, clique
expansion lacks higher-order information in the hypergraph,
and star expansion ignores connections between two hypervertices or two hyperedges, resulting in information decaying in feature aggregation from a hypervertex to another hypervertex since information passing through an intermediate
hyperedge is required. Neither of them can take advantage
of the high-order information involved in hypergraphs.
Another kind of approach applies hypergraph convolutional operation based on hypergraph Laplacians to learn
representations for hypergraphs (Feng et al. 2019). To better leverage hypergraph structure, (Dong, Sawin, and Bengio
2020) propose to learn representations for hypervertices and
hyperedges alternately. (Wu, Yan, and Ng 2022) further extends this idea to learn representations for hypervertices and
hyperedges from the information of both hypervertices and
hyperedges. However, these methods learn separate embedding spaces for hypervertices and hyperedges without exploring a shared embedding space, which can capture common knowledge involved in hypervertices and hyperedges.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose an expansion method for transforming a hypergraph to
a standard graph with preserved higher-order information as
well as direct connections between hypervertices or hyperedges. Figure 1 illustrates an example hypergraph and its
expansions. Based on the expanded graph, we propose to
learn a joint representation space for both hypervertices and
hyperedges named Hypergraph Joint Representation Learning (HJRL), which extracts common knowledge involved in
the representations of hypervertices and hyperedges, and at
the same time, improves the data efficiency and reduces the
computational cost.
In specific, we propose an expansion method called cross
expansion, which transforms both hypervertices and hyper-

Hypergraph captures high-order information in structured
data and obtains much attention in machine learning and data
mining. Existing approaches mainly learn representations for
hypervertices by transforming a hypergraph to a standard
graph, or learn representations for hypervertices and hyperedges in separate spaces. In this paper, we propose a hypergraph expansion method to transform a hypergraph to a
standard graph while preserving high-order information. Different from previous hypergraph expansion approaches like
clique expansion and star expansion, we transform both hypervertices and hyperedges in the hypergraph to vertices in
the expanded graph, and construct connections between hypervertices or hyperedges, so that richer relationships can be
used in graph learning. Based on the expanded graph, we
propose a learning model to embed hypervertices and hyperedges in a joint representation space. Compared with the
method of learning separate spaces for hypervertices and hyperedges, our method is able to capture common knowledge
involved in hypervertices and hyperedges, and also improve
the data efficiency and computational efficiency. To better
leverage structure information, we minimize the graph reconstruction loss to preserve the structure information in the
model. We perform experiments on both hypervertex classification and hyperedge classification tasks to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Graph structure models pairwise relations between objects
appearing in many real-world applications (Wu et al. 2020;
Yang, Ma, and Cheng 2021), in which the relation between
two vertices is indicated by if there exists an edge connecting
them. Nevertheless, higher-order relationships among objects are ubiquitous in practice and cannot be captured by
a standard graph structure. To tackle this, the hypergraph
is proposed to model complicated relationships among vertices (Gao et al. 2020). In a hypergraph, a hyperedge can
connect more than two hypervertices, and two hypervertices
can have more than one kind of relation. For example, in a
co-author network, a hypervertex represents an author, and a
hyperedge represents a paper co-authored by multiple hypervertices. One paper (hyperedge) usually has more than two
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9232

