The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeblurSR: Event-Based Motion Deblurring under the Spiking Representation
Chen Song, Chandrajit Bajaj, Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
{song, bajaj, huangqx}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We present DeblurSR, a novel motion deblurring approach
that converts a blurry image into a sharp video. DeblurSR
utilizes event data to compensate for motion ambiguities and
exploits the spiking representation to parameterize the sharp
output video as a mapping from time to intensity. Our key
contribution, the Spiking Representation (SR), is inspired by
the neuromorphic principles determining how biological neurons communicate with each other in living organisms. We
discuss why the spikes can represent sharp edges and how
the spiking parameters are interpreted from the neuromorphic
perspective. DeblurSR has higher output quality and requires
fewer computing resources than state-of-the-art event-based
motion deblurring methods. We additionally show that our
approach easily extends to video super-resolution when combined with recent advances in implicit neural representation.

Blurry Image
Format: x, y, t, pol
(62, 81, 0.0003, -1)
(93, 6, 0.0004, -1)
(129, 29, 0.0005, +1)
… ...

DeblurSR

Sharp Video

Neuromorphic Events

Figure 1: Problem Description. Imagine we are holding a
camera while walking on the street. Relative movement between the camera and its surroundings causes motion blur,
a visual artifact commonly observed by unprofessional photographers. With the help of neuromorphic events, which are
a list of 4D points describing the coordinates, time, and polarity of intensity changes, DeblurSR converts the blurry image we take into a sharp video describing the camera’s motion trajectory during the exposure interval.

Introduction
Neuromorphic events are commonly used in deblurring algorithms (Pan et al. 2019, 2020; Jiang et al. 2020; Lin et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020; Shang et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2021a; Han et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2022;
Kim et al. 2021; Song, Huang, and Bajaj 2022; Wang et al.
2019). Modern neuromorphic devices are extremely fast and
capture up to one million events per second. The enormous
density of neuromorphic events has been shown to enable
motion-deblurring algorithms to reverse the exposure process and recover the relative movement between the camera and the environment from one single image (Pan et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2020; Song, Huang, and Bajaj 2022). Figure 1 presents an illustration of the event-based image-tovideo motion deblurring task.
While early motion-deblurring works apply numerical optimization techniques to directly solve for the sharp output video (Pan et al. 2019, 2020; Wang et al. 2019), recent
approaches utilize different data-driven pipelines as the inference model (Wang et al. 2020; Song, Huang, and Bajaj
2022). Despite these attempts, it is yet unclear how to properly instill prior knowledge about the neuromorphic event
mechanism to build an effective deep learning paradigm that
simultaneously addresses the motion ambiguity and emphasizes sharp edges.

One interesting yet under-explored solution is to approximate the sharp output video by per-pixel parametric mappings from time to intensity and use deep learning to regress
the parametric coefficients (Song, Huang, and Bajaj 2022).
This allows the algorithm to fully exploit the speed of event
cameras because the output theoretically has an infinitely
high frame rate. However, common parametric kernels such
as polynomial and trigonometric functions inherently assume that the underlying intensity signal is smooth and continuous. In reality, a sharp video contains numerous visual
features that strongly contrast the background. The movement of a white object before a black background leads to
instantaneous intensity flips between the two most extreme
pixel values. It creates discontinuities in the intensity signal,
which polynomials and trigonometric functions cannot represent. As the only existing work that uses per-pixel parametric mappings to represent videos with arbitrarily high
frame rates, E-CIR (Song, Huang, and Bajaj 2022) relies on
a refinement module independent of the continuous parameterization to compensate for its limited representation capacity, resulting in a monolithic inefficient two-stage pipeline.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4900

