The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scaling Up Pareto Optimization for Tree Structures with Affine Transformations:
Evaluating Hybrid Floating Solar-Hydropower Systems in the Amazon
Marc Grimson1 , Rafael Almeida5 , Qinru Shi2 , Yiwei Bai1 , Héctor Angarita3 , Felipe Siqueira
Pacheco4 , Rafael Schmitt3 , Alexander Flecker4 , Carla P. Gomes1
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, USA
Center for Applied Mathematics, Cornell University, USA
3
Natural Capital Project, Stanford University, USA
4
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, USA
5
School of Earth, Environmental, and Earth Sciences, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, USA
mg2425@cornell.edu, rafael.almeida@utrgv.edu, qs63@cornell.edu, yb263@cornell.edu, haac@stanford.edu,
fsp9@cornell.edu, asf3@cornell.edu, gomes@cs.cornell.edu
2

Abstract
Sustainability challenges inherently involve the consideration of multiple competing objectives. The Pareto frontier
– the set of all optimal solutions that cannot be improved
with respect to one objective without negatively affecting another – is a crucial decision-making tool for navigating sustainability challenges as it highlights the inherent trade-offs
among conflicting objectives. Our research is motivated by
the strategic planning of hydropower in the Amazon basin,
one of the earth’s largest and most biodiverse river systems,
where the need to increase energy production coincides with
the pressing requirement of minimizing detrimental environmental impacts. We investigate an innovative strategy that
pairs hydropower with Floating Photovoltaic Solar Panels
(FPV). We provide a new extended multi-tree network formulation, which enables the consideration of multiple dam
configurations. To address the computational challenge of
scaling up the Pareto optimization framework to tackle multiple objectives across the entire Amazon basin, we further
enhance the state-of-the-art algorithm for Pareto frontiers in
tree-structured networks with two improvements. We introduce affine transformations induced by the sub-frontiers to
compute Pareto dominance and provide strategies for merging sub-trees, significantly increasing the pruning of dominated solutions. Our experiments demonstrate considerable
speedups, in some cases by more than an order of magnitude,
while maintaining optimality guarantees, thus allowing us to
more effectively approximate the Pareto frontiers. Moreover,
our findings suggest significant shifts towards higher energy
values in the Pareto frontier when pairing hybrid hydropower
with FPV solutions, potentially amplifying energy production
while mitigating adverse impacts.

a
Floating Solar
PV System

Internal Interconnection Cables
Hybrid System
Substation
Transmission
System

Hydropower Dam

Figure 1: (a) Existing (red) and proposed (yellow) hydropower dams in the Amazon basin and (b) Hybrid hydropower dam with floating photovoltaic solar panels (FPV)
system (Lee et al. 2020).
maintaining a healthy environment (United Nations General
Assembly 2015). Such trade-offs between conflicting objectives naturally translate to Multi-Objective Combinatorial
Optimization Problems (MOCOP) (Ehrgott and Gandibleux
2000; Ehrgott, Gandibleux, and Przybylski 2016; Wiecek
et al. 2008). Our goal is to understand these trade-offs and
enable stakeholders to make informed decisions based on
their preferences and constraints.
Our work is motivated by the need to identify portfolios of
hydropower dams that maximize economic, social, and environmental needs (Almeida et al. 2022b). Curbing climate

Introduction
Computational Sustainability (Gomes et al. 2019) is a field
within Computer Science that aims to use Artificial Intelligence to work towards a sustainable future. Problems in
Computational Sustainability often require finding a balance
between conflicting concerns, as captured for example, in
the Sustainable Development Goals that aim to ensure economic and social equity across all strata of society while
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22067

