The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

OCEAN-MBRL: Offline Conservative Exploration for Model-Based Offline
Reinforcement Learning
Fan Wu1,2 , Rui Zhang 3 , Qi Yi4 , Yunkai Gao4 , Jiaming Guo3 , Shaohui Peng1 , Siming Lan4 ,
Husheng Han2, 3 , Yansong Pan2 , Kaizhao Yuan2 , Pengwei Jin2, 3 , Ruizhi Chen1 ,
Yunji Chen2, 3 , Ling Li1, 2, *
1

Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS, Beijing, China
3
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, USTC, Hefei, China
wufan2020@iscas.ac.cn
Abstract

Model-based offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have emerged as a promising paradigm for offline RL. These
algorithms usually learn a dynamics model from a static
dataset of transitions, use the model to generate synthetic
trajectories, and perform conservative policy optimization
within these trajectories. However, our observations indicate that policy optimization methods used in these modelbased offline RL algorithms are not effective at exploring
the learned model and induce biased exploration, which ultimately impairs the performance of the algorithm. To address
this issue, we propose Offline Conservative ExplorAtioN
(OCEAN), a novel rollout approach to model-based offline
RL. In our method, we incorporate additional exploration
techniques and introduce three conservative constraints based
on uncertainty estimation to mitigate the potential impact of
significant dynamic errors resulting from exploratory transitions. Our work is a plug-in method and can be combined
with classical model-based RL algorithms, such as MOPO,
COMBO, and RAMBO. Experiment results of our method
on the D4RL MuJoCo benchmark show that OCEAN significantly improves the performance of existing algorithms.

Figure 1: Comparison of random policy against maximum
entropy policy from MOPO (Yu et al. 2020). We train
MOPO for 2M gradient steps in the D4RL (Fu et al. 2020)
Maze2d-umaze-v1 task and rolled out trajectories from
states in the task dataset. The MOPO policy in the left figure
can only roll out on the right side of the existing data, while
a random policy can better explore the entire state space.
Meger, and Precup 2019). The current research mainly focuses on how to better utilize existing data to update policies and achieve better performance (Kumar et al. 2019; Wu,
Tucker, and Nachum 2019; An et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021).
Simultaneously, model-based offline RL algorithms are a
natural fit for addressing the issue of limited data in offline
settings by modeling the dataset and learning the dynamic
model of the environment (Yu et al. 2020, 2021; Rigter, Lacerda, and Hawes 2022), which is used for rolling out trajectories and updating policy. However, the cumulative error incurred during the interaction with the dynamic model
renders the rollout of a complete trajectory detrimental to
policy learning. Therefore, most model-based offline RL algorithms adopt the k-step rollout method of MBPO (Janner
et al. 2019).
Our work highlights the fact that previous studies have not
explicitly investigated the exploration mechanism in the kstep rollout method, which is particularly crucial in modelbased offline RL. Existing approaches have mainly relied
on simplistic mechanisms such as maximum entropy exploration from SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018), along with a rollout
stop mechanism based on uncertainty. However, we have observed that such a mechanism introduces bias, as depicted

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) is
a machine learning method that enables agents to learn
optimal decision-making policy in complex environments
through interaction with their surroundings. While current
RL algorithms have made significant advances in fields such
as robot control (Kalashnikov et al. 2018; Quillen et al.
2018), autonomous driving (Yurtsever et al. 2020; Kiran
et al. 2021), and game intelligence (Silver et al. 2016), the
associated risks and costs of agent-environment interaction
cannot be overlooked. In this regard, offline RL (Lange,
Gabel, and Riedmiller 2012), which learns strategies from
existing datasets, presents a promising solution, making it
a critical component in implementing RL algorithms in the
real world.
Restricted datasets are the main reason for the performance limitations of offline RL algorithms (Fujimoto,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15897

