The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

EnMatch: Matchmaking for Better Player Engagement via
Neural Combinatorial Optimization
Kai Wang, Haoyu Liu, Zhipeng Hu, Xiaochuan Feng, Minghao Zhao, Shiwei Zhao, Runze Wu,
Xudong Shen, Tangjie Lv, Changjie Fan
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., Hangzhou, China
{wangkai02,liuhaoyu03,zphu,fengxiaochuan,zhaominghao,zhaoshiwei,wurunze1,
hzshenxudong,hzlvtangjie,fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com
Abstract

in one combat have similar gaming skills so that the fairness
of games could be well ensured.
However, is game fairness the only critical factor for
player engagement? In most matchmaking scenes, the answer is no, which has been demonstrated in EOMM (Chen
et al. 2017). Using churn rate as an indicator of player engagement, EOMM analyzes the impact of match win-loss
outcomes on player retention in 1-vs-1 scenes and shows
that fair games are not sufficient to ensure player engagement. However, it still remains unexplored in scenes that
contain multiple players in one team, i.e., k-vs-k mode. Two
key challenges exist for an engagement-oriented matchmaking method in k-vs-k scenes:
What are the key factors that influence user engagement?
Estimating player engagement in advance is crucial for establishing the optimization objective of matchmaking. Previous works mostly emphasize win-loss outcomes, which may
not be sufficient in scenes with larger player counts. As the
number of players in a match increases, the impact of factors
such as players’ roles within a team and the interaction between players becomes gradually increases. When engagement prediction relies on combinations of other players, the
feature space of the model can become exponentially large,
making model learning based solely on low-resolution user
satisfaction labels with limited data difficult (Adams and
Zemel 2011; Cao et al. 2007). To accurately predict player
engagement, it is essential to figure out what the key factors
are and quantify these factors together. This is especially important in our k-vs-k scene.
How to conduct matchmaking with careful consideration
on each individual player? Note that in our k-vs-k scene,
rather than selecting players from the same tier or forming 1-vs-1 games as in previous works, each player needs
to be well estimated under multiple possible team compositions. This results in an NP-hard combinatorial optimization
problem with non-linear objectives, which can not be efficiently solved by tier-based heuristics or the graph matching
methods (Chen et al. 2017) proposed for 1-vs-1 games. Furthermore, the complexity of player interactions necessitates
cross-tier matching, resulting in a significantly larger exponential search space. In addition to considering the quality
of the match for a single game, we also need to take into
account the quality of the matches that can be formed with
the remaining players. Thus, when the focus shifts from fair

Matchmaking is a core task in e-sports and online games,
as it contributes to player engagement and further influences
the game’s lifecycle. Previous methods focus on creating
fair games at all times. They divide players into different
tiers based on skill levels and only select players from the
same tier for each game. Though this strategy can ensure
fair matchmaking, it is not always good for player engagement. In this paper, we propose a novel Engagement-oriented
Matchmaking (EnMatch) framework to ensure fair games
and simultaneously enhance player engagement. Two main
issues need to be addressed. First, it is unclear how to measure the impact of different team compositions and confrontations on player engagement during the game considering the
variety of player characteristics. Second, such a detailed consideration on every single player during matchmaking will result in an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem with
non-linear objectives. In light of these challenges, we turn to
real-world data analysis to reveal engagement-related factors.
The resulting insights guide the development of engagement
modeling, enabling the estimation of quantified engagement
before a match is completed. To handle the combinatorial optimization problem, we formulate the problem into a reinforcement learning framework, in which a neural combinatorial optimization problem is built and solved. The performance of EnMatch is finally demonstrated through the comparison with other state-of-the-art methods based on several
real-world datasets and online deployments on two games.

Introduction
Matchmaking is an essential part of e-sports and online
games. It pairs players into different combat teams and
helps maintain an enjoyable playing experience for all participants. Previous research focuses on creating balanced
games, where closely skilled players are matched to create competitive gameplay, assuming that balanced teams are
the most desired matchmaking outcome for players. They
hereby design an effective and efficient strategy— first divide players into different tiers and then only select players
from the same tier to form opposing teams (Graepel and Herbrich 2006; Herbrich, Minka, and Graepel 2007; Gong et al.
2020). Players in the same tier are supposed to have similar
gaming skills. Hence, through this approach, all the players
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9098

