The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FRIH: Fine-Grained Region-Aware Image Harmonization
Jinlong Peng* , Zekun Luo, Liang Liu, Boshen Zhang
Tencent Youtu Lab
{jeromepeng, zekunluo, leoneliu, boshenzhang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Image harmonization aims to generate a more realistic appearance of foreground and background for a composite image. All the existing methods perform the same harmonization process for the whole foreground. However, the implanted foreground always contains different appearance patterns. Existing solutions ignore the difference of each color
block and lose some specific details. Therefore, we propose a novel global-local two stages framework for Finegrained Region-aware Image Harmonization (FRIH). In the
first stage, the whole input foreground mask is used to make
a global coarse-grained harmonization. In the second stage,
we adaptively cluster the input foreground mask into several submasks. Each submask and the coarsely adjusted image are concatenated respectively and fed into a lightweight
cascaded module, refining the global harmonization result.
Moreover, we further design a fusion prediction module to
generate the final result, utilizing the different degrees of harmonization results comprehensively. Without bells and whistles, our FRIH achieves a competitive performance on iHarmony4 dataset with a lightweight model.

Real

Composite

RainNet

Ours

Figure 1: Case study on the coarse-grained harmonization
problem of different foreground appearance patterns. On the
top line, the implanted foreground is a person with green
shirt and orange hair. The background contains more orange pixels, leading to a better harmony of the orange hair,
while the saturation in the green shirt decreases in RainNet
(Ling et al. 2021). On the bottom line, the implanted foreground is a gray sculpture and a red wreath. The background
is brighter, resulting in a bright overall harmony process in
RainNet (Ling et al. 2021), in which the red wreath looks
good while the gray sculpture becomes too bright. Clearly,
our FRIH could solve all the above problems well.

Introduction
Image composition plays an essential role in image editing
and generation (Liu et al. 2020; Azadi et al. 2020; Qiu et al.
2020; Cheng et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2019;
Van den Oord et al. 2016). However, since the source of the
implanted foreground object and the new background image
are different, it is easy to cause an unrealistic perception of
the composite image. Image harmonization is an important
operation to address this issue, aiming to make the implanted
foreground compatible with the background.
Traditional image harmonization methods mainly focused
on low-level feature statistics, such as color distribution
matching (Cohen-Or et al. 2006; Pitié and Kokaram 2007),
gradient-domain compositing (Pérez, Gangnet, and Blake
2003; Jia et al. 2006; Tao, Johnson, and Paris 2013) and
hybrid feature transferring (Sunkavalli et al. 2010). These
methods limit the harmonization performance due to the
lack of high level information. There are also several unsupervised or self-supervised image harmonization methods

(Chen and Kae 2019; Zhan et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2021), not
relying on manual annotation. But they only work better in
specific scenes, such as the portraits harmonization, lack of
universality. Recently, the supervised encoder-decoder harmonization methods (Tsai et al. 2017; Cong et al. 2020; Ling
et al. 2021) have achieved superior performance based on the
construction of the large training datasets.
However, there is still a major problem of existing solutions. The implanted foreground always contains different
appearance patterns. The similarity between the composite
image and the real ground-truth image varies among different sub-regions. Some sub-regions in the composite image
are relatively similar to the real ground-truth image, while
others may be much far away from the target. Thus different sub-regions need different harmonization operations.
Existing methods perform the same harmonization process
for the whole foreground, ignoring the difference of each

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4478

