The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PrefAce: Face-Centric Pretraining with Self-Structure Aware Distillation
Siyuan Hu1 * , Zheng Wang2 , Peng Hu3 , Xi Peng3 , Jie Wu2 , Hongyuan Zhu4† , Yew Soon Ong1, 4
1

Nanyang Technological University,
2
Wuhan University,
3
Sichuan University,
4
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
husi0002@e.ntu.edu.sg, wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn, penghu.ml@gmail.com, pengx.gm@gmail.com, whu wujie@163.com,
hongyuanzhu.cn@gmail.com, asysong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Video-based facial analysis is important for autonomous
agents to understand human expressions and sentiments.
However, limited labeled data is available to learn effective facial representations. This paper proposes a novel selfsupervised face-centric pretraining framework, called PrefAce, which learns transferable video facial representation
without labels. The self-supervised learning is performed
with an effective landmark-guided global-local tube distillation. Meanwhile, a novel instance-wise update FaceFeat
Cache is built to enforce more discriminative and diverse
representations for downstream tasks. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed framework learns universal
instance-aware facial representations with fine-grained landmark details from videos. The point is that it can transfer across various facial analysis tasks, e.g., Facial Attribute
Recognition (FAR), Facial Expression Recognition (FER),
DeepFake Detection (DFD), and Lip Synchronization (LS).
Our framework also outperforms the state-of-the-art on various downstream tasks, even in low data regimes. Code is
available at https://github.com/siyuan-h/PrefAce.

Ours

MARLIN

Figure 1: Distribution overview of t-SNE visualization on
embeddings generated by PrefAce and state-of-the-art.

Self-supervised pretraining is a powerful solution to bypass the limitations of full supervision. Utilizing nonannotated data for generic representation learning, it transfers knowledge across tasks, enabling further training
with limited annotation. In natural scene imagery, selfsupervised approaches like self-distillation (Caron et al.
2021a), contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020b), jigsaw puzzle solving (Noroozi and Favaro 2016), and masked autoencoders (He et al. 2022) have even outperformed supervised
methods.
In facial analysis, prevailing methods often remain specialized and fully supervised. Recently, (Bulat et al. 2022)
studied the efficacy of common self-supervised techniques
in scalable, generic representation learning from uncurated
images and videos. (Zheng et al. 2022) studied the selfsupervised facial video representation learning in the setting of visual-linguistic pretraining. One step ahead, MARLIN (Cai et al. 2023) introducing facial region masking and
adversarial training for face reconstruction to learn representations from videos modalities only which alleviate the
requirement of image-caption pairs in (Zheng et al. 2022).
On the other hand, recent studies (Oquab et al. 2023)
demonstrate that performing vanilla self-supervised learning
on uncurated data will lead to inferior representations with
less transferable to other tasks. Our empirical study of recent
SOTA face pretraining method (e.g. MARLIN) also reveals
that this phenomenon that it tends to learn common face features while ignores diverse and discriminative features (see

Introduction
Facial analysis tasks offer valuable insights into human nonverbal behavior, shedding light on social interaction (Haugh
2009), communication (Jack and Schyns 2015), and cognition (Storrs, Anderson, and Fleming 2021), with implications for Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and Affective Computing. Recent strides in deep neural network models, encompassing Facial Attribute Recognition (FAR) (Zhu
et al. 2022), Facial Expression Recognition (FER) (Li and
Deng 2022), DeepFake Detection (DFD) (Tolosana et al.
2020), and Lip Synchronization (LS) (Kadam et al. 2021),
have shown remarkable potential. However, the need for extensive annotated datasets poses challenges due to resource
and time demands, especially for specialized applications requiring domain expertise for annotation like Facial Expression Recognition (FER).
* This paper was completely accomplished when Hu Siyuan in-

terned under Dr. Zhu Hongyuan’s supervision at A*STAR.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12538

