The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Seed-Guided Fine-Grained Entity Typing in Science and Engineering Domains
Yu Zhang1 * , Yunyi Zhang1∗ , Yanzhen Shen1 ,
Yu Deng , Lucian Popa3 , Larisa Shwartz2 , ChengXiang Zhai1 , Jiawei Han1
2

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
2
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
3
IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA, USA
{yuz9, yzhan238, yanzhen4, czhai, hanj}@illinois.edu, {dengy, lpopa, lshwart}@us.ibm.com
Abstract

(Yu et al. 2020, 2021) and knowledge graph construction
(Rukmono and Chaudron 2023)).
Second, massive human annotation is too costly to be
a solution. Although entity typing has been extensively
studied in NLP, most existing approaches rely on massive
human-annotated training data, which are time-consuming
and costly to obtain, especially in specialized technical domains. Moreover, practitioners in these domains often need
to apply the model to their confidential datasets (e.g., internal software issue reports) which cannot be accessed by
external annotators, incurring domain gaps between training and inference data. To alleviate annotation efforts, recent studies explore the setting of few-shot entity typing
(Ding et al. 2022; Huang, Meng, and Han 2022; Dai and
Zeng 2023), where a few manually labeled samples are provided to train the model. However, unless the entity types
are balanced (which is usually not the case – the number
of A PPLICATION entities is 24 times more than the number
of A LGORITHM entities in the StackOverflowNER dataset
(Tabassum et al. 2020)), one needs to sample and annotate a
much larger number of entities to cover the minority types.
Third, domain-agnostic zero-shot learning methods do
not provide a good solution either. Previous zero-shot entity typing models (Zhou et al. 2018; Obeidat et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2020a) rely on type names only and do not
seek help from any annotated examples. This makes the
model unaware of domain-specific knowledge, which may
lead to suboptimal performance in highly specialized science and engineering domains. For example, given the sentence “ListView keep BooleanSparseArray of checked positions (you can get it with method getCheckedItemPositions()).”, if we ask GPT-3.5 Turbo (Ouyang et al. 2022)
about the type of “ListView” by providing it with type names
only, GPT-3.5 Turbo will answer “U SER I NTERFACE E LE MENT ” instead of the correct answer “L IBRARY C LASS”.
To strike a balance between few-shot and zero-shot settings, in this paper, inspired by the weakly supervised setting in text classification (Meng et al. 2018; Mekala and
Shang 2020), we confine the supervision signals to be type
names and a few (e.g., 5) seed entities per type. In comparison with the labeled samples under the few-shot setting,
the given entities under our setting are not associated with
any context information. For example, the supervision only
tells “ListView” is a L IBRARY C LASS in general, but no spe-

Accurately typing entity mentions from text segments is
a fundamental task for various natural language processing applications. Many previous approaches rely on massive
human-annotated data to perform entity typing. Nevertheless, collecting such data in highly specialized science and
engineering domains (e.g., software engineering and security) can be time-consuming and costly, without mentioning the domain gaps between training and inference data if
the model needs to be applied to confidential datasets. In
this paper, we study the task of seed-guided fine-grained entity typing in science and engineering domains, which takes
the name and a few seed entities for each entity type as the
only supervision and aims to classify new entity mentions
into both seen and unseen types (i.e., those without seed entities). To solve this problem, we propose SET YPE which
first enriches the weak supervision by finding more entities
for each seen type from an unlabeled corpus using the contextualized representations of pre-trained language models.
It then matches the enriched entities to unlabeled text to
get pseudo-labeled samples and trains a textual entailment
model that can make inferences for both seen and unseen
types. Extensive experiments on two datasets covering four
domains demonstrate the effectiveness of SET YPE in comparison with various baselines. Code and data are available
at: https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/SEType.

Introduction
Entity typing, i.e., automatically determining the types of
entity mentions given their contexts, is a fundamental step
for various text mining and natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, such as entity linking (Wu et al. 2020) and text
classification (Hu et al. 2019). Entity typing in science and
engineering domains poses substantial new challenges, calling for dedicated research. First, fine-grained entity typing
is critical for domain-specific applications. For example, in
software and security domains (e.g., StackOverflow threads,
GitHub README files, and vulnerability descriptions), entities need to be typed in fine-grained scale (e.g., devices,
operating systems, versions, and functions) in order to drive
downstream applications (e.g., technical question answering
* Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19606

