The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Structure-CLIP: Towards Scene Graph Knowledge to Enhance Multi-Modal
Structured Representations
Yufeng Huang1 * , Jiji Tang2 * , Zhuo Chen3 , Rongsheng Zhang2,3 , Xinfeng Zhang2 , Weijie Chen2 ,
Zeng Zhao2 , Zhou Zhao3 , Tangjie Lv2 , Zhipeng Hu2 , Wen Zhang1†
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Fuxi AI Lab, Netease Inc.
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{huangyufeng, zhuo.chen, zhaozhou, zhang.wen}@zju.edu.cn
{tangjiji01, zhangrongsheng, zhangxinfeng01, chenweijie05, hzlvtangjie, zphu}@corp.netease.com
Abstract
Large-scale vision-language pre-training has achieved significant performance in multi-modal understanding and generation tasks. However, existing methods often perform poorly
on image-text matching tasks that require structured representations, i.e., representations of objects, attributes, and
relations. The models cannot make a distinction between
“An astronaut rides a horse” and “A horse rides an astronaut”. This is because they fail to fully leverage structured
knowledge when learning multi-modal representations. In
this paper, we present an end-to-end framework StructureCLIP, which integrates Scene Graph Knowledge (SGK) to
enhance multi-modal structured representations. Firstly, we
use scene graphs to guide the construction of semantic negative examples, which results in an increased emphasis on
learning structured representations. Moreover, a KnowledgeEnhance Encoder (KEE) is proposed to leverage SGK as input to further enhance structured representations. To verify
the effectiveness of the proposed framework, we pre-train our
model with the aforementioned approaches and conduct experiments on downstream tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that Structure-CLIP achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance on VG-Attribution and VG-Relation datasets,
with 12.5% and 4.1% ahead of the multi-modal SOTA model
respectively. Meanwhile, the results on MSCOCO indicate
that Structure-CLIP significantly enhances the structured representations while maintaining the ability of general representations. Our code is available at https://github.com/zjukg/
Structure-CLIP.

Figure 1: CLIP scores (after normalizing among two results)
between the image and aligned/unaligned captions. The results show that the CLIP model does not have the ability to
distinguish sentences with structured semantic differences.

For example, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the CLIP score (i.e.,
semantic similarity) between the image and the correctly
matched caption (“An astronaut is riding a horse”), exhibits
a lower value in contrast to the score between the image
and a non-matching caption (“A horse is riding an astronaut”). Subsequently, Fig. 1 (b) illustrates that exchanging
attributes between two objects can also pose challenges for
the model to accurately distinguish their semantics. These
findings suggest that the generic representations yielded by
the CLIP model are unable to differentiate between text segments that encompass identical words but diverge in terms
of structured knowledge. In other words, the CLIP model exhibits a tendency similar to that of a bag-of-words approach,
which does not understand fine-grained semantics in sentences (Lin et al. 2023).
Winoground (Thrush et al. 2022) is the first work focusing
on this problem and performing a broad-based examination.
They intentionally created a dataset consisting of 400 instances, where each instance consists of two sentences with
identical word compositions but different semantic mean-

Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated significant performance in various multi-modal understanding and
generation tasks (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022; Singh
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2019). Despite the impressive performance of multi-modal models in various tasks, the question
of whether these models can effectively capture structured
knowledge(i.e., the ability to comprehend object properties
and the relationships between objects) remains unresolved.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2417

