The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing the Robustness of Spiking Neural Networks with Stochastic Gating
Mechanisms
Jianhao Ding1 , Zhaofei Yu1,2 * , Tiejun Huang1 , Jian K. Liu3
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
Institution for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
djh01998@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, j.liu.22@bham.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Synaptic
transmission

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) exploit neural spikes to provide solutions for low-power intelligent applications on neuromorphic hardware. Although SNNs have high computational efficiency due to spiking communication, they still lack
resistance to adversarial attacks and noise perturbations. In
the brain, neuronal responses generally possess stochasticity induced by ion channels and synapses, while the role
of stochasticity in computing tasks is poorly understood.
Inspired by this, we elaborate a stochastic gating spiking
neural model for layer-by-layer spike communication, introducing stochasticity to SNNs. Through theoretical analysis, our gating model can be viewed as a regularizer that
prevents error amplification under attacks. Meanwhile, our
work can explain the robustness of Poisson coding. Experimental results prove that our method can be used alone
or with existing robust enhancement algorithms to improve
SNN robustness and reduce SNN energy consumption. We
hope our work will shed new light on the role of stochasticity in the computation of SNNs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DingJianhao/StoG-meets-SNN/.

Closed

Ionic
current

Open

Figure 1: Diagram of spiking neurons with stochastic gating
in neuronal synapses and ion channels.

gap between the computational capabilities of SNNs and the
robustness observed in biological neural systems.
Typical application scenarios for SNNs include robotic
control (Bing et al. 2018) and autonomous driving (Yamazaki et al. 2022), where reliable perception is safetycritical. Malicious attacks can make neural networks give
wrong predictions (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Szegedy et al. 2014). These attacks are usually constructed
from derivatives that are automatically differentiated. While
SNNs possess the potential for improved robustness compared to their traditional counterparts (Sharmin et al. 2020),
they are not immune to attacks due to their training with
surrogate functions (Wu et al. 2018). Recent research has
shown that SNNs can still be susceptible to adversarial attacks, emphasizing the need to understand and enhance their
robustness against such threats (Liang et al. 2023; Sharmin
et al. 2019). Consequently, the quest for understanding and
improving the robustness of SNNs has become a critical and
pressing issue in the field (Liang et al. 2022). In order to unleash the potential invulnerability of SNN from adversarial
attacks and ensure their reliability and safety in real-world
applications, researchers are actively exploring innovative
techniques and strategies. At present, leading studies mainly
consider how to use the wisdom of generalization on toxic
samples for defense (Kundu, Pedram, and Beerel 2021), and

Introduction
As a representative of low-energy neural network systems,
spiking neural networks (SNN) are being studied by researchers from the perspective of deep learning (Maass
1997; Zenke et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2023).
While traditional artificial neural networks (ANN) use floatpoint values to simulate the rate coding of biological neurons, SNNs take a different approach by directly communicating through spike sequences, offering a simplified representation of the intricate dynamics of the biological system (Gerstner et al. 2014). This simplification presents a
remarkable advantage for SNNs, enabling them to carry
out computations on neuromorphic hardware with high efficiency (DeBole et al. 2019; Pei et al. 2019). Behind the advantage is the impact that the simplified SNN gradually approaches ANN in terms of computing capability, and does
not exhibit the huge advantage of high robustness shown
by the biological nervous system. Nonetheless, researchers
continue to explore and refine SNNs, aiming to bridge the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

492

