The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Diffusion Language-Shapelets for Semi-supervised Time-Series Classification
Zhen Liu1 , Wenbin Pei2,3 , Disen Lan1 , Qianli Ma1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
3
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence (Dalian University of Technology), Ministry of Education
cszhenliu@mail.scut.edu.cn, peiwenbin@dlut.edu.cn, 202130480657@mail.scut.edu.cn, qianlima@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

SSC-based time series methods mainly apply consistency regularization and pseudo-labeling techniques. The
former (Fan et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2023) uses sampled
subsequences to design time series prediction loss and relation prediction loss, for learning temporal dependencies
of labeled and unlabeled instances. The latter (Lee et al.
2013; Liu et al. 2023b) utilizes a model that predicts labels (pseudo-labels in reality) on unlabeled data for training.
Although the aforementioned methods improve the classification performance of an SSC model, they ignore the interpretability of the model. As a result, it is difficult for humans
to understand the predictions.
Shapelets are a set of discriminant subsequences (also
called shapes) of time series (Ye and Keogh 2009), each
of which is expected to represent a class optimally. Therefore, the use of shapelets can assist practitioners to well understand the meaning of time series, and expand the applications of TSC methods to some applications that are expected to have good model interpretability, e.g., medical diagnosis (Lin et al. 2019) and industrial safety (Yuan et al.
2020). However, existing shapelets learning-based methods (Grabocka et al. 2014; Li et al. 2021) usually rely on
a large amount of labeled data. Unfortunately, in these applications, it is hard or expensive to label enough data for
training. Without enough labeled data, the shapelets learned
by the existing methods are often poorly discriminative, and
even dissimilar to any subsequences of the time series.
Recently, diffusion models have achieved remarkable performance in time series prediction (Rasul et al. 2021) and
imputation (Tashiro et al. 2021) tasks due to their effectiveness in generating samples. For instance, Shen and Kwok
(2023) use the distribution of past observations to drive the
diffusion model to generate moment values in the future.
Shapelets learning aims to obtain partially discriminative
subsequences based on the distribution of all subsequences
of a time series, which inspires us to consider using the distribution of subsequences as a condition and then employing
diffusion models to generate shapelets. However, in SSC,
only a small number of subsequences contain class information. Thus, it is still a tough challenge to investigate how
diffusion models can be used to generate shapelets that are
conducive to enhancing classification performance.
In real life, humans can often rapidly identify instances
belonging to the same class using just a small number of

Semi-supervised time-series classification could effectively
alleviate the issue of lacking labeled data. However, existing approaches usually ignore model interpretability, making
it difficult for humans to understand the principles behind the
predictions of a model. Shapelets are a set of discriminative
subsequences that show high interpretability in time series
classification tasks. Shapelet learning-based methods have
demonstrated promising classification performance. Unfortunately, without enough labeled data, the shapelets learned by
existing methods are often poorly discriminative, and even
dissimilar to any subsequence of the original time series.
To address this issue, we propose the Diffusion LanguageShapelets model (DiffShape) for semi-supervised time series
classification. In DiffShape, a self-supervised diffusion learning mechanism is designed, which uses real subsequences
as a condition. This helps to increase the similarity between
the learned shapelets and real subsequences by using a large
amount of unlabeled data. Furthermore, we introduce a contrastive language-shapelets learning strategy that improves
the discriminability of the learned shapelets by incorporating
the natural language descriptions of the time series. Experiments have been conducted on the UCR time series archive,
and the results reveal that the proposed DiffShape method
achieves state-of-the-art performance and exhibits superior
interpretability over baselines.

Introduction
Time series is a set of data points listed in chronological order, which is usually used to describe time-dependent phenomena, e.g., electrocardiograms (Maweu et al. 2021), electricity consumption (Cheng et al. 2020), and human activities (Chen et al. 2021). Recently, deep learning has been successfully applied to time series classification (TSC), mainly
due to its powerful feature learning capability. In general,
training deep models requires a large amount of labeled data.
However, it is usually time-consuming and laborious to label time series data in many real-world applications. Semisupervised classification (SSC) (Yang et al. 2022) allows using labeled and unlabeled data simultaneously for training,
which could alleviate the issue of lacking labeled data.
* Qianli Ma is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14079

