The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Explore 3D Dance Generation via Reward Model from Automatically-Ranked
Demonstrations
Zilin Wang1* , Haolin Zhuang1* , Lu Li1* , Yinmin Zhang2 , Junjie Zhong3 ,
Jun Chen1 , Yu Yang1 , Boshi Tang1 , Zhiyong Wu1†
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
The University of Sydney
3
Waseda University
{wangzl21, zhuanghl21, lilu21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yinmin.zhang@sydney.edu.au, junjiezhong@ruri.waseda.jp
{y-chen21, yy20, tbs22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

the excessive focus on mimicking human movements without considering human preferences (e.g., movement difficulty and aesthetic appeal). Inspired by the learning process
of human dancers, novice dancers not only require the mechanical imitation of movements from dance experts but also
continuous practice and exploration to develop their skills.
Furthermore, receiving feedback from experts plays a crucial role in reinforcing their movements, ultimately helping
them become proficient dancers.
In this work, we argue that the aforementioned three issues arise from the lack of exploration capacity in current
dance generation models. We expect trained dance agents to
explore various movements within the dance space while receiving accurate signals indicating which movements are desirable, thereby increasing the probability of generating such
movements. Based on this assumption, we propose the Exploratory 3D Dance generation framework, E3D2, to address the issue of exploration. To achieve this, we model the
music-conditioned dance generation task as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and employ Reinforcement Learning
(RL) to endow the dance agent with the ability to explore.
For the reward signal, we utilize Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) to train a Reward Model (RM) from automatically ranked dance demonstrations, which guides the
exploration and exploitation of the dance agent. As shown
in Figure 2, we firstly use Behavior Cloning (Michie, Bain,
and Hayes-Miches 1990) to train an initial dance generation policy, allowing the agent to learn basic dance movements. Then, we inject increasing levels of noise into multiple cloned initial dance generation policies to acquire multiple policies with decreasing performance, generating different quality dance demonstrations. Next, we train a reward model with these automatically ranked dance demonstrations. Finally, under the guidance of the learned reward
model, we encourage the dance agent to explore using reinforcement learning, ultimately obtaining the optimal dance
generation policy.
Our design enables the dance policy to address the above
issues through exploration: (1) To tackle the limited diversity and quality of generated dances, reinforcement learning
encourages the dance agent to efficiently explore a broader
range of state-action pairs, where new movements emerge

This paper presents an Exploratory 3D Dance generation
framework, E3D2, designed to address the exploration capability deficiency in existing music-conditioned 3D dance generation models. Current models often generate monotonous
and simplistic dance sequences that misalign with human preferences because they lack exploration capabilities. The E3D2 framework involves a reward model trained
from automatically-ranked dance demonstrations, which then
guides the reinforcement learning process. This approach encourages the agent to explore and generate high quality and
diverse dance movement sequences. The soundness of the
reward model is both theoretically and experimentally validated. Empirical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of E3D2 on the AIST++ dataset.

Introduction
Music-conditioned 3D dance generation is an emerging field
that combines the art of dance and the science of machine
learning, fostering a novel and creative fusion. By utilizing
music as a guiding condition, dance generative models create dance poses synchronized with the melody and rhythm of
the music. Several studies (Huang et al. 2021, 2022; Li et al.
2021; Siyao et al. 2022) utilize generative networks to autoregressively generate dance sequences in supervised learning, with music as the condition and human dance poses as
the supervisory signal. These approaches are capable of producing complete dance movements, as significant advancements in the field of dance generation.
Nevertheless, we observe that supervised learning approaches often exhibit the following three shortcomings:
(1) Weak generalization for unseen music, which affects diversity and quality, (2) Fragility of auto-regressive models,
which are prone to severe compounding rollout errors, particularly when data is scarce, leading to the potential collapse of the dance sequence, and (3) Misalignment between
generated dances and human preferences, which stems from
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

301

