The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SkyScript: A Large and Semantically Diverse Vision-Language Dataset for
Remote Sensing
Zhecheng Wang, Rajanie Prabha* , Tianyuan Huang* , Jiajun Wu, Ram Rajagopal
Stanford University
{zhecheng, rajanie, tianyuah, ramr}@stanford.edu, jiajunwu@cs.stanford.edu

SkyScript

Abstract
Remote sensing imagery, despite its broad applications in
helping achieve Sustainable Development Goals and tackle
climate change, has not yet benefited from the recent advancements of versatile, task-agnostic vision language models (VLMs). A key reason is that the large-scale, semantically
diverse image-text dataset required for developing VLMs is
still absent for remote sensing images. Unlike natural images, remote sensing images and their associated text descriptions cannot be efficiently collected from the public Internet at scale. In this work, we bridge this gap by using
geo-coordinates to automatically connect open, unlabeled remote sensing images with rich semantics covered in OpenStreetMap, and thus construct SkyScript, a comprehensive
vision-language dataset for remote sensing images, comprising 2.6 million image-text pairs covering 29K distinct semantic tags. With continual pre-training on this dataset, we obtain a VLM that surpasses baseline models with a 6.2% average accuracy gain in zero-shot scene classification across
seven benchmark datasets. It also demonstrates the ability of
zero-shot transfer for fine-grained object attribute classification and cross-modal retrieval. We hope this dataset can support the advancement of VLMs for various multi-modal tasks
in remote sensing, such as open-vocabulary classification, retrieval, captioning, and text-to-image synthesis.

NWPU-Captions
BigEarthNet
Satlas
MLRSNet
PatternNet
RSI-CB128 RSD46-WHU fMoW
RSI-CB256
MillionAID
RSITMD RSICD
SeasoNet
AID
CLRS SenseEarth-classify
UCMSEN12MS
DIOR
Captions DOTA-v2.0
OpenSentinelMap
GID
So2Sat LCZ42
TGRS-HRRSD
SydneyNaSC-TG2
CV-BrCT
SAT-6
Captions
SAT-4
EuroSAT

Figure 1: Comparison of general-purpose remote sensing
datasets. Grey circles denote datasets for classification, object detection, or semantic segmentation (only datasets with
≥10,000 images are shown). Blue circles denote image-text
datasets. Our dataset, SkyScript, is over two orders of magnitude more semantically diverse than existing remote sensing image-text datasets.

Introduction

Despite numerous task-specific supervised learning models developed for remote sensing images, this domain has
not yet fully benefited from the recent advancements of taskagnostic, versatile vision language models (VLMs) such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021; Alayrac et al.
2022). This is because a key ingredient in the VLM’s recipe
for gaining versatility and generalizability is the large and
semantically diverse collection of image-text pairs, which is
still not readily available for remote sensing images. In the
recent development of VLMs, such image-text pairs, ranging from million to billion scale, are usually collected from
the public Internet through web crawling (Schuhmann et al.
2022). By contrast, remote sensing images are collected and
owned exclusively by Earth observation companies, government agencies, or intergovernmental organizations (e.g., European Space Agency). Although these imagery data may be
accessed through specialized, often non-free data pipelines
(e.g., paid API service), they cannot be crawled from the
web at scale. Even when these images can be obtained, they

Remote sensing imagery plays an important role for achieving Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Applying computer vision on remote sensing images can automate a broad
range of applications, such as poverty estimation (Jean et al.
2016), crop yield prediction (You et al. 2017), deforestation
detection (Torres et al. 2021), and renewable energy mapping (Yu et al. 2018; Kruitwagen et al. 2021). Facing the
increasing risk of climate change, remote sensing imagery
and the vision models built for it can further contribute to
both mitigation and adaptation by enabling the observation
of the Earth surface (Helber et al. 2019), detection of highpollution industry (Lee et al. 2021), evaluation of carbon
stock (Reiersen et al. 2022), and identification of vulnerable infrastructure and populations (Huang et al. 2021).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5805

