The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reproduce, Replicate, Reevaluate.
The Long but Safe Way to Extend Machine Learning Methods
Luisa Werner1 , Nabil Layaı̈da1 , Pierre Genevès1 , Jérôme Euzenat1 , Damien Graux2
1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG F-38000 Grenoble, France
2
ADAPT SFI Research Centre, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
{Luisa.Werner, Nabil.Layaida, Pierre.Geneves, Jerome.Euzenat}@inria.fr, grauxd@tcd.ie

Abstract
Same datasets

Reproducibility is a desirable property of scientific research.
On the one hand, it increases confidence in results. On the
other hand, reproducible results can be extended on a solid
basis. In rapidly developing fields such as machine learning, the latter is particularly important to ensure the reliability of research. In this paper, we present a systematic approach to reproducing (using the available implementation),
replicating (using an alternative implementation) and reevaluating (using different datasets) state-of-the-art experiments.
This approach enables the early detection and correction of
deficiencies and thus the development of more robust and
transparent machine learning methods. We detail the independent reproduction, replication, and reevaluation of the initially published experiments with a method that we want to
extend. For each step, we identify issues and draw lessons
learned. We further discuss solutions that have proven effective in overcoming the encountered problems. This work can
serve as a guide for further reproducibility studies and generally improve reproducibility in machine learning.

Different datasets

Same software

Different software

Reproduce

Replicate

Reevaluate

Table 1: Overview of the three steps.

ways, the data processing pipeline may be overlooked, etc.
(Lones 2023; Forde and Paganini 2019). All these factors
can compromise the reproducibility of experiments.
Various terminologies have been considered for reproducibility in computer science (Drummond 2009; Goodman,
Fanelli, and Ioannidis 2016; Rougier et al. 2017; Plesser
2018; Gundersen, Gil, and Aha 2018). We use and enrich
the terminology adopted by the ACM (ACM 2016), as summarized in Table 1:
• ‘repeat’ means reexecuting an experiment with the same
code, the same parameters, the same data by the same
experimenter;
• ‘reproduce’ means performing an experiment with the
same software, the same parameters and the same data
but by a different experimenter;
• ‘replicate’ means performing an experiment independently on the same data but using different software and
by a different experimenter;
• to these, we add ‘reevaluate’ which means performing
an experiment independently on different data.
When necessary, ‘reproducibility’ is also used as a term covering all such activities.
This work is motivated by our objective to extend the
Knowledge Enhanced Neural Networks (KENN) (Daniele
and Serafini 2023) to knowledge graphs. To that extent,
we need to reimplement the system, available in Tensorflow (Abadi et al. 2015), in the graph-specific library PyTorch Geometric (Fey and Lenssen 2019). This is a common use case as, beyond the motivation to extend, there
may be various other reasons to reimplement a system (Tian
et al. 2022; Alahmari et al. 2020). For that purpose, we
provide a progressive approach for extending a machine
learning method by first going through reproducing, replicating and reevaluating its results. This approach aims at
ensuring that the reimplementation is reliable. It is tempting to skip these steps and jump directly to method exten-

Introduction
Experiment reproducibility is a cornerstone of scientific research. It is so for the experimenters, because it allows them
to be more confident in the results they claim. It is so for the
research community, because it allows other researchers to
stand on a solid ground in developing their own work. This
leads to more reliable and superior research results, which is
beneficial for the society as a whole.
In the machine learning community, strong incentives
emerge to provide the necessary information to reproduce
results (Pineau et al. 2021). More generally, this is a basic
open science requirement to increase accountability and reproducibility. Reproducibility guidelines and checklists focus on encouraging researchers to provide more detailed
documentation of their published work (IJCAI 2022; ICML
2023; AAAI 2023). However, it is not obvious that such
guidelines are sufficient to independently reproduce experiments. Indeed, random operations may be introduced in several places (Chen et al. 2022), hyperparameters may change
the behavior of models (Henderson et al. 2018; Lucic et al.
2018), components may exchange information in imprecise
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15850

