The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge-Aware Parameter Coaching for Personalized Federated Learning
Mingjian Zhi1 , Yuanguo Bi1 * , Wenchao Xu2 , Haozhao Wang3 , Tianao Xiang1
1

Northeastern University, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2110657@stu.neu.edu.cn, biyuanguo@mail.neu.edu.cn, wenchao.xu@polyu.edu.hk, hz wang@hust.edu.cn,
2010652@stu.neu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2020), knowledge distillation-based methods (Li and Wang
2019; Zhang et al. 2021a; Lin et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022;
Jin et al. 2023) and so on.
However, there are two critical issues in the existing pFL
methods. Firstly, a local model is usually taken as a whole
for global weighted aggregation, which disregards the heterogeneous knowledge represented by the layered DNN parameters and thus limits the optimization of personalized
models (Yosinski et al. 2014; Zeiler and Fergus 2014). For
example, shallow layers are close to the data plane, and they
can reveal the low-level and regional features that are typically irrelevant to data heterogeneity, such that sharing these
layers can boost the pFL training even under non-IID condition (Luo et al. 2021). Conversely, deep layers often correspond to the semantic features that may contain different knowledge from different clients, so recklessly sharing
these layers can lead to degraded performance and excessive training time (Zeiler and Fergus 2014). Secondly, significant training overhead is often required to induce finegrained personalized weights for inter-client collaboration,
and thus a client cannot efficiently leverage the mutually
beneficial knowledge from different clients. For example,
pFedLA uses a hypernetwork to exploit the inter-similarities
among non-IID clients, but it requires excessive communication rounds to converge (Ma et al. 2022).
To solve the aforementioned issues, we propose an efficient knowledge-aware parameter coaching method for personalized federated learning, where a client refers to the
granular knowledge from other clients to coach the personalized training of the local parameters without incurring
much additional overhead. Specifically, the server maintains
a personalized model for each client, where the layer-wise
parameters are a linear combination of all clients’ corresponding parameters with adaptive weights. A personalized
server model acts as a regularizer to guide the update of local
layer-wise parameters. Moreover, the adaptive weights represented by relation cube can be derived efficiently from the
clients’ parameters, resulting in minimal computation burden in the server and low training time. We summarize the
main contributions of our paper as follows.

Personalized Federated Learning (pFL) can effectively exploit the non-IID data from distributed clients by customizing personalized models. Existing pFL methods either simply take the local model as a whole for aggregation or require
significant training overhead to induce the inter-client personalized weights, and thus clients cannot efficiently exploit the
mutually relevant knowledge from each other. In this paper,
we propose a knowledge-aware parameter coaching scheme
where each client can swiftly and granularly refer to parameters of other clients to guide the local training, whereby accurate personalized client models can be efficiently produced
without contradictory knowledge. Specifically, a novel regularizer is designed to conduct layer-wise parameters coaching via a relation cube, which is constructed based on the
knowledge represented by the layered parameters among all
clients. Then, we develop an optimization method to update
the relation cube and the parameters of each client. It is theoretically demonstrated that the convergence of the proposed
method can be guaranteed under both convex and non-convex
settings. Extensive experiments are conducted over various
datasets, which show that the proposed method can achieve
better performance compared with the state-of-the-art baselines in terms of accuracy and convergence speed.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) allows distributed clients to collaboratively exploit their local data
to train a shared global model without delivering the local
data to a centralized server, which not only avoids exposing
sensitive user information but also reduces communication
overhead for saving the transmissions of raw data.
Traditional FL paradigms suffer from significant performance degradation when the client data is non-identically
and independently distributed (non-IID) (Kairouz et al.
2021; Tan et al. 2022a), which is quite common in the diverse FL environments and data domains. As a solution,
personalized federated learning (pFL) is proposed to mitigate the non-IID issue, and many pFL methods have been
studied to improve model accuracy for diverse clients including meta learning-based methods (Fallah, Mokhtari, and
Ozdaglar 2020; Jiang et al. 2019; Lin, Yang, and Zhang

• Based on the layered property of the deep neural networks (DNN) model, a relation cube is defined to explicitly demonstrate the similarity of layered knowledge
among all clients. In addition, a lightweight optimization

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17069

