The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Watermarking Conditional Text Generation for AI Detection:
Unveiling Challenges and a Semantic-Aware Watermark Remedy
Yu Fu1 , Deyi Xiong2 , Yue Dong1 *
1

University of California Riverside
2
Tianjin University
1
yfu093@ucr.edu , dyxiong@tju.edu.cn2 , yue.dong@ucr.edu1

Abstract

Input: (H) [TABLECONTEXT] (R) title (T)
The Big Fix (H) [TABLECONTEXT] (R) [title]

p-value

Pool Man (H) The Big Fix (R) year (T) 1978

Target: Mandy Patinkin was the actor for the

z-score

(T) Mandy Patinkin (H) The Big Fix (R) role (T)

Num Tokens

To mitigate potential risks associated with language models
(LMs), recent AI detection research proposes incorporating
watermarks into machine-generated text through random vocabulary restrictions and utilizing this information for detection. In this paper, we show that watermarking algorithms
designed for LMs cannot be seamlessly applied to conditional text generation (CTG) tasks without a notable decline
in downstream task performance. To address this issue, we introduce a simple yet effective semantic-aware watermarking
algorithm that considers the characteristics of conditional text
generation with the input context. Compared to the baseline
watermarks, our proposed watermark yields significant improvements in both automatic and human evaluations across
various text generation models, including BART and Flan-T5,
for CTG tasks such as summarization and data-to-text generation. Meanwhile, it maintains detection ability with higher
z-scores but lower AUC scores, suggesting the presence of a
detection paradox that poses additional challenges for watermarking CTG.

Pool Man in the 1978 movie The Big Fix.

Original Watermark
Mandy Patinkin played as Pool Man in episode The 30 11.82 1e-32
Big Polliners in episode No, No, It is 1978 in TV
Series and movie.

Semantic Watermark
In 1978, Mandy Patinkin is in the title The Big Fix,
the role is Pool Man.

22 13.75 2e-43

Figure 1: The outputs with the original watermark (OW)
(Kirchenbauer et al. 2023) and our proposed semantic-aware
watermark (SW) on a test example from DART – a data-totext generation benchmark – with parameters γ = 0.1 and
δ = 5. We expect ∼ 90% of human-generated texts from the
red list, whereas AI primarily utilizes the green list. Both
watermarks yield high z-scores (z > 4), indicating strong
watermark strength for detection. Yet, OW forces the algorithm to generate from the red list due to randomly assigning key source entities (Mandy Patinkin) to it. As δ increases
(towards a hard watermark), excluding these red tokens risks
more hallucinations (words with underline).

Introduction
Language Models (LMs) have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in generating content that closely resembles human performances across diverse tasks (Tan et al. 2023;
Dong et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023). As large-scale models
such as ChatGPT (OpenAI 2021) evolve and produce increasingly human-like content, concerns have surged around
potential limitations and risks tied to their use (Bender
et al. 2021), including hallucination (Alkaissi and McFarlane 2023), bias and toxicity (Deshpande et al. 2023), failure
in commonsense reasoning (Bian et al. 2023), and misinformation and malicious use (OpenAI 2023).
To mitigate potential risks associated with LMs, it’s crucial to develop methods that differentiate between AI and
human-generated content. Current AI-detection tools primarily rely on perplexity-based classifiers, assuming lower
perplexity in AI-generated text (Solaiman et al. 2019; Jawahar, Abdul-Mageed, and Lakshmanan 2020; Mitchell et al.
2023; Mitrović, Andreoletti, and Ayoub 2023). Conversely,

an alternative approach is to inject watermarks during generation for subsequent detection. For instance, Kirchenbauer
et al. (2023) proposed using hash function to randomly bifurcate the vocabulary into “green” and “red” lists at each
decoding step, serving as watermarks. This watermark provides reliable detection signals without the need to train
a classifier and produces high-quality generated texts with
only a slight perplexity drop in language modeling.
Different from existing research, our focus is on watermarks for conditional text generation (CTG), and we unveil the challenges associated with the use of watermarks

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18003

