The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Interactive Hyperparameter Optimization in Multi-Objective Problems
via Preference Learning
Joseph Giovanelli1 , Alexander Tornede2 , Tanja Tornede2 , Marius Lindauer2
1

2

Alma Mater Studiorum — University of Bologna
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover
j.giovanelli@unibo.it, {a.tornede, t.tornede, m.lindauer}@ai.uni-hannover.de

Abstract

2019; van Wynsberghe 2021). Comparing two ML models
with respect to several objectives is non-trivial and most approaches solve this problem by returning a set of solutions
that cannot be improved further without going to the expense
of at least one of the objectives, called the Pareto front.
Naturally, as standard ML algorithms, MO-ML algorithms expose hyperparameters controlling their learning behavior and thus, also the resulting Pareto front. To unleash
the full potential of the MO-ML algorithms, these hyperparameters should be optimized with adequate methods. Unfortunately, optimizing the hyperparameters of such MOML algorithms is challenging for a user with standard hyperparameter optimization (HPO) (Feurer and Hutter 2019; Bischl et al. 2023) approaches, such as SMAC (Hutter, Hoos,
and Leyton-Brown 2011; Lindauer et al. 2022), Optuna (Akiba et al. 2019), Hyperopt (Komer, Bergstra, and Eliasmith
2014), HpBandSter (Falkner, Klein, and Hutter 2018) or
SyneTune (Salinas et al. 2022), which iteratively evaluate
configurations. This is the case, as evaluating a hyperparameter configuration of an MO-ML algorithm involves evaluating the quality of the Pareto front of models returned by
the corresponding algorithm. Several so-called (quality) indicators, such as hypervolume (Zitzler and Thiele 1999), are
used to assess different properties of the shape of the Pareto
front and in principle can also be used for the purpose of
rating a configuration in the context of HPO. Nevertheless,
although a user might have a clear idea about what kind
of Pareto front shape they would like to choose their final
model from, choosing the quality indicator leading to this
Pareto front shape is a challenging task in practice. At the
same time, however, correctly configuring the HPO tool with
the right loss function, i.e. quality indicator in our case, is
crucial to achieve the desired result.
With this paper, we propose an interactive humancentered HPO (Pfisterer, Thomas, and Bischl 2019; Souza
et al. 2021; Moosbauer et al. 2021; Hvarfner et al. 2022;
Moosbauer et al. 2022; Francia, Giovanelli, and Pisano
2023; Segel et al. 2023; Mallik et al. 2023) approach for
MO-ML algorithms that frees users from choosing a predefined quality indicator suitable for their needs by learning
one tailored towards them based on feedback. To achieve
this, it first learns the desired Pareto front shape from the
user in a short interactive session and then starts a corresponding HPO process optimizing towards the previously

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is important to leverage
the full potential of machine learning (ML). In practice, users
are often interested in multi-objective (MO) problems, i.e.,
optimizing potentially conflicting objectives, like accuracy
and energy consumption. To tackle this, the vast majority of
MO-ML algorithms return a Pareto front of non-dominated
machine learning models to the user. Optimizing the hyperparameters of such algorithms is non-trivial as evaluating a
hyperparameter configuration entails evaluating the quality of
the resulting Pareto front. In literature, there are known indicators that assess the quality of a Pareto front (e.g., hypervolume, R2) by quantifying different properties (e.g., volume,
proximity to a reference point). However, choosing the indicator that leads to the desired Pareto front might be a hard
task for a user. In this paper, we propose a human-centered
interactive HPO approach tailored towards multi-objective
ML leveraging preference learning to extract desiderata from
users that guide the optimization. Instead of relying on the
user guessing the most suitable indicator for their needs, our
approach automatically learns an appropriate indicator. Concretely, we leverage pairwise comparisons of distinct Pareto
fronts to learn such an appropriate quality indicator. Then, we
optimize the hyperparameters of the underlying MO-ML algorithm towards this learned indicator using a state-of-the-art
HPO approach. In an experimental study targeting the environmental impact of ML, we demonstrate that our approach
leads to substantially better Pareto fronts compared to optimizing based on a wrong indicator pre-selected by the user,
and performs comparable in the case of an advanced user
knowing which indicator to pick.

Introduction
Practical applications of machine learning often call for
the optimization of more than one loss or objective function, called multi-objective machine learning (MO-ML) (Jin
2006) borrowing from the notion of multi-objective optimization (MO) (Deb, Sindhya, and Hakanen 2016; Gunantara 2018). For example, instead of only focusing on the performance of a model, its energy consumption is becoming
more and more important in various domains such as edge
computing, but also in general, sparked by efforts in the area
of green artificial intelligence (Green AI) (Schwartz et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12172

