The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Supervision Interpolation via LossMix:
Generalizing Mixup for Object Detection and Beyond
Thanh Vu1,2 * , Baochen Sun2† , Bodi Yuan2 , Alex Ngai2 Yueqi Li2 , Jan-Michael Frahm1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
Mineral
{thanhvu,baochens,bodiyuan}@mineral.ai, {alexander.s.ngai,yueqili.innovation}@gmail.com, jmf@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

Original Input

The success of data mixing augmentations in image classification tasks has been well-received. However, these techniques cannot be readily applied to object detection due to
challenges such as spatial misalignment, foreground/background distinction, and plurality of instances. To tackle these
issues, we first introduce a novel conceptual framework called
Supervision Interpolation (SI), which offers a fresh perspective on interpolation-based augmentations by relaxing and
generalizing Mixup. Based on SI, we propose LossMix, a
simple yet versatile and effective regularization that enhances
the performance and robustness of object detectors and more.
Our key insight is that we can effectively regularize the training on mixed data by interpolating their loss errors instead of
ground truth labels. Empirical results on the PASCAL VOC
and MS COCO datasets demonstrate that LossMix can consistently outperform state-of-the-art methods widely adopted
for detection. Furthermore, by jointly leveraging LossMix
with unsupervised domain adaptation, we successfully improve existing approaches and set a new state of the art for
cross-domain object detection.

Mixed Input

yi

yj
yi =(dog,
yj =(bird,

Mixed Label:

?

Introduction

Mixup

Over the past decade, object detection has made remarkable
progress, with impressive scores on challenging benchmarks
such as MS COCO (Lin et al. 2014). However, state-ofthe-art detectors still suffer from poor generalization abilities and struggle with data outside their training distribution, especially under domain shifts (Li et al. 2020; Oza
et al. 2021). Recently, data mixing techniques, pioneered by
Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018b), have emerged as an effective
augmentation and regularization method for improving accuracy and robustness in deep neural networks. These techniques (Zhang et al. 2018b; Yun et al. 2019; Verma et al.
2019; Kim, Choo, and Song 2020; Dabouei et al. 2021;
Hong, Choi, and Kim 2021) use a linear interpolation of
both images and their labels to generate synthetic training
data. The “mixing” process encourages the model to behave
linearly between training examples, which can potentially
reduce undesired oscillations for out-of-distribution predictions. Since its introduction in 2018, Mixup has garnered

)
)

Mixed Loss:

λ * Ldet (

, yi )

(1 - λ) * Ldet (

+
, yj)

LossMix (ours)

Figure 1: Compared to label-mixing (e.g., Mixup, CutMix),
the proposed LossMix deploys interpolated losses instead of
interpolated ground truths as the mixed supervision signals.
This significantly simplifies the challenges involved in applying data mixing to higher-level tasks such as detection.

increasing attention and has been widely adopted for image classification problems (Zhang et al. 2018b; Yun et al.
2019; Verma et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Kim, Choo, and
Song 2020; Wu, Inkpen, and El-Roby 2020; Dabouei et al.
2021; Hong, Choi, and Kim 2021; Na et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2022a,b; Pinto et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). This motivates us
to investigate Mixup-like augmentation for object detection.
Unfortunately, Mixup cannot be applied to object detection task off the shelf. On one hand, the mixing of the category label of object instances is non-trivial (Fig. 2) due to
issues such as spatial misalignment, foreground/background
distinctions, and the plurality of instances. In contrast to
classification, where images share the same shape and each

* Work done during a residency with Mineral.
†

Project lead.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5280

