The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fair Lotteries for Participatory Budgeting
Haris Aziz, Xinhang Lu, Mashbat Suzuki, Jeremy Vollen, Toby Walsh
UNSW Sydney, Australia
{haris.aziz, xinhang.lu, mashbat.suzuki, j.vollen, t.walsh}@unsw.edu.au

Abstract

rithm. One approach to address this issue is the use of randomization to achieve stronger fairness properties ex-ante.
This approach has been successful in various contexts, such
as resource allocation (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001), voting (Bogomolnaia, Moulin, and Stong 2005), and committee
voting (Cheng et al. 2020).
In this paper, we initiate the study of randomization for
PB. We begin by studying the problem of implementation in
PB: Given a marginal probability for each project, how can
we compute a probability distribution (or lottery) over discrete outcomes that realizes these probabilities? While this
question has already been answered in the PB special case
of committee voting (Cheng et al. 2020), we find that the
PB setting with heterogeneous costs gives rise to significant
obstacles on this front. Since, unlike committee voting, we
cannot guarantee that the total spend is equal ex-ante and
ex-post, we develop a technique which bounds the amount
by which the ex-post spend differs from the ex-ante spend.
Given our new implementation approach, we then return
to the objective of strong ex-ante fairness properties in PB.
Our goal is to achieve ex-ante fairness while also ensuring
that our lotteries only include ex-post fair outcomes, thus
guaranteeing desirable fairness, both ex-ante and ex-post.
This approach is known as the best-of-both-worlds fairness
perspective, and has been employed in other adjacent contexts, such as fair division (see, e.g., Aziz et al. 2023a) and
committee voting (Aziz et al. 2023b). In this paper, we define a hierarchy of ex-ante fairness properties for PB and
then consider a hierarchy of PB settings, giving algorithms
which guarantee best-of-both-worlds fairness and/or incompatibility results for each setting considered.

In pursuit of participatory budgeting (PB) outcomes with
broader fairness guarantees, we initiate the study of lotteries
over discrete PB outcomes. As the projects have heterogeneous costs, the amount spent may not be equal ex ante and
ex post. To address this, we develop a technique to bound
the amount by which the ex-post spend differs from the exante spend—the property is termed budget balanced up to
one project (BB1). With respect to fairness, we take a best-ofboth-worlds perspective, seeking outcomes that are both exante and ex-post fair. Towards this goal, we initiate a study
of ex-ante fairness properties in PB, including Individual Fair
Share (IFS), Unanimous Fair Share (UFS) and their stronger
variants, as well as Group Fair Share (GFS). We show several
incompatibility results between these ex-ante fairness notions
and existing ex-post concepts based on justified representation. One of our main contributions is a randomized algorithm which simultaneously satisfies ex-ante Strong UFS, expost full justified representation (FJR) and ex-post BB1 for
PB with binary utilities.

1

Introduction

Participatory Budgeting (PB) is one of the exciting democratic paradigms that facilitates members of a community,
municipality, or town to collectively make public project
funding decisions. Considering that PB generalizes classical
voting and committee selection problems in social choice
theory, it also poses interesting axiomatic and algorithmic
research challenges (Aziz and Shah 2021; Rey and Maly
2023). A major effort underway in computational social
choice is to design meaningful axioms that capture elusive
properties such as fairness and representation, and to design computationally efficient algorithms that satisfy such
axioms. There is also a movement to apply such rules in various countries (see, e.g., https://equalshares.net).
While existing algorithms for selecting discrete projects
satisfy meaningful proportional representation properties,
they do not provide any minimal representation guarantees
to individual voters, even in an ex-ante sense. For example,
existing rules allow for the possibility that certain voters do
not like any of the projects selected by the PB process. Indeed, this is an inevitable reality for any deterministic algo-

1.1

Our Results

In Section 3, we tackle the question of implementation in
PB. We first show that, unlike the committee voting setting,
fractional outcomes cannot always be implemented by a lottery over integral outcomes using the same amount of budget. Given this, we define a well-motivated axiom for lotteries — budget balanced up to one (BB1) — which enforces a
natural bound on the amount by which the total ex-post cost
can differ from the cost of the fractional outcome the lottery implements. We then demonstrate an approach which
gives an implementation satisfying our axiom for any fractional outcome, and complement this result by showing that

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9469

