The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Budget Throttling in Repeated Second-Price Auctions
Zhaohua Chen* 1 , Chang Wang* 2 , Qian Wang* 1 , Yuqi Pan3 , Zhuming Shi4 , Zheng Cai5 , Yukun Ren5 ,
Zhihua Zhu5 , Xiaotie Deng1,6
1

CFCS, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Northwestern University
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
4
Stony Brook University
5
Tencent Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
6
CMAR, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
chenzhaohua@pku.edu.cn, wc@u.northwestern.edu, charlie@pku.edu.cn, pyq0419@stu.pku.edu.cn,
zhuming.shi@stonybrook.edu, {zhengcai, rickyren, zhihuazhu}@tencent.com, xiaotie@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

provide advertisers with various budget control methods to
choose from.

In today’s online advertising markets, a crucial requirement
for an advertiser is to control her total expenditure within
a time horizon under some budget. Among various budget
control methods, throttling has emerged as a popular choice,
managing an advertiser’s total expenditure by selecting only
a subset of auctions to participate in. This paper provides a
theoretical panorama of a single advertiser’s dynamic budget
throttling process in repeated second-price auctions. We first
establish a lower bound on the regret and an upper bound
on the asymptotic competitive ratio for any throttling algorithm, respectively, when the advertiser’s values are stochastic and adversarial. Regarding the algorithmic side, we propose the OGD-CB algorithm, which guarantees a near-optimal
expected regret with stochastic values. On the other hand,
when values are adversarial, we prove that this algorithm also
reaches the upper bound on the asymptotic competitive ratio.
We further compare throttling with pacing, another widely
adopted budget control method, in repeated second-price auctions. In the stochastic case, we demonstrate that pacing is
generally superior to throttling for the advertiser, supporting
the well-known result that pacing is asymptotically optimal
in this scenario. However, in the adversarial case, we give an
exciting result indicating that throttling is also an asymptotically optimal dynamic bidding strategy. Our results bridge
the gaps in theoretical research of throttling in repeated auctions and comprehensively reveal the ability of this popular
budget-smoothing strategy.

This work studies one of these methods, called throttling
(a.k.a. probabilistic pacing), which is widely adopted by
major advertising platforms including Facebook (Facebook
2017), Google (Karande, Mehta, and Srikant 2013), LinkedIn
(Agarwal et al. 2014) and Yahoo! (Xu et al. 2015). Under this
method, an advertiser’s accumulated payment is controlled
by being excluded from a fraction of auctions throughout the
entire period (e.g., a day, a week, or a month). Compared to
other budget management strategies (Balseiro et al. 2021),
such as pacing (a.k.a. bid-shading), an essential feature of
throttling is that an advertiser’s bid is never altered in any auction instance. As revealed in the literature (Karande, Mehta,
and Srikant 2013; Chen, Kroer, and Kumar 2021), this feature attracts a large number of advertisers to use the throttling
strategy due to two primary reasons. (a) Some advertisers
do not permit the platform to modify their bids, forcing the
platform to exclude them from some auctions to control their
budget, i.e., adopting the throttling strategy. (b) Strategies
that modify bids, such as pacing, may allocate an advertiser
to those auctions where she is superior to other advertisers,
and could be detrimental for the advertiser to exploit other
parts of the market. In contrast, with unmodified bids competing, the throttling strategy provides advertisers with a more
straightforward and unbiased observation of various users,
enabling them to gain a clearer understanding of their competitiveness in different market sectors. For instance, under
pacing, a small budget on some market sectors to be explored
would lead to a small pacing multiplier on the advertiser’s
bid, which would cause the advertiser to win nothing in this
sector, considering other advertisers who are superior. In
comparison, under throttling, even with a small budget, the
advertiser has a chance to have a competitive bid (as the bid
is not modified) and win in some auctions, thus helping the
advertiser to explore the new market sector with a small cost.
These phenomena illustrate the importance of throttling as a
popular budget control method.

Introduction
In recent years, the online advertising market has experienced
significant growth, driven by the rise of new social media platforms such as short videos. When a user submits an ad query
to the market, an auction is held among all interested advertisers, and the winner is awarded the opportunity to display
their ad. Owing to the vast market volume, it is common for
advertisers to set a budget to regulate their expenditure over
a specified period. Correspondingly, advertising platforms
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The throttling strategy has been extensively explored in
the literature, primarily from an empirical perspective evalu-

9598

