The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Music Style Transfer with Time-Varying Inversion of Diffusion Models
Sifei Li1,2 , Yuxin Zhang1,2 , Fan Tang3 , Chongyang Ma4 , Weiming Dong1,2 * , Changsheng Xu1,2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Kuaishou Technology
{lisifei2022, weiming.dong, changsheng.xu}@ia.ac.cn, tangfan@ict.ac.cn, chongyangm@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Tzerpos 2022; Choi and Lee 2023) can stylize music with a
specific timbre to a specific or a few instruments, while others (Huang et al. 2019; Chang, Chen, and Hu 2021; Bonnici,
Benning, and Saitis 2022; Wu et al. 2023b) have achieved
many-to-many music style transfer but restrict the transformation to a finite set of styles presented in the training data. There are efforts (Cı́fka, Şimşekli, and Richard
2020; Cı́fka et al. 2021) to explore one-shot music style
transfer, but they still have difficulties in handling natural
sounds. With the development of large language models,
some works (Forsgren and Martiros 2022; Liu et al. 2023;
Schneider, Jin, and Schölkopf 2023; Huang et al. 2023a) explore text-guided music generation and demonstrate remarkable capacity for generating impressive results. Specially,
MusicLM (Agostinelli et al. 2023) and MUSICGEN (Copet
et al. 2023) implement music style transfer by conditioning
on both textual and melodic representations. However, existing methods can only achieve common style transfer based
on coarse descriptions of genres (e.g., “rock”, “jazz”), instruments (e.g., “piano”, “guitar”, “violin”), or performance
forms (e.g., “chorus”, “string quartet”). They lack the ability to handle niche instruments such as cornet or erhu. Furthermore, these methods are insufficient to address complex
scenarios involving the description of natural sounds or synthesized audio effects.
To alleviate all the above problems and leverage the generative capabilities of pretrained large-scale models, we propose a novel example-guided music stylization method. Our
approach aims to achieve music style transfer based on arbitrary examples, encompassing instruments, natural sounds,
and synthesized sound effects. Given an audio clip, we can
transfer its style to arbitrary input music which is used as
content. As illustrated in Figure 1, our method can transfer
the texture of the style mel-spectrograms to the local regions
of the content mel-spectrograms, while preserving the structure of the content mel-spectrograms.
To achieve this goal, we seek to obtain an effective style
representation of the input audio. Inspired by Textual Inversion (Gal et al. 2023a), which utilizes a pseudo-word
to represent a specific concept through the reconstruction
of target images, we aim to learn a pseudo-word that represents the style audio in a similar manner. However, we
expect to avoid introducing the content of the style audio
during the stylization process. We suppose that different

With the development of diffusion models, text-guided image style transfer has demonstrated high-quality controllable
synthesis results. However, the utilization of text for diverse
music style transfer poses significant challenges, primarily
due to the limited availability of matched audio-text datasets.
Music, being an abstract and complex art form, exhibits variations and intricacies even within the same genre, thereby
making accurate textual descriptions challenging. This paper presents a music style transfer approach that effectively
captures musical attributes using minimal data. We introduce a novel time-varying textual inversion module to precisely capture mel-spectrogram features at different levels.
During inference, we propose a bias-reduced stylization technique to obtain stable results. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can transfer the style of specific instruments, as well as incorporate natural sounds to compose melodies. Samples and source code are available at
https://lsfhuihuiff.github.io/MusicTI/.

Introduction
If a picture is worth a thousand words, then every melody
is timeless. Music is an essential art form in human society, and a change in music style can offer listeners a completely new experience and perception. For a long time, music creation has had high barriers to entry. However, music
style transfer has opened up possibilities for ordinary individuals to achieve personalized music experiences. Music
style transfer refers to the process of transferring the style
of a given audio clip to another without altering its melody.
Sound is omnipresent in our lives, so inspired by music creators who utilize natural sounds in their compositions1 , music style transfer can be extended to encompass various types
of sound examples.
Deep learning-based music style transfer has been a hot
research topic in recent years. Some works (Alinoori and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
How natural sounds can be involved in music production is well explained by https://youtu.be/ixiiesRtgKU?list=
RDixiiesRtgKU; https://theworld.org/stories/2021-03-14/naturealways-singing-now-you-can-make-your-own-music-naturessounds.

547

