The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Importance of Application-Grounded Experimental Design for Evaluating
Explainable ML Methods
Kasun Amarasinghe1 , Kit T. Rodolfa2 , Sérgio Jesus3 , Valerie Chen1 , Vladimir Balayan3 ,
Pedro Saleiro3 , Pedro Bizarro3 , Ameet Talwalkar1 , Rayid Ghani1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
2
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA
3
Feedzai, Lisboa, Portugal
amarasinghek@cmu.edu, krodolfa@law.stanford.edu, sergio.jesus@feedzai.com, valeriechen@cmu.edu, {vladimir.balayan,
pedro.saleiro, pedro.bizarro}@feedzai.com, {talwalkar, rayid}@cmu.edu
Abstract

conclusions (Amarasinghe et al. 2020). We argue that existing evaluation studies violate at least one of these requirements, which we elaborate on in the next section.

Most existing evaluations of explainable machine learning
(ML) methods rely on simplifying assumptions or proxies
that do not reflect real-world use cases; the handful of more
robust evaluations on real-world settings have shortcomings
in their design, generally leading to overestimation of methods’ real-world utility. In this work, we seek to address this
by conducting a study that evaluates post-hoc explainable ML
methods in a setting consistent with the application context
and provide a template for future evaluation studies. We modify and improve a prior study on e-commerce fraud detection
by relaxing the original work’s simplifying assumptions that
departed from the deployment context. Our study finds no
evidence for the utility of the tested explainable ML methods in the context, which is a drastically different conclusion from the earlier work. This highlights how seemingly
trivial experimental design choices can yield misleading conclusions about method utility. In addition, our work carries
lessons about the necessity of not only evaluating explainable
ML methods using tasks, data, users, and metrics grounded
in the intended application context but also developing methods tailored to specific applications, moving beyond generalpurpose explainable ML methods.

In this work, we seek to bridge this critical gap by conducting a study that evaluates explainable ML methods in
a setting consistent with the application context. Our study
builds on the e-commerce fraud detection setting used in a
previous study (Jesus et al. 2021) consisting of professional
fraud analysts reviewing real-world e-commerce transactions to detect fraud. We identify several simplifying assumptions made by the previous study that deviated from
the deployment context and modify the setup to relax those
assumptions making the experimental setup faithful to the
application context. Our setup results in dramatically different conclusions of the relative utility of ML predictions and
explanations compared to the earlier work of (Jesus et al.
2021). For instance, while the authors of (Jesus et al. 2021)
find that the ML predictions and explanations impact the
decision correctness of fraud analysts (based on confusion
matrix-based metrics), we do not find any utility of the ML
models or explanations in improving the decision correctness metric that captures the operational objectives. In light
of these results, we see our main contributions as:

Introduction
Despite the rapid expansion in explainable machine learning
(ML) method development, rigorous approaches for evaluating the utility of explainable ML methods in real-world
contexts have remained elusive (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017;
Chen et al. 2022; Amarasinghe et al. 2020). According to
Amarasinghe et al., four key elements are required to evaluate the real-world utility of an explainable ML method: (1)
the real task performed in the deployment context, including
performance metrics that represent operational goals of the
setting, (2) real data collected from the application setting
that capture the nuances and complexities of the use case,
(3) real users with domain expertise who perform the task in
the real-world, and (4) a robust inference strategy to evaluate
the incremental impact of explainable ML methods, including sufficient sample sizes for statistical power, appropriate
hypotheses and experimental variants, and a valid analytical
methodology to capture uncertainty in the data and support

1. Conducting a robust application-grounded evaluation
study of explainable ML methods that includes domain
expert users, the intended task, real-world data, and an
inference strategy grounded in the operational goals.
2. Highlighting the critical importance of using evaluation metrics that capture operational goals, going beyond
confusion matrix-based metrics and self-reported assessments of explanation quality.
3. Illustrating the importance of designing experiments
that reflect the application context and providing widereaching lessons for future evaluations of explainable
ML methods in other domains by highlighting the contrasting conclusions between the earlier work and ours.
4. Highlighting the inefficacy of popular general-purpose
explainable ML methods in our real-world setting, suggesting a need for developing use-case-specific methods.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20921

