The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MuLTI: Efficient Video-and-Language Understanding with Text-Guided
MultiWay-Sampler and Multiple Choice Modeling
Jiaqi Xu, Bo Liu, Yunkuo Chen, Mengli Cheng, Xing Shi
Alibaba Group, China
{zhoumo.xjq, xuanyuan.lb, chenyunkuo.cyk, mengli.cml, shubao.sx}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

2022) concatenate video-text encoder outputs for transformer encoders processing, with complexity growing with
sequence length squared. Other studies (Lei et al. 2021b;
Li et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022; Lei et al. 2021a) reduce
computation by condensing video features via mean pooling
or class tokens before feature fusion, risking loss of critical
details. Flamingo (Alayrac et al. 2022) employs samplers
and random queries for efficient video feature condensation,
though this approach is suboptimal and may compromise
feature integrity. In summary, balancing computational costs
and the model’s accuracy in the feature fusion module is still
challenging. Following (Miech et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2020; Zhu and Yang 2020; Miech et al. 2020), we
explore strategies for selectively freezing encoder components to lower visual encoder training costs.
Aligning pretraining with downstream tasks is challenging. Previous pretraining frameworks generally apply four
typical pretraining tasks: Masked Frame Modeling (MVM)
tasks (Lei et al. 2021a; Ma, Lou, and Ouyang 2021; Fu et al.
2021; Huang et al. 2022) for video encoder optimization,
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) tasks (Devlin et al.
2018; Sun et al. 2019; Zhu and Yang 2020; Luo et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2020; Lei et al. 2021b) for text encoder optimization, Video Text Matching (VTM) and Video Text Comparison (VTC) tasks (Li et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2020; Fu et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021) for joint optimization of video and text
encoders. Although the above methods have proven effective
in learning video and text representations, there are still significant domain gaps between pretraining and downstream
tasks, especially in videoQA. Only the VTC task is consistent with text-video retrieval among the above pretraining
tasks. In summary, narrowing the domain gap between the
pretraining and downstream tasks is still challenging.
Addressing these challenges, we introduce MuLTI, featuring a Text-Guided MultiWay-Sampler for sequence condensation and multi-modal fusion. Existing methods typically use a learnable query vector to sample the video feature through self-attention modules (Alayrac et al. 2022).
A randomly initialized query vector can discard vital original feature information, causing performance drops. We design an lightweight Adapt-Pooling method in Text-Guided
MultiWay-Sampler to obtain the condensed features by calculating the importance of each sequence block. Then, we
add the condensed features to the sampled features and use

Video-and-language understanding has a variety of applications in the industry, such as video question answering, textvideo retrieval, and multi-label classification. Existing videoand-language understanding methods generally adopt heavy
multi-modal encoders and feature fusion modules, which
consume high computational costs. Specially, they have difficulty dealing with dense video frames or long text prevalent
in industrial applications.
This paper proposes MuLTI, a highly accurate and efficient
video-and-language understanding model that achieves efficient and effective feature fusion and rapid adaptation to
downstream tasks. Specifically, we design a Text-Guided
MultiWay-Sampler based on adapt-pooling residual mapping
and self-attention modules to sample long sequences and fuse
multi-modal features, which reduces the computational costs
and addresses performance degradation caused by previous
samplers. Therefore, MuLTI can handle longer sequences
with limited computational costs. Then, to further enhance
the model’s performance and fill in the lack of pretraining
tasks in the video question answering, we propose a new
pretraining task named Multiple Choice Modeling. This task
bridges the gap between pretraining and downstream tasks
and improves the model’s ability to align video and text features. Benefiting from the efficient feature fusion module
and the new pretraining task, MuLTI achieves state-of-the-art
performance on multiple datasets. Implementation and pretrained models will be released.

Introduction
Video-and-language understanding has a wide range of applications such as video question answering (videoQA), textvideo retrieval and multi-label classification (Diba et al.
2019). Existing methods have made significant progress in
video-and-language understanding. However, they still suffer from two challenges: Balancing computational efficiency
and performance when dealing with long sequences and the
domain gap between pretraining and downstream tasks.
The video-text model generally consists of three modules:
text encoder, video encoder, and feature fusion module. The
latter two usually cause high computational costs.
Feature fusion modules face efficiency and effectiveness
challenges. Previous studies (Fu et al. 2021; Huang et al.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6297

