The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BDIQA: A New Dataset for Video Question Answering to Explore Cognitive
Reasoning through Theory of Mind
Yuanyuan Mao1,2 , Xin Lin1,2 , Qin Ni3 , Liang He1,2
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, ECNU, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
3
Key Laboratory of Multilingual Education with AI, Shanghai International Studies University
51215901051@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, xlin@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,niqin@shisu.edu.cn,lhe@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Alice is in livingroom

Abstract
As a foundational component of cognitive intelligence, theory
of mind (ToM) can make AI more closely resemble human
thought processes, thereby enhancing their interaction and
collaboration with human. In particular, it can significantly
improve a model’s comprehension of videos in complex
scenes. However, current video question answer (VideoQA)
datasets focus on studying causal reasoning within events,
few of them genuinely incorporating human ToM. Consequently, there is a lack of development in ToM reasoning tasks within the area of VideoQA. This paper presents
BDIQA, the first benchmark to explore the cognitive reasoning capabilities of VideoQA models in the context of ToM.
BDIQA is inspired by the cognitive development of children’s ToM and addresses the current deficiencies in machine ToM within datasets and tasks. Specifically, it offers
tasks at two difficulty levels, assessing Belief, Desire and
Intention (BDI) reasoning in both simple and complex scenarios. We conduct evaluations on several mainstream methods of VideoQA and diagnose their capabilities with zeroshot, few-shot and supervised learning. We find that the performance of pre-trained models on cognitive reasoning tasks
remains unsatisfactory. To counter this challenge, we undertake thorough analysis and experimentation, ultimately presenting two guidelines to enhance cognitive reasoning derived from ablation analysis.

Job open fridge

He leave kitchen with food Alice enter kitchen

Alice switch up the stove She put bowl on table Alice open the fridge

Q1: What is Alice’s desire ?
Have a meal
Q3: What are her intentions ?
Switch on stove, prepare
bowl, fetch food
Q2: Where does she think
food is?
In the fridge.

Figure 1: An example of how ToM is involved in human
action explanation. Job takes the only food in fridge away
and leaves the kitchen while Alice is in the living room. Alice’s desire is to have a meal (desire). In the last picture, she
is planning to fetch food (intention). She is walking to the
empty fridge because she mistakenly thinks that the food is
in the fridge (belief) and hold a false belief about the food.

significantly improve a model’s comprehension of videos
in complex scenes (Zhong et al. 2022; Zellers et al. 2019).
Since ToM reasoning on VideoQA requires to infer hidden
information and relationships related to human understanding with the simultaneous verification of multiple skills as
well as integrating visual and auditory information.
However, there is a lack of development in cognitive reasoning tasks within the VideoQA domain. Some of current
work on VideoQA study causal reasoning of events but few
of them are involved in human mental states. For example,
when asked “why does Alice walk to the empty fridge?”
in Figure 1, only by establishing human cognitive processes
can models answer this question correctly; most of existing
research tend to provide straightforward action descriptions
such as wanting to open fridge or fetch food. In contrast
to descriptions, a comprehensive understanding necessitates
an exploration of intrinsic motivation and mechanisms of
a complex cognitive process for action generation. As is
shown above, belief, desire, and intention (BDI) of ToM play
fundamental roles and can be used to better explain human
actions. Figure 2 and Figure 1 show the definition of BDI
and how humans engage in cognitive reasoning with BDI
reasoning. These three elements work together in a dynamic
and complex manner in the human’s mind. Even though
there exists some work (Xiao et al. 2021; Ko et al. 2021;

Introduction
In the attempt to understand the mechanisms of human
for advanced intelligence, cognitive intelligence of AI has
gained much attention in recent years, such as affecting computing (Poria et al. 2017) and human value alignment (Carroll 2018). Theory of mind (ToM) is the basis of human
cognition. It represents a set of cognitive abilities which attribute mental states (beliefs, intentions, desires, knowledge,
perspectives, etc.) to others and recognizes that these mental
states may differ from one’s own (Premack and Woodruff
1978). The development of ToM also has fundamental significance for AI cognition development. It can make AI
more closely resemble human thought processes, thereby
enhancing their interaction and collaboration (Smart 2018;
Agarwal and Bansal 2021). In particular, integrating ToM
reasoning into video question answering (VideoQA), can
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

583

