The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Symmetric Temporally Sparse BPTT for Efficient RNN Training
Xi Chen1 , Chang Gao2 , Zuowen Wang1 , Longbiao Cheng1 , Sheng Zhou1 ,
Shih-Chii Liu1 , Tobi Delbruck1
1

Sensors Group, Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich
2
Department of Microelectronics, Delft University of Technology
{xi, zuowen, longbiao, shengzhou, shih, tobi}@ini.uzh.ch, chang.gao@tudelft.nl

Abstract

Among various approaches that exploit sparsity in RNN
inference to improve efficiency (Kadetotad et al. 2020; Srivastava et al. 2019; Chen, Blair, and Cong 2022; Lindmar,
Gao, and Liu 2022), a previously proposed biologically inspired network model named Delta Network (DN) (Neil
et al. 2017), uses temporal sparsity to dramatically reduce
memory access and Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) operations during inference. By introducing a delta threshold on
neuron activation changes, the update of slow-changing activations can be skipped, thus saving a large number of computes while achieving comparable accuracy. Hardware inference accelerators that exploit this temporal sparsity (Gao
et al. 2018, 2020; Gao, Delbruck, and Liu 2022) can achieve
5-10X better energy efficiency with a custom design architecture that performs zero-skipping on sparse delta vectors.
However, these accelerators only do inference, i.e., the forward propagation. This paper proves for the first time that
the identical forward delta sparsity can be used in the backward propagation of training RNNs without extra accuracy
loss and extends the DN framework to the entire training
process. The main contributions of this work are:

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are useful in temporal
sequence tasks. However, training RNNs involves dense matrix multiplications which require hardware that can support a
large number of arithmetic operations and memory accesses.
Implementing online training of RNNs on the edge calls for
optimized algorithms for an efficient deployment on hardware. Inspired by the spiking neuron model, the Delta RNN
exploits temporal sparsity during inference by skipping over
the update of hidden states from those inactivated neurons
whose change of activation across two timesteps is below a
defined threshold. This work describes a training algorithm
for Delta RNNs that exploits temporal sparsity in the backward propagation phase to reduce computational requirements for training on the edge. Due to the symmetric computation graphs of forward and backward propagation during
training, the gradient computation of inactivated neurons can
be skipped. Results show a reduction of ∼80% in matrix operations for training a 56k parameter Delta LSTM on the Fluent Speech Commands dataset with negligible accuracy loss.
Logic simulations of a hardware accelerator designed for the
training algorithm show 2-10X speedup in matrix computations for an activation sparsity range of 50%-90%. Additionally, we show that the proposed Delta RNN training will be
useful for online incremental learning on edge devices with
limited computing resources.

1. The first mathematical formulation for Delta RNN training, showing that Delta RNN training is inherently a type
of sparse Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT), utilizing the identical temporal sparsity during both forward
and backward propagation. Moreover, due to this consistent temporal sparsity, any speed improvements seen during Delta RNN inference can also be observed during the
training of these networks.

Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are widely used in applications involving temporal sequence inputs such as edge
audio voice wakeup, keyword spotting, and spoken language
understanding. These RNNs are commonly trained once and
then deployed, but there is an opportunity to continually improve their accuracy and classification power without giving up privacy by incremental training on edge devices.
Training of RNNs on the edge requires a hardware platform that has enough computing resources and memory to
support the large number of arithmetic operations and data
transfers. This is because the computation in RNNs consists
mainly of Matrix-Vector Multiplications (MxV), which is a
memory-bounded operation. An effective method to reduce
the energy consumption for training RNNs is to minimize
the number of memory accesses.

2. Empirical results showing that for a fixed number of
training epochs, a Delta RNN training uses 7.3X fewer
training operations compared to the dense RNN with
only a factor of 1.16X increase in error rate on the Fluent
Speech Commands Dataset (FSCD).
3. Empirical results showing that on the frequently used
Google Speech Command Dataset (GSCD) used for
edge keyword spotting, ∼80% training operations can be
saved in an incremental learning setting.
4. Register Transfer Level (RTL) simulation results of the
first hardware accelerator designed for training Delta
RNNs which can achieve 2-10X speedup for an activation sparsity range of 50%-90%.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11399

