The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarial Purification with the Manifold Hypothesis
Zhaoyuan Yang1 , Zhiwei Xu2 , Jing Zhang2 , Richard Hartley2 , Peter Tu1
1

GE Research, Niskayuna, NY
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
{zhaoyuan.yang,tu}@ge.com, {zhiwei.xu,jing.zhang,richard.hartley}@anu.edu.au
2

Abstract
In this work, we formulate a novel framework for adversarial robustness using the manifold hypothesis. This framework
provides sufficient conditions for defending against adversarial examples. We develop an adversarial purification method
with this framework. Our method combines manifold learning with variational inference to provide adversarial robustness without the need for expensive adversarial training. Experimentally, our approach can provide adversarial robustness even if attackers are aware of the existence of the defense. In addition, our method can also serve as a test-time defense mechanism for variational autoencoders. Code is available at: https://github.com/GoL2022/AdvPFY.

Figure 1: Adversarial purification against adversarial attacks. (a) Clean, adversarial (adv.), and purified images. (b)
Jointly learning of the variational autoencoder and the classifier to achieve semantic consistency. (c) Applying semantic consistency between predictions and reconstructions to
defend against attacks.

Introduction
State-of-the-art neural network models are known of being vulnerable to adversarial examples. With small perturbations, adversarial examples can completely change predictions of neural networks (Szegedy et al. 2014). Defense
methods are then designed to produce robust models towards adversarial attacks. Common defense methods for adversarial attacks include adversarial training (Madry et al.
2018), certified robustness (Wong and Kolter 2018), etc.. Recently, adversarial purification has drawn increasing attention (Croce et al. 2022), which purifies adversarial examples
during test time and thus requires fewer training resources.
Existing adversarial purification methods achieve superior performance when attackers are not aware of the existence of the defense; however, their performance drops significantly when attackers create defense-aware or adaptive
attacks (Croce et al. 2022). Besides, most of them are empirical with limited theoretical justifications. Differently, we
adapt ideas from the certified robustness and build an adversarial purification method with a theoretical foundation.
Specifically, our adversarial purification method is based
on the assumption that high-dimensional images lie on lowdimensional manifolds (the manifold hypothesis). Compared with low-dimensional data, high-dimensional data
are more vulnerable to adversarial examples (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). Thus, we transform the adversarial robustness problem from a high-dimensional image domain to a low-dimensional image manifold domain

and present a novel adversarial purification method for
non-adversarially trained models via manifold learning and
variational inference (see Figure 1 for the pipeline). With
our method, non-adversarially trained models can achieve
performance on par with the performance of adversarially
trained models. Even if attackers are aware of the defenses,
our approach still provides robustness against attacks.
Our method is significant in introducing the manifold hypothesis to the adversarial defense framework. We improve a
model’s adversarial robustness from low-dimensional image
manifolds than the complex high-dimensional image space.
In the meantime, we provide conditions (in theory) to quantify the robustness of the predictions. Also, we present an
effective adversarial purification approach combining manifold learning and variational inference, which achieves reliable performance on adaptive attacks without adversarial
training. We also demonstrate the feasibility of our method
to improve the robustness of adversarially trained models.

Related Work
Adversarial Training. Adversarial training is one of the
most effective adversarial defense methods which incorporates adversarial examples into the training set (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018). Such a

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16379

