The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Evaluate Geometry of Radiance Fields with Low-Frequency Color Prior
Qihang Fang1,2, * , Yafei Song3, * , Keqiang Li1,2 , Li Shen3 , Huaiyu Wu1 , Gang Xiong1,† , Liefeng Bo3
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
fangqihang2020@ia.ac.cn, huaizhang.syf@alibaba-inc.com, likeq98@gmail.com, lshen.lsh@gmail.com,
huaiyu.wu@ia.ac.cn, gang.xiong@ia.ac.cn, liefeng.bo@alibaba-inc.com
Novel-view Image

Rendered Depth

Residual Color

TensoRF

Abstract
A radiance field is an effective representation of 3D scenes,
which has been widely adopted in novel-view synthesis and
3D reconstruction. It is still an open and challenging problem to evaluate the geometry, i.e., the density field, as the
ground-truth is almost impossible to obtain. One alternative
indirect solution is to transform the density field into a pointcloud and compute its Chamfer Distance with the scanned
ground-truth. However, many widely-used datasets have no
point-cloud ground-truth since the scanning process along
with the equipment is expensive and complicated. To this end,
we propose a novel metric, named Inverse Mean Residual
Color (IMRC), which can evaluate the geometry only with the
observation images. Our key insight is that the better the geometry, the lower-frequency the computed color field. From
this insight, given a reconstructed density field and observation images, we design a closed-form method to approximate
the color field with low-frequency spherical harmonics, and
compute the inverse mean residual color. Then the higher
the IMRC, the better the geometry. Qualitative and quantitative experimental results verify the effectiveness of our proposed IMRC metric. We also benchmark several state-of-theart methods using IMRC to promote future related research.
Our code is available at https://github.com/qihangGH/IMRC.

IMRC: 14.31

DVGO
+ Distortion Loss

DVGO

PSNR: 24.51

PSNR: 25.69

IMRC: 13.38

PSNR: 25.61

IMRC: 13.94

Figure 1: One example of novel-view images, rendered
depth from reconstructed density fields, and residual color of
TensoRF (Chen et al. 2022a), DVGO (Sun, Sun, and Chen
2022a), and DVGO (Sun, Sun, and Chen 2022a) + Distortion Loss (Barron et al. 2022). From top two rows, although
DVGO achieves a better PSNR↑, its geometry is qualitatively worse than TensoRF. From the bottom row, distortion
loss could be qualitatively verified to improve the geometry.
Our IMRC↑ quantitatively evaluates these results correctly.

Introduction
A radiance field has been popular for representing 3D objects or scenes, especially the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
(Mildenhall et al. 2020). However, as the ground-truth of a
radiance field is hard to obtain, we could not directly evaluate its reconstructed geometry. Alternatively, novel-view
synthesis methods usually measure the similarity between
the rendered image and its observed counterpart using image
quality metrics such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR).
As shown in the top two rows of Fig. 1, this metric may be
enough to evaluate the synthetic images but not appropriate
to evaluate the geometry.
Besides novel-view synthesis, a lot of works exploit radiance fields for 3D reconstruction (Wang et al. 2021a; Long
et al. 2022; Oechsle, Peng, and Geiger 2021; Sun et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2021, 2022; Wu et al. 2022b; Wang et al. 2022;

Wu et al. 2022a, 2023). They need a proper metric to quantitatively evaluate the geometry result. To this end, surface
reconstruction methods usually transform the density field
into a point-cloud using the marching cubes algorithm and
compute Chamfer Distance (CD) with the scanned groundtruth. However, the scanning process along with the equipment is expensive and complicated. Thus, few datasets have
this ground-truth, and many widely-used ones do not.
To alleviate above difficulties and introduce a new metric that does not require the geometric ground-truth, our key
observation is that the color of any point on the groundtruth surface of an object tends to be low-frequency. This
phenomenon is named as low-frequency color prior. Specifically, we adopt a closed-form method to compute the color
field given the observation images and density field of a
scene. We name the result as the computed color field to

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.
This paper has been accepted by AAAI2024.

1707

