The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Influential Exemplar Replay for Incremental Learning in Recommender Systems
Xinni Zhang1 , Yankai Chen1 , Chenhao Ma2 , Yixiang Fang2 , Irwin King1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{xnzhang23, ykchen, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {machenhao, fangyixiang}@cuhk.edu.cn
2

×10−3

×10−2

DeepFM: CTR
35
TwoTower: CTR
BPR-MF: Top-N
LightGCN: Top-N 25

80
AUC

Personalized recommender systems have found widespread
applications for effective information filtering. Conventional
models engage in knowledge mining within the static setting to reconstruct singular historical data. Nonetheless, the
dynamics of real-world environments are in a constant state
of flux, rendering acquired model knowledge inadequate for
accommodating emergent trends and thus leading to notable recommendation performance decline. Given the typically prohibitive cost of exhaustive model retraining, it has
emerged to study incremental learning for recommender
systems with ever-growing data. In this paper, we propose
an effective model-agnostic framework, namely INFluential
Exemplar Replay (INFER). INFER facilitates recommender
models in retaining the earlier assimilated knowledge, e.g.,
users’ enduring preferences, while concurrently accommodating evolving trends manifested in users’ new interaction
behaviors. We commence with a vanilla implementation that
centers on identifying the most representative data samples
for effective consolidation of early knowledge. Subsequently,
we propose an advanced solution, namely INFERONCE , to optimize the computational overhead associated with the vanilla
implementation. Extensive experiments on four prototypical
backbone models, two classic recommendation tasks, and
four widely used benchmarks consistently demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method as well as its compatibility for
extending to several incremental recommender models.

90
70
60

15

50
40

Data-level
Data properties

Recall@20

Abstract

E.g., frequency

Model-level
Model influence

1

6

11

16

5

RecSys

Consecutive time steps

(a) Performance degradation

(b) Replay sample retrieval

Figure 1: Illustration of INFER motivations.
ity for realistic deployment (Covington, Adams, and Sargin
2016; Guo et al. 2017; Ying et al. 2018).
Derived from conventional neural models, these recommender algorithms are mostly crafted within the static setting. In such learning frameworks, models acquire knowledge from singular and fixed training data and subsequently
extrapolate insights to forthcoming data, with the presumption of identical distribution. However, such a “once-for-all”
strategy may prove unsuitable for intricate real-world dynamic settings, featuring constantly emerging objects (e.g.,
users and items) and evolving engagements. Consequently,
as shown in Figure 1a, the cessation of learning data updates
impedes recommender models to assimilate new trends and
knowledge (Xu et al. 2020), leading to performance degradation for proper recommendations.
To circumvent the expensive model retraining, incremental learning has recently exhibited promising advantages
(Zenke, Poole, and Ganguli 2017; Prabhu, Torr, and Dokania
2020; Wang, Zhang, and Coates 2021; He et al. 2023a). Generally, this learning paradigm enables neural models to continually adapt to evolving data for new knowledge integration, with the primary focus to alleviate the tendency of forgetting previously learned information, a.k.a., catastrophic
forgetting problem (McCloskey and Cohen 1989), during
model incremental updating. Despite the recent progress in
Computer Vision (Hung et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2021; Bonicelli et al. 2022; Prabhu, Torr, and Dokania 2020), the exploration of incremental learning for recommender systems remains relatively nascent. The major challenges are twofold.
(1) These methods are for incremental data either with different data classes or for different visual tasks, whereas the

Introduction
To tackle overwhelming information overload, recommender systems play a crucial role in online services, e.g.,
Web search, news recommendation, and E-commerce advertising. Modern algorithms exploit knowledge mining from
similar user correlations, e.g., collaborative filtering (Rendle et al. 2012; He et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2023c) and social
regularization (Ma et al. 2011), to content-based analysis,
e.g., multimodal understanding (Zheng et al. 2018; Gupta
et al. 2020) and auxiliary knowledge supplement (Wang
et al. 2019a,b; Chen et al. 2022c,b; Zhang et al. 2022a). With
the advancements of deep learning techniques, these recommender models exhibit strong capability in learning complex
and latent features, demonstrating the performance superiorCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9368

