The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Compound Text-Guided Prompt Tuning via Image-Adaptive Cues
Hao Tan1,2 * , Jun Li1,2 * , Yizhuang Zhou3 , Jun Wan1,2† , Zhen Lei1,2,4 , Xiangyu Zhang3
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
MEGVII Technology
4
CAIR, HKISI, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong, China
{tanhao2023, lijun2021, jun.wan, zhen.lei}@ia.ac.cn, {zhouyizhuang, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com
2

Text
Encoder
class1

707-320

class2

737-200

…

classN

…

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) such as CLIP have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities to downstream
tasks. However, existing prompt tuning based frameworks
need to parallelize learnable textual inputs for all categories,
suffering from massive GPU memory consumption when
there is a large number of categories in the target dataset.
Moreover, previous works require to include category names
within prompts, exhibiting subpar performance when dealing
with ambiguous category names. To address these shortcomings, we propose Compound Text-Guided Prompt Tuning
(TGP-T) that significantly reduces resource demand while
achieving superior performance. We introduce text supervision to the optimization of prompts, which enables two benefits: 1) releasing the model reliance on the pre-defined category names during inference, thereby enabling more flexible prompt generation; 2) reducing the number of inputs to
the text encoder, which decreases GPU memory consumption significantly. Specifically, we found that compound text
supervisions, i.e., category-wise and content-wise, is highly
effective, since they provide inter-class separability and capture intra-class variations, respectively. Moreover, we condition the prompt generation on visual features through a
module called Bonder, which facilitates the alignment between prompts and visual features. Extensive experiments on
few-shot recognition and domain generalization demonstrate
that TGP-T achieves superior performance with consistently
lower training costs. It reduces GPU memory usage by 93%
and attains a 2.5% performance gain on 16-shot ImageNet.
The code is available at https://github.com/EricTan7/TGP-T.

…

Abstract

Similarity

747-400

N sentence inputs
(a) Previous prompt tuning framework
(b) Compound Text Guided Prompt Tuning (TGP-T)

Text
Encoder

semantically rich

2 prompt inputs

Image
Encoder

Fusion
“This 707-320 is a white and Content
orange jetliner with two
Caption
engines under each wing.”
“A photo of a 707-320, a type Category
of aircraft.”
Template

Figure 1: Paradigm Comparison. (a) Prior works parallelize
N learnable sentence inputs to text encoder and concatenate category names to each input. (b) TGP-T introduces
text supervision to the optimization of prompts, which releases the reliance on category names and reduces the number of prompt inputs to two. This decreases GPU memory
consumption significantly. By employing two levels of text
supervision, TGP-T performs strong adaptation ability.

Among them, CLIP utilized the contrastive paradigm to
align two modalities with 400 million image-text pairs. One
of its significant advancements is the ability to achieve openvocabulary recognition by calculating the similarity between
the query image feature and hand-craft text prompts (e.g., “a
photo of a <class>.”) without additional training.
Fine-tuning a foundation model can be computationally
expensive in the era of foundation models. Consequently,
there has been a shift in focus from adapting the model to
specific tasks (i.e., fine-tuning) to fitting the downstream
tasks with the foundation model (i.e., prompting) (Liu et al.
2023b). The milestone work CoOp (Zhou et al. 2022b) is
the first time to apply prompt tuning to the VLMs, introducing a series of learnable prompts for textual input instead of taking hand-crafted templates. The follow-up Co-

Introduction
Large-scale vision-language pre-training (Kim, Son, and
Kim 2021; Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021; Bao et al.
2022) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for tackling a
wide range of visual tasks (Gu et al. 2021; Saharia et al.
2022; Alayrac et al. 2022). The vision-language models
(VLMs), e.g., CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia
et al. 2021), have demonstrated remarkable generalization
capabilities to various downstream tasks (Yao et al. 2021;
Guo et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Smith et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5061

