The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Progressive Text-to-Image Diffusion with Soft Latent Direction
Yuteng Ye, Jiale Cai, Hang Zhou, Guanwen Li,
Youjia Zhang, Zikai Song, Chenxing Gao, Junqing Yu, Wei Yang*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{yuteng ye, jaile cai, henrryzh, juggle lee, youjiazhang, skyesong, cxg, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

cur in the synthesis results are missing entities, and inaccurate inter-object relations, as shown in ??. Existing work
improves the compositional skills of text-to-image synthesis models by incorporating linguistic structures (Feng et al.
2022), and attention controls (Hertz et al. 2022; Chefer et al.
2023) within the diffusion guidance process. Notably, Structured Diffusion (Feng et al. 2022) parse a text to extract
numerous noun phrases, Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al.
2023) strength attention activations associated with the most
marginalized subject token. Yet, these remedies still face difficulties when the text description is long and complex, especially when it involves two and more subjects. Furthermore,
users may find it necessary to perform subtle modifications
to the unsatisfactory regions of the generated image, while
preserving the remaining areas.
In this paper, we propose a novel progressive synthesizing/editing operation that successively incorporates entities,
that conform to the spatial and relational constraint defined
in the text prompt, while preserving the structure and aesthetics in each step. Our intuition is based on the observation that text-to-image models tend to better handle shortsentence prompts with a limited number of entities (1 or 2)
than long descriptions with more entities. Therefore, we can
parse the long descriptions into short-text prompts and craft
the image progressively via a diffusion model to prevent the
leakage and missing of semantics.
However, applying such a progressive operation to diffusion models faces two major challenges:
• The absence of a unified method for converting the integrated text-to-image process into a progressive procedure that can handle both synthesis and editing simultaneously. Current strategies can either synthesize (Chefer
et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023) or edit (Kawar et al. 2023;
Goel et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2022; Avrahami, Fried, and
Lischinski 2022; Yang et al. 2023), leaving a gap in the
collective integration of these functions.
• The need for precise positioning and relational entity
placement. Existing solutions either rely on user-supplied
masks for entity insertion, necessitating manual intervention (Avrahami, Fried, and Lischinski 2022; Nichol et al.
2021), or introduce supplementary phrases to determine
the entity editing direction (Hertz et al. 2022; Brooks,
Holynski, and Efros 2023), which inadequately addressing spatial and relational dynamics.

In spite of the rapidly evolving landscape of text-to-image
generation, the synthesis and manipulation of multiple entities while adhering to specific relational constraints pose enduring challenges. This paper introduces an innovative progressive synthesis and editing operation that systematically
incorporates entities into the target image, ensuring their adherence to spatial and relational constraints at each sequential
step. Our key insight stems from the observation that while
a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model adeptly handles
one or two entities, it often falters when dealing with a greater
number. To address this limitation, we propose harnessing
the capabilities of a Large Language Model (LLM) to decompose intricate and protracted text descriptions into coherent directives adhering to stringent formats. To facilitate
the execution of directives involving distinct semantic operations—namely insertion, editing, and erasing—we formulate the Stimulus, Response, and Fusion (SRF) framework.
Within this framework, latent regions are gently stimulated in
alignment with each operation, followed by the fusion of the
responsive latent components to achieve cohesive entity manipulation. Our proposed framework yields notable advancements in object synthesis, particularly when confronted with
intricate and lengthy textual inputs. Consequently, it establishes a new benchmark for text-to-image generation tasks,
further elevating the field’s performance standards.

Introduction
Text-to-image generation is a vital and rapidly evolving field
in computer vision that has attracted unprecedented attention from both researchers and the general public. The remarkable advances in this area are driven by the application of state-of-the-art image-generative models, such as
auto-regressive (Ramesh et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022)
and diffusion models (Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al.
2022; Rombach et al. 2022), as well as the availability of
large-scale language-image datasets (Sharma et al. 2018;
Schuhmann et al. 2022). However, existing methods face
challenges in synthesizing or editing multiple subjects with
specific relational and attributive constraints from textual
prompts (Chefer et al. 2023). The typical defects that oc* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6693

