The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multiobjective Lipschitz Bandits under Lexicographic Ordering
Bo Xue1,2 , Ji Cheng1,2 , Fei Liu1,2 , Yimu Wang3 , Qingfu Zhang1,2, *
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
{boxue4, jcheng27, fliu36}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, yimu.wang@uwaterloo.ca, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

as the Click-Through Rate (CTR) and the Post-Click Conversion Rate (CVR) in advertising recommendation systems
(Ma et al. 2018). This has led to the study of multiobjective
multi-armed bandits (MOMAB), in which payoffs are vectors containing multiple elements, and the learner aims to simultaneously minimize the regret for all objectives (Drugan
and Nowe 2013). A commonly used criterion for evaluating the performance of MOMAB is Pareto regret, which regards all objectives as equivalent (Van Moffaert et al. 2014;
Q. Yahyaa, M. Drugan, and Manderick 2014; Turgay, Oner,
and Tekin 2018; Lu et al. 2019a; Xu and Klabjan 2023).
However, some scenarios may require varying levels of importance among objectives, such as radiation treatment for
cancer patients, where the primary objective is target coverage and the secondary objective is the therapy’s proximity
to organs at risk (Jee, McShan, and Fraass 2007). Similarly,
water resource planning legally mandates the prioritization
of objectives such as flood protection, supply shortage for
irrigation, and electricity generation (Weber et al. 2002).
To deal with these real-world applications, a natural idea
is to utilize lexicographic ordering, as it ranks the objectives according to their importance (Ehrgott 2005; Wray and
Zilberstein 2015; Wray, Zilberstein, and Mouaddib 2015;
Hüyük and Tekin 2021; Hosseini et al. 2021; Skalse et al.
2022). Let X represent an arm space, and the expected payoffs for a, b ∈ X are [µ1 (a), µ2 (a), . . . , µm (a)] ∈ Rm and
[µ1 (b), µ2 (b), . . . , µm (b)] ∈ Rm . The arm a is said to lexicographically dominate arm b if and only if µ1 (a) > µ1 (b),
or there exists an i∗ ∈ {2, 3, . . . , m}, such that µi (a) =
∗
∗
µi (b) for 1 ≤ i ≤ i∗ − 1 and µi (a) > µi (b). The lexicographically optimal arm is the one that is not lexicographically dominated by any other arms (Hüyük and Tekin 2021).
The only existing algorithm for multiobjective bandits under lexicographic ordering is specifically designed for the
MOMAB model (Hüyük and Tekin 2021), whose arm set
is finite, i.e., X = [K]1 . Let x∗ denote the lexicographically optimal arm among X and xt be the arm chosen at t-th
epoch. Hüyük and Tekin (2021) defined a priority-based regret to evaluate the performance of their algorithm, given by

This paper studies the multiobjective bandit problem under
lexicographic ordering, wherein the learner aims to simultaneously maximize m objectives hierarchically. The only existing algorithm for this problem considers the multi-armed
e
bandit model, and its regret bound is O((KT
)2/3 ) under a
metric called priority-based regret. However, this bound is
suboptimal, as the lower bound for single objective multiarmed bandits is Ω(K log T ). Moreover, this bound becomes
vacuous when the arm number K is infinite. To address these
limitations, we investigate the multiobjective Lipschitz bandit model, which allows for an infinite arm set. Utilizing a
newly designed multi-stage decision-making strategy, we develop an improved algorithm that achieves a general regret
e (diz +1)/(diz +2) ) for the i-th objective, where
bound of O(T
i
dz is the zooming dimension for the i-th objective, with
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m}. This bound matches the lower bound of
the single objective Lipschitz bandit problem in terms of T ,
indicating that our algorithm is almost optimal. Numerical
experiments confirm the effectiveness of our algorithm.

Introduction
Online learning with bandit feedback is a powerful paradigm
for modeling sequential decision-making cases (Robbins
1952), such as clinical trials (Villar, Bowden, and Wason
2015), news recommendation (Li et al. 2010), and website
optimization (White 2012). The fundamental model of this
paradigm is multi-armed bandits (MAB), where a learner
repeatedly selects one arm from K available arms and receives a stochastic payoff drawn from an unknown distribution associated with the chosen arm (Bubeck et al. 2015; Luo
et al. 2018; Zhou, Xu, and Blanchet 2019; Xue et al. 2020;
Zhu and Mineiro 2022; Qin et al. 2023; Gou, Yi, and Zhang
2023). The goal of learner is to minimize regret, defined as
the cumulative difference between the expected payoff of the
selected arm and that of the inherently best arm. To achieve
this goal, the learner must strike a balance between exploration and exploitation, attempting potentially better arms
while concurrently employing the best arm identified so far.
Although MAB is powerful, many real-world applications
involve multiple and potentially conflicting objectives, such

ei (T ) =
R

* Qingfu Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

T
X


µi (x∗ ) − µi (xt ) I(Ai (xt )), i ∈ [m]. (1)

t=1

Here, I(·) is the indicator function, and Ai (xt ) denotes the

16238

