The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatial-Logic-Aware Weakly Supervised Learning
for Flood Mapping on Earth Imagery
Zelin Xu1 , Tingsong Xiao1 , Wenchong He1 , Yu Wang1 , Zhe Jiang1 * ,
Shigang Chen1 , Yiqun Xie2 , Xiaowei Jia3 , Da Yan4 , Yang Zhou5
1
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
The University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
3
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
4
Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, IN, USA
5
Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA
{zelin.xu, xiaotingsong, whe2, yuwang1, zhe.jiang, sgchen}@ufl.edu,
xie@umd.edu, xiaowei@pitt.edu, yanda@iu.edu, yangzhou@auburn.edu
Spatial Knowledge Base for Flood Mapping
2

Spatial Knowledge Base for Flood Mapping

Abstract

𝒓𝟏 : ∀ 𝒔𝒊 , 𝒔𝒋 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅 𝒔𝒊 ˄ 𝑨𝒅𝒋𝒂𝒄𝒆𝒏𝒕 𝒔𝒊 , 𝒔𝒋 → 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅 𝒔𝒋
𝒓𝟐 : ∀ 𝒔𝒊 , 𝒔𝒋 𝑹𝒊𝒗𝒆𝒓 𝒔𝒊 ˄ 𝑫𝒊𝒔𝒕𝒂𝒏𝒄𝒆 𝒔𝒊 , 𝒔𝒋 ≤ 𝒅 → 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅(𝒔𝒋 )
𝒓𝟑 : ∀ 𝒔𝒊 , 𝒔𝒋 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅 𝒔𝒊 ˄ 𝑹𝒊𝒗𝒆𝒓 𝒔𝒊 ˄ 𝑫𝒐𝒘𝒏𝒔𝒕𝒓𝒆𝒂𝒎 𝒔𝒊 , 𝒔𝒋 → 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅 𝒔𝒋
𝒓𝟒 : ∀ 𝒔𝒊 𝑺𝒍𝒐𝒑𝒆 𝒔𝒊 > 𝒔 → ¬ 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅 𝒔𝒊
𝒓𝟓 : ∀ 𝒔𝒊 𝑬𝒍𝒆𝒗𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒔𝒊 > 𝒆 → ¬ 𝑭𝒍𝒐𝒐𝒅(𝒔𝒊 )

Flood mapping on Earth imagery is crucial for disaster management, but its efficacy is hampered by the lack of highquality training labels. Given high-resolution Earth imagery
with coarse and noisy training labels, a base deep neural network model, and a spatial knowledge base with label constraints, our problem is to infer the true high-resolution labels while training neural network parameters. Traditional
methods are largely based on specific physical properties and
thus fall short of capturing the rich domain constraints expressed by symbolic logic. Neural-symbolic models can capture rich domain knowledge, but existing methods do not address the unique spatial challenges inherent in flood mapping on high-resolution imagery. To fill this gap, we propose a spatial-logic-aware weakly supervised learning framework. Our framework integrates symbolic spatial logic inference into probabilistic learning in a weakly supervised setting. To reduce the time costs of logic inference on vast highresolution pixels, we propose a multi-resolution spatial reasoning algorithm to infer true labels while training neural
network parameters. Evaluations of real-world flood datasets
show that our model outperforms several baselines in prediction accuracy. The code is available at https://github.com/
spatialdatasciencegroup/SLWSL.

⋯⋯

Image Feature

Hidden True Label

Observed Label

Figure 1: A real-world problem example.

Planet Labs), aerial planes (e.g., NOAA National Geodetic
Survey), and unmanned aerial vehicles, the cost of manually
labeling flood extent becomes prohibitive. Instead, there are
abundant weak (imperfect) labels that are spatially coarse
and noisy, e.g., data product from low-resolution Earth imagery, and non-expert annotations.
Given high-resolution Earth imagery with coarse and
noisy training labels, a base deep neural network model, and
a spatial knowledge base with label logic constraints, our
problem is to infer the true labels in a high resolution while
training neural network parameters. Figure 1 provides an example. The input high-resolution Earth imagery and coarse
and noisy labels are shown on the left and right sides, respectively. The spatial domain logic rules on pixel labels are
shown at the top. The goal is to infer the hidden true labels
in a high resolution in the middle.
However, the problem poses several technical challenges.
First, the spatially coarse and noisy labels make it hard to
directly train a neural network on high-resolution Earth imagery. Second, hidden true pixel labels follow the physical
constraints expressed by the spatial logic rules, requiring
the learning framework to integrate data-driven and logicguided approaches. Third, spatial uncertainty is inherent in
the label inference process, coming from weak input labels,
imperfect spatial logic rules, and the neural network training
process. Finally, the computational costs are very high for
spatial learning on a vast number of raster pixels, especially

Introduction
Flood extent mapping on high-resolution Earth imagery
plays a crucial role in addressing major societal challenges,
such as disaster management and response, national water forecasting, and energy and food security (Eftelioglu
et al. 2017). For example, during Hurricane Harvey floods
in 2017, first responders needed to know where flood water was to plan rescue efforts. In national water forecasting, detailed flood extent maps can be used to calibrate
and validate the NOAA National Water Model, which can
forecast the flow of over 2.7 million rivers and streams
through the entire continental U.S. (Cline et al. 2009). Unfortunately, with the large amount of high-resolution earth
imagery being collected from satellites (e.g., DigitalGlobe,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22457

