The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

StegFormer: Rebuilding the Glory of Autoencoder-Based Steganography
Xiao Ke†1,2 , Huanqi Wu†1,2 , Wenzhong Guo* 1,2
1

Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Networking Computing and Intelligent Information Processing, College of Computer
and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Fuzhou 350116, China
kex@fzu.edu.cn, wuhuanqi135@gmail.com, guowenzhong@fzu.edu.cn

xsec ret
xrecov ery

Abstract
Image hiding aims to conceal one or more secret images
within a cover image of the same resolution. Due to strict
capacity requirements, image hiding is commonly called
large-capacity steganography. In this paper, we propose
StegFormer, a novel autoencoder-based image-hiding model.
StegFormer can conceal one or multiple secret images within
a cover image of the same resolution while preserving the
high visual quality of the stego image. In addition, to mitigate
the limitations of current steganographic models in real-world
scenarios, we propose a normalizing training strategy and a
restrict loss to improve the reliability of the steganographic
models under realistic conditions. Furthermore, we propose
an efficient steganographic capacity expansion method to increase the capacity of steganography and enhance the efficiency of secret communication. Through this approach, we
can increase the relative payload of StegFormer to 96 bits
per pixel without any training strategy modifications. Experiments demonstrate that our StegFormer outperforms existing
state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. In the case of single-image
steganography, there is an improvement of more than 3 dB
and 5 dB in PSNR for secret/recovery image pairs and cover/stego image pairs.

xsec ret

Conceal
Network

Conceal Process

Invertible
Network

xstego
Reveal Process

xstego
Reveal
Network

xrecov ery

Backward Propagation

Figure 1: The illustration of difference between autoencoder
based steganography and INN-based steganography.

Recently, the advancement of deep learning has led to the
emergence of numerous deep steganographic models. Those
models have a larger capacity than traditional methods. Consequently, image hiding, as a branch of image steganography, has seen significant development. Image hiding requires
concealing one or more secret images into a carrier image,
and its relative payload is beyond 24 bits per pixel (bbp).
Because of stricter requirements on capacity, it is also called
large-capacity steganography.
To the best of our knowledge, current large-capacity
steganography frameworks can be classified into two architectures. The first is the autoencoder architecture, exemplified by BalujaNet (Baluja 2017), which consists of separate
conceal network and reveal network. The second is the invertible neural network (INN) architecture, exemplified by
HiNet (Jing et al. 2021), which utilizes the same parameters
for hiding and recovery processes. The INN-based steganography treats the concealing and recovering processes of the
secret image as a pair of inverse problems, utilizing identical parameters for both processes. This approach minimizes
information loss and renders it especially suitable for largecapacity steganography.
While the INN excels in image hiding, it faces notable
challenges. Firstly, during the training process, each iteration necessitates performing backward propagation twice, as
illustrated in Figure 1. Consequently, INN demands double
training time of autoencoder-based models with equivalent
computational cost. Secondly, the invertible framework imposes several constraints on the architecture. For instance,
both the conceal network and the reveal network must be
entirely consistent, which presents difficulties in modifying
the structure to specific requirements.

Introduction
Steganography is a technique of information hiding whose
primary goal is to conceal secret data in a carrier without
affecting its representation and avoid arousing suspicion.
As an essential part of steganography, image steganography
uses images as a carrier for information hiding, which has
a long history dating back to ancient Greece. Nowadays, research on digital image steganography is still proceeding.
Traditional image steganography methods include using the
LSB (Least Significant Bit) algorithm (Wang, Lin, and Lin
2001) to hide the information in bits into the least significant
bits of pixels or using the DCT (Discrete Cosine Transform)
transform (Patel and Dave 2012) to conceal the data into the
frequency domain of the image. However, the capacity of
those methods is small, which is far from meeting the needs
of modern secret communication.
* Corresponding Author.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2723

