The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PromptMRG: Diagnosis-Driven Prompts for Medical Report Generation
Haibo Jin1 , Haoxuan Che1 , Yi Lin1 , Hao Chen1,2 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
{hjinag,hche,jhc}@cse.ust.hk, yi.lin@connect.ust.hk

Abstract

Ground-truth: There is opacity
to suggest pneumonia.

Automatic medical report generation (MRG) is of great research value as it has the potential to relieve radiologists from
the heavy burden of report writing. Despite recent advancements, accurate MRG remains challenging due to the need
for precise clinical understanding and disease identification.
Moreover, the imbalanced distribution of diseases makes the
challenge even more pronounced, as rare diseases are underrepresented in training data, making their diagnosis unreliable. To address these challenges, we propose diagnosisdriven prompts for medical report generation (PromptMRG),
a novel framework that aims to improve the diagnostic accuracy of MRG with the guidance of diagnosis-aware prompts.
Specifically, PromptMRG is based on encoder-decoder architecture with an extra disease classification branch. When generating reports, the diagnostic results from the classification
branch are converted into token prompts to explicitly guide
the generation process. To further improve the diagnostic accuracy, we design cross-modal feature enhancement, which
retrieves similar reports from the database to assist the diagnosis of a query image by leveraging the knowledge from a
pre-trained CLIP. Moreover, the disease imbalanced issue is
addressed by applying an adaptive logit-adjusted loss to the
classification branch based on the individual learning status
of each disease, which overcomes the barrier of text decoder’s
inability to manipulate disease distributions. Experiments on
two MRG benchmarks show the effectiveness of the proposed
method, where it obtains state-of-the-art clinical efficacy performance on both datasets.

Prediction 1: There is no opacity
to suggest pneumonia.
Prediction 2: There are right
lower lobe opacities concerning
for pneumonia.
(a)
F1

F1

T
E
2K M
M

T
KiU

(b)

L
DC

RG
RG

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of two predictions. (b) F1 scores
of five SOTA methods, a vanilla classifier, and our proposed model on MIMIC test. (c) F1 scores of a vanilla MRG
model over different diseases on MIMIC test, and diseases
are sorted in ascending order of training numbers.

However, it is challenging to generate an accurate medical
report as it demands a comprehensive understanding of the
given image, especially the ability to identify clinical findings. For example, Figure 1(a) shows two sample predictions
of a chest X-ray alongside the ground-truth (GT). While the
wording of the first prediction is highly similar to the GT, its
diagnosis regarding opacity and pneumonia is incorrect. In
contrast, the second prediction is preferred as it successfully
identifies opacity and pneumonia, albeit the different wording. Therefore, an ideal MRG system should be able to identify abnormalities accurately, then convert the findings into
texts with both linguistic precision and clinical relevance.
To obtain a MRG system with satisfactory performance,
various methods have been proposed. For example, knowledge graph is an effective technique to enhance feature
learning and diagnostic ability by injecting domain knowledge into the model (Zhang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021a);

Introduction
Automated analysis of medical images involves wide range
of tasks, such as anomaly detection (Cai et al. 2022), disease
classification (Luo et al. 2022, 2020), lesion detection (Luo
et al. 2021), landmark detection (Jin, Che, and Chen 2023),
etc. Among them, medical report generation (MRG) is a task
to generate a free-text description of a medical image, where
it provides a comprehensive summary of the image’s content. Due to its potential in relieving the heavy workload of
radiologists, many works haven been proposed for MRG in
recent years.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2607

