The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Interpretability Benchmark for Evaluating Spatial Misalignment
of Prototypical Parts Explanations
Mikołaj Sacha1, 2 , Bartosz Jura3, 4 , Dawid Rymarczyk1,2,6 ,
Łukasz Struski1 , Jacek Tabor1 , Bartosz Zieliński1,5
1

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University
Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences, Jagiellonian University
3
Łukasiewicz Research Network – Poznań Institute of Technology, 6 Ewarysta Estkowskiego St., 61-755, Poznań, Poland
4
Faculty of Management and Social Communication, Jagiellonian University
5
IDEAS NCBR
6
Ardigen SA
mikolaj.sacha@doctoral.uj.edu.pl
2

Abstract

original image

modified image

Prototypical parts-based networks are becoming increasingly
popular due to their faithful self-explanations. However, their
similarity maps are calculated in the penultimate network
layer. Therefore, the receptive field of the prototype activation
region often depends on parts of the image outside this region,
which can lead to misleading interpretations. We name this
undesired behavior a spatial explanation misalignment and
introduce an interpretability benchmark with a set of dedicated metrics for quantifying this phenomenon. In addition,
we propose a method for misalignment compensation and
apply it to existing state-of-the-art models. We show the expressiveness of our benchmark and the effectiveness of the
proposed compensation methodology through extensive empirical studies.

considered
prototypical part

Introduction
The lack of insights into the reasons behind model predictions is a major limitation of current deep learningbased systems, particularly in high-stake decision fields like
medicine and autonomous driving (Rudin 2019). As a result, eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has gained
significant attention in recent years, with two main branches
of research being extensively developed: post hoc and selfexplainable methods (Rudin 2019).
The post hoc approaches assume that an explainer model
needs to be developed to explain the predictions of a classic deep neural network. However, this approach may be
biased and unreliable (Adebayo et al. 2018a). That is why
self-explainable methods were introduced, such as prototypical parts-based methods (Chen et al. 2019). They contain
built-in interpretability components and provide interpretation along with the prediction.
Prototypical parts-based networks, such as ProtoPNet (Chen et al. 2019), utilize feature-matching learning
theory (Rosch 1975) to identify important image parts by
comparing them with reference patterns from training data.
However, despite its ability to provide highly faithful explanations, this approach has known shortcomings, such

original similarity map

similarity map after the
modification

Figure 1: The receptive field of the prototypical part activation region often depends on parts of the image outside
this region. In this example, the activation region (green
bounding box) depends on the upper left background outside the bounding box. Therefore, after changing this part of
the background (as in the modified image), the location of
the activation region also changes (red bounding box). Such
behavior is unwanted because it misleads explanations.
as ambiguity of prototypical parts (Nauta et al. 2020) or
non-resistance to image modifications, like JPEG compression (Hoffmann et al. 2021). Consequently, tools such as
PRP (Gautam et al. 2023) have been introduced to improve
interpretability.
In this paper, we identify another risk related to the fact
that prototypical parts similarity maps are calculated in the
penultimate network layer. Therefore, the receptive field of
the prototypical part activation region often depends on parts
of the image outside this region. It can result in misleading
explanations because users usually identify the activation region with the receptive field, while, as presented in Fig. 1,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21563

