The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Cross-Modal Alignment with Synthetic Pairs
for Text-Only Image Captioning
Zhiyue Liu1,2 * , Jinyuan Liu1 , Fanrong Ma1
1

School of Computer, Electronics and Information, Guangxi University, Nanning, China
2
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Multimedia Communications and Network Technology
liuzhy@gxu.edu.cn, {2213394017, 2213301037}@st.gxu.edu.cn

Abstract

The generalization ability is crucial in practical applications,
especially in the absence of in-domain image-text paired
samples. Unsupervised transferability enables the model to
work on new tasks or domains without paired training data,
making it a valuable feature for various real-world scenarios.
Unsupervised image captioning, as another line of work,
has garnered increasing attention for its ability to generate
captions without human-annotated data. By capitalizing on
the multimodal embedding space of CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), recent methods adopt text-only training paradigms to
develop a language model using CLIP text features as the input. During inference, they decode captions from the given
image’s features extracted by CLIP. In contrast to other unsupervised methods, text-only image captioning utilizes textual data during training without the accessibility to realworld images (Li et al. 2023). Although previous methods
have shown competitive results, they heavily depend on the
CLIP’s cross-domain capability. The presence of the modality gap (Liang et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2023) poses a challenge in those text-only methods based on CLIP, as it hinders
the direct use of visual embeddings as the source to generate
captions. Towards this issue, some works propose solutions
by noise injection or feature projection (Nukrai, Mokady,
and Globerson 2022; Li et al. 2023), assisting image features
from CLIP to better align with text features during inference,
while the modality gap still exists. Due to the absence of images, only textual information could be utilized for training
while real images for inference. This leads to a discrepancy
between training and inference. Thus, the learned alignment
cannot work efficiently for real image captioning, hindering
existing models from performing well. Besides, overreliance
on CLIP would indeed obstruct the acquisition of valuable
knowledge from other pre-trained models.
This paper proposes a method by exploring synthetic pairs
for text-only image captioning, called SynTIC. With multiple frozen pre-trained models, we mitigate the inconsistency
of training and inference, while better aligning texts and images. Firstly, a pre-trained text-to-image model is employed
to generate the synthetic image corresponding to each training text. Nonetheless, directly training the captioning model
on synthetic image-text pairs results in limited performance
due to the dissimilarity between synthetic images and natural images. Specifically, images generated from simple descriptive texts are usually short of the depth and details in

Although image captioning models have made significant advancements in recent years, the majority of them heavily depend on high-quality datasets containing paired images and
texts which are costly to acquire. Previous works leverage the
CLIP’s cross-modal association ability for image captioning,
relying solely on textual information under unsupervised settings. However, not only does a modality gap exist between
CLIP text and image features, but a discrepancy also arises
between training and inference due to the unavailability of
real-world images, which hinders the cross-modal alignment
in text-only captioning. This paper proposes a novel method
to address these issues by incorporating synthetic image-text
pairs. A pre-trained text-to-image model is deployed to obtain images that correspond to textual data, and the pseudo
features of generated images are optimized toward the real
ones in the CLIP embedding space. Furthermore, textual information is gathered to represent image features, resulting
in the image features with various semantics and the bridged
modality gap. To unify training and inference, synthetic image features would serve as the training prefix for the language decoder, while real images are used for inference. Additionally, salient objects in images are detected as assistance
to enhance the learning of modality alignment. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method obtains the state-of-theart performance on benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Image captioning is an appealing research task, aiming to
produce descriptive textual content for provided images. The
major challenge in this task involves comprehending the association between images and texts, which heavily relies on
paired datasets (Stefanini et al. 2022). Current researches
primarily concentrate on training models using paired data,
leading to substantial enhancements (Wu et al. 2022; Luo
et al. 2023; Kuo and Kira 2023), while these models generalize poorly to images in the wild (Wu et al. 2018; Agrawal
et al. 2019). Despite pre-training on web-scale noisy paired
data and subsequent fine-tuning on human-annotated captioning data have shown effectiveness (Radford et al. 2021;
Yu et al. 2022a; Alayrac et al. 2022), pre-trained methods
still count on paired data to achieve optimal performance.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3864

