The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ShareBERT: Embeddings Are Capable of Learning Hidden Layers
Jia Cheng Hu, Roberto Cavicchioli, Giulia Berardinelli, Alessandro Capotondi
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
via G.Campi 213/b
41125, Modena, Italy
jiachenghu@unimore.it, roberto.cavicchioli@unimore.it,
giulia.berardinelli@unimore.it, alessandro.capotondi@unimore.it
Abstract

mixed precision. One possible solution consists of reducing
the hidden size drastically, but established works (Jiao et al.
2019; Sanh et al. 2019) showcased that they do not achieve
a satisfying level of performance unless knowledge transfer methods, such as Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), are adopted. Whereas, regarding
the first factor, there is a lack of research literature. Input embeddings are often overlooked in model compression techniques even though they can account for a significant portion
of the total model size, especially in the lighter variants. For
instance, they represent 21% of base BERT (Devlin et al.
2018) and 30% of GPT-3 small (Brown et al. 2020).
In this work, we propose a novel parameter-sharing strategy based on the embeddings, that enables the design of
near-zero parameter encoders, pushing the design of tiny
pre-trained language models to a new extent. Experimental results show that we achieve 95.5% of BERT Base performances using only 5M parameters (21.9× fewer parameters) and, most importantly, without the help of any transfer learning techniques. The method is orthogonal to quantization and KD, which can be applied to optimize the results further. Additionally, analytic results showcase that our
methods do not negatively impact the learning of hidden layers and can pave the way for new developments in transfer
learning research. The main contributions of this paper are
the following: (i) we propose two novel parameter-sharing
methods, called embeddings parameter-sharing and virtual
embeddings parameter-sharing; (ii) we present the ShareBERT architecture as an instance of the application of the
methods on BERT; (iii) we discuss the impact of the proposed methods on representation learning using Word Analogy and Word Similarity benchmarks, and analyze the learning of hidden layers using the edge probing technique introduced in (Tenney, Das, and Pavlick 2019); (iv) to showcase
the robustness of our approach, we present its impact on two
additional applicative domains like Neural Machine Translation and Image Captioning.

The deployment of Pre-trained Language Models in memorylimited devices is hindered by their massive number of parameters, which motivated the interest in developing smaller
architectures. Established works in the model compression
literature showcased that small models often present a noticeable performance degradation and need to be paired with
transfer learning methods, such as Knowledge Distillation. In
this work, we propose a parameter-sharing method that consists of sharing parameters between embeddings and the hidden layers, enabling the design of near-zero parameter encoders. To demonstrate its effectiveness, we present an architecture design called ShareBERT, which can preserve up to
95.5% of BERT Base performances, using only 5M parameters (21.9× fewer parameters) without the help of Knowledge
Distillation. We demonstrate empirically that our proposal
does not negatively affect the model learning capabilities and
that it is even beneficial for representation learning. Code will
be available at https://github.com/jchenghu/sharebert.

Introduction
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al. 2018;
Brown et al. 2020) have achieved outstanding results on
many natural language tasks and established the practice
of training a large model on a massive amount of data and
fine-tuning on smaller downstream tasks. However, the fact
that these models are often made of at least a hundred million parameters poses an obstacle to their deployment in
memory-limited devices (Sandler et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018;
Roth et al. 2020; Sarkar et al. 2023) and introduces inference bottlenecks in off-chip operations, mobile-devices (Tabani et al. 2021) and multi-node communications. To combat these problems, many model compression methods were
developed and, to the best of our knowledge, the best language model among tiny ones is ALBERT Small (Lan et al.
2019), which reproduces 97.4% of BERT Base (Devlin et al.
2018) performances using only 12M parameters. This is possible thanks to sharing one BERT encoder across all layers.
However, even the cost of one single encoding layer can be
a limiting factor in some applications. For instance, several
edge devices (Ojo et al. 2018; Merenda, Porcaro, and Iero
2020) cannot afford to store more than 10M parameters in

Related Works
Model Compression. Pre-trained Language Model compression is a very active research area. One trend consists
of applying Knowledge Distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015), which follows the principle of transferring the
knowledge from one model (teacher) into another one (stu-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18225

