The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NESTER: An Adaptive Neurosymbolic Method for Causal Effect Estimation
Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy, Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
cs19resch11002@iith.ac.in, vineethnb@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Causal effect estimation from observational data is a central
problem in causal inference. Methods based on potential outcomes framework solve this problem by exploiting inductive
biases and heuristics from causal inference. Each of these
methods addresses a specific aspect of causal effect estimation, such as controlling propensity score, enforcing randomization, etc., by designing neural network (NN) architectures
and regularizers. In this paper, we propose an adaptive method
called Neurosymbolic Causal Effect Estimator (NESTER),
a generalized method for causal effect estimation. NESTER
integrates the ideas used in existing methods based on multihead NNs for causal effect estimation into one framework.
We design a Domain Specific Language (DSL) tailored for
causal effect estimation based on causal inductive biases used
in literature. We conduct a theoretical analysis to investigate
NESTER’s efficacy in estimating causal effects. Our comprehensive empirical results show that NESTER performs better
than state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Causal effect estimation measures the effect of a treatment
variable on an outcome variable (e.g., the effect of a medicine
on recovery). Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs), where
individuals are randomly split into treated and control groups,
are considered the gold standard approach for causal effect
estimation (Chalmers et al. 1981). However, RCTs are often:
(i) unethical (e.g., to find the causal effect of smoking on
lung disease, a randomly chosen person cannot be forced to
smoke), and/or (ii) impossible/infeasible (e.g., in finding the
causal effect of blood pressure on the risk of an adverse cardiac event, it is impossible to intervene on the same patient
with and without high blood pressure with all other parameters the same) (Sanson-Fisher et al. 2007; Carey and Stiles
2016). These limitations leave us with observational data to
compute causal effects.
Observational data, similar to RCTs, suffer from the fundamental problem of causal inference (Pearl 2009), viz. for any
individual, we cannot observe all potential outcomes at the
same time (e.g., we cannot uniquely record the same person’s
medical condition at a given time to two different treatments
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14793

individually, say, on consuming a medicinal drug and an alternate placebo). Observational data also suffers from selection
bias (e.g., certain age groups are more likely to take certain
kinds of medication compared to other age groups) (Collier
and Mahoney 1996). For these reasons, estimating unbiased
causal effects from observational data is challenging. However, due to the many use cases in the real-world, estimating
causal effects from observational data has remained an important problem in causal inference (Rosenbaum and Rubin
1983, 1985; Brady, Collier, and Sekhon 2008; Morgan and
Winship 2014), with recent efforts leveraging learning-based
methods to this end (Curth and van der Schaar 2021a).
Simpson’s paradox (Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell 2016) underpins the necessity of choosing the correct set of features
to control/adjust for estimating causal effects from observational data. The Pearlian framework (Pearl 2009) uses
graphical criteria such as back-door criterion and front-door
criterion depending on the available adjustment variables and
identifiability conditions. However, the Pearlian framework
requires knowledge of the underlying causal graph, which
is not feasible for many real-world scenarios. On the other
hand, under the ignorability assumption, methods based on
the Rubin-Neyman potential outcomes framework (Rubin
1974), assume that a known set of observed features to control is available. However, as discussed above, observational
data suffers from issues such as selection bias, leading to biased estimates of causal effects. Various methods have been
proposed to address one or more of these issues in recent
literature (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017; Shi, Blei, and
Veitch 2019; Curth and van der Schaar 2021a).
This paper provides a pathway to integrate existing solutions based on the potential outcomes framework, especially
the methods based on multi-head neural network (NN) architectures with regularizers, into a single framework. We
propose an adaptive method called NEuroSymbolic causal
effecT EstimatoR (NESTER) that automatically synthesizes a
neurosymbolic program for estimating causal effects. Synthesized programs by NESTER can instantiate existing methods
based on multi-head NN architectures with regularizers as
special cases. For example, as shown in Fig 1, NESTER can
synthesize a program PT that is functionally similar to that
of TARNet architecture (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017).
The two NN heads of TARNet corresponding to the two treatment values t = 1, t = 0 can be seen as implementing an

