The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Gradual Residuals Alignment: A Dual-Stream Framework for
GAN Inversion and Image Attribute Editing
Hao Li1 , Mengqi Huang1 , Lei Zhang1 , Bo Hu1 , Yi Liu2 , Zhendong Mao1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, Beijing, China
{lihaohn, huangmq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23, hubo, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn, gavin1332@gmail.com
2

Abstract
GAN-based image attribute editing firstly leverages GAN Inversion to project real images into the latent space of GAN
and then manipulates corresponding latent codes. Recent inversion methods mainly utilize additional high-bit features to
improve image details preservation, as low-bit codes cannot
faithfully reconstruct source images, leading to the loss of
details. However, during editing, existing works fail to accurately complement the lost details and suffer from poor editability. The main reason is they inject all the lost details indiscriminately at one time, which inherently induces the position and quantity of details to overfit source images, resulting in inconsistent content and artifacts in edited images. This
work argues that details should be gradually injected into both
the reconstruction and editing process in a multi-stage coarseto-fine manner for better detail preservation and high editability. Therefore, a novel dual-stream framework is proposed to
accurately complement details at each stage. The Reconstruction Stream is employed to embed coarse-to-fine lost details
into residual features and then adaptively add them to the
GAN generator. In the Editing Stream, residual features are
accurately aligned by our Selective Attention mechanism and
then injected into the editing process in a multi-stage manner. Extensive experiments have shown the superiority of our
framework in both reconstruction accuracy and editing quality compared with existing methods.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. Giving a source image and then editing (e.g., pose) it. (a) Existing high-bit inversion injects lost details of reconstruction into the edited
images as much as possible at one time, which leads to inconsistent content and artifacts. (b) Our method gradually
aligns and complements lost details at different stages in
editing, which achieves a unity of both high-quality details
preservation and high editability with the artifacts mitigated.

Introduction

Image attribute editing, which aims to modify the desired attributes of a given image while preserving other details, has
gained increasing research interest for its various real-world
applications. Rapid progress has been made in this area with
the development of generative adversarial network (GAN)
based editing methods, which leverage the latent space of
pre-trained GAN models (typically, W+ of StyleGAN) by
GAN Inversion (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka 2019). The critical
challenge of GAN Inversion lies in achieving the unity of
both high-fidelity details preservation and high editing quality since the distortion-editability trade-off (Tov et al. 2021).
Early GAN Inversion methods (Richardson et al. 2021;
Tov et al. 2021) focus on Low-bit Inversion to better map
images to low-bit codes (i.e., low-dimension latent codes

∈ R18×512 ), resulting in severe details lost in both of their
reconstructed and edited images compared to the source images. Recent works introduced High-bit Inversion, which
first utilize low-bite codes to generate coarse results and further use high-bit features (e.g., high-dimension feature maps
∈ R64×64×512 ) to improve details preservation. These highbit features are derived from source images or the residuals
between source images and low-bit codes’ reconstruction.
For example, (Yao et al. 2022; Liu, Song, and Chen 2023)
propose to replace a part of low-bit codes with high-bit features and then restart generation. (Wang et al. 2022; Pehlivan, Dalva, and Dundar 2023) focus on establishing an additional branch to complement details for image generation by
calculating residuals. In conclusion, most recent works pur-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3064

