The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Swift-Mapping: Online Neural Implicit Dense Mapping in Urban Scenes
Ke Wu1 , Kaizhao Zhang2 , Mingzhe Gao3 , Jieru Zhao3 , Zhongxue Gan1 * , Wenchao Ding1 * †
1

Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
School of Future Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
23110860017@m.fudan.edu.cn, 8200880120@stu.hit.edu.cn, {a823337391z, zhao-jieru}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{ganzhongxue, dingwenchao}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Online dense mapping of urban scenes is of paramount importance for scene understanding of autonomous navigation. Traditional online dense mapping methods fuse sensor
measurements (vision, lidar, etc.) across time and space via
explicit geometric correspondence. Recently, NeRF-based
methods have proved the superiority of neural implicit representations by high-fidelity reconstruction of large-scale city
scenes. However, it remains an open problem how to integrate
powerful neural implicit representations into online dense
mapping. Existing methods are restricted to constrained indoor environments and are too computationally expensive to
meet online requirements. To this end, we propose SwiftMapping, an online neural implicit dense mapping framework in urban scenes. We introduce a novel neural implicit
octomap (NIO) structure that provides efficient neural representation for large and dynamic urban scenes while retaining online update capability. Based on that, we propose
an online neural dense mapping framework that effectively
manages and updates neural octree voxel features. Our approach achieves SOTA reconstruction accuracy while being
more than 10x faster in reconstruction speed, demonstrating
the superior performance of our method in both accuracy and
efficiency.

Figure 1: 3D reconstruction of urban scenes (KITTI) using
Swift-Mapping. Swift-mapping provides a high-fidelity and
accurate reconstruction for scene details while being capable of scaling to large scale city scenes utilizing the neural
implicit octomap structure (NIO).

Koestler et al. 2022; Lin and Zhang 2022). However, these
methods often struggle when dealing with the complex and
ever-changing nature of urban scenes, like efficiency and
memory challenges, rapid ego motion, occlusions, and scale
variations.
In contrast, recent advances in neural implicit representations, as exemplified by the pioneering NeRF-based techniques (Mildenhall et al. 2021), have showcased remarkable potential in reconstructing expansive urban landscapes
using naive and lightweight network structures and simple
losses. For instance, NeRF-W (Martin-Brualla et al. 2021)
introduces an innovative approach by combining Multilayer
Perceptrons (MLP) with latent vectors, enhancing NeRF’s
adaptability across diverse scenes and facilitating the reconstruction of high-quality city-scale environments. BlockNeRF (Tancik et al. 2022) decomposes an urban scene into
independent MLPs by spatial location and composites multiple MLPs during inference. However, it is worth noting
that these methods primarily emphasize the fidelity of reconstruction, often embracing intricate models and resourceintensive training processes. Integrating neural implicit rep-

Introduction
For autonomous navigation in open urban scenes, it is essential to comprehend complex urban environments with high
accuracy and efficiency to meet the navigation requirements.
Online dense mapping, which involves the real-time construction and updating of detailed scene representations, has
emerged as a critical component for achieving this level of
scene understanding.
In the field of online dense mapping, conventional methods have heavily relied on explicit geometric matching
to fuse sensor measurements over time and space. Techniques like multi-view stereo and simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) have been the cornerstones of these
approaches (Newcombe, Lovegrove, and Davison 2011;
* Corresponding authors: Zhongxue Gan and Wenchao Ding.
†
This work is sponsored by Shanghai Pujiang Program
(23PJ1400900).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6048

