The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Fixed-Parameter Tractable Algorithm for Counting Markov Equivalence
Classes with the Same Skeleton
Vidya Sagar Sharma
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai
vidyasagartifr@gmail.com

Abstract

A

A

Causal DAGs (also known as Bayesian networks) are a popular tool for encoding conditional dependencies between random variables. In a causal DAG, the random variables are
modeled as vertices in the DAG, and it is stipulated that every random variable is independent of its non-descendants
conditioned on its parents. It is possible, however, for two
different causal DAGs on the same set of random variables
to encode exactly the same set of conditional dependencies.
Such causal DAGs are said to be Markov equivalent, and
equivalence classes of Markov equivalent DAGs are known
as Markov Equivalent Classes (MECs). Beautiful combinatorial characterizations of MECs have been developed in the
past few decades, and it is known, in particular that all DAGs
in the same MEC must have the same “skeleton” (underlying
undirected graph) and v-structures (induced subgraph of the
form a → b ← c).
These combinatorial characterizations also suggest several
natural algorithmic questions. One of these is: given an undirected graph G as input, how many distinct Markov equivalence classes have the skeleton G? Much work has been devoted in the last few years to this and other closely related
problems. However, to the best of our knowledge, a polynomial time algorithm for the problem remains unknown.
In this paper, we make progress towards this goal by giving
a fixed parameter tractable algorithm for the above problem,
with the parameters being the treewidth and the maximum
degree of the input graph G. The main technical ingredient
in our work is a construction we refer to as shadow, which
lets us create a “local description” of long-range constraints
imposed by the combinatorial characterizations of MECs.

B

D1

C B

D2

A
C B

D3

A
C B

D4

C

A

A

A

B
C
undirected graph G

B
C
M1 = {D1 , D2 , D3 }

B
C
M2 = {D4 }

Figure 1: Markov equivalent DAGs and MECs with the same
skeleton. D1 , D2 , and D3 are Markov equivalent, while D4
is not equivalent to D1 , D2 , and D3 . The MEC M1 =
{D1 , D2 , D3 } contains D1 , D2 and D3 , and its graphical
representation is the union of D1 , D2 , and D3 . The MEC M2
contains only D4 , and its graphical representation matches
D4 . The MECs M1 and M2 share G as their skeleton, and
in fact are the only MECs with skeleton G. Both M1 and
M2 entail a conditional independence relation of the form
B ⊥ C | S, where in M1 , S = {A}, and in M2 , S = ∅.

G with vertices V if and only if for every w in V , w is independent of the set of all its non-descendants conditional
on the set of its parents (x is a parent of y in G if x → y
is in G). The set of probability distributions that satisfy G is
denoted Markov(G). Further, for disjoint A, B, S ⊆ V , G
is said to entail that A is independent of B given S (written G |= A ⊥ B|S) if and only if A is independent of B
given S in every probability measure in Markov(G). Two
DAGs are said to be Markov equivalent if both entail the
same set of such conditional independence relations. Verma
and Pearl (1990) gave an elegant graphical characterization
of this equivalence: two DAGs are Markov equivalent if and
only if they have the same skeleton (underlying undirected
graph) and the same set of v-structures (induced subgraphs
of the form a → b ← c). DAGs that are Markov equivalent
to each other are said to belong to the same Markov equivalence class (MEC) (see fig. 1).
As an MEC consists of Markov equivalent DAGs, it
uniquely represents the set of conditional independence relations represented by the DAGs it contains and is graphically
represented by a partially directed graph which is the graph-

Introduction
Graphical models provide frameworks for concisely describing conditional independence constraints between subsystems of a larger system. Due to their generality, they find
applications in several areas, and have also been studied extensively from a theoretical point of view.
In this paper, our focus is on a specific type of graphical model: namely directed acyclic graphical (DAG) models or Bayesian networks. Here, a probability distribution
over a set of random variables V is said to satisfy a DAG
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20532

