The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PARSAC:
Accelerating Robust Multi-Model Fitting with Parallel Sample Consensus
Florian Kluger, Bodo Rosenhahn
Leibniz University Hannover
kluger@tnt.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
We present a real-time method for robust estimation of multiple instances of geometric models from noisy data. Geometric models such as vanishing points, planar homographies
or fundamental matrices are essential for 3D scene analysis. Previous approaches discover distinct model instances in
an iterative manner, thus limiting their potential for speedup
via parallel computation. In contrast, our method detects all
model instances independently and in parallel. A neural network segments the input data into clusters representing potential model instances by predicting multiple sets of sample
and inlier weights. Using the predicted weights, we determine
the model parameters for each potential instance separately
in a RANSAC-like fashion. We train the neural network via
task-specific loss functions, i.e. we do not require a groundtruth segmentation of the input data. As suitable training data
for homography and fundamental matrix fitting is scarce, we
additionally present two new synthetic datasets. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on these as well as multiple established datasets, with inference times as small as five
milliseconds per image.

1

Figure 1: Applications: PARSAC estimates multiple vanishing points (V, top), fundamental matrices (F, middle) or
homographies (H, bottom). We visualise distinct model instances using different colour hues. Brightness in columns
three and four is proportional to the corresponding weight.

Introduction

chler and Bolles 1981). Given only one instance of a geometric model in our data, we thus have to segment our data
into two groups: inliers and outliers. However, as the number
of model instances increases, the number of data groups also
increases, and inliers of one model act as pseudo-outliers for
all other models. Consequently, robustly estimating the parameters of all models becomes more difficult, especially if
the number of model instances is unknown beforehand.
Early approaches solve this problem by repeatedly applying a robust estimator like RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles
1981). After each step, they remove all data points associated with previously predicted models (Vincent and Laganiére 2001). More recent methods instead generate model
hypotheses beforehand, then use clustering and optimisation
techniques in order to assign data points to a model or the
outlier class (Barath and Matas 2018; Barath, Matas, and
Hajder 2016; Pham et al. 2014; Amayo et al. 2018; Isack and
Boykov 2012; Toldo and Fusiello 2008; Magri and Fusiello
2014, 2015, 2016, 2019; Chin, Wang, and Suter 2009). Hybrid approaches combine the strengths of both methodologies by interleaving multiple sampling, clustering and optimisation steps (Barath and Matas 2019; Barath et al. 2023).

In Computer Vision, we commonly aim to explain highdimensional and noisy observations using low-dimensional
geometric models. These models can give important insights
into the structure of our data, and are crucial for 3D scene
analysis and reconstruction. For example, by fitting vanishing points to a set of 2D line segments, we can deduce
information about the 3D layout of a scene from a single
view (Zhou et al. 2019b; Zou et al. 2018). Similarly, fitting
homographies to point correspondences of image pairs allows us to reason about dominant 3D planes within a scene.
Robust estimation of fundamental matrices is indispensable
for applications such as SLAM (Mur-Artal and Tardós 2017)
and two-view motion segmentation (Ozbay, Camps, and Sznaier 2022). We typically obtain the features for model fitting using low-level algorithms, such as SIFT (Lowe 2004)
and LSD (Von Gioi et al. 2008). As these methods are imperfect, model fitting algorithms must be able to identify
erroneous features (outliers) in order to robustly determine
model parameters using valid features (inliers) only (FisCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2804

