The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contextual Pre-planning on Reward Machine Abstractions for Enhanced Transfer
in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Guy Azran1 , Mohamad H. Danesh2 , Stefano V. Albrecht3 , Sarah Keren1
1

Taub Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
2
School of Computer Science, McGill University
3
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
guy.azran@campus.technion.ac.il, mo.danesh@mail.mcgill.ca, s.albrecht@ed.ac.uk, sarahk@cs.technion.ac.il
Abstract

robot is expected to use its experience in making coffee in a
mug to learn to achieve the new task more quickly.

Recent studies show that deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
agents tend to overfit to the task on which they were trained
and fail to adapt to minor environment changes. To expedite learning when transferring to unseen tasks, we propose a
novel approach to representing the current task using reward
machines (RMs), state machine abstractions that induce subtasks based on the current task’s rewards and dynamics. Our
method provides agents with symbolic representations of optimal transitions from their current abstract state and rewards
them for achieving these transitions. These representations
are shared across tasks, allowing agents to exploit knowledge
of previously encountered symbols and transitions, thus enhancing transfer. Empirical results show that our representations improve sample efficiency and few-shot transfer in a
variety of domains.

1

A contextual MDP (CMDP) (Langford 2017; Hallak,
Di Castro, and Mannor 2015) models settings like Example 1 as a collection of tasks in the same environment, where
each task is represented by the current context. CMDPs have
been used in recent work that aims to improve zero-shot
transfer capabilities, i.e., solving new tasks after training on
a subset of them (Benjamins et al. 2022; Hallak, Di Castro,
and Mannor 2015). In contrast, we aim to improve few-shot
transfer, in which the agent may continue training on previously unseen tasks with the objective of minimizing the additional training required to achieve desirable performance.
One of the key challenges when using a CMDP to model
transfer learning settings is finding a concise way to represent the current context while maximizing transfer capabilities. For this, we take advantage of reward machines (RMs)
(Toro Icarte et al. 2018), state-machine-based abstractions
that represent the structure of the reward function and the
dynamics of a task and its subtasks. Transitions between
abstract states in the RM occur when certain facts, represented as binary symbols, hold true. As the agent traverses
the environment, it keeps track of these facts and its current
RM state. Camacho et al. (2021) used RMs by providing the
agent with the current abstract state and showed that this can
expedite learning on a single task. In contrast, we leverage
RMs to improve transfer to new tasks.
Our novel technique, called Contextual PRE-Planning
(C-PREP), takes as input a CMDP and an RM generator function that represents contextual information through
task-specific RM abstractions with shared symbolic representations. Given a task, C-PREP finds an optimal policy in
the corresponding RM abstraction and gives the agent the
next desired abstract transition according to that policy as
additional input. Furthermore, C-PREP uses the RM by reshaping the reward function according to abstract state transitions within the RM, thus highlighting important transitions throughout learning. When transferred to a new task,
the agent can exploit abstract transitions that it has encountered during training and needs only to adapt to symbols
with which it has not previously interacted.
We empirically evaluate C-PREP in various environments
with sparse rewards and varying difficulties. In our experiments, a DQN agent (Mnih et al. 2015) is initially trained

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) methods, especially deep RL
(DRL) methods, have shown impressive capabilities in a
wide variety of problems (Chen, Xu, and Agrawal 2021;
Schrittwieser et al. 2020). However, recent studies show that
these algorithms have difficulty adapting to even the slightest variations in the agent’s objective or environment dynamics (Danesh and Fern 2022; Agarwal et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2018; Leike et al. 2017). Adapting quickly to new tasks is
imperative in real-world scenarios, such as robotics (Dunion
et al. 2023a,b) and healthcare (Tseng et al. 2017), where
agents reside in a dynamic world with ever-changing objectives and constraints. Consequently, agents require many
interactions with the environment to learn to perform new
tasks despite having mastered similar ones. The problem is
exacerbated for tasks with sparse reward signals (Gupta et al.
2022) and long-term dependencies between actions (Langford 2018).
Example 1 A housekeeper robot learns to do multiple tasks,
one of which is to make coffee in a mug. Next, the robot is
tasked with making coffee in a glass, something it has never
attempted. The two tasks are similar in that they interact
with many of the same objects (e.g. coffee, spoon, etc.) and
perform identical subtasks (e.g. boil water, fill cup, etc.). The
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10953

