The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Fine-Grained HBOE with Rendered Orientation Set and Laplace
Smoothing
Ruisi Zhao1,2 , Mingming Li1 , Zheng Yang2 , Binbin Lin3 ,
Xiaohui Zhong4 , Xiaobo Ren4 , Deng Cai1,2 , Boxi Wu3 *
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
FABU Inc
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Ningbo Zhoushan Port Group Co.,Ltd., Ningbo, China
zhaors00@zju.edu.cn
Real data

Abstract
Human body orientation estimation (HBOE) aims to estimate the orientation of a human body relative to the camera’s frontal view. Despite recent advancements in this field,
there still exist limitations in achieving fine-grained results.
We identify certain defects and propose corresponding approaches as follows: 1). Existing datasets suffer from nonuniform angle distributions, resulting in sparse image data for
certain angles. To provide comprehensive and high-quality
data, we introduce RMOS (Rendered Model Orientation Set),
a rendered dataset comprising 150K accurately labeled human instances with a wide range of orientations. 2). Directly
using one-hot vector as labels may overlook the similarity between angle labels, leading to poor supervision. And converting the predictions from radians to degrees enlarges the regression error. To enhance supervision, we employ Laplace
smoothing to vectorize the label, which contains more information. For fine-grained predictions, we adopt weighted
Smooth-L1-loss to align predictions with the smoothed-label,
thus providing robust supervision. 3). Previous works ignore
body-part-specific information, resulting in coarse predictions. By employing local-window self-attention, our model
could utilize different body part information for more precise
orientation estimations. We validate the effectiveness of our
method in the benchmarks with extensive experiments and
show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art. Project
is available at: https://github.com/Whalesong-zrs/TowardsFine-grained-HBOE.

Mix

Synthetic data

z
𝐻

𝑆Ԧ

y
OEFormer

𝐶Ԧ

φ

x

Estimate φ

170°/34 bin 180°/36 bin 100°/20 bin 140°/28 bin

180°/36 bin 90°/18 bin

Figure 1: Illustration of HBOE. We present the real and synthetic data as examples, where the ϕ is the angle we estimating. We visualize the angles in the bottom lines.

Introduction
Human body orientation estimation (HBOE) involves estimating the orientation of a person’s skeleton relative to the
camera frontal view. It has been applied in various industrial applications, e.g., pedestrian trajectory prediction in autonomous driving and human-robot interactions. For some
downstream tasks, body orientation is easier to obtain, provides sufficient information, and demonstrates greater robustness to illumination and occlusions compared to 3D
pose estimation, for understanding human behaviors.
Though many prior methods performed well in coarsegrained estimation, they encountered challenges in accurately predicting angles. These difficulties can be attributed

to three key factors. The primary bottleneck is the quality of datasets. The widely used TUD dataset (Andriluka,
Roth, and Schiele 2010), which originally only provided 8class labels, has a small scale that limits model capability.
Additionally, the high-quality MEBOW (Wu et al. 2020)
dataset based on COCO (Lin et al. 2014) suffers from a nonuniform angle distribution and scarce image data for certain angles, causing inaccurate predictions. Secondly, many
methods treated HBOE as a 6/8-class classification problem (Liu, Liu, and Ma 2017; Yu et al. 2019; Choi, Lee,
and Zhang 2016), further contributing to coarse results and
ignoring the similarity between classes. Directly regressing
values in radians struggles to obtain accurate predictions, as
converting radians to degrees enlarges the regression error
(Zhou et al. 2022; Burgermeister and Curio 2022). More-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7505

