The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

AdaCCD: Adaptive Semantic Contrasts Discovery Based Cross Lingual Adaptation
for Code Clone Detection
Yangkai Du1 , Tengfei Ma2 , Lingfei Wu3 , Xuhong Zhang1 , Shouling Ji1 *
1

Zhejiang University
Stony Brook University
3
Anytime.AI
{yangkaidu,zhangxuhong,slj}@zju.edu.cn, tengfei.ma@stonybrook.edu, lwu@anytime-ai.com,
2

Abstract
Code Clone Detection, which aims to retrieve functionally
similar programs from large code bases, has been attracting
increasing attention. Modern software often involves a diverse range of programming languages. However, current code
clone detection methods are generally limited to only a few
popular programming languages due to insufficient annotated
data as well as their own model design constraints. To address these issues, we present AdaCCD, a novel cross-lingual
adaptation method that can detect cloned codes in a new language without annotations in that language. AdaCCD leverages language-agnostic code representations from pre-trained
programming language models and propose an Adaptively Refined Contrastive Learning framework to transfer knowledge
from resource-rich languages to resource-poor languages. We
evaluate the cross-lingual adaptation results of AdaCCD by
constructing a multilingual code clone detection benchmark
consisting of 5 programming languages. AdaCCD achieves
significant improvements over other baselines, and achieve
comparable performance to supervised fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

Code Clone Detection is an essential task in software engineering, which aims to identify functionally similar source
code from a large code base. Those identified code snippets
benefit programmers in reviewing or refactoring code. In recent years, numerous novel neural models (Wei and Li 2017;
Zhang et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020) have
been proposed for Code Clone Detection and achieved great
success on popular code clone benchmarks.
However, a major limitation of existing models for code
clone detection is that they only support a single programming language. In the real world, large projects often consist
of multiple programming languages, including scripting languages like Python and system languages like C/C++ and
Rust. This urges us to develop a model that supports multiple
languages at the same time. Additionally, these models often
rely on a large amount of annotated data for training, which
is not always available for less popular languages. This can
limit their ability to detect code clones in projects containing
low-resource languages.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17942

One solution is representing code in different languages
with a uniform compiler-generated intermediate representation (IR). The model could be trained on IR (Ben-Nun,
Jakobovits, and Hoefler 2018; VenkataKeerthy et al. 2020)
rather than on the source code, allowing it to learn common
patterns across different languages. However, obtaining IR for
different programming languages requires intensive domain
expertise and engineering efforts to fix compilation errors,
making it infeasible for language extension. Another solution
is utilizing a pre-trained multilingual code encoder. By pretraining programming language models (PPLMs) on large
code corpora containing multiple programming languages
(Feng et al. 2020; Lachaux et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Guo
et al. 2021, 2022), PPLMs can learn language-agnostic code
context and representations from self-supervised learning.
However, the performance using such self-supervised code
representations directly for code clone detection is generally
much inferior to supervised fine-tuning. To address this limitation, we are exploring the cross-lingual adaptation method,
i.e. we first train a PPLM-based model on only one language
with annotation data and then adapt it to other languages
without annotation data. This could be extremely useful for
clone detection on low-resource programming languages.
In this work, we propose a new contrastive learning framework of cross-lingual adaptation for code clone detection
named AdaCCD. Given the PPLM-based model pretrained
on one language, AdaCCD discovers semantically similar
and dissimilar contrasts through clustering and neighborhood search. Considering that the discovered contrastive pairs
from clustering are not reliable (especially in the beginning
phase), AdaCCD also incorporates semantic-preserving program transformations to derive guaranteed semantic similar
contrasts. A novel adaptive mechanism is then used to adjust
the preference of the two types of contrasts, reducing false
positives in the discovery stage. Applying contrastive learning to those semantic contrasts encloses the representation of
semantically similar programs and pushes away the representation of dissimilar programs in the target language. AdaCCD
iteratively improves its accuracy by using the enhanced model
to discover more accurate semantic contrasts from unlabeled
target corpora and using these for bootstrapping.
In experiments we adapt GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al.
2021) and CodeBERT (Feng et al. 2020), trained on POJ104/GCJ benchmarks (Mou et al. 2016; Ye et al. 2020), to

