The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Risk-Aware Continuous Control with Neural Contextual Bandits
Jose A. Ayala-Romero1 , Andres Garcia-Saavedra1 , Xavier Costa-Perez2, 1
1

NEC Laboratories Europe
i2CAT Foundation and ICREA
{jose.ayala, andres.garcia.saavedra, xavier.costa}@neclab.eu
2

Abstract

(Ayala-Romero et al. 2019), or video analytics optimization
(Galanopoulos et al. 2021). In this framework, one metric
needs to be maximized, while one or more other metrics
must be bounded at each time step (step-wise constraints).
In practice, performance metrics — whether utility or constraints — often possess random components. These can
arise from measurement errors or be intrinsic to the metric, a
phenomenon called aleatoric uncertainty. Such uncertainty
hinders constraint satisfaction, which is a crucial aspect in
most applications, further complicating the problem.
Previous works address the aforementioned constrained
contextual bandit problem considering long-term budget
constraints (Badanidiyuru et al. 2014; Agrawal et al. 2014),
which does not fit our setting where the constraints must
be satisfied at each step. Other works propose linear contextual bandits with safety constraints (Amani et al. 2019;
Kazerouni et al. 2017; Daulton et al. 2019). These solutions aim to achieve at least a percentage of the performance
of a baseline policy. However, none of these works consider aleatoric uncertainty, which is a key aspect to design
risk-aware decision-making algorithms. Berkenkamp et al.
(2021) propose a Bayesian optimization algorithm called
SafeOPT that handles noisy observation and constraints at
each step as we do. Although SafeOPT is data-efficient, it
presents important disadvantages over our solution concerning its computational complexity and requirements on prior
knowledge, aspects that we discuss in detail later.
In this paper, we present a novel algorithmic framework
for risk-aware decision-making. In particular, we propose
an actor multi-critic architecture. We use different critics to
separately characterize the distribution of each of the metrics — both utility and constraints. We use these critics to
train a deterministic actor that enables our solution to operate in continuous action spaces. Previous works adopt the
strategy of learning the mean value of the metric of interest
(Mnih et al. 2015; Fujimoto et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2020a).
Other works consider a unique utility function capturing the
reward with a Lagrangian-like penalty term (Tessler et al.
2018; Solozabal et al. 2020). However, such strategies can
lead to constraint violations that depend on the aleatoric uncertainty inherent in the metrics. In contrast, our approach
seeks to characterize the aleatoric uncertainty for each performance metric, which allows us to modulate the risk level
in the decision-making process. To this end, we introduce a

Recent advances in learning techniques have garnered attention for their applicability to a diverse range of real-world sequential decision-making problems. Yet, many practical applications have critical constraints for operation in real environments. Most learning solutions often neglect the risk
of failing to meet these constraints, hindering their implementation in real-world contexts. In this paper, we propose a
risk-aware decision-making framework for contextual bandit
problems, accommodating constraints and continuous action
spaces. Our approach employs an actor multi-critic architecture, with each critic characterizing the distribution of performance and constraint metrics. Our framework is designed
to cater to various risk levels, effectively balancing constraint
satisfaction against performance. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we first compare it against stateof-the-art baseline methods in a synthetic environment, highlighting the impact of intrinsic environmental noise across
different risk configurations. Finally, we evaluate our framework in a real-world use case involving a 5G mobile network
where only our approach consistently satisfies the system
constraint (a signal processing reliability target) with a small
performance toll (8.5% increase in power consumption).

Introduction
Recent progress in the domain of decision-making learning techniques has garnered considerable attention owing to
their extensive applicability in diverse real-world sequential decision-making problems (Silver et al. 2016; Brown
and Sandholm 2019; Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR) et al. 2022). Nevertheless, the practical deployment of these techniques necessitates careful consideration of critical operational constraints inherent in real
environments. Regrettably, existing learning solutions often
overlook the risk associated with violating these constraints,
thereby impeding their viability in real-world scenarios.
Motivated by many real-world applications, we address the contextual bandit (CB) problem with constraints,
which has been applied to many different problems in diverse fields, e.g., industrial control and temperature tuning
(Fiducioso et al. 2019), parameter optimization in robotics
(Berkenkamp et al. 2021), mobile networks optimization
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20930

