The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Pandora’s Problem with Deadlines
Ben Berger1 , Tomer Ezra2 , Michal Feldman3,4 , Federico Fusco5
1

Offchain Labs, Inc.
Simons Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute
3
Tel Aviv University
4
Microsoft ILDC
5
Department of Computer, Control
and Management Engineering “Antonio Ruberti”,
Sapienza University of Rome
2

Abstract

employment opportunities if the recruiter took too long to
offer them the job.
Motivated by such applications, in this work we introduce
a variant of Pandora’s problem where each box, in addition
to its cost and value distribution, is also associated with a
known deadline, after which it is no longer available. This
constraint complicates the problem significantly, as it limits the exploration orders that can be chosen by the decision
maker. Furthermore, it may introduce interference between
boxes that are otherwise compatible. For instance, suppose
there are two favorable candidates that an employer would
have liked to interview one after the other, but both of them
are available only in the very next time slot. Weitzman’s solution would not work in this case, as the employer must
choose only one of them to interview.

Pandora’s problem is a fundamental model that studies optimal search under costly inspection. In the classic version,
there are n boxes, each associated with a known cost and a
known distribution over values. A strategy inspects the boxes
sequentially and obtains a utility that equals the difference
between the maximum value of an inspected box and the total inspection cost. Weitzman (1979) presented a surprisingly
simple strategy that obtains the optimal expected utility.
In this work we introduce a new variant of Pandora’s problem
in which every box is also associated with a publicly known
deadline, indicating the final round by which its value may be
chosen. This model captures many real-life scenarios where
alternatives admit deadlines, such as candidate interviews and
college admissions. Our main result is an efficient thresholdbased strategy that achieves a constant approximation relative
to the performance of the optimal strategy for the deadlines
setting.

Our results. While Weitzman’s algorithm is not applicable in our model, we devise a simple strategy that attains a
constant approximation to the optimal utility attainable by
any algorithm.
Result 1 (see Corollary 1). There is an efficient algorithm
that achieves a 0.15-approximation to the optimal expected
utility in Pandora’s Problem with Deadlines.
We further show how to generalize this result to the more
restricted time slots setting — where in addition to the exploitation deadline, each box is also associated with the set
of time slots in which it is allowed to be inspected.
Result 2 (see Theorem 1). There is an efficient algorithm
that achieves a 0.15-approximation to the optimal expected
utility in Pandora’s Problem with Time Slots.
Our results add to a large body of work that studies Pandora’s problem under different restrictions on exploration
and exploitation (see Related Work).

Introduction
Pandora’s problem, introduced in a seminal paper by Weitzman (1979), models the search for a good alternative among
different options, under costly evaluation. An instance of the
problem consists of n boxes, each hiding some reward drawn
from a known and independent distribution. Each box also
comes with a known evaluation cost.
In the original variant, the decision maker opens the boxes
sequentially in any desired order (which may be adaptive),
until she decides to halt. The goal is to maximize the obtained utility, which is the maximum observed value across
all opened boxes, minus the sum of their costs. This captures
many real-life scenarios such as interviewing job candidates
and choosing colleges, where the decision-maker has to balance between the need to explore many options in order to
guarantee a good result, and to minimize the total exploration cost. Remarkably, Weitzman provided a simple and
efficient strategy which obtains the optimal expected utility.
The original model described above assumes that all rewards are available throughout the entire procedure. However, this may not necessarily be the case in practice, as some
alternatives might become unavailable at some point in time.
For instance, job candidates might eventually defer to other

Technical Challenges and Techniques. Solving Pandora’s problem entails finding a balance in the well known
exploration-exploitation dilemma: inspecting new boxes is
costly, but may offer the opportunity to collect better reward.
The presence of deadlines and time slots imposes extra constraints on the order in which boxes can be opened, as well
as on the “reward collection” process. For instance, continuing the exploration process may impede the decision maker
to collect some very good observed reward whose deadline
is close. To address the last challenge, we focus on strategies

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20337

