The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fairness under Covariate Shift: Improving Fairness-Accuracy Tradeoff with Few
Unlabeled Test Samples
Shreyas Havaldar* 1 , Jatin Chauhan* †2 , Karthikeyan Shanmugam* 1 ,
Jay Nandy†3 , Aravindan Raghuveer1
1

Google Research India
2
UCLA
3
Fujitsu Research India
{shreyasjh, karthikeyanvs, araghuveer}@google.com, {chauhanjatin100, jayjaynandy}@gmail.com,

Abstract
Covariate shift in the test data is a common practical phenomena that can significantly downgrade both the accuracy and the
fairness performance of the model. Ensuring fairness across
different sensitive groups under covariate shift is of paramount
importance due to societal implications like criminal justice.
We operate in the unsupervised regime where only a small
set of unlabeled test samples along with a labeled training
set is available. Towards improving fairness under this highly
challenging yet realistic scenario, we make three contributions.
First is a novel composite weighted entropy based objective
for prediction accuracy which is optimized along with a representation matching loss for fairness. We experimentally verify
that optimizing with our loss formulation outperforms a number of state-of-the-art baselines in the pareto sense with respect
to the fairness-accuracy tradeoff on several standard datasets.
Our second contribution is a new setting we term Asymmetric
Covariate Shift that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been
studied before. Asymmetric covariate shift occurs when distribution of covariates of one group shifts significantly compared
to the other groups and this happens when a dominant group
is over-represented. While this setting is extremely challenging for current baselines, We show that our proposed method
significantly outperforms them. Our third contribution is theoretical, where we show that our weighted entropy term along
with prediction loss on the training set approximates test loss
under covariate shift. Empirically and through formal sample complexity bounds, we show that this approximation to
the unseen test loss does not depend on importance sampling
variance which affects many other baselines.

1

Introduction

Predictions of machine learnt models are used to make important decisions that have societal impact, like in criminal
justice, loan approvals, to name a few. Therefore, there is a lot
of interest in understanding, analyzing and improving model
performance along other dimensions like robustness (Silva
and Najafirad 2020), model generalization (Wiles et al. 2021)
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Contributions to this work were made when affiliated with
Google Research India
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12331

and fairness (Oneto and Chiappa 2020). In this work, we
focus on the algorithmic fairness aspect. Datasets used for
training could be biased in the sense that some groups may be
under-represented, thus biasing classifier decisions towards
the over-represented group or the bias could be in terms of
undesirable causal pathways between sensitive attribute and
the label in the real world data generating mechanism (Oneto
and Chiappa 2020). It has often been observed (Bolukbasi
et al. 2016), (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018) that algorithms
that optimize predictive accuracy that are fed pre-existing
biases further learn and then propagate the same biases. Improving fairness of learning models has received significant
attention from the research community (Mitchell et al. 2021).
Another common challenge that models deployed in real
world situations face is that of Covariate Shift. In covariate
shift, the distribution of covariates (feature vectors) across
training and testing changes, however the optimal label predictor conditioned on input remains the same. Therefore
the model may make wrong predictions when deployed or
more seriously can slowly degrade over time when the covariate shift is gradual. Due to the practical importance of
this problem, there has been a significant amount of research
in detecting covariate shift and modeling methodologies to
address it (Wilson and Cook 2020; Redko et al. 2020).
The problem that we study in this paper is at the juncture of the above two hard problems: ensuring fairness under
covariate shift. While this question has not received much
attention, some recent works like (Rezaei et al. 2021) have
begun to address this problem. We also introduce a new variant of covariate shift called Asymmetric covariate shift where
distribution of covariates of one group shifts significantly as
compared to the other groups. Asymmetric covariate shift is
a very common practical situation when there is long tail of
underrepresented groups in the training data. For example,
consider the popular and important task of click through prediction of advertisements (Li et al. 2015). Small and medium
sized advertisers have poorer representation in the training
data because they do not spend as much as the large businesses on advertising. Therefore during inference Small and
Medium (SMB) advertisement clicks will see significantly
more co-variate shift compared to those clicks on ads from
large advertisers. Also, due to the nature of the problem of co-

