The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spot the Error:
Non-autoregressive Graphic Layout Generation with Wireframe Locator
Jieru Lin1 * , Danqing Huang2 , Tiejun Zhao1 , Dechen Zhan1 , Chin-Yew Lin2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Microsoft Research
hitjierulin@gmail.com, {dahua, cyl}@microsoft.com, {tjzhao, dechen}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Layout generation is a critical step in graphic design to
achieve meaningful compositions of elements. Most previous
works view it as a sequence generation problem by concatenating element attribute tokens (i.e., category, size, position).
So far the autoregressive approach (AR) has achieved promising results, but is still limited in global context modeling and
suffers from error propagation since it can only attend to the
previously generated tokens. Recent non-autoregressive attempts (NAR) have shown competitive results, which provides a wider context range and the flexibility to refine with
iterative decoding. However, current works only use simple
heuristics to recognize erroneous tokens for refinement which
is inaccurate. This paper first conducts an in-depth analysis
to better understand the difference between the AR and NAR
framework. Furthermore, based on our observation that pixel
space is more sensitive in capturing spatial patterns of graphic
layouts (e.g., overlap, alignment), we propose a learningbased locator to detect erroneous tokens which takes the wireframe image rendered from the generated layout sequence as
input. We show that it serves as a complementary modality to the element sequence in object space and contributes
greatly to the overall performance. Experiments on two public datasets show that our approach outperforms both AR and
NAR baselines. Extensive studies further prove the effectiveness of different modules with interesting findings. Our code
will be available at https://github.com/ffffatgoose/SpotError.

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) AR and (b) iterative-based NAR
approach in layout generation. The AR approach generates
one token at a time conditioned on previously generated tokens. NAR generates all tokens simultaneously and uses a
locator (usually heuristics) to detect erroneous tokens which
will be masked and re-predict in the next decoding iteration.
However, for layout generation, it is important to model relationships between elements as well as the global context.
The inherent causal attention in the AR approach exposes
limitation in global context modeling and causes immutable
dependency chain issue and error propagation (Kong et al.
2022).
Recently, there are some attempts of non-autoregressive
(NAR) approaches (Kong et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Inoue et al. 2023; Hui et al. 2023) that generate the entire sequence simultaneously. It allows a more flexible modeling
of bidirectional context and shows promising results in the
task. In this paper, we conduct an in-depth analysis to compare the AR and NAR approaches (as shown in Figure 1)
with two findings: (1) we show that NAR is more robust to
different element orders in the sequence than AR; (2) similar
to the word repetition issue in non-autoregressive machine
translation (NMT) (Huang, Perez, and Volkovs 2022), NAR
tends to position elements to similar regions that will cause
overlap problem and results in inferior layouts.
Iterative decoding is an effective mechanism to alleviate this issue. In the recent state-of-the-art NAR system
BLT (Kong et al. 2022), it uses a Transformer-based decoder (Vaswani et al. 2017) and applies a heuristic strategy
to choose the least confident tokens from the decoder’s prediction as the erroneous ones. However, such simple heuristic is likely to be biased to the decoder’s learned distribution
and potentially propagate the mistakes, acting as noises to
make a negative impact on subsequent iterations.
This paper proposes a learning-based locator module to

Introduction
Layout generation refers to the arrangement of elements
(i.e., size and position) on a canvas, which is essential for
creating visually appealing graphic designs (e.g., articles,
user interface). State-of-the-art systems (Jyothi et al. 2019;
Arroyo, Postels, and Tombari 2021; Kikuchi et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2021) mostly view the task as a sequence generation problem where the sequence is composed of element
attribute tokens (i.e., category, position, size). Majority of
the works follow the autoregressive (AR) approach which
generates one token at a time based on the previously output
and have achieved promising results (Yang et al. 2021; Guo,
Huang, and Xie 2021; Yang et al. 2023; Weng et al. 2023).
* Work was done during the first author’s internship at Microsoft
mentored by Danqing Huang.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3413

