The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Exploiting Polarized Material Cues for Robust Car Detection
Wen Dong1 , Haiyang Mei1,2 , Ziqi Wei3,4,∗ , Ao Jin1 , Sen Qiu1 , Qiang Zhang1 , Xin Yang1, *
1

Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
State Key Laboratory of Structural Analysis for Industrial Equipment, Dalian University of Technology
{dongwen, dllsja}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, haiyang.mei@outlook.com, ziqi.wei@ia.ac.cn, {qiu, zhangq, xinyang}@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

Although existing state-of-the-art methods explore rich
contexts in multiple modalities including RGB, LiDAR, and
infrared to improve the detection accuracy, these methods
typically assume the imaging quality is optimal. When it
comes to adverse conditions such as low light, rain, and fog,
a significant accuracy drop would occur due to the poor and
limited sensing scene information fed into the algorithms.
For example, an RGB camera may fail to capture important
visual cues under low-light conditions (Song et al. 2019;
Arora et al. 2022), a LiDAR sensor may struggle to distinguish targets in complex environments due to its limited
range and resolution (Qian et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020),
and, similarly, an infrared sensor may produce blurry images
with low contrast when exposed to extreme weather conditions (Du et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2022). Instead, polarization,
characteristic of the light wave, can robustly reveal the intrinsic physical properties of cars and their surrounding environment (e.g., the surface geometric structure, roughness,
and material) in various view/lighting/weather conditions.
This inspires us to exploit the reliable and discriminative
features provided by polarization to complement traditional
RGB features for robust car detection.
Linear polarization cues, described by the angle of polarization (AoLP) and the degree of linear polarization (DoLP),
might not be equally obvious/informative over different
scenes and image regions, or even confound valid RGB
cues. To address these challenges, we design a novel RGBPolarization Car Detection Network (PCDNet) with RGB
intensities, trichromatic AoLP and DoLP as input. PCDNet
is built on three key modules: (i) Polarization Integration
(PI) module that fuses AoLP and DoLP to generate a comprehensive and semantically meaningful polarization representation; (ii) Material Perception (MP) module to explore
the polarization/material properties of cars across different learning samples for enhancing the polarization cues in
each scene; and (iii) Cross-Domain Demand Query (CDDQ)
module to dynamically integrate the informative polarization cues into RGB features based on the spatial demand
map generated from RGB domain.
To train PCDNet, we introduce an RGB-Polarization car
detection dataset, dubbed RGBP-Car, which consists of
1,611 RGB images and pixel-aligned trichromatic (i.e., red,
green and blue channels) AoLP and DoLP images, as well as
corresponding annotated 31,234 bounding boxes of cars. To

Car detection is an important task that serves as a crucial
prerequisite for many automated driving functions. The large
variations in lighting/weather conditions and vehicle densities of the scenes pose significant challenges to existing car
detection algorithms to meet the highly accurate perception
demand for safety, due to the unstable/limited color information, which impedes the extraction of meaningful/discriminative features of cars. In this work, we present a novel learningbased car detection method that leverages trichromatic linear
polarization as an additional cue to disambiguate such challenging cases. A key observation is that polarization, characteristic of the light wave, can robustly describe intrinsic
physical properties of the scene objects in various imaging
conditions and is strongly linked to the nature of materials
for cars (e.g., metal and glass) and their surrounding environment (e.g., soil and trees), thereby providing reliable and
discriminative features for robust car detection in challenging scenes. To exploit polarization cues, we first construct a
pixel-aligned RGB-Polarization car detection dataset, which
we subsequently employ to train a novel multimodal fusion
network. Our car detection network dynamically integrates
RGB and polarization features in a request-and-complement
manner and can explore the intrinsic material properties of
cars across all learning samples. We extensively validate our
method and demonstrate that it outperforms state-of-the-art
detection methods. Experimental results show that polarization is a powerful cue for car detection. Our code is available
at https://github.com/wind1117/AAAI24-PCDNet.

Introduction
Autonomous driving and advanced driving assistance system (ADAS) rely on highly accurate road scene analysis. As
a fundamental step to achieving a reliable road scene understanding, object detection has received great attention in
recent years and has been significantly boosted with the development of deep neural networks (DNNs) (Lin et al. 2017;
Redmon and Farhadi 2018; Sun et al. 2021). In practical road
scenes, cars appear to be one of the most frequently observed
yet dangerous objects, and car detection is still a challenging
problem due to the large structural and appearance variations
of cars in different scenes.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1564

