The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Logic of Doxastic Strategies
Junli Jiang,1 Pavel Naumov2
1

Institute of Logic and Intelligence, Southwest University, China
2
University of Southampton, United Kingdom
walk08@swu.edu.cn, p.naumov@soton.ac.uk

and say that dataset {⃗x, ⃗v } informs the knowledge of the
statement “The Patriot has a strategy to destroy the Scud”. In
general, we write KX φ if knowing the values of all variables
in set X is enough to conclude that statement φ is true. We
refer to sets of data variables, like X, as datasets. Modality
KX for a set X of Boolean variables is introduced by Grossi,
Lorini, and Schwarzentruber (2015). For arbitrary datasets,
it is proposed by Baltag and van Benthem (2021). The name
“data-informed knowledge” is suggested by us in (Jiang and
Naumov 2022a). We also proposed a dynamic logic for this
modality (Deuser et al. 2024).
Of course, for the Patriot to know that it has a strategy is not the same as to know what the strategy is.
The distinction between “knowing that a strategy exists”
and “knowing what the strategy is”, in the case of the
traditional (indistinguishability-relation-based) knowledge,
has been studied in various logics of know-how strategies (Ågotnes and Alechina 2019; Naumov and Tao 2017;
Fervari et al. 2017; Naumov and Tao 2018c,b,a; Fervari,
Velázquez-Quesada, and Wang 2021; Li and Wang 2021).
In our data-informed setting, in order for the Patriot to
know the strategy (direction in which to launch a surfaceto-air missile), it also must know the exact time, t, since the
position, ⃗x, and the velocity, ⃗v , of the Scud has been measured. We write this as

Abstract
In many real-world situations, there is often not enough information to know that a certain strategy will succeed in achieving the goal, but there is a good reason to believe that it will.
The paper introduces the term “doxastic” for such strategies.
The main technical contribution is a sound and complete logical system that describes the interplay between doxastic strategy and belief modalities.

1

Introduction

During the 1991 Gulf War, American troops successfully used surface-to-air Patriot missiles to intercept Iraqimodified Scud tactical ballistic missiles originally designed
by the Soviet Union in the 1950s. In fact, on 15 February
1991, President George H. W. Bush travelled to the Patriot
manufacturing plant in Andover, Massachusetts to praise the
missiles’ capability:
You see, what has taken place here is a triumph of
American technology . . . we are witnessing a revolution in modern warfare, a revolution that will shape
the way that we defend ourselves for decades to come.
For years, we’ve heard that antimissile defenses won’t
work, that shooting down a ballistic missile is impossible – like trying to “hit a bullet with a bullet.”
Some people called it impossible; you called it your
job. They were wrong, and you were right . . . Patriot
is 41 for 42: 42 Scuds engaged, 41 intercepted. (Bush
1991)

[Patriot]⃗x,⃗v,t (“Scud is destroyed”)

(2)

and say that the dataset {⃗x, ⃗v , t} informs the strategy of Patriot to achieve the condition “Scud is destroyed”. In general, we write [C]X φ if knowing the values of all variables
in dataset X is enough to know a strategy for coalition C to
achieve condition φ. We introduced this modality in (Jiang
and Naumov 2022a).
The values in the dataset {⃗x, ⃗v , t}, obtained from the
radar, gave the Patriot enough information to compute the
strategy (direction of missile launch) that was guaranteed to
destroy the Scud. Upon computing the strategy, the Patriot
sent it to the launcher. . . Seconds later, Scud hit the barracks
of the 14th Quartermaster Detachment of the US Army’s
99th Infantry Division.
To understand what went wrong that day in the skies
above Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, one needs to acknowledge the
fact that data does not always correctly reflect the state-ofaffairs of the real world. Even if the Patriot knows the “true”

Just 10 days after this speech, an American radar detected
an Iraqi Scud approaching Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Traditionally, knowledge is modelled through an indistinguishability relation that captures an agent’s own observations. However, modern autonomous agents often obtain their knowledge from the data that they receive from
other systems. This was the case on 25 February 1991. By
analysing the position, ⃗x, and the velocity, ⃗v , of the Scud,
the Patriot concluded that intercepting the Scud was within
its capabilities. We write this as
K⃗x,⃗v (“The Patriot has a strategy to destroy the Scud”) (1)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19876

