The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Continuous Implicit Field with Local Distance Indicator for
Arbitrary-Scale Point Cloud Upsampling
Shujuan Li1 * , Junsheng Zhou1 * , Baorui Ma1,2 , Yu-Shen Liu1† , Zhizhong Han3
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
lisj22, zhoujs21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, brma@baai.ac.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu
(a) Input

Abstract
Point cloud upsampling aims to generate dense and uniformly
distributed point sets from a sparse point cloud, which plays
a critical role in 3D computer vision. Previous methods typically split a sparse point cloud into several local patches,
upsample patch points, and merge all upsampled patches.
However, these methods often produce holes, outliers or nonuniformity due to the splitting and merging process which
does not maintain consistency among local patches. To address these issues, we propose a novel approach that learns an
unsigned distance field guided by local priors for point cloud
upsampling. Specifically, we train a local distance indicator
(LDI) that predicts the unsigned distance from a query point
to a local implicit surface. Utilizing the learned LDI, we learn
an unsigned distance field to represent the sparse point cloud
with patch consistency. At inference time, we randomly sample queries around the sparse point cloud, and project these
query points onto the zero-level set of the learned implicit
field to generate a dense point cloud. We justify that the implicit field is naturally continuous, which inherently enables
the application of arbitrary-scale upsampling without necessarily retraining for various scales. We conduct comprehensive experiments on both synthetic data and real scans, and
report state-of-the-art results under widely used benchmarks.
Project page: https://lisj575.github.io/APU-LDI

(b) PC2-PU

(c) Grad-PU

(d) Ours

(e) GT

4×

16 ×

Figure 1: Comparison with PC2 -PU (Long et al. 2022) and
Grad-PU (He et al. 2023). The input point cloud has 2048
points, and ground truth has 8192 points for the palm and
32768 points for the chair. Previous methods upsample the
point cloud at the local level, which results in outliers, holes
and non-uniform when combining local patches. We represent the entire point cloud as a continuous implicit field and
generate globally consistent results.

patches, in which a neural network is trained for predicting surface signals, such as surface points (Yu et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019; Qian et al. 2021a; Feng et al. 2022), offsets
(Li et al. 2021), interpolation weights (Luo et al. 2021; Qian
et al. 2021b), and the point-to-surface distances (He et al.
2023; Zhao et al. 2023). With the help of learned signals,
points on each patch become denser. Finally, the upsampled
patches are combined into a complete point cloud as the final
prediction. However, the inconsistency among local patches
causes two issues as shown in Figure 1. First, the geometry of the patch boundary is hard to determine without the
global shape information, resulting in outliers on the final
dense point cloud. Second, combining inconsistent patches
leads to holes or non-uniformity on the final point cloud.
To solve these issues, we propose to learn an unsigned
distance field to represent a shape with the guidance from
a pre-trained local distance indicator (LDI) learned from
dense point cloud patches at local level. With the continuous
implicit field and local distance prior, we produce accurate
upsampling results which capture rich geometric details and

Introduction
Point cloud, as a lightweight representation of 3D objects
and scenes, has gained significant attention. It can be easily
obtained through depth cameras or other 3D scanning devices. However, the raw point clouds obtained from these
devices are often sparse and non-uniform, which negatively impacts various downstream applications like semantic understanding (Zhang et al. 2019), surface reconstruction
(Chen, Liu, and Han 2023b), and point cloud rendering (Dai
et al. 2020). Hence, it is crucial to generate dense and uniformly distributed points from the raw point cloud data.
Recently, the learning-based methods on point cloud upsampling have achieved promising results. The mainstream
methods typically split a sparse point cloud into several
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3181

