The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Shadow Generation with Decomposed Mask Prediction and Attentive Shadow
Filling
Xinhao Tao1 , Junyan Cao1 , Yan Hong2 , Li Niu1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tiansuan Lab, Ant Group
{taoxinhao, Joy C1, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
Image composition refers to inserting a foreground object
into a background image to obtain a composite image. In this
work, we focus on generating plausible shadows for the inserted foreground object to make the composite image more
realistic. To supplement the existing small-scale dataset, we
create a large-scale dataset called RdSOBA with rendering
techniques. Moreover, we design a two-stage network named
DMASNet with decomposed mask prediction and attentive
shadow filling. Specifically, in the first stage, we decompose
shadow mask prediction into box prediction and shape prediction. In the second stage, we attend to reference background shadow pixels to fill the foreground shadow. Abundant experiments prove that our DMASNet achieves better
visual effects and generalizes well to real composite images.

1

Figure 1: The example data for shadow generation task. The
left two examples are from our RdSOBA dataset and the
right two examples are from DESOBA dataset (Hong, Niu,
and Zhang 2022). In each example, the background object
(resp., shadow) mask is outlined in green (resp., blue) and
the foreground object (resp., shadow) mask is outlined in
red (resp., yellow).

Introduction

Image composition refers to cutting out a foreground object and pasting it on another background image to acquire a
composite image, which could benefit plenty of applications
in art, movie, and daily photography (Chen and Kae 2019;
Weng et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020c). However, the quality of composite images could be significantly compromised
by the inconsistency between foreground and background,
including appearance, geometric, and semantic inconsistencies. In recent years, many deep learning models (Lin et al.
2018; van Steenkiste et al. 2020; Azadi et al. 2020) have endeavored to tackle different types of inconsistencies in composite images, but only a few works (Hong, Niu, and Zhang
2022) focused on the shadow inconsistency, which is a crucial aspect of appearance inconsistency. In this work, we aim
to cope with the shadow inconsistency, i.e., generating plausible shadow for the foreground object to make the composite image more realistic.
For the shadow generation task, the used data are exhibited in Figure 1. Given a composite image Ic without foreground shadow, the foreground object mask Mf o , and the
masks of background object-shadow pairs {Mbo , Mbs }, our
goal is generating Iˆg with foreground shadow. To solve this
problem, SGRNet (Hong, Niu, and Zhang 2022) released the
first synthetic dataset DESOBA for real-world scenes. The

data in DESOBA can be summarized as tuples of the form
{Ic , Mf o , Mf s , Mbo , Mbs , Ig }. The way to obtain pairs in
DESOBA is as follows. First, they manually remove the
shadows in real images to get shadow-free images. Then,
they replace one foreground shadow region in a real image
(ground-truth image) with the counterpart in its shadow-free
version, yielding a synthetic composite image without foreground shadow. Due to the high cost of manual shadow removal, the scale of DESOBA dataset is very limited (e.g.,
1012 ground-truth images and 3623 tuples). Nevertheless,
deep learning models require abundant training data.
To supplement DESOBA dataset, we create a large-scale
dataset RdSOBA using rendering techniques. We first collect lots of 3D objects and 3D scenes, then place a group of
3D objects in the 3D scene. By using rendering techniques,
we can get the images without object shadows and the images with object shadows without manual effort. Finally, we
obtain 114,350 ground-truth images and 280,000 tuples. The
details of dataset construction can be found in Section 3. Our
main goal is using both synthetic dataset DESOBA and rendered dataset RdSOBA to train a model, which can generate
foreground shadows for real composite images.
Early shadow generation methods (Zhan et al. 2020; Liu

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5198

