The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From Statistical Relational to Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence
Giuseppe Marra
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science,
Celestijnenlaan 200A, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
giuseppe.marra@kuleuven.be

Abstract. The integration of learning and reasoning is one
of the key challenges in artificial intelligence and machine
learning today. The area of Neuro-Symbolic AI (NeSy) tackles this challenge by integrating symbolic reasoning with
neural networks. In our recent work (De Raedt et al. 2020;
Marra et al. 2024), we provided an introduction to NeSy by
drawing several parallels to another field that has a rich tradition in integrating learning and reasoning, namely Statistical
Relational Artificial Intelligence (StarAI).
The seven dimensions of Neurosymbolic. We identify
seven dimensions that these fields have in common and that
can be used to categorize both StarAI and NeSy approaches.
These seven dimensions are concerned with:

(e.g. constants or atoms), symbols versus sub-symbols
(e.g. embeddings).
6. Degree of integration. We analyzed to which extent hybrid systems retain properties of the base paradigms, i.e.
deep learning, computational logic and probability theory. It turns out that most of the system fails in recovering
pure logic reasoning, as different degree of relaxations
are often at the base of the NeSy integration. Systems
that do retain pure logic reasoning capabilities are often
computationally intractable.
7. Tasks. NeSy has been mainly applied on distant supervision settings, where logic is used to provide a weak supervision signal to the output of neural networks. Other
common settings are collective classification, knowledge
graph completion and knowledge induction.

1. Logic Inference. We distinguish two approaches to logical inference: model-based and the proof-based. According to the model-based perspective, logic rules are interpreted as a set of constraints on boolean variables. This
perspective gives rise to NeSy methods where logic is
turned into a regularization loss for neural networks. In
the proof-theoretic perspective, logic rules are seen as inference rules and one performs a sequence of inference
steps to obtain a proofs for a query. This perspective leads
rise to NeSy methods where logic is a template for the architecture of a neural network.
2. Logic syntax, We categorize systems in terms of propositional, relational or first-order logic. Relational and firstorder NeSy systems introduce logic variables in their logical statements, allowing a structured (i.e. templated) definition of their learning modules.
3. Logic semantics, In order to allow for gradient-based
learning, the majority of NeSy systems introduce relaxation of the discrete boolean logic semantics. The most
common choices are fuzzy and probabilistic logic.
4. Learning. NeSy systems are often concerned with learning the parameters of both the weighted logic theories or
the weights of the neural networks. Some systems learn
also the structure of the model, i.e. the shape of the logic
rules or the architecture of the neural modules.
5. Symbols vs sub-symbols. We can contrast two main
classes of representation for the elements a logic theory

The NeSy recipe. The definition of the seven dimensions serves to unify various NeSy systems under a common framework, akin to a standard ”recipe.” In particular,
each system can be distilled into the same two fundamental
choices:
• Construction of a purely logical architecture. Irrespective of whether a system is rooted in proof-based or
model-based paradigms, both culminate in the generation of a ”ground” theory. This theory can be represented
in terms of an AND/OR tree.
• Compilation of the logical architecture into a computational graph. This phase involves the transformation
of the aforementioned AND/OR tree into a continuous and differentiable architecture, akin to a computational graph. This transformation can often be described
through the introduction of an algebraic structure. Here,
AND and OR nodes are interpreted as continuous functions and leaves undergo substitution with neural network outputs. The resultant compiled structure is a hybrid deep computational graph.

References
De Raedt, L.; Dumančić, S.; Manhaeve, R.; and Marra, G.
2020. From statistical relational to neural-symbolic artificial
intelligence. In IJCAI.
Marra, G.; Dumančić, S.; Manhaeve, R.; and De Raedt, L.
2024. From Statistical Relational to Neurosymbolic Artificial Intelligence: a Survey. Artificial Intelligence, 104062.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22678

