The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Piecewise Linear Transformation −
Propagating Aleatoric Uncertainty in Neural Networks
Thomas Krapf, Michael Hagn, Paul Miethaner,
Alexander Schiller, Lucas Luttner, Bernd Heinrich

Faculty for Computer Science and Data Science, University of Regensburg
{Thomas.Krapf, Michael.Hagn, Paul.Miethaner, Alexander.Schiller, Lucas.Luttner, Bernd.Heinrich}@ur.de
Abstract

which typically suffer from a high number of missing or uncertain values and extreme class imbalance (because actual
cyber-attacks are rather scarce). Indeed, inherent scores such
as the softmax output of a NN have been shown to be no
valid measure for the confidence of the prediction (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune
2015). Exacerbating this issue, NNs are prone to overconfident predictions (Guo et al. 2017; Wilson and Izmailov
2020) and opaque due to their ‘black-box’ nature (Roy et al.
2019). Hence, the uncertainty of a prediction needs to be incorporated and accurately assessed in NN-based decisionmaking. Predictive uncertainty in the NN output can be induced by the ubiquitous noise in the data analyzed (aleatoric
uncertainty), by uncertainty in the model and its parameters
(epistemic uncertainty), or a combination of both (Gal
2016).
In recent years, many works on uncertainty in NNs have
emerged, in which uncertainty is typically represented in
probabilistic terms such as probability distributions (PDs).
Most of these works focus on epistemic uncertainty, e.g., by
incorporating uncertainty in the weights of the NN in a probabilistic setting (e.g., Gal 2016; Kendall and Gal 2017; Goulet, Nguyen, and Amiri 2021). In such Bayesian NNs, each
weight parameter is treated as a PD, thus representing uncertainty in the NN itself. In addition, due to the high presence of noise and data quality defects in real-world data,
other works focusing on aleatoric uncertainty and its effect
on the NN output have been published, which aim to propagate aleatoric uncertainty (represented by PDs) through NNs
(e.g., Abdelaziz et al. 2015; Gast and Roth 2018; Jin,
Dundar, and Culurciello 2015). However, regarding exactness, these methods suffer from significant approximation
errors and are unable to accurately quantify predictive uncertainty in the NN output. This is mainly due to restrictive
and approximative assumptions about the PDs in the input,
hidden, or output layer (e.g., the assumption of any post-activation PD being a Gaussian). Therefore, the following research question arises:

Real-world data typically exhibit aleatoric uncertainty which
has to be considered during data-driven decision-making to
assess the confidence of the decision provided by machine
learning models. To propagate aleatoric uncertainty represented by probability distributions (PDs) through neural networks (NNs), both sampling-based and function approximation-based methods have been proposed. However, these
methods suffer from significant approximation errors and are
not able to accurately represent predictive uncertainty in the
NN output. In this paper, we present a novel method, Piecewise Linear Transformation (PLT), for propagating PDs
through NNs with piecewise linear activation functions (e.g.,
ReLU NNs). PLT does not require sampling or specific assumptions about the PDs. Instead, it harnesses the piecewise
linear structure of such NNs to determine the propagated PD
in the output space. In this way, PLT supports the accurate
quantification of predictive uncertainty based on the criterion
exactness of the propagated PD. We assess this exactness in
theory by showing error bounds for our propagated PD. Further, our experimental evaluation validates that PLT outperforms competing methods on publicly available real-world
classification and regression datasets regarding exactness.
Thus, the PDs propagated by PLT allow to assess the uncertainty of the provided decisions, offering valuable support.

Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) have been deployed in data-driven
decision-making in many tasks and fields, such as autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021), medical
diagnostics (Takenaka et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021), cyber security (Pawlicki, Kozik, and Choraś 2022; Vigneswaran et
al. 2018), industrial processes (Nunez et al. 2020; Zhang et
al. 2021), and many more. However, despite being applied
in high-risk and safety-critical domains, traditional NNs
only yield deterministic point estimates without further valid
information about the confidence or uncertainty of their predictions (Gal 2016; Ayhan and Berens 2018). For example,
this is particularly relevant for cyber threat intelligence data,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20456

