The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

I-CEE: Tailoring Explanations of Image Classification Models to User Expertise
Yao Rong1 , Peizhu Qian2 , Vaibhav Unhelkar2 , Enkelejda Kasneci1
1

Technical University of Munich
2
Rice University
{yao.rong, enkelejda.kasneci}@tum.de, {pqian, vaibhav.unhelkar}@rice.edu

Abstract

User
Expertise

Effectively explaining decisions of black-box machine learning models is critical to responsible deployment of AI systems that rely on them. Recognizing their importance, the
field of explainable AI (XAI) provides several techniques to
generate these explanations. Yet, there is relatively little emphasis on the user (the explainee) in this growing body of
work and most XAI techniques generate “one-size-fits-all”
explanations. To bridge this gap and achieve a step closer towards human-centered XAI, we present I-CEE, a framework
that provides Image Classification Explanations tailored to
User Expertise. Informed by existing work, I-CEE explains
the decisions of image classification models by providing the
user with an informative subset of training data (i.e., example
images), corresponding local explanations, and model decisions. However, unlike prior work, I-CEE models the informativeness of the example images to depend on user expertise, resulting in different examples for different users. We
posit that by tailoring the example set to user expertise, ICEE can better facilitate users’ understanding and simulatability of the model. To evaluate our approach, we conduct
detailed experiments in both simulation and with human participants (N = 100) on multiple datasets. Experiments with
simulated users show that I-CEE improves users’ ability to
accurately predict the model’s decisions (simulatability) compared to baselines, providing promising preliminary results.
Experiments with human participants demonstrate that our
method significantly improves user simulatability accuracy,
highlighting the importance of human-centered XAI.

Explanations

Humans decode
model reasoning

I-CEE

C1

Human’s
Belief

C2
Model’s Label
C1
One-sizefits-all

C2

Figure 1: I-CEE tailors the explanation process to each user
by considering their expertise. By selecting the most informative explanations based on user expertise, I-CEE can better enhance user simulatability of ML model’s decisions.

for image classification widely use attribution explanations,
such as GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017), SHAP (Lundberg
and Lee 2017) or LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016).
While these techniques inform our work, they all miss one
key element: human factors, potentially due to the complexity of modeling human users.
We advocate that human modeling is critical to XAI research because explainability is inherently centered around
humans (Liao and Varshney 2021). A few works focusing on explaining reinforcement learning policies use cognitive science theories to model the human user and generate explanations based on the human model (Baker and
Saxe 2011; Huang et al. 2019; Lage et al. 2019b; Qian and
Unhelkar 2022). Closer to our focus, the works of Yang,
Folke, and Shafto (2022) and Yang et al. (2021) utilize a
Bayesian Teaching framework to model human perception
and then generate human-centered explanations. One limitation of these works is that all human users are treated the
same by the modeling method, presuming that an identical
set of explanations will work for all users. In contrast, we
attempt to generate tailored explanations for each user by
modeling their task-specific expertise. Our approach to modeling user expertise is informed by human annotator models
used in active and imitation learning (Welinder et al. 2010;
Beliaev et al. 2022). Similar to these works, our user model
aims to capture both the decisions and reasoning process

Introduction
As AI systems receive increasingly important roles in our
life, human users are challenged to comprehend the decisions made by these systems. To ensure user safety and
proper use of AI systems, experts across disciplines have
recognized the need for AI transparency (Yang et al. 2017;
Ehsan et al. 2021; Russell 2021). Solutions for AI transparency – e.g., techniques for explainable AI (XAI) – are
essential as most AI models can be viewed as a “black box,”
whose decision-making process cannot be easily interpreted
or understood by human users. Among the different settings
of XAI, our work focuses on explaining image classification
tasks (Barredo Arrieta et al. 2020). Existing XAI techniques
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21545

