The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unravelling Expressive Delegations: Complexity and Normative Analysis
Giannis Tyrovolas1 , Andrei Constantinescu2 , Edith Elkind3
1

Independent
ETH Zurich
3
University of Oxford
johntyro@hotmail.com, aconstantine@ethz.ch, elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

every voter can pick from a limited number of candidates.
Delegative democracy can then be seen as a balance of the
two, by challenging the premise that the number of representatives needs to be kept small. In this model, voters can vote
directly on issues if they wish to do so. Passive voters can
delegate to representatives called delegates. Delegates are
not chosen at fixed time points, but need to canvass voters
continually, and acquire the combined power of all voters
that delegate to them. They can vote on issues directly, or
delegate to other delegates. Importantly, delegates need not
win competitive elections, and their votes are public for the
sake of accountability. Ford introduces several strengthenings of liquid democracy, such as voters delegating fractions
of their votes to different delegates. A particularly interesting variant is to allow agents to submit “multiple delegation
choices in order of preference.” This is done partly to deal
with the case of cycles, where Alice delegates to Bob, but
also Bob delegates to Alice.
Colley, Grandi, and Novaro (2022) further extend this
model, by allowing each delegation choice to be an arbitrary function of other agents’ selections. That is, instead of
delegating to Bob, Alice can declare that she supports option X if at least one of Bob, Charlie and Diana supports it
(for a formal treatment of this model, see the Preliminaries).
An agent’s ballot is then a ranked list of such functions, in
order of preference. This enhancement of the basic model
means that cycles can be introduced in much more complicated ways.
Colley et al. propose two “unravelling” procedures to resolve these cycles. M IN S UM is a utilitarian method that minimises the sum of preference levels used, and M IN M AX is an
egalitarian method that minimises the maximum of the preference levels used. They prove that M IN S UM is NP-hard if
agents are allowed to use arbitrary-arity logical ANDs and
M IN M AX is NP-hard for arbitrary Boolean functions. Also,
they give polynomial-time algorithms to unravel instances
where agents can only delegate directly to other agents.

We consider binary group decision-making under a rich
model of liquid democracy: agents submit ranked delegation
options, where each option may be a function of multiple
agents’ votes; e.g., “I vote yes if a majority of my friends
vote yes.” Such ballots are unravelled into a profile of direct votes by selecting one entry from each ballot so as not
to introduce cyclic dependencies. We study delegation via
monotonic Boolean functions, and two unravelling procedures: M IN S UM, which minimises the sum of the ranks of
the chosen entries, and its egalitarian counterpart, M IN M AX.
We provide complete computational dichotomies: M IN S UM
is hard to compute (and approximate) as soon as any nontrivial functions are permitted, and polynomial otherwise; for
M IN M AX the easiness results extend to arbitrary-arity logical ORs and ANDs taken in isolation, but not beyond. For
the classic model of delegating to individual agents, we give
asymptotically near-tight algorithms for carrying out the two
procedures, and efficient algorithms for finding optimal unravellings with the highest vote count for a given alternative.
These algorithms inspire novel tie-breaking rules for the setup
of voting to change a status quo. We then introduce a new axiom, which can be viewed as a variant of the participation axiom, and use algorthmic techniques developed earlier in the
paper to show that it is satisfied by M IN S UM and a lexicographic refinement of M IN M AX (but not M IN M AX itself).

Introduction
Liquid democracy, also referred to as delegative democracy,
is a decision-making mechanism that allows the voters more
flexibility than representative democracy: While every voter
may vote directly on an issue, voters may also delegate their
vote to other voters. Crucially, delegations are transitive:
if Alice delegates to Bob, and Bob delegates to Claire, then
Claire votes with the combined power of all three.
Variants of this idea have been explored by many authors;
see, e.g., the survey by Behrens (2017). In particular, Ford
(2002) argues that large-scale direct democracy is infeasible and likely undesirable, whereas representative democracy is rather rigid: it requires holding elections every so often, with winners representing their entire constituency and
losers gaining no representative power. Further, there is a
hard limit on the total number of elected representatives, and

Our Contribution
We focus on binary issues and strengthen the complexity results of Colley et al. to complete computational dichotomies: M IN S UM is hard to compute (and approximate)
as soon as any non-trivial functions are permitted, and polynomial otherwise; for M IN M AX the easiness results extend

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9918

