The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Performance Maximizing Ensembles with Explainability Guarantees
Vincent Pisztora, Jia Li
Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, USA
uxp5@psu.edu, jol2@psu.edu

Abstract
In this paper we propose a method for the optimal allocation
of observations between an intrinsically explainable glass box
model and a black box model. An optimal allocation being defined as one which, for any given explainability level
(i.e. the proportion of observations for which the explainable
model is the prediction function), maximizes the performance
of the ensemble on the underlying task, and maximizes performance of the explainable model on the observations allocated to it, subject to the maximal ensemble performance
condition. The proposed method is shown to produce such
explainability optimal allocations on a benchmark suite of
tabular datasets across a variety of explainable and black box
model types. These learned allocations are found to consistently maintain ensemble performance at very high explainability levels (explaining 74% of observations on average),
and in some cases even outperform both the component explainable and black box models while improving explainability.

Figure 1: This figure shows a two-class classification task
in which the areas of expertise (the diamond pattern for the
glass box and the spiral pattern for the black box model) are
complementary. The glass box achieves a 92.7% accuracy,
the black box reaches 95.0% accuracy, and the allocated
ensemble of the two exceeds both with a 95.8% accuracy.
Thus, the resulting EEG allocation improves performance
over both component models while also providing explainability (for 20% of observations in this case).

However, using an approach of “complete explainability”,
in which a glass box model is used as the prediction function
across the entire feature space, may not be viable. It may be
the case that, in a given setting, no glass box exists that can
adequately model the relationship of interest in all regions of
the feature space. Thus in some regions, the model’s predictions will fail to exceed the performance threshold required
by the use-case. If, as a consequence, the model exceeds the
application’s global error tolerance (e.g. a low accuracy in
stroke prediction (Gage et al. 2001)), it may not be usable in
practice.
An alternative, “partial explainability” approach requires
instead that only a proportion of observations be provided
intrinsically explainable predictions. We will refer to this
proportion, which is the proportion of observations for
which the explainable model is the prediction function, as
the explainability level q. Such approaches, including our
proposed method, Ensembles with Explainability Guarantees (EEG), can provide high performance while maximizing explainability, and work especially well in cases where
the explainable model can be paired with an alternate model
with complementary strengths. As demonstrated in Fig. 1,
by identifying the areas of expertise of the glass box and
black box models, the EEG approach can allocate predictions accordingly to improve both performance and explainability.

Introduction
In most high stakes settings, such as medical diagnosis (Gulum, Trombley, and Kantardzic 2021) and criminal justice
(Rudin 2019), model predictions have two viability requirements. Firstly, they must exceed a given global performance
threshold, thus ensuring an adequate understanding of the
underlying process. Secondly, model predictions must be explainable.
Explainability, however defined (Linardatos, Papastefanopoulos, and Kotsiantis 2020), is a desirable characteristic in any prediction function. Intrinsically interpretable
“glass box” models ((Agarwal et al. 2021), (Lemhadri,
Ruan, and Tibshirani 2021), (Rymarczyk et al. 2020)),
which are explainable by construction, are particularly advantageous as they require no additional post-hoc processing ((Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), (Lundberg and Lee
2017)) to achieve explainability, and thus also avoid complications arising from post-hoc explanation learning ((Rudin
2019), (Garreau and Luxburg 2020)). Due to these advantages, glass box models are uniquely suited to settings where
faithful explanations of predictions are required.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14617

