The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Look-Up Table from Expanded Convolutional Network for Accelerating
Image Super-resolution
Kai Yin, Jie Shen*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
yinkai@std.uestc.edu.cn, sjie@uestc.edu.cn

29

Abstract
The look-up table (LUT) has recently shown its practicability and effectiveness in super-resolution (SR) tasks due to its
low computational cost and hardware independence. However, most existing methods focus on improving the performance of SR, neglecting the demand for high-speed SR on
low-computational edge devices. In this paper, we propose
an efficient expanded convolution (EC) layer, which expands
the output size of regular convolution to enlarge the receptive field (RF) indirectly. It can increase the size of the LUT
corresponding to the network linearly with the increase of
RF. Additionally, after introducing the EC, multiple LUTs are
merged into one LUT, achieving faster running speed while
maintaining SR performance. More specifically, we expand
the coverage of the convolutional output so that the output
at the current position covers the target position and its surroundings, forming an overlapping sliding window at the output end. We sum up the overlapping parts of the sliding window as the output, thereby achieving the effect of enlarging
the RF size. Moreover, by expanding the numerical range of
the accumulated results and rescaling them to [0, 255], the
method can mitigate the error caused by quantization output.
Experiments indicate that the proposed method performs better than the baseline method and is faster than other LUTbased SR methods.

RRDB
CARN-M

PSNR(dB)

28

Mu-LUT
FSRCNN
Ours

27

SR-LUT

SP-LUT

Bicubic

26

Bilinear
25

Nearest
101

102

103

Runtime(ms)

104

Figure 1: Comparison of PSNR on Set14 benchmark dataset
for ×4 SR and runtime is measured by generating 1280×720
image. We compare our method with common interpolation
based methods (square), prior LUT-based methods (circle)
and deep learning based methods (diamond). Compared to
previous LUT-based methods, our method show better or
comparable PSNR quality while achieving faster runtime.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have strong fitting and
nonlinear mapping capabilities. With the development of
deep learning, research on using deep neural networks to
solve SR problems is gradually increasing (Dong et al. 2014;
Dong, Loy, and Tang 2016; Shi et al. 2016). Through its
powerful nonlinear mapping ability, depth models can learn
different mapping relationships for different pixel arrangements in LR images and even predict the lost high-frequency
information. Therefore, deep learning methods are significantly superior to interpolation methods in restoring image details. Despite the great success of deep models, as
the depth and width of the model increase, although the
super-resolution effect is improved, the computational load
and storage space occupied by the model are also sharply
increasing. Moreover, some attention-based methods also
require a large amount of memory consumption. Without
high-performance hardware support, DNN-based methods
are challenging to apply in practice.
A look-up table (LUT) is commonly used in low-level vision tasks by storing the outputs of complex computations in

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to recover highresolution (HR) images with high-frequency image details
from a single low-resolution (LR) image, which has extensive applications in medical imaging, video surveillance,
satellite and aerial imaging. In the early days, interpolationbased methods were common, such as nearest neighbor interpolation, bilinear interpolation, and bicubic (Keys 1981)
interpolation. These methods output the missing pixels
based on the weighted average of nearby pixels at the target position. Interpolation methods have the advantages of
simplicity and fast processing speed. However, interpolation
methods only consider the positional information without
the arrangement patterns of different pixel values, so they
cannot effectively restore high-frequency signals.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6720

