The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Attacking Transformers with Feature Diversity Adversarial Perturbation
Chenxing Gao1 , Hang Zhou1 , Junqing Yu1 , YuTeng Ye1 , Jiale Cai1 , Junle Wang2 , Wei Yang1 *
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Tencent
{cxg, henrryzh,yjqing, yuteng ye, jaile cai, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn; wangjunle@gmail.com;

Abstract

Initially, adversarial attacks were studied on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based models. The most commonly used methods are gradient-based approaches such as
FGSM (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), BIM (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016), and their variants
MI (Dong et al. 2018), DI (Xie et al. 2019), NI (Lin et al.
2019) , to perturb the entire image (Kim 2020) or a small
patch (Gao et al. 2020) in the same direction as the gradient of the cost function with respect to the data. Other approaches use optimization-based schemes that seek to minimize the distance between the original samples.
With the increasing prevalence of ViT-based models,
their sensitivity to adversarial attacks has become a hot
research area. Recent studies have found that ViT-based
models are still vulnerable to specially crafted perturbations (Hatamizadeh et al. 2022; Shi and Han 2021; Fu et al.
2022; Lovisotto et al. 2022). Shi (Shi and Han 2021; Brown
et al. 2017) propose Patch-wise Adversarial Removal (PAR)
black-box method to attack ViT. Wei (Wei et al. 2022) propose to skip the gradient on the attention during the backward propagation for boosting transferability. Their performances on other black-box models like CNNs and MLPs
are still poor due to the structural gap. Further, most existing methods for adversarial attacks depend on classification
labels to determine the cost function and compute the gradient direction. This can impede transferability because the
targeted black-box model may use different category divisions, or even operate in a separate domain, from the whitebox model. To the best of our knowledge, the only notable
exception is FG-UAP (Ye, Cheng, and Huang 2022), which
attacks CNN models at the layers where neural collapse occurs. However, this method is limited to CNN-based models
and focus on neural collapse layers, i.e., the last several layers.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel
label-free white-box attack approach for ViT models that exhibits strong transferability to various black-box models, including most ViT variants, CNNs, and MLPs. Our method is
inspired by the analysis of the feature collapse phenomenon
in ViT-based models (Dong, Cordonnier, and Loukas 2021;
Wang et al. 2022a). The attention mechanism, which is a
critical component for information aggregation in ViT models, is overly dependent on the low-frequency component of
features, thus acting as a low-pass filter (Dong, Cordonnier,

Understanding the mechanisms behind Vision Transformer
(ViT), particularly its vulnerability to adversarial perturbations, is crucial for addressing challenges in its real-world
applications. Existing ViT adversarial attackers rely on labels to calculate the gradient for perturbation, and exhibit low
transferability to other structures and tasks. In this paper, we
present a label-free white-box attack approach for ViT-based
models that exhibits strong transferability to various blackbox models, including most ViT variants, CNNs, and MLPs,
even for models developed for other modalities. Our inspiration comes from the feature collapse phenomenon in ViTs,
where the critical attention mechanism overly depends on the
low-frequency component of features, causing the features
in middle-to-end layers to become increasingly similar and
eventually collapse. We propose the feature diversity attacker
to naturally accelerate this process and achieve remarkable
performance and transferability.

Introduction
The Vision Transformer (ViT) has gained significant attention in recent years for its outstanding performance
in various computer vision tasks such as object detection (Beal et al. 2020; Carion et al. 2020), semantic segmentation (Strudel et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021), human pose
estimation (Xu et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2021), scene understanding (Wu et al. 2022; Said et al. 2023) and etc. Understanding the mechanisms behind ViT, particularly its vulnerability to adversarial perturbations, is crucial for addressing
challenges in its real-world applications. In general, adversarial attacks involve crafting small perturbations to input
data to cause models to produce incorrect results with high
confidence while being imperceptible to the human visual
system. Existing adversarial attack approaches can be categorized as “white-box” or “black-box” based on whether
the attacker has access to the network parameters. While
white-box attacks require additional knowledge about network architecture and trained weights, they are valuable because perturbations obtained from a white-box model have
the potential to be transferred to attack a black-box model,
i.e., possessing cross-model transferability.
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1788

