The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Diversity-Authenticity Co-constrained Stylization for
Federated Domain Generalization in Person Re-identification
Fengxiang Yang1,2 , Zhun Zhong3 , Zhiming Luo1 * , Yifan He4 , Shaozi Li1 , Nicu Sebe2
1

2

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
3
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK
4
Reconova Technologies Co., Ltd., China
(1) Enlarging Wasserstein Distance for Diversity

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of federated domain generalization in person re-identification (FedDG re-ID), aiming to learn a model generalizable to unseen domains with
decentralized source domains. Previous methods mainly focus on preventing local overfitting. However, the direction of
diversifying local data through stylization for model training is largely overlooked. This direction is popular in domain generalization but will encounter two issues under
federated scenario: (1) Most stylization methods require
the centralization of multiple domains to generate novel
styles but this is not applicable under decentralized constraint. (2) The authenticity of generated data cannot be ensured especially given limited local data, which may impair the model optimization. To solve these two problems,
we propose the Diversity-Authenticity Co-constrained Stylization (DACS), which can generate diverse and authentic
data for learning robust local model. Specifically, we deploy a style transformation model on each domain to generate novel data with two constraints: (1) A diversity constraint is designed to increase data diversity, which enlarges
the Wasserstein distance between the original and transformed data; (2) An authenticity constraint is proposed to ensure data authenticity, which enforces the transformed data
to be easily/hardly recognized by the local-side global/local model. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed DACS and show that DACS achieves
state-of-the-art performance for FedDG re-ID. Project:
https://github.com/FlyingRoastDuck/DACS official.git

1

x

!x = (x−μ)⁄σ

σ%

x′ =#σ ∗ !x + μ%

x′

μ%
Enlarging Wasserstein Distance

Feature Space

D
A
C
S

Diversity

Authenticity
: Diversity Constraint
: Local Data
: Novel Data

: Our DACS
: Novel but Unreal Data

(2) Reducing Global Uncertainty for Authenticity
Local Model

Local Model

Local-side
Global Model

Local-side
Global Model

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the proposed DiversityAuthenticity Co-constrained Stylization (DACS). Middle:
We introduce a style transformation model (STM) for each
domain to hallucinate novel data with two constraints. (1)
Diversity Constraint: STM is encouraged to generate diverse
images . (2) Authenticity Constraint: We ensure data authenticity by enforcing the transformed data to be easily / hardly
recognized by local-side global model / local model.

Introduction

Person Re-identification (re-ID) aims at retrieving target
pedestrian in a non-overlapped camera system, which can
largely benefit the smart city construction, e.g., finding lost
children or escaped criminals. It is reported that deep-based
methods (He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2018; Ye et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2018) have drastically promoted the development of re-ID. However, these modern
methods still suffer from the domain shift caused by different domains, leading to unsatisfactory performance when
deployed in novel domains.

Recent studies (Zhao et al. 2021; Song et al. 2019; Dai
et al. 2021) attempt to solve domain shift issue by designing domain generalizable (DG) algorithms, where they learn
generalized re-ID models by training on several labeled
source domains. Despite their success, all of them require
the centralization of training data, raising data privacy concerns. One promising solution is federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017), which aims to learn a generalized model
by accumulating (e.g., averaging) the knowledge of models
independently trained on each domain. In such a learning
paradigm, the data privacy issue can be largely alleviated.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6477

