The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupled Optimisation for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Cong Cong* 1 , Shiyu Xuan2 , Sidong Liu3 , Shiliang Zhang2 , Maurice Pagnucco1 , Yang Song1
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
3
Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
z3414050@ad.unsw.edu.au, {morri,yang.song1}@unsw.edu.au, sidong.liu@mq.edu.au, shiyu xuan@stu.pku.edu.cn,
slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
When training on a long-tailed dataset, conventional learning algorithms tend to exhibit a bias towards classes with a
larger sample size. Our investigation has revealed that this
biased learning tendency originates from the model parameters, which are trained to disproportionately contribute to
the classes characterised by their sample size (e.g., many,
medium, and few classes). To balance the overall parameter contribution across all classes, we investigate the importance of each model parameter to the learning of different
class groups, and propose a multistage parameter Decouple
and Optimisation (DO) framework that decouples parameters
into different groups with each group learning a specific portion of classes. To optimise the parameter learning, we apply different training objectives with a collaborative optimisation step to learn complementary information about each
class group. Extensive experiments on long-tailed datasets,
including CIFAR100, Places-LT, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturaList 2018, show that our framework achieves competitive
performance compared to the state-of-the-art.

a) Accuracy (y-axis) of different b) Parameter importance (y-axis)
class groups
to different class groups

Figure 1: a) Classification accuracies of different class
groups comparing the baseline ResNet model, PaCo (Cui
et al. 2021), CMO (Park et al. 2022), RIDE (Wang et al.
2020), and our proposed method. b) Averaged parameter
importance for different class groups comparing the various
approaches. We notice a positive correlation between accuracy and parameter importance. More visualisation results
are provided in Supplementary Material.

Introduction
Real-world datasets normally exhibit a long-tailed class distribution, where certain classes possess a large number of
samples, while rarer classes are characterised by a limited
sample size (Zhang et al. 2021c). Such class imbalances
pose a significant challenge when training Deep Convolutional Neural Networks as the head classes with dominant
amounts of instances tend to overwhelm the model learning on tail classes by influencing the learning of most of the
gradients, consequently leading to subpar performance on
minority classes. This is a critical issue, especially in domains like autonomous driving (Yurtsever et al. 2020) and
computer-aided diagnostics (Marrakchi, Makansi, and Brox
2021; Cong et al. 2022a,b) where models trained on longtailed datasets are required to demonstrate high performance
across all classes.
Early attempts to alleviate this issue include upsampling
rare classes (Zhang et al. 2021b), knowledge transfer (Wang
et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2021) and loss re-weighting (Wang

et al. 2021c; Ren et al. 2020). Recent works discover that improving feature quality, especially via self-supervised learning (Liu et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2022b), can effectively enhance model performance on imbalanced datasets. Some
studies find that feature learning and classifier learning
favour different learning strategies, therefore applying a
two-stage decoupled learning scheme further improves performance (Kang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020). Moreover,
the model ensemble based on multi-expert learning represents the state-of-the-art, with each expert model focusing
on distinct partitions of the data distribution (Zhang et al.
2022).
Our analysis shows that each model parameter holds varying degrees of importance in learning different class groups.
In long-tailed classification, model parameters tend to be
generally more important for the classes with many samples, i.e., the many class group. The measurement of the
importance of a parameter here is similar to that used during model pruning, i.e., being estimated by the changes in
the final loss induced by removing it from the model. Fig.
1 (b) shows the averaged parameter importance across vari-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1380

