The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Seeing Dark Videos via Self-Learned Bottleneck Neural Representation
Haofeng Huang1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Ling-Yu Duan1 , Jiaying Liu1 *
1

Peking University, Beijing, China,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Beijing, China
hhf@pku.edu.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, lingyu@pku.edu.cn, liujiaying@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Content Objective

Enhancing low-light videos in a supervised style presents a
set of challenges, including limited data diversity, misalignment, and the domain gap introduced through the dataset construction pipeline. Our paper tackles these challenges by constructing a self-learned enhancement approach that gets rid
of the reliance on any external training data. The challenge
of self-supervised learning lies in fitting high-quality signal
representations solely from input signals. Our work designs
a bottleneck neural representation mechanism that extracts
those signals. More in detail, we encode the frame-wise representation with a compact deep embedding and utilize a neural network to parameterize the video-level manifold consistently. Then, an entropy constraint is applied to the enhanced
results based on the adjacent spatial-temporal context to filter
out the degraded visual signals, e.g. noise and frame inconsistency. Last, a novel Chromatic Retinex decomposition is
proposed to effectively align the reflectance distribution temporally. It benefits the entropy control on different components of each frame and facilitates noise-to-noise training,
successfully suppressing the temporal flicker. Extensive experiments demonstrate the robustness and superior effectiveness of our proposed method. Our project is publicly available
at: https://huangerbai.github.io/SLBNR/.

Input Output Target
(a) Input

(b) Supervised

(d) Frame2Frame

(c) UDVD

(e) Ours

Figure 1: Results and frameworks of different methods.
(b) The learning paradigm of supervised methods; (c)
Even bounded by the content bottleneck, UDVD (Sheth
et al. 2021)’s results still suffer from remaining noise
due to the overfitting caused by self-supervision; (d)
Frame2Frame (Ehret et al. 2019) introduces artifacts as
solely the objective bottleneck might incur misalignment
during model optimization; (e) Our method constructs the
bottleneck in both content and objective views, which leads
to superior results.

Introduction

bution and flicker (Wei et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2022), which
damages the spatial structure and the temporal consistency.
In the deep-leaning era, many learning-based low light
enhancement methods (Chen et al. 2019; Jiang and Zheng
2019; Wang et al. 2021) are proposed. Most of them adopt
full-supervision to pursue better restoration performance,
which learns the mapping strategy from low-light images/videos to normal-light ones with an end-to-end learned
neural network. To serve that, several paired datasets (Chen
et al. 2019; Jiang and Zheng 2019; Wang et al. 2021) are collected for training and evaluation. However, it is resourceintensive to construct a real paired low light video dataset,
which demands professional equipment e.g. an electric slide
rail (Wang et al. 2021) or a split optic (Jiang and Zheng
2019), and careful registration. Furthermore, this means
of collection assumes that the directly captured videos are
normal-light ground truth and processed videos processed

Videos captured in a low-light environment suffer from severe visual degradation. Common intuitive choices (e.g. long
exposure or high ISO) are not satisfactory for videos. It
is difficult to apply the former for video, while the latter
leads to heavy noise. Therefore, low-light video enhancement from the software perspective is highly demanded.
This task is challenging because of the complex noise distri* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62332010 and Grant 62088102, in part by the Key Laboratory of
Science, Technology and Standard in Press Industry (Key Laboratory of Intelligent Press Media Technology), and in part by the
PKU-NTU Joint Research Institute (JRI) sponsored by a donation
from the Ng Teng Fong Charitable Foundation.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2321

