The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Polyper: Boundary Sensitive Polyp Segmentation
Hao Shao1 , Yang Zhang2 , Qibin Hou1 *
1

2

VCIP, School of Computer Science, Nankai University
Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University
shaoh@mail.nankai.edu.cn, houqb@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a new boundary sensitive framework for polyp
segmentation, called Polyper. Our method is motivated by
a clinical approach that seasoned medical practitioners often leverage the inherent features of interior polyp regions
to tackle blurred boundaries. Inspired by this, we propose
explicitly leveraging polyp regions to bolster the model’s
boundary discrimination capability while minimizing computation. Our approach first extracts boundary and polyp regions from the initial segmentation map through morphological operators. Then, we design the boundary sensitive attention that concentrates on augmenting the features near the
boundary regions using the interior polyp regions’s characteristics to generate good segmentation results. Our proposed
method can be seamlessly integrated with classical encoder
networks, like ResNet-50, MiT-B1, and Swin Transformer.
To evaluate the effectiveness of Polyper, we conduct experiments on five publicly available challenging datasets, and
receive state-of-the-art performance on all of them. Code is
available at https://github.com/haoshao-nku/medical seg.git.

TransUNet (Lin et al. 2022)
TransFuse (Zhang et al. 2021)
Polyp-PVT (Dong et al. 2021)

CaraNet (Lou et al. 2022)
SegT (Chen et al. 2023)
Polyper (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparisons with other methods on five datasets.

both CNN and Swin Transformer architectures using multidilation convolutions and multi-feature aggregation blocks.
While this approach can perform well in the mid to late
stages of a well-margined lesion, it struggles to effectively
handle early polyps with lower edge contrast.
Another popular strategy is to generate a polyp mask to
coarsely localize the polyp and then enhance the semantic features around the potential boundaries. As an early
attempt, SegT (Chen, Ma, and Zhang 2023) highlights the
boundaries of the polyp area by assessing the disparity between the foreground and background regions. However, accurately capturing the polyp boundaries poses a challenge
due to the ambiguity caused by blending polyp boundaries
with the surrounding mucosa. Relying solely on the synergistic effect between foreground and background information may not lead to accurate polyp segmentation. CaraNet
(Lou et al. 2022) leverages the long-distance interaction of
axial attention to calculate the pairwise affinity from a global
perspective. The roughly estimated polyp regions are removed from the deep features, and then features at different scales are utilized to supplement the boundary details
to produce good segmentation results. However, axial attention may not consistently benefit the network because
it risks inadvertently excluding crucial boundary information (Thanh Duc et al. 2022). Hence, the methods above cannot sufficiently address the issue of blurred boundaries.

Introduction
Colon polyps are protruding growths within the colon mucosa, exhibiting considerable variability in shape, texture,
and color (Pooler et al. 2023). Importantly, colon polyps are
recognized as precancerous lesions closely associated with
the development of colon cancer (Djinbachian et al. 2020).
Consequently, there is a pressing need to enhance both the
efficiency of early detection and the accuracy of polyp contour segmentation. Polyps pose diagnostic challenges during
colonoscopy due to the inconspicuous borders and low contrast. In their initial stages, polyps often manifest smaller dimensions, resulting in less defined margins that exacerbate
detection difficulties.
To address this challenge, one of the current research
trends is to maximize the integration of features at various
scales to preserve as many boundary details as possible. Typically, Wu et al. (Wu et al. 2021) introduced semantic calibration and refinement techniques to bridge the semantic gap
between feature maps at different levels. SwinE-Net (Park
and Lee 2022) refines the multi-level features extracted from
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4731

