The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimal Transport with Tempered Exponential Measures
Ehsan Amid1 * , Frank Nielsen2 , Richard Nock3 , Manfred K. Warmuth3
1
Google DeepMind
Sony Computer Science Laboratories Inc.
3
Google Research
eamid@google.com, frank.nielsen@acm.org, {richardnock, manfred}@google.com
2

Abstract

being the dimension of the marginals (we consider discrete
optimal transport). At the expense of an increase in complexity, getting back to a user-constrained sparse solution
can be done by switching to a quadratic regularizer (Liu,
Puigcerver, and Blondel 2023), but loses an appealing structure of the entropic-regularized OT (EOT) solution, a discrete exponential family with very specific features. Sparsity
is an important topic in optimal transport: both unregularized and EOT plans are extremal in the sparsity scale, which
does not necessarily fit in observed patterns (Peyré and Cuturi 2019).
Finally and most importantly, optimal transport, regularized or not, does not require normalized measures; in
fact, it can be extended to the unbalanced problem where
marginals’ total masses do not even match (Janati et al.
2020). In that last, very general case, the problem is usually cast with approximate marginal constraints and without
any constraint whatsoever on the transport plan’s total mass.
In this context, our paper introduces OT on tempered exponential measures (TEMs, a generalization of exponential
families), with a generalization of the EOT. Notable structural properties of the problem include training as fast as
Sinkhorn balancing and with guarantees on the solution’s
sparsity, also including the possibility of unbalanced optimal
transport but with tight control over total masses via their codensities, distributions that are used to indirectly normalize
TEMs (see Figure 1). We characterize sparsity up to sparsity patterns in the optimal solution and show that sparsity
with TEMs can be interpreted as balancing the classical OT
cost with an interaction term interpretable in the popular
gravity model for spatial interactions (Haynes and Fotheringham 1984). Interestingly, this interpretation cannot hold
anymore for the particular case of exponential families and
thus breaks for EOT.
To maximize readability, all proofs are deferred to an appendix.1

In the field of optimal transport, two prominent subfields
face each other: (i) unregularized optimal transport, “à-laKantorovich”, which leads to extremely sparse plans but with
algorithms that scale poorly, and (ii) entropic-regularized
optimal transport, “à-la-Sinkhorn-Cuturi”, which gets nearlinear approximation algorithms but leads to maximally unsparse plans. In this paper, we show that an extension of
the latter to tempered exponential measures, a generalization
of exponential families with indirect measure normalization,
gets to a very convenient middle ground, with both very fast
approximation algorithms and sparsity, which is under control up to sparsity patterns. In addition, our formulation fits
naturally in the unbalanced optimal transport problem setting.

Introduction
Most loss functions used in machine learning (ML) can
be related, directly or indirectly, to a comparison of positive measures (in general, probability distributions). Historically, two broad families of distortions were mainly used: f divergences (Ali and Silvey 1966; Csiszár 1963) and Bregman divergences (Bregman 1967). Among other properties,
the former are appealing because they encapsulate the notion
of monotonicity of information (Amari 2016), while the latter are convenient because they axiomatize the expectation
as a maximum likelihood estimator (Banerjee et al. 2004).
Those properties, however, put constraints on the distributions, either on their support for the former or their analytical
form for the latter.
A third class of distortion measures has progressively
emerged later on, alleviating those constraints and with the
appealing property to meet distance axioms: Optimal Transport distances (Peyré and Cuturi 2019; Villani 2009). Those
can be interesting in wide ML fields (Peyré and Cuturi
2019), but they suffer from poor scalability. A trick of balancing the metric cost with an entropic regularizer (Cuturi
2013) substantially improves scalability to near-optimality
but blurs the frontiers with other distortion measures (Cuturi
2013; Muzellec et al. 2017). Most importantly, the structure
of the unregularized OT plan is substantially altered through
regularization: its sparsity is reduced by a factor ⌦pnq, n

Definitions
Optimal Transport in the Simplex
In classical discrete optimal transport (OT), we are given a
cost matrix M P Rnˆn (n ° 1) and two probability vec.
tors r and column c in the simplex n “ tp P Rn :

* Authors listed alphabetically.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10838

The full article is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.04015.

