The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HGPrompt: Bridging Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Graphs
for Few-Shot Prompt Learning
Xingtong Yu1 * , Yuan Fang2† , Zemin Liu3 , Xinming Zhang1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
yxt95@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yfang@smu.edu.sg, zeminliu@nus.edu.sg, xinming@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

Veličković et al. 2018a) and heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs) (Wang et al. 2019; Lv et al. 2021) have
been widely deployed, respectively, for various tasks such
as link prediction (LP), node classification (NC) and graph
classification (GC). However, when trained in a supervised
manner, GNNs and HGNNs depend heavily on extensive
task-specific labels, which are challenging or expensive to
procure. Moreover, the supervised paradigm would require
re-training for different tasks even on the same graph, incurring significant overheads.
Hence, the “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm (Dong et al.
2019) has emerged as a practical alternative to supervised
learning. First, a pre-training step utilizes label-free graphs
to learn task-irrelevant general properties on homogeneous
(Hu et al. 2020) or heterogeneous graphs (Jiang et al. 2021).
Next, a fine-tuning step updates the pre-trained model to
adapt it to downstream tasks using some task-specific labels. Apparently, the two steps optimize different objectives,
creating a gap between pre-training and downstream tasks,
which further leads to subpar performance (Liu et al. 2023a).
In addition, fine-tuning a large pre-trained model can be
costly, and still require considerable task-specific labels to
avoid overfitting.
To address the issues with fine-tuning, prompt-based
learning (Brown et al. 2020; Jia et al. 2021) has become popular. Prompt learning seeks to extract the semantic relevance
between a downstream task and the pre-trained model, acting as a bridge to align downstream objectives toward the
pre-trained model. Under this approach, the parameters of
the pre-trained model are frozen, and only a light-weight,
task-specific prompt vector is tuned for a downstream task.
Given much fewer learnable parameters in a prompt than in
the pre-trained model, prompt-tuning can be both efficient
and effective especially in few-shot tasks with very scarce
task-specific labels.
Fueled by the success of prompt learning in language
models, researchers have attempted its application to graphs
(Liu et al. 2023b; Sun et al. 2023, 2022; Tan et al. 2023; Yu
et al. 2023b). Typically, these approaches first introduce a
unification template to bridge pre-training and downstream
tasks on graphs. Then, they design a learnable prompt that
appends to or modifies the input of the downstream task, to
better align the task with the pre-trained graph model. Yet
these previous works are only designed for homogeneous

Graph neural networks (GNNs) and heterogeneous graph
neural networks (HGNNs) are prominent techniques for homogeneous and heterogeneous graph representation learning,
yet their performance in an end-to-end supervised framework greatly depends on the availability of task-specific supervision. To reduce the labeling cost, pre-training on selfsupervised pretext tasks has become a popular paradigm,
but there is often a gap between the pre-trained model and
downstream tasks, stemming from the divergence in their objectives. To bridge the gap, prompt learning has risen as a
promising direction especially in few-shot settings, without
the need to fully fine-tune the pre-trained model. While there
has been some early exploration of prompt-based learning
on graphs, they primarily deal with homogeneous graphs, ignoring the heterogeneous graphs that are prevalent in downstream applications. In this paper, we propose HGP ROMPT, a
novel pre-training and prompting framework to unify not only
pre-training and downstream tasks but also homogeneous and
heterogeneous graphs via a dual-template design. Moreover,
we propose dual-prompt in HGP ROMPT to assist a downstream task in locating the most relevant prior to bridge the
gaps caused by not only feature variations but also heterogeneity differences across tasks. Finally, we thoroughly evaluate and analyze HGP ROMPT through extensive experiments
on three public datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph data is ubiquitous due to its ability to model relations
between objects, such as bibliographic networks,chemical
compound graphs, and social networks. In particular, realworld graphs often involve multiple types of nodes and
edges, such as authors, papers and conferences interacting
in various ways in a bibliographic network. These graphs
are called heterogeneous graphs or heterogeneous information networks (HINs) (Sun and Han 2013; Yang et al. 2020),
in contrast to conventional homogeneous graphs that consist
of only one type of node and edge.
On such homogeneous and heterogeneous graphs,
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016;
* Work was done while at Singapore Management University.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16578

