The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spotting the Unseen: Reciprocal Consensus Network Guided by Visual Archetypes
Wenbo Hu1,2 , Hongjian Zhan1 , Xinchen Ma1 , Yue Lu1 * , Ching Y. Suen2
1

2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, Shanghai, China
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
{wenbo,xcma}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {hjzhan, ylu}@cee.ecnu.edu.cn, suen@cse.concordia.ca

Abstract
Humans often require only a few visual archetypes to spot
novel objects. Based on this observation, we present a strategy rooted in “spotting the unseen” by establishing dense
correspondences between potential query image regions and
a visual archetype, and we propose the Consensus Network
(CoNet). Our method leverages relational patterns intra and
inter images via Auto-Correlation Representation (ACR) and
Mutual-Correlation Representation (MCR). Within each image, the ACR module is capable of encoding both local selfsimilarity and global context simultaneously. Between the
query and support images, the MCR module computes the
cross-correlation across two image representations and introduces a reciprocal consistency constraint, which can incorporate to exclude outliers and enhance model robustness. To overcome the challenges of low-resource training
data, particularly in one-shot learning scenarios, we incorporate an adaptive margin strategy to better handle diverse
instances. The experimental results indicate the effectiveness
of the proposed method across diverse domains such as object detection in natural scenes, and text spotting in both historical manuscripts and natural scenes, which demonstrates
its sparkling generalization ability. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/infinite-hwb/conet.

Figure 1: Given a scene image and a set of visual archetypes,
our goal is to perform accurate spotting in the scene image
based on these visual archetypes.

“unknown”, offering the advantage of automatically discovering unseen categories but failing to categorize them
further. Another drawback of these approaches is their reliance on vast amounts of training data, a requirement that
isn’t always feasible in certain application scenarios. Traditional sliding-window-based spotting methods (Wicht, Fischer, and Hennebert 2016; Chan and Riek 2020) though
seemingly promising for addressing the open recognition issue, often underperform in practice. This underperformance
can likely be attributed to variations in object morphology
across different categories and the breakdown of data distribution assumptions when faced with novel categories.
More recent approaches have leveraged one-shot or fewshot learning for object detection (Fan et al. 2019; Hsieh
et al. 2019; Osokin, Sumin, and Lomakin 2020; Zhang et al.
2020; Cheng, Wang, and Long 2021; Jiang et al. 2023).
Yet, these methods frequently face challenges when dealing with images of closely related categories. In scenarios
like text spotting in historical documents or logo spotting
in natural scenes, the novel classes might be mistaken for
confusable categories. Moreover, utilizing deep learning in
low-data regimes often results in a diminished quality of the
feature space. Acknowledging these limitations in existing
techniques, we are compelled to seek a novel approach better equipped to manage such intricacies.

Introduction
The need to “spot the unseen” is prevalent in real-world
scenarios, such as historical document analysis, where researchers might encounter previously unrecorded characters. With the advances of deep learning over the past
decades, while state-of-the-art detection or recognition models have showcased impressive performance, they still have
a fundamental limitation: under the closed-world assumption, they can only predict classes observed and annotated in
their training dataset (Han et al. 2022; Ren et al. 2015; Liu
et al. 2015; Zhou 2022). Ideally, we would like the object
detection model to be able to detect all objects in the world.
To tackle this challenge, several object detection methods rooted in open-set learning have emerged (Neal et al.
2018; Huang et al. 2022; Jeong, Choi, and Kim 2021; Joseph
et al. 2021; Han et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022). In practical applications, these methods label unseen categories as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12556

