The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A User-Friendly Framework for Generating Model-Preferred Prompts in
Text-to-Image Synthesis
Nailei Hei1 , Qianyu Guo3 , Zihao Wang4 , Yan Wang1 * , Haofen Wang5 * , Wenqiang Zhang1,2,3 *
1

2

Shanghai Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
Engineering Research Center of Robotics, Ministry of Education, Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
4
Tongji University
5
College of Design and Innovation, Tongji University
nlhei22@m.fudan.edu.cn, qyguo20@fudan.edu.cn, zihaowang26@outlook.com
yanwang19@fudan.edu.cn, carter.whfcarter@gmail.com, wqzhang@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

a green tree

Well-designed prompts have demonstrated the potential to
guide text-to-image models in generating amazing images.
Although existing prompt engineering methods can provide
high-level guidance, it is challenging for novice users to
achieve the desired results by manually entering prompts
due to a discrepancy between novice-user-input prompts
and the model-preferred prompts. To bridge the distribution gap between user input behavior and model training
datasets, we first construct a novel Coarse-Fine Granularity
Prompts dataset (CFP) and propose a novel User-Friendly
Fine-Grained Text Generation framework (UF-FGTG) for
automated prompt optimization. For CFP, we construct a
novel dataset for text-to-image tasks that combines coarse and
fine-grained prompts to facilitate the development of automated prompt generation methods. For UF-FGTG, we propose a novel framework that automatically translates userinput prompts into model-preferred prompts. Specifically, we
propose a prompt refiner that continually rewrites prompts to
empower users to select results that align with their unique
needs. Meanwhile, we integrate image-related loss functions
from the text-to-image model into the training process of text
generation to generate model-preferred prompts. Additionally, we propose an adaptive feature extraction module to ensure diversity in the generated results. Experiments demonstrate that our approach is capable of generating more visually appealing and diverse images than previous state-of-theart methods, achieving an average improvement of 5% across
six quality and aesthetic metrics. Data and code are available
at https://github.com/Naylenv/UF-FGTG.

UF-FGTG

a large tree in a forest with a person
a green tree at night while it rains
a painting of green tree house in
the middle of a lake
a green tree with moss growing
on the ground and trees in the
background, with a lake in the
middle, Florence Engelbach,
forest, an impressionist painting,
Datasets naturalism

UF-FGTG

a large tree house in the middle of a
lake surrounded by trees
a painting of green tree house in
the middle of a lake, birds flying
around

a green tree
Novice User

···
Gap

Model-Preferred Prompts

(a)

Novice User Pompts

a painting of green tree house in
the middle of a lake, birds flying
around, Anton Fadeev,
comfortable, reasonable structure,
shock, high detail, abundant a
detailed matte painting, rossdraws
global illumination, neo-primitive
pastel colors, photorealism, 8k

Stable Diffusion

(b)

Figure 1: (a) We uncover an inconsistency in the word
length distribution between prompts in the text-to-image
training dataset and those provided by novice users, leading to a misalignment between model-preferred prompts and
novice user prompts. (b) Our proposed UF-FGTG continually rewrites prompts, allowing users to select results of interest based on their needs until satisfied.

Introduction

cial role in determining the quality of the generated images (Ko et al. 2023; Liu, Qiao, and Chilton 2022). Adjusting the prompt to better reflect the user’s intentions can lead
to superior results. This issue is particularly pronounced in
text-to-image models, as the capacity of their text encoders
is relatively limited, such as CLIP text encoder (Radford
et al. 2021) in Stable Diffusion. Empirical observations have
also shown that common user inputs are often insufficient
to produce aesthetically pleasing images using current models (Hao et al. 2023).
However, previous research has primarily focused on

Generative foundation models, including language models
and text-to-image models, can be prompted to follow user
instructions. Recent advancements in text-to-image synthesis such as Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al. 2022) and
Midjourney (Holz 2023) have facilitated the generation of
high-fidelity images based on text prompts. Concurrently,
recent studies have revealed that prompt design plays a cru* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2139

