The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Phoneme Hallucinator: One-Shot Voice Conversion via Set Expansion
Siyuan Shan, Yang Li, Amartya Banerjee, Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
{siyuanshan, yangli95, amartya1, joliva}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Voice conversion (VC) aims at altering a person’s voice to
make it sound similar to the voice of another person while
preserving linguistic content. Existing methods suffer from
a dilemma between content intelligibility and speaker similarity; i.e., methods with higher intelligibility usually have a
lower speaker similarity, while methods with higher speaker
similarity usually require plenty of target speaker voice data
to achieve high intelligibility. In this work, we propose a
novel method Phoneme Hallucinator that achieves the best of
both worlds. Phoneme Hallucinator is a one-shot VC model;
it adopts a novel model to hallucinate diversified and highfidelity target speaker phonemes based just on a short target
speaker voice (e.g. 3 seconds). The hallucinated phonemes
are then exploited to perform neighbor-based voice conversion. Our model is a text-free, any-to-any VC model that requires no text annotations and supports conversion to any unseen speaker. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations show
that Phoneme Hallucinator outperforms existing VC methods for both intelligibility and speaker similarity.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Comparison between kNN-VC (SOTA method)
and our proposed Phoneme Hallucinator on the LibriSpeech
test-clean split with varying target voice duration. Word Error Rate (WER↓) and Speaker Similarity (↑) respectively
measure intelligibility and speaker similarity. Shadowed areas indicate standard deviations of WER and Speaker Similarity computed on the test-clean split.

Voice conversion (VC) refers to the process of altering the
acoustic characteristics of a person’s voice (source) to another person’s voice (target) while preserving linguistic content (Mohammadi and Kain 2017). It has a wide range of
applications such as the creation of personalized voices for
those with speech disabilities, vocal identity protection, and
entertainment purposes on short-video platforms. Intelligibility and speaker similarity are two important criteria to
evaluate a VC model, the former measures the degree to
which spoken words or utterances in the converted speech
are clear and understandable to listeners, while the latter reflects the similarity between the converted speech and the
target speech. A good VC model should achieve high intelligibility and produce speech characteristics similar to target
speakers simultaneously.
There have been significant advances for VC (Li, Tu, and
Xiao 2023; Qian et al. 2019; Chou and Lee 2019; Casanova
et al. 2022) recently due to the development of novel generative models such as VAE, GAN, flow models, and diffusion
models. These methods adopt speaker embedding models

(Snyder et al. 2018) to extract target speaker characteristics
and rely on designs such as information bottlenecks (Qian
et al. 2019), normalization methods (Chou and Lee 2019),
or data augmentation (Li, Tu, and Xiao 2023) to convert
speech. However, they still struggle with speaker similarity
as shown in a recent work kNN-VC (Baas, van Niekerk, and
Kamper 2023). Instead of using a speaker embedding model
and complicated designs, kNN-VC introduces a simple approach. First, it extracts frame-wise self-supervised representations for the source and the target speech respectively.
As the representations contain both speaker characteristics
and phoneme information, conversion can be performed by
directly replacing each frame of the source representation
with its nearest neighbors in the target representation set. Fi-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14910

