The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Recommender Ecosystems: A Mechanism Design Perspective on Holistic
Modeling and Optimization
Craig Boutilier, Martin Mladenov, Guy Tenneholtz
Google Research
cboutilier@google.com, mmladenov@google.com, guytenn@google.com

Abstract

This leads to a set of research questions pertaining to such
RESs: (i) How should we analyze and model agent interactions in an RES? (ii) How do we optimize RS policies in the
face of such dynamic interactions? (iii) What criteria and
objectives should be used to guide this optimization?
In this research challenges paper, we outline a research
agenda intended to develop a deeper understanding of RESs,
and encourage research into methods, models and algorithms for the design of RS policies that maximize long-term
user utility and overall social welfare across the ecosystem.
An important part of this agenda is the incorporation of concepts, methods and perspectives from economic mechanism
design (MD) (Hurwicz 1960). MD has played at best a minor role in the design of RSs,1 in large part due to the local,
single-user focus typical of RS research. When moving to
RESs, modeling and optimization in the presence of interacting agents must account for: (i) their incentives and behaviors; (ii) potential information asymmetry; (iii) the potential
for strategic behavior; and (iv) tradeoffs in the value generated for different agents. The design of mechanisms (here,
RS policies) in such settings is precisely the province of MD.
However, the complexity of RESs poses unique challenges
for traditional MD, some of which we outline.
We begin by outlining a very stylized RS model to ground
our discussion, illustrating how local RS policies—those
that ignore RES interactions—degrade long-term user utility. Next we describe key concepts of classical MD, and how
these map to elements of an RES. We then argue that decidedly “nonstandard” MD models are needed, describing four
classes of research challenges: (1) we first outline the subtleties of agent incentives, preference modeling and elicitation; (2) we then discuss private information and its role in

Modern recommender systems (RSs) lie at the heart of complex recommender ecosystems (RESs) that couple the behavior of users, content providers, vendors, advertisers, and other
actors. Despite this, the focus of much RS research and deployment is on the local, myopic optimization of the recommendations made to individual users. This comes at a significant cost to the long-term utility that RSs generate for their
users. We argue that modeling the incentives and behaviors of
these actors, and the interactions among them induced by the
RS, is needed to maximize value and improve overall ecosystem health. Moreover, we propose the use of economic mechanism design (MD), largely overlooked in RS research, as a
framework for developing such models. That said, one cannot
apply “vanilla” MD to RES optimization out of the box—the
use of MD raises a number of subtle and interesting research
challenges. We outline a number of these here, emphasizing
the need to develop nonstandard approaches to MD that intersect with numerous areas of research, including preference
modeling, reinforcement learning and exploration, behavioral
economics, and generative AI, among others.

Why Model Recommender Ecosystems?
Recommender systems (RSs) play an ever-increasing role
in our daily lives, mediating the search for information, the
consumption of content, the purchase of goods and services,
and even communication between individuals. This ubiquity amplifies the importance of research into effective models and algorithms that ensure RSs act in the best interests
of their users and society at large. The majority of RS research and practice focuses on the local, myopic optimization of recommendations to individual users, in which a recommendation to one user does not consider the impact it
might have on other users or interested actors. This overlooks the fact that most RSs lie at the heart of complex recommender ecosystems (RESs), in which the RS mediates and
induces interactions between and among users, content creators, vendors, etc. These interactions, in turn, can impact—
both positively and negatively—the ability of the RS to make
high-quality recommendations in the future, a fact we illustrate below. (See Abdollahpouri et al. (2020) a comprehensive overview of the multiagent perspective on RSs.)

1
With notable exceptions, a few of which we list. Of special
note is work using MD, game-theoretic or equilibrium analysis
(Ben-Porat and Tennenholtz 2018; Mladenov et al. 2020; Hron
et al. 2022; Jagadeesan, Garg, and Steinhardt 2022; Kurland and
Tennenholtz 2022; Ben-Porat et al. 2022; Cen and Ilyas 2022; Liu,
Mania, and Jordan 2020). Also of relevance is work on fairness in
RSs (Akpinar et al. 2022; Asudeh et al. 2019; Basu et al. 2020;
Biega, Gummadi, and Weikum 2018; Heuss, Sarvi, and de Rijke
2022; Wu et al. 2022; Mehrotra et al. 2018); and work on phenomena such as filter bubbles, polarization, and popularity bias (Pariser
2011; Abebe et al. 2018; Amelkin, Bullo, and Singh 2017; Ribeiro
et al. 2020; Abdollahpouri et al. 2019).

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22575

