The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NeuSurf: On-Surface Priors for Neural Surface Reconstruction from Sparse Input
Views
Han Huang1,2 , Yulun Wu1,2 , Junsheng Zhou1,2 , Ge Gao1,2 * , Ming Gu1,2 , Yu-Shen Liu2
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{h-huang20, wu-yl22, zhoujs21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {gaoge, guming, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Input

Recently, neural implicit functions have demonstrated remarkable results in the field of multi-view reconstruction.
However, most existing methods are tailored for dense views
and exhibit unsatisfactory performance when dealing with
sparse views. Several latest methods have been proposed
for generalizing implicit reconstruction to address the sparse
view reconstruction task, but they still suffer from high training costs and are merely valid under carefully selected perspectives. In this paper, we propose a novel sparse view reconstruction framework that leverages on-surface priors to
achieve highly faithful surface reconstruction. Specifically,
we design several constraints on global geometry alignment
and local geometry refinement for jointly optimizing coarse
shapes and fine details. To achieve this, we train a neural network to learn a global implicit field from the on-surface points
obtained from SfM and then leverage it as a coarse geometric
constraint. To exploit local geometric consistency, we project
on-surface points onto seen and unseen views, treating the
consistent loss of projected features as a fine geometric constraint. The experimental results with DTU and BlendedMVS
datasets in two prevalent sparse settings demonstrate significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

Reconstruction

NeuS

SparseNeuS

VolRecon

Ours

Figure 1: Surface reconstruction results from sparse-view
images (large-overlap setting). The state-of-the-art methods
SparseNeuS (Long et al. 2022) and VolRecon (Ren et al.
2023) produce noisy and broken surfaces, while the results
of ours (NeuSurf) are detailed and complete.
geometries. These methods simultaneously optimize both
implicit geometry and neural radiance fields by minimizing
the discrepancy between the rendered and the ground truth
images. However, the well-optimized photometric loss may
distort the geometry due to shape-radiance ambiguity (Zhu
et al. 2023). Especially under the situation of sparse view
input, learning of the geometry field may further collapse.
As a remedy, some recent methods (Long et al. 2022; Ren
et al. 2023) partly solved the sparse view reconstruction by
introducing additional generalizable priors. They first learn
geometric priors from large-scale data, and then fine-tune
the implicit fields to achieve surface reconstruction in new
scenarios. However, the learned priors are only effective in
a fixed large-overlap sparse setting. Once the sparse view is
inconsistent with the pose distribution with the fixed setting,
the priors will be invalid and fail to bring robust guidance to
surface reconstruction. As a result, the performance of the
generalizable methods is dramatically limited in cases with
different sparse settings. Due to the long training time and
complex data pre-processing, it is unrealistic to train a prior
for each sparse setting.
In this paper, we propose a novel sparse view reconstruc-

Introduction
Surface reconstruction from multi-view images is a critical
task in the fields of computer vision and computer graphics. Traditional methods, like Multi-View Stereo (Campbell
et al. 2008; Schonberger and Frahm 2016; Yao et al. 2018),
leverage geometric consistency between images to compute
the depth map. Subsequently, they obtain the reconstructed
point cloud through depth map fusion. Nonetheless, the
conversion of this intermediate representation might introduce cumulative geometric errors. In scenarios with sparse
views, the MVS method faces challenges in reconstructing a
smooth and detailed surface due to the scarcity of matching
points and variations in viewing angles.
In recent years, neural rendering-based surface reconstruction methods (Yariv et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Yu
et al. 2022) have been widely used to improve the reconstruction results by producing smoother and more complete
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2312

