The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MM-TTS: Multi-Modal Prompt Based Style Transfer for Expressive
Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Wenhao Guan1 , Yishuang Li2 , Tao Li1 , Hukai Huang1 ,
Feng Wang1 , Jiayan Lin1 , Lingyan Huang1 , Lin Li2,3∗ , Qingyang Hong1 *
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China
3
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
whguan@stu.xmu.edu.cn,{lilin,qyhong}@xmu.edu.cn
2

A man says with
an extremely
happy tone.

Abstract
The style transfer task in Text-to-Speech (TTS) refers to the
process of transferring style information into text content to
generate corresponding speech with a specific style. However, most existing style transfer approaches are either based
on fixed emotional labels or reference speech clips, which
cannot achieve flexible style transfer. Recently, some methods
have adopted text descriptions to guide style transfer. In this
paper, we propose a more flexible multi-modal and style controllable TTS framework named MM-TTS. It can utilize any
modality as the prompt in unified multi-modal prompt space,
including reference speech, emotional facial images, and text
descriptions, to control the style of the generated speech in a
system. The challenges of modeling such a multi-modal style
controllable TTS mainly lie in two aspects: 1) aligning the
multi-modal information into a unified style space to enable
the input of arbitrary modality as the style prompt in a single system, and 2) efficiently transferring the unified style
representation into the given text content, thereby empowering the ability to generate prompt style-related voice. To
address these problems, we propose an aligned multi-modal
prompt encoder that embeds different modalities into a unified style space, supporting style transfer for different modalities. Additionally, we present a new adaptive style transfer method named Style Adaptive Convolutions (SAConv) to
achieve a better style representation. Furthermore, we design
a Rectified Flow based Refiner to solve the problem of oversmoothing Mel-spectrogram and generate audio of higher fidelity. Since there is no public dataset for multi-modal TTS,
we construct a dataset named MEAD-TTS, which is related to
the field of expressive talking head. Our experiments on the
MEAD-TTS dataset and out-of-domain datasets demonstrate
that MM-TTS can achieve satisfactory results based on multimodal prompts. The audio samples and constructed dataset
are available at https://multimodal-tts.github.io.

TTS

Content Text

Generated Speech based
on Any-modality Prompt

Figure 1: The general style transfer framework for TTS with
multi-modal prompts.

and FastSpeech2 (Ren et al. 2021) have emerged as viable solutions. In order to explore the impact of different
generative models on TTS systems, a series of TTS models based on generative models, including Glow-TTS (Kim
et al. 2020), Diff-TTS (Jeong et al. 2021), VITS (Kim, Kong,
and Son 2021) and ProDiff (Huang et al. 2022b), have been
developed. Moreover, to address the mismatch issue in the
Mel-spectrogram domain within the two-stage system, several end-to-end TTS models (Kim, Kong, and Son 2021;
Tan et al. 2022; Lei et al. 2023) have been proposed. Recently, novel approaches utilizing discrete tokens (Du et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023) for modeling text and speech sequences have emerged, leading to more natural and highfidelity speech synthesis. The applications of these technologies have progressively bridged the gap between the generation result of typical TTS system and human-level speech.
The essence of TTS is a cross-modal task that maps text
content to corresponding speech. However, simply generating speech corresponding to the text content is not enough.
We also hope that the generated speech has rich paralinguistic information such as speaker identity, language, emotion and prosody. A lot of expansion works are proposed
to achieve specific purposes. For example, multi-speaker
TTS (Casanova et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020), multilingual
TTS (Li et al. 2021a), style transfer (Huang et al. 2022a;
Guan et al. 2023a). We divide the style transfer tasks for
TTS into four main categories: emotion label based style
transfer, reference speech based style transfer, face based

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of deep learning, Text-toSpeech (TTS) has witnessed significant progress. The development of typical neural TTS systems presents diversification. To address the challenge of slow inference speed in
autoregressive models (Shen et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019), nonautoregressive systems like FastSpeech (Ren et al. 2019)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18117

