The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Reliable Learning in the Wild: Generalization and Adaptation
Huaxiu Yao
Department of Computer Science & School of Data Science and Society
UNC-Chapel Hill

The past decade has witnessed a remarkable success of
machine learning, particularly in settings where engineers
frame a task to a specific function, then collect a large
amount of human-labeled, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) examples to fit this function, and finally deploy the fitted function to make predictions on new examples within the same distribution. While this standardized
pipeline has proven to be immensely beneficial for fields
where data labeling is relatively inexpensive and the training
and deployment steps are under the same environment (e.g.,
classical image classification), it represents just a fraction of
the possible real-world scenarios.
To deploy ML systems in broader realistic scenarios (e.g.,
medical imaging, drug discovery), I assert that such systems should relax the i.i.d. assumption and not focus on only
one particular environment or task. Instead, we should design machine learning systems that are capable of acquiring
commonly shared knowledge from versatile source environments and tasks, while being generalizable and adaptable to
new environments and new tasks. Such capabilities will allow ML systems to be more seamlessly deployed to a wide
range of settings. For example, to apply ML in healthcare,
an entire engineering team is dedicated to deploying and
monitoring the ML systems: they need to regularly refresh
the models, mitigate racial bias between subpopulations, and
adapt the models to a new environment (e.g., a new hospital) with limited patient records. My research vision focuses
on automating this process by developing machine learning
systems that are reliable and widely generalizable to changing environments and tasks with limited supervision. To develop such systems, I made the following contributions.

temporal distribution shifts.
• Effective and Compositional Adaptation with Limited
Supervision. In addition to enhancing out-of-distribution
robustness, gathering a Small amount of target data for
adaptation offers an alternative approach to tackle changing environments. To ensure both effective and efficient
adaptation, I introduced several methods that (1) facilitate
compositional generalization and adaptation by extracting
relationships from historical observations or by integrating relationships derived from meta-data; (2) bolster reliable adaptation even in the face of imperfect observations;
and (3) enable precise adaptation through selective finetuning.
• Interdisciplinary Applications. Multiple of the aforementioned contributions have sound theoretical guarantees and provide guidance for building ML systems that
are more reliable to changing environments. To further
make such ML models more practical in reality, I collaborated with interdisciplinary stakeholders in computational biology, medicine, natural language processing,
computer science education, transportation, and hydrogeochemistry. We leveraged domain knowledge to reduce
the dependency on a substantial amounts of labeled data
and to make our models more robust to changing distributions, leading to data science applications in healthcare
and medicine, smart cities, and e-commerce.
Future Plans. The objective of my future research is to design the next generation of machine learning systems capable of continuously and reliably adapting to complex environments and tasks. Building upon our previous results,
there are three key areas and next steps essential for successfully achieving this goal: strengthening the power of
pre-training and fine-tuning, achieving unbiased and fair
learning, and performing continual learning under changing
environments. By making machine learning systems wellgeneralizable and adaptable, I believe that these systems can
be deployed everywhere with strong reliability. Such a wide
spectrum AI deployments further require expertise and collaboration in many interdisciplinary fields.

• Mitigating Spurious Correlation and Enhancing Outof-Distribution Robustness. For ML systems to perform
reliably under distribution shifts, it’s crucial to address the
spurious correlations present in the training data. To this
end, I developed a series of methods to (1) directly capture
environment-agnostic information through selective augmentation, and (2) posthoc rectify inaccurately predicted
results. In addition to these methodological contributions,
we introduced the Wild-Time benchmark, designed to promote the advancement of models that can adapt to natural
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22683

