The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Visual Hallucination Elevates Speech Recognition
Fang Zhang1,2 , Yongxin Zhu1,2 , Xiangxiang Wang3 , Huang Chen3 , Xing Sun3 , Linli Xu1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
Tencent YouTu Lab
{fangzhang,zyx2016}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{xenoswang,huaangchen,winfredsun}@tencent.com
linlixu@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

the standard approach. Meanwhile, the quality and intelligibility of speech recognition are highly vulnerable to noise
and may degrade dramatically with corrupted speech (Vincent et al. 2017; Kinoshita et al. 2020). Therefore, enhancing
noise robustness is crucial for ASR systems. Motivated by
the fact that invariant lip movements in a video are not affected by noisy environments, Audio Visual Speech Recognition (AVSR) is proposed to transcribe text from both audio and visual streams. Various studies have confirmed the
significant superiority of Audio-Visual (AV) models over
their Audio-only (AO) counterparts in diverse noisy scenarios (Son Chung et al. 2017; Petridis et al. 2018a,b), as well
as in handling overlapping speech (Rose et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2020).
However, the paired visual input is not always accessible
at inference time, which is quite common in practice. For
instance, the speaker may step away or eat food, the audio
and lips go out of sync, and the camera or recording devices can be turned off, etc. These significantly limit the applicability of these AVSR methods in real-life scenarios, as
most of them are unable to handle the absence of the visual
modality. The conventional approach to addressing the problem of missing modality generally involves modality translation, which reconstructs the absent modality by leveraging information from the available modalities. In the AVSR
task, it becomes more challenging due to the corruption of
the audio modality. Hegde et al. propose to generate accurate lip movements given noisy audio. By employing a pretrained speech-to-lip model called Wav2Lip (Prajwal et al.
2020) as a teacher network that generates precise lip movements from clean speech, a student network is subsequently
trained to imitate the teacher’s lip movements given noisy
speech. However, a major limitation of this method is its disregard of the high-level semantic relationships between the
audio and visual modalities, resulting in the generation of
pseudo videos with low information density. Therefore, an
additional visual encoder is required in (Hegde et al. 2021)
to extract the semantic features with a higher correlation to
the speech content.
In this paper, to effectively address the aforementioned
challenges regarding the visual modality dropout, we directly model the semantic relationships between the audio
and visual modalities in the discrete feature spaces rather
than in the real feature space. Firstly, we pretrain the au-

Due to the detrimental impact of noise on the conventional
audio speech recognition (ASR) task, audio-visual speech
recognition (AVSR) has been proposed by incorporating both
audio and visual video signals. Although existing methods
have demonstrated that the aligned visual input of lip movements can enhance the robustness of AVSR systems against
noise, the paired videos are not always available during inference, leading to the problem of the missing visual modality, which restricts their practicality in real-world scenarios.
To tackle this problem, we propose a Discrete Feature based
Visual Generative Model (DFVGM) which exploits semantic correspondences between the audio and visual modalities during training, generating visual hallucinations in lieu
of real videos during inference. To achieve that, the primary challenge is to generate the visual hallucination given
the noisy audio while preserving semantic correspondences
with the clean speech. To tackle this challenge, we start with
training the audio encoder in the Audio-Only (AO) setting,
which generates continuous semantic features closely associated with the linguistic information. Simultaneously, the visual encoder is trained in the Visual-Only (VO) setting, producing visual features that are phonetically related. Next, we
employ K-means to discretize the continuous audio and visual feature spaces. The discretization step allows DFVGM to
capture high-level semantic structures that are more resilient
to noise and generate visual hallucinations with high quality.
To evaluate the effectiveness and robustness of our approach,
we conduct extensive experiments on two publicly available
datasets. The results demonstrate that our method achieves
a remarkable 53% relative reduction (30.5%→12.9%) in
Word Error Rate (WER) on average compared to the current
state-of-the-art Audio-Only (AO) baselines while maintaining comparable results (< 5% difference) under the AudioVisual (AV) setting even without video as input.

Introduction
Recognizing speech is essential for natural human-computer
interactions, facilitating accessibility for individuals with
disabilities, and advancing various applications such as virtual assistants, transcription services, and voice-controlled
technologies. In recent years, end-to-end Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) based on deep learning (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013; Hinton et al. 2012) has become
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19542

