The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PoseGen: Learning to Generate 3D Human Pose Dataset with NeRF
Mohsen Gholami, Rabab Ward, Z. Jane Wang
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
{mgholami, rababw, zjanew}@ece.ubc.ca

Train Data

Abstract
This paper proposes an end-to-end framework for generating 3D human pose datasets using Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF). Public datasets generally have limited diversity in
terms of human poses and camera viewpoints, largely due to
the resource-intensive nature of collecting 3D human pose
data. As a result, pose estimators trained on public datasets
significantly underperform when applied to unseen out-ofdistribution samples. Previous works proposed augmenting
public datasets by generating 2D-3D pose pairs or rendering a large amount of random data. Such approaches either
overlook image rendering or result in suboptimal datasets for
pre-trained models. Here we propose PoseGen, which learns
to generate a dataset (human 3D poses and images) with a
feedback loss from a given pre-trained pose estimator. In
contrast to prior art, our generated data is optimized to improve the robustness of the pre-trained model. The objective of PoseGen is to learn a distribution of data that maximizes the prediction error of a given pre-trained model. As
the learned data distribution contains OOD samples of the
pre-trained model, sampling data from such a distribution
for further fine-tuning a pre-trained model improves the generalizability of the model. This is the first work that proposes NeRFs for 3D human data generation. NeRFs are datadriven and do not require 3D scans of humans. Therefore,
using NeRF for data generation is a new direction for convenient user-specific data generation. Our extensive experiments show that the proposed PoseGen improves two baseline models (SPIN and HybrIK) on four datasets with an average 6% relative improvement. Code is available at https:
//github.com/mgholamikn/PoseGen.

3DPW

Test Data

AGORA

Figure 1: There is a domain gap between the training data
used for training pose estimators and in-the-wild images
(OOD samples). Therefore, pre-trained models underperform when applied to OOD samples.

ual annotation and require an expensive setting for accurate measuring. Therefore, there are limited public datasets
and these datasets generally have limited diversity. Unfortunately, most pose estimation models that are trained on
public datasets underperform when applied to the out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples or samples in the tails of the
distribution. Figure 1 shows the domain gap between training and test data.
To address the above-mentioned concern, prior work proposed augmenting the publicly available datasets by generating 2D-3D human pose pairs (Gong, Zhang, and Feng 2021;
Gholami et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2020; Li and Pun 2023) or
by rendering synthetic images in more variant poses and appearances (Patel et al. 2021; Black et al. 2023). Augmenting a 3D dataset in the 2D-3D pose space is useful merely
for the models that accept 2D poses as input. Therefore, the

Introduction
3D human pose and mesh estimation, the task of reconstructing human pose in 3D space given a 2D image of the
person, is an ill-posed problem, and many data-driven approaches using deep learning were recently proposed (Liu,
Kortylewski, and Yuille 2023; Gholami et al. 2022a; Li et al.
2022). A dataset covering the distribution of possible human
poses, global orientation, appearance, and other attributes
would be large and difficult to capture in practice. In contrast to vision tasks such as classification and object detection, 3D human pose labels can not be obtained by manCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1905

