The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Constraint Latent Space Matters: An Anti-anomalous Waveform Transformation
Solution from Photoplethysmography to Arterial Blood Pressure
Cheng Bian* , Xiaoyu Li, Qi Bi, Guangpu Zhu, Jiegeng Lyu, Weile Zhang, Yelei Li, Zijing Zeng
OPPO Health Lab, Shenzhen, China
{biancheng, lixiaoyu5, zhuguangpu, lvjiegeng, zhangweile, liyelei1, zijing}@oppo.com, 2009biqi@163.com

Abstract

cal discomfort for patients, but also inconvenience to do longitudinal monitoring (Shaltis, Reisner, and Asada 2006b).
Compared to conventional BP measurement, invasive arterial blood pressure (ABP) can deliver thorough insights into
fluctuations in blood pressure, bearing significant essence
in disease diagnosis and medical research analysis (Avolio,
Butlin, and Walsh 2009). However, due to the high requirement for sensor positioning, it is rarely utilized in clinical
practice (Chen 2022).
Thanks to the rapid development of intelligent algorithms
and smart hardware, in recent years, photoplethysmography
(PPG) has emerged as a promising alternative for measuring
blood flow velocity (Lee et al. 2014). In fact, as a simple,
user-friendly and affordable approach, it has been widely
used in devices such as smartwatches and fitness trackers.
The key principle of PPG is to measure changes in the
blood flow velocity, which correlates with the artery pressure. It has been revealed through some research (Reisner
et al. 2008; Millasseau et al. 2000) that PPG and ABP signals share a common physiological factor, which can help
facilitate the potential for mutual conversion.
Owing to the rapid development of deep learning techniques(Pan et al. 2022; Bian et al. 2021, 2020; Bi et al.
2022), cutting-edge research in the field can be summarized
into two categories, namely, estimation from blood pressure
features (Miao et al. 2019; Wu, Pang, and Kwong 2014)
and waveform transformation (Mehrabadi et al. 2022; Vardhan et al. 2021; Ibtehaz et al. 2022). Estimation from blood
pressure features intends to predict systolic and diastolic
blood pressure, but it inevitably discards the ABP waveform
and results in the loss of cardiovascular disease details. It
not only degrades the accuracy of blood pressure estimation (Miao et al. 2019), but also negatively impacts its generalization to downstream tasks such as measuring cardiac
capacity (Mukkamala et al. 2006).
To comprehensively perceive the cardiac process (Mukkamala, Stergiou, and Avolio 2022) and measure the blood
pressure from PPG, a precise mapping from the peripheral blood volume changes to the arterial blood pressure
waveform is critical. Several studies attempted to address
this bottleneck by applying deep learning-based techniques
(e.g., convolutional networks (Brophy et al. 2021), variational autoencoders (VAE) (Shimazaki et al. 2018), Transformers (Chu et al. 2023), and generative adversarial net-

Arterial blood pressure (ABP) holds substantial promise for
proactive cardiovascular health management. Notwithstanding its potential, the invasive nature of ABP measurements
confines their utility primarily to clinical environments, limiting their applicability for continuous monitoring beyond
medical facilities. The conversion of photoplethysmography
(PPG) signals into ABP equivalents has garnered significant
attention due to its potential in revolutionizing cardiovascular disease management. Recent strides in PPG-to-ABP prediction encompass the integration of generative and discriminative models. Despite these advances, the efficacy of these
models is curtailed by the latent space shift predicament,
stemming from alterations in PPG data distribution across
disparate hardware and individuals, potentially leading to distorted ABP waveforms. To tackle this problem, we present
an innovative solution named the Latent Space Constraint
Transformer (LSCT), leveraging a quantized codebook to
yield robust latent spaces by employing multiple discretizing
bases. To facilitate improved reconstruction, the Correlationboosted Attention Module (CAM) is introduced to systematically query pertinent bases on a global scale. Furthermore, to
enhance expressive capacity, we propose the Multi-Spectrum
Enhancement Knowledge (MSEK), which fosters local information flow within the channels of latent code and provides
additional embedding for reconstruction. Through comprehensive experimentation on both publicly available datasets
and a private downstream task dataset, the proposed approach
demonstrates noteworthy performance enhancements compared to existing methods. Extensive ablation studies further
substantiate the effectiveness of each introduced module.

Introduction
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a common cause of morbidity and mortality especially among the elderly population. Hypertension is both a major cause and a key indicator of CVD. Thus, it is of great importance to do continuous and regular blood pressure monitoring. However, the
gold standard of measuring blood pressure (BP) is invasive
and requires expert intervention (Ogedegbe and Pickering
2010). Although cuff-based BP devices have been developed, they still give rise to not only physical and psychologi* Corresponding author: biancheng@oppo.com
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11087

