The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Label-Efficient Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation with
Unsupervised Meta-Training
Jianwu Li1,* , Kaiyue Shi1, * , Guo-Sen Xie2 , Xiaofeng Liu3 , Jian Zhang4 , Tianfei Zhou1,†
1

2

Beijing Institute of Technology
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Hohai University
4
University of Technology Sydney

Abstract

Following the standard setting of FSL, we organize data
into two sets: Dtrain as a labeled training dataset (e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015)) of base (seen) classes,
and Dtest = {S, Q} comprising of a small-sized support set S
and a query set Q. All categories in Dtest are new to Dtrain .
From the view of pre-trained knowledge transferring, FSL is
solved either by fine-tuning a Dtrain -pretrained model over S
and then testing the model on Q (Chen et al. 2019; Boudiaf
et al. 2021), or by meta-learning (Vilalta and Drissi 2002;
Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) to distill the knowledge of
multiple learning episodes sampled from Dtrain and then using the knowledge to improve learning performance on Dtest .
Despite their popularity, existing paradigms suffer two
major limitations when evolving from image- to pixel-wise
classification. First, it is hard to directly generalize the
knowledge discovered from ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.
2015) to solve semantic segmentation due to the inherent
gap between semantic concepts and pixel regions. To tackle
this, Dtrain is commonly provided with pixel-wise annotations, yielding a fully supervised scheme that is adopted by
almost all current approaches (Boudiaf et al. 2021; Nguyen
and Todorovic 2019; Tian et al. 2020; Boudiaf et al. 2021;
Min, Kang, and Cho 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Lang et al.
2022; Dong and Xing 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Yang et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2019b; Liu et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2021b,a).
However, these annotations are particularly onerous to collect, especially for the tasks where expertise knowledge
counts like medical imaging segmentation. Second, for the
de-facto meta-learning paradigm, the diversity of training
episodes – covering a distribution of related tasks – is critical
but tends to be inadequate due to i) the smaller scale of Dtrain
in segmentation (e.g., PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al.
2010)) against classification (e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky
et al. 2015)), and ii) the single level of semantic abstraction
revealed in most segmentation datasets (e.g., only objectlevel annotations are provided for VOC). This limits model
to learn from various scenarios in the real worlds (e.g., partlevel semantics like head or background semantics like sky).
These issues lead to an open question: can we use cheaper
and larger-scale unlabeled data to meta-learn FSS models?
To answer this, we challenge the status quo by presenting a pioneering study of unsupervised meta-training for
FSS, i.e., meta-learning from a variety of training episodes

The goal of this paper is to alleviate the training cost for
few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) models. Despite that
FSS in nature improves model generalization to new concepts
using only a handful of test exemplars, it relies on strong
supervision from a considerable amount of labeled training data for base classes. However, collecting pixel-level annotations is notoriously expensive and time-consuming, and
small-scale training datasets convey low information density
that limits test-time generalization. To resolve the issue, we
take a pioneering step towards label-efficient training of FSS
models from fully unlabeled training data, or additionally a
few labeled samples to enhance the performance. This motivates an approach based on a novel unsupervised metatraining paradigm. In particular, the approach first distills pretrained unsupervised pixel embedding into compact semantic clusters from which a massive number of pseudo metatasks is constructed. To mitigate the noise in the pseudo metatasks, we further advocate a robust Transformer-based FSS
model with a novel prototype-based cross-attention design.
Extensive experiments have been conducted on two standard
benchmarks, i.e., PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i , and the results
show that our method produces impressive performance without any annotations, and is comparable to fully supervised
competitors even using only 20% of the annotations. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/SSSKYue/UMTFSS.

Introduction
This paper is concerned with the problem of few-shot learning (FSL) for image semantic segmentation (Shaban et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022b), i.e., learning
to segment objects of unseen classes where each class has
only a few exemplars. Though we knew decades ago that, the
crux of FSL is to align with human and animal learning capability of transferring past knowledge or experience to understand new concepts (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2006),
not until the recent endeavors in deep learning (Sun et al.
2019; Dhillon et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2022b; Zhou et al.
2022a), had we yet reached a consensus on transferring visual knowledge in a DNN pre-trained over a large dataset.
* Equal contributions
†

Corresponding author: Tianfei Zhou
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3109

