The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedCSL: A Scalable and Accurate Approach to Federated Causal Structure
Learning
Xianjie Guo1 , Kui Yu1 * , Lin Liu2 , Jiuyong Li2
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
2
UniSA STEM, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia
xianjieguo@mail.hfut.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn, {lin.liu, jiuyong.li}@unisa.edu.au

Abstract

NOTEARS (Zheng et al. 2018) and DAG-GNN (Yu et al.
2019), utilize gradient descent to optimize a weight adjacency matrix to fit causal relationships among variables, providing a new research approach for causal structure learning.
In practice, the performance of a learning algorithm is
largely attributed to the number of available samples. To
improve the learning performance, users often try to collect
data from multiple decentralized sources and aggregate them
into a large-scale dataset. However, due to concerns about
data privacy, data owners are increasingly reluctant to share
their local data with others (Yang et al. 2019). To address
this issue, federated learning (FL) has emerged as a novel
learning paradigm that trains a model from locally stored
data while preserving privacy (McMahan et al. 2017).
Although there has been significant research in the field of
FL (Zhang et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023), the problem of causal
structure learning in the FL setting has received limited attentions so far. Some notable work in this area includes
NOTEARS-ADMM (Ng and Zhang 2022), FedDAG (Gao
et al. 2023) and FedPC (Huang et al. 2023a). Specifically,
NOTEARS-ADMM directly applies the distributed optimization algorithm ADMM (Boyd et al. 2011) to optimize
the NOTEARS method. FedDAG adopts a two-level structure for each local model, where the first level learns causal
structure by communicating with the server, and the second
level approximates variable relationships on each local data
for handling data heterogeneity. FedPC proposes a layerwise aggregation strategy for seamless integration of the PC
algorithm into the federated learning paradigm, which has
achieved promising performance on multiple types of data.

As an emerging research direction, federated causal structure
learning (CSL) aims at learning causal relationships from decentralized data across multiple clients while preserving data
privacy. Existing federated CSL algorithms suffer from scalability and accuracy issues, since they require computationally expensive CSL algorithms to be executed at each client.
Furthermore, in real-world scenarios, the number of samples
held by each client varies significantly, and existing methods
still assign equal weights to the learned structural information from each client, which severely harms the learning accuracy of those methods. To address these two limitations, we
propose FedCSL, a scalable and accurate method for federated CSL. Specifically, FedCSL consists of two novel strategies: (1) a federated local-to-global learning strategy that enables FedCSL to scale to high-dimensional data for tackling
the scalability issue, and (2) a novel weighted aggregation
strategy that does not rely on any complex encryption techniques while preserving data privacy for tackling the accuracy
issue. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, highdimensional synthetic datasets and a real-world dataset verify the efficacy of the proposed FedCSL method. The source
code is available at https://github.com/Xianjie-Guo/FedCSL.

Introduction
Causal structure learning (CSL) is a primary approach to uncover causal relationships among variables (Lampinen et al.
2022), and it has been widely applied in various fields including social science (Hedström and Ylikoski 2010), artificial intelligence (Glymour, Scheines, and Spirtes 2014; Wu
et al. 2023a), and systems biology (Lagani et al. 2016).
Related Work During the last decades, many CSL methods have been proposed (Vowels, Camgoz, and Bowden 2022), which can be broadly categorized into two
classes: combinatorial optimization-based and continuous
optimization-based methods. Methods in the former, such
as PC (Spirtes et al. 2000), GES (Chickering 2002) and
A* (Yuan, Malone, and Wu 2011), heuristically evaluate
the goodness-of-fit between the structural combinations over
variables and the dataset used to learn the optimal causal
structure. In contrast, methods in the latter class, such as

Challenges Existing federated CSL algorithms, however,
face the following two main challenges.
Challenge 1: Scalability issue. Learning a global causal
structure from a single data source is a computationally expensive task and is proven to be an NP-hard problem (Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2004). Often complex optimization methods or sophisticated neural network models
are required for achieving satisfactory performance (Yu et al.
2019). Existing federated CSL algorithms primarily rely on
global learning strategies, leading to significant computational challenges for these algorithms to deal with highdimensional data across multiple clients (data sources).
Challenge 2: Accuracy issue. In real-world scenarios, the

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12235

