The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedST: Federated Style Transfer Learning for Non-IID Image Segmentation
Boyuan Ma1 , Xiang Yin1 , Jing Tan1 , Yongfeng Chen1 , Haiyou Huang1 , Hao Wang1 , Weihua Xue2 ,
Xiaojuan Ban1,3,*
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering,
Shunde Innovation School, Key Laboratory of Intelligent Bionic Unmanned Systems, Institute for Advanced Materials and
Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
2
School of Materials Science and Technology, Liaoning Technical University, Liaoning 114051, China
3
Institute of Materials Intelligent Technology, Liaoning Academy of Materials, Shenyang 110004, China
banxj@ustb.edu.cn, mbytony@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning collaboratively trains machine learning
models among different clients while keeping data privacy
and has become the mainstream for breaking data silos. However, the non-independently and identically distribution (i.e.,
Non-IID) characteristic of different image domains among
different clients reduces the benefits of federated learning and
has become a bottleneck problem restricting the accuracy and
generalization of federated models. In this work, we propose
a novel federated image segmentation method based on style
transfer, FedST, by using a denoising diffusion probabilistic model to achieve feature disentanglement and image synthesis of cross-domain image data between multiple clients.
Thus it can share style features among clients while protecting structure features of image data, which effectively alleviates the influence of the Non-IID phenomenon. Experiments
prove that our method achieves superior segmentation performance compared to state-of-art methods among four different
Non-IID datasets in objective and subjective assessment. The
code is available at https://github.com/YoferChen/FedST.

Figure 1: The Non-IID phenomenon, caused by crossdomain data in different clients, is a common issue in practical FL-based segmentation tasks, such as the segmentation
of material microscopic images, medical images, and face
images. While the images of different clients have similar
underlying structures, the different stylistic appearance information among clients will result in worse performance
and slower convergence of an FL model.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has become one of the mainstream learning paradigms to take advantage of multiple data
sources while protecting data privacy (Li et al. 2019; Voigt
and Von dem Bussche 2017). In FL, clients collaboratively
train a model while keeping the training data decentralized
(Kairouz et al. 2021). It provides an opportunity for collaborative learning across multiple clients without infringing privacy (Jiang et al. 2020), which enables it to be used in many
fields where data security is of importance, such as medical
data analysis (Brisimi et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021) and wireless communication (Niknam, Dhillon, and Reed 2020).
Despite the rich opportunities offered by FL, nonindependent and identically distributed (Non-IID) data
among different clients often bring great challenges to FL,
resulting in worse performance and slower convergence
(Kopparapu and Lin 2020; Kopparapu, Lin, and Zhao 2020).
Especially, the Non-IID phenomenon, caused by crossdomain data on image segmentation tasks, is a common issue in practical FL applications, as shown in Figure 1. For instance, in materials science, researchers usually analyze dif-

ferent microscopic images of different materials. Austenitic
alloys are composed of iron and many other elements. It renders a different appearance compared to pure iron in microscopic images, even though they have similar grain structures. On the other hand, in clinical practice, doctors often
use different image modalities to observe the same human
tissue and organ, such as the CT and MRI image modality
of the liver. In natural images, cross-domain image segmentation under an FL framework is also common, such as face
segmentation of different races or different ages. In these
scenarios, while the images in all clients have similar underlying structures, the Non-IID problem caused by different stylistic appearances still hinders the performance of FL
model.
To solve the Non-IID problem in image segmentation
tasks in FL, our insight is that most participated clients generally have similar underlying structure information and different style information, as shown in Figure 1 and Figure
2. And the goal of image segmentation is to remove the
style information in the image and get the segmentation re-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4053

