The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PDE+: Enhancing Generalization via PDE with Adaptive Distributional Diffusion
Yige Yuan1,2 , Bingbing Xu1 * , Bo Lin3 , Liang Hou1,2 , Fei Sun1 , Huawei Shen1,2 * , Xueqi Cheng1,2 *
1
CAS Key Laboratory of AI Safety & Security,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{yuanyige20z, xubingbing, houliang17z, sunfei, shenhuawei, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, matbl@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The generalization of neural networks is a central challenge
in machine learning, especially concerning the performance
under distributions that differ from training ones. Current
methods, mainly based on the data-driven paradigm such
as data augmentation, adversarial training, and noise injection, may encounter limited generalization due to model nonsmoothness. In this paper, we propose to investigate generalization from a Partial Differential Equation (PDE) perspective,
aiming to enhance it directly through the underlying function of neural networks, rather than focusing on adjusting
input data. Specifically, we first establish the connection between neural network generalization and the smoothness of
the solution to a specific PDE, namely transport equation.
Building upon this, we propose a general framework that introduces adaptive distributional diffusion into transport equation
to enhance the smoothness of its solution, thereby improving generalization. In the context of neural networks, we put
this theoretical framework into practice as PDE+ (PDE with
Adaptive Distributional Diffusion) which diffuses each sample
into a distribution covering semantically similar inputs. This
enables better coverage of potentially unobserved distributions in training, thus improving generalization beyond merely
data-driven methods. The effectiveness of PDE+ is validated
through extensive experimental settings, demonstrating its superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our
code is available at https://github.com/yuanyige/pde-add.

1

12345

12345

12345

12345

12345

Figure 1: Model trained on six training distributions and
evaluated on five corresponding test distributions. Model
performs best on each test distribution is highlighted in red.

Introduction

The generalization of neural networks is a fundamental challenge in the field of machine learning. It refers to the ability of
neural networks to perform effectively under unobserved distributions, which may differ from those encountered during
the training process (Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002). Pursuing
superior generalization capability is essential as it ensures
model adaptability to diverse real-world scenarios, guaranteeing reliable predictions and decisions.
Existing approaches for improving generalization mainly
employ a data-driven paradigm (Emmert-Streib and Dehmer
2022), including data augmentation (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019), adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018), and
noise injection (Bishop 1995). In terms of implementation,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16614

they primarily enhance the training samples via manipulating the original input (Hendrycks et al. 2020; Madry et al.
2018) or transforming the hidden representations (Lim et al.
2022). However, such a data-driven paradigm usually cannot
guarantee reliable generalization capabilities on unobserved
distributions. Taking data augmentation as an illustration,
Fig. 1 shows that the model can only achieve satisfactory generalization performance when the training data is subjected
to augmentation similar to that of the testing data. Analogous phenomena are also frequently observed in adversarial
training and noise injection. For instance, adversarial training
can improve generalization on adversarial examples but often
comes with the cost of performance on natural data (Tsipras
et al. 2019). Likewise, while injecting Gaussian noise can
enhance generalization in the face of common corruptions, it
risks -overfitting (Klim, Maksym, and Nicolas 2022), i.e.,
overfitting to the particular Gaussian noise used in training.
The limited generalization capabilities of data-driven
paradigm is due to model irregularity (Wang et al. 2020), i.e.,
the function learned by the neural network is non-smoothness.
This may cause a problematic situation where semantically
similar samples are encoded distantly, resulting in incorrect predictions. To address the irregularity issue, several
approaches have been proposed to improve the smoothness
of models (Sokolic et al. 2017), which helps to tackle the distribution shift problem (Rodríguez et al. 2020). Among them,
Lipschitz continuity (Cisse et al. 2017) enforces smoothness
constraints on models through regularization or architectural
restrictions, e.g., gradient regularization (Drucker and Le Cun
1992) and spectral normalization (Miyato et al. 2018). However, such restrictions often come at the cost of expressive
power (Anil, Lucas, and Grosse 2019).

