The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Hardness Negative Sampling for Collaborative Filtering
Riwei Lai1, 2 , Rui Chen1 * , Qilong Han1 * , Chi Zhang1 , Li Chen2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{lai, ruichen, hanqilong, zhangchi20}@hrbeu.edu.cn, lichen@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Negative sampling is essential for implicit collaborative filtering to provide proper negative training signals so as to
achieve desirable performance. We experimentally unveil a
common limitation of all existing negative sampling methods
that they can only select negative samples of a fixed hardness
level, leading to the false positive problem (FPP) and false
negative problem (FNP). We then propose a new paradigm
called adaptive hardness negative sampling (AHNS) and discuss its three key criteria. By adaptively selecting negative
samples with appropriate hardnesses during the training process, AHNS can well mitigate the impacts of FPP and FNP.
Next, we present a concrete instantiation of AHNS called
AHNSp<0 , and theoretically demonstrate that AHNSp<0 can
fit the three criteria of AHNS well and achieve a larger lower
bound of normalized discounted cumulative gain. Besides,
we note that existing negative sampling methods can be regarded as more relaxed cases of AHNS. Finally, we conduct comprehensive experiments, and the results show that
AHNSp<0 can consistently and substantially outperform several state-of-the-art competitors on multiple datasets.

Figure 1: Average hardness of selected negative items in
RNS, DNS, and DENS on two Amazon datasets.

been proposed. The first line consists of static negative
sampling, which assigns a static probability for each candidate to be sampled. For example, random negative sampling (RNS) (Rendle et al. 2009) chooses uninteracted items
with equal probability, and popularity-biased negative sampling (PNS) (Chen et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019) adopts itempopularity-biased distributions to favor popular items. The
other line is hard negative sampling, such as dynamic negative sampling (DNS) (Zhang et al. 2013) and disentangled
negative sampling (DENS) (Lai et al. 2023), which focuses
on selecting hard negative samples that are difficult to be
distinguished from the positive samples with dynamic distributions. Such hard negative samples can provide more informative training signals so that user interests can be better
characterized (Xu et al. 2022).
Although the above two lines of works on negative sampling have achieved some promising results, we point out
that all these methods can only select negative samples of
a certain “hardness” level, preventing them from achieving
better performance. Without loss of generality, assume that
positive samples’ predicted scores are always positive. We
can define the hardness of a negative sample as its relative predicted score, i.e., the ratio of its predicted score to
that of its corresponding positive sample, in order to smooth
the influence of the simultaneous increase in the predicted
scores of all items during the training process. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, throughout the training process, RNS can only select easy negative samples with hardness around 0, while
DNS and DENS can only choose hard negative samples with
hardness around 0.3 and 0.4, respectively.
Unavoidably, these fixed hardness negative sampling
methods may suffer from two significant problems: (1) false
positive problem (FPP): as shown in the upper part of Fig. 2,

Introduction
Collaborative filtering (CF), as the most representative technique for recommendation, focuses on modeling user interests from observed user-item interactions (Wang et al. 2019;
He et al. 2020). In many cases, it is not always possible
to obtain a large amount of high-quality explicit feedback.
As a result, implicit feedback, such as clicks or purchases,
has become a default choice to train a CF model (Lai et al.
2023). In implicit feedback, each observed interaction normally indicates a user’s interest in an item and corresponds
to a positive training sample. As for negative training samples, a widely adopted approach is to randomly select some
uninteracted items for users. An implicit CF model is then
optimized to give positive samples higher scores than negative ones (Rendle et al. 2009).
Similar to many semi-supervised learning problems, existing implicit CF models highly rely on mining negative
samples to provide proper negative training signals. Without auxiliary data describing items, two lines of works have
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8645

