The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

C ONCEPT B ED: Evaluating Concept Learning Abilities of Text-to-Image Diffusion
Models
Maitreya Patel1 * , Tejas Gokhale2 , Chitta Baral1 , Yezhou Yang1
1

2

Arizona State University
University of Maryland Baltimore County

Abstract
The ability to understand visual concepts and replicate and
compose these concepts from images is a central goal for
computer vision. Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I)
models have lead to high definition and realistic image quality generation by learning from large databases of images
and their descriptions. However, the evaluation of T2I models
has focused on photorealism and limited qualitative measures
of visual understanding. To quantify the ability of T2I models in learning and synthesizing novel visual concepts (a.k.a.
personalized T2I), we introduce C ONCEPT B ED, a large-scale
dataset that consists of 284 unique visual concepts, and 33K
composite text prompts. Along with the dataset, we propose
an evaluation metric, Concept Confidence Deviation (CCD),
that uses the confidence of oracle concept classifiers to measure the alignment between concepts generated by T2I generators and concepts contained in target images. We evaluate visual concepts that are either objects, attributes, or styles, and
also evaluate four dimensions of compositionality: counting,
attributes, relations, and actions. Our human study shows that
CCD is highly correlated with human understanding of concepts. Our results point to a trade-off between learning the
concepts and preserving the compositionality which existing
approaches struggle to overcome. The data, code, and interactive demo is available at: https://conceptbed.github.io/

1

Figure 1: Visual concept learners such as textual inversion
models learn to “invert” a set of images (about a concept c)
into a text embedding V∗ , and then use this learned textual
concept in new text prompts to generate images of concept c
under different contexts and by performing novel compositions with other concepts. The proposed C ONCEPT B ED
dataset along with the evaluation metric CCD allows us to
comprehensively and quantifiably evaluate concept learning
abilities of text-to-image diffusion models.

Introduction

this has also sparked interest in visual concept learning
(a.k.a. personalized T2I) through the procedure of “image
inversion” – to translate one or many images corresponding
to a visual concept into a latent representation of that visual
concept. While earlier methods primarily explored image
inversion using generative adversarial networks (Xia et al.
2022), methods such as Textual Inversion (Gal et al. 2022)
and Dreambooth (Ruiz et al. 2022) combine image inversion with T2I – this has led to an effective way to quickly
learn concepts from a few images and reproduce them in
novel combinations and compositions with other concepts,
attributes, styles, etc. These methods aim to learn concepts
with minimal reference images by fine-tuning pre-trained
text-conditioned diffusion models (Figure 1). Therefore this
paradigm of T2I and image inversion is a powerful new way
of learning and reproducing concepts.
Within this paradigm of novel visual concept learning
via image inversion, two primary evaluation criteria have
emerged: (1) concept alignment, which assesses the corre-

Humans reason about the visual world by aggregating entities that they see into “visual concepts”: both cats and
elephants are animals, and both palms and pines
are trees. We use natural language to describe images
and things that we see. Although this type of visual concept learning is well-defined in human psychology (Murphy
2004), it remains elusive in the context of data-driven techniques capable of learning and reasoning from images and
their natural language descriptions.
Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models are trained to
translate natural language phrases into images that correspond to that input. High-quality T2I models, therefore,
serve as a link between human-level concepts (expressed in
natural language) and their visual representations and are
one way to reproduce visual concepts. On the other hand,
* Corresponding Author: maitreya.patel@asu.edu
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14554

