The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NN-Steiner: A Mixed Neural-Algorithmic Approach for the Rectilinear Steiner
Minimum Tree Problem
Andrew B. Kahng1, 2 , Robert R. Nerem3 , Yusu Wang3 , and Chien-Yi Yang2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego
3
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego
abk@ucsd.edu, rrnerem@ucsd.edu, yusuwang@ucsd.edu, chy036@ucsd.edu

2

Abstract

congestion, and timing delay. Hence, RSMT constructions
have been well-studied for interconnect planning and estimation, timing estimation, global routing, and other applications (Kahng et al. 2022).
The existence of an optimal RSMT whose Steiner points
are restricted to the Hanan grid, which is formed by intersections of all axis-parallel lines passing through points in V ,
was established in (Hanan 1966). The RSMT problem was
subsequently shown to be NP-complete (Garey and Johnson
1977). It was proved by (Hwang 1976) that the rectilinear
minimum spanning tree gives a 3/2-approximation. Results
leveraging Zelikovsky’s method led to a 5/4-approximation
(Berman et al. 1994). Theoretically, the best known approximation algorithm for RSMT in fixed-dimensional space
is obtained via the PTAS (polynomial-time approximation
scheme) proposed by Arora (Arora 1998). Arora’s method
provides a (1 + ε)-approximation for a range of problems,
such as the traveling salesperson problem, in addition to
RSMT. Unfortunately, while this algorithm runs in time
polynomial in the number of points, its time complexity depends exponentially on 1ε and, consequently, the method has
yet to find use in practice.
On one hand, given the importance of the RSMT problem in chip design and its intractability, a large number of
heuristics have been developed in the VLSI CAD community, aiming to improve the quality of RSMT computation
with practical running time, e.g., (Kahng, Măndoiu, and Zelikovsky 2003; Liu, Chen, and Young 2021; Hu et al. 2006;
Fallin et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2005; Cinel and Bazlamaçci
2008). The current state-of-the-art (SOTA) heuristic algorithm is FLUTE (Wong and Chu 2008; Chu and Wong 2007,
2005; Chu 2004). FLUTE constructs a lookup table encoding optimal RSMTs for all instances smaller than 10 and
then constructs RSMTs for larger pointsets by partitioning
the input pointset into subsets of size q or smaller, and combining the optimal trees over these subsets. FLUTE has been
shown to be very close to optimal for small pointsets and
is widely used in practice in VLSI CAD. GeoSteiner (Juhl
et al. 2018) is the SOTA algorithm for exact RSMT computation, and is an integer linear programming approach.
On the other hand, with recent success of deep neural networks (NNs) in many applications, there has been a surge
in use of NNs to help tackle combinatorial optimization
problems (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021; Khalil et al.

Recent years have witnessed rapid advances in the use of
neural networks to solve combinatorial optimization problems. Nevertheless, designing the “right” neural model that
can effectively handle a given optimization problem can be
challenging, and often there is no theoretical understanding
or justification of the resulting neural model. In this paper,
we focus on the rectilinear Steiner minimum tree (RSMT)
problem, which is of critical importance in IC layout design
and as a result has attracted numerous heuristic approaches
in the VLSI literature. Our contributions are two-fold. On
the methodology front, we propose NN-Steiner, which is a
novel mixed neural-algorithmic framework for computing RSMTs that leverages the celebrated PTAS algorithmic
framework of Arora to solve this problem (and other geometric optimization problems). Our NN-Steiner replaces key algorithmic components within Arora’s PTAS by suitable neural components. In particular, NN-Steiner only needs four
neural network (NN) components that are called repeatedly
within an algorithmic framework. Crucially, each of the four
NN components is only of bounded size independent of input size, and thus easy to train. Furthermore, as the NN component is learning a generic algorithmic step, once learned,
the resulting mixed neural-algorithmic framework generalizes to much larger instances not seen in training. Our NNSteiner, to our best knowledge, is the first neural architecture of bounded size that has capacity to approximately solve
RSMT (and variants). On the empirical front, we show how
NN-Steiner can be implemented and demonstrate the effectiveness of our resulting approach, especially in terms of generalization, by comparing with state-of-the-art methods (both
neural and non-neural based).

1

Introduction

Given a set of points V in Rd , a Steiner tree spanning V
is a tree whose vertex set is V together with a set of additional points S ⊂ Rd called Steiner points. A rectilinear
Steiner tree is a Steiner tree where all edges are axis-parallel.
Given V , the rectilinear Steiner minimum tree (RSMT) problem aims to compute the rectilinear Steiner tree spanning V
with smallest possible cost, defined as the total length of all
edges in the tree. The RSMT problem has fundamental importance in VLSI physical design, as minimum wiring is correlated with key figures of merit including dynamic power,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13022

