The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic, and Cultural Rules:
Compilation and Reasoning
Nicolas Troquard, Martina De Sanctis, Paola Inverardi,
Patrizio Pelliccione, Gian Luca Scoccia
Gran Sasso Science Institute
L’Aquila, Italy
firstname.surname@gssi.it
Abstract

3. create a preliminary normative rule,
4. identify conflicts between normative rule and robot/system capabilities, and if any:
• resolve normative conflicts,
• refine normative rule,
• go back to 4.
In the process, philosophers, ethicists, lawyers, domain experts, and other professionals can extract normative rules
from a specific domain. These rules are referred to as SLEEC
rules, which stands for social, legal, ethical, empathetic, and
cultural rules. These rules are aimed to play a crucial role for
facilitating the creation of tools and instruments to engineer
systems that conform adequately to the established norms,
while also aiding in the verification of existing system behavior. However, the SLEEC rules obtained through elicitation are typically expressed in natural language. Therefore,
to be employed effectively in AI systems, these rules need
to be translated into a machine-interpretable language. Fortunately, the elicitation process generates rules that are characterized by a clear pattern.
The primary objective of this paper is to present a systematic approach for translating SLEEC rules into classical logic, thereby facilitating their seamless integration in
SLEEC-sensitive AI systems.
Example 1 Townsend et al. (2022) describe the rule elicitation methodology on a running example in the domain of
nursing homes. At the end of the iterative process, the following SLEEC rule is obtained.
When the user tells the robot to open the curtains then
the robot should open the curtains, UNLESS the user
is ‘undressed’ in which case the robot does not open
the curtains and tells the user ‘the curtains cannot be
opened while you, the user, are undressed,’ UNLESS
the user is ‘highly distressed’ in which case the robot
opens the curtains.
For clarity of exposition and concision, we will follow suit
and illustrate the present work with this running example.

The rise of AI-based and autonomous systems is raising concerns and apprehension due to potential negative repercussions stemming from their behavior or decisions. These systems must be designed to comply with the human contexts in
which they will operate. To this extent, Townsend et al. (2022)
introduce the concept of SLEEC (social, legal, ethical, empathetic, or cultural) rules that aim to facilitate the formulation, verification, and enforcement of the rules AI-based and
autonomous systems should obey. They lay out a methodology to elicit them and to let philosophers, lawyers, domain
experts, and others to formulate them in natural language.
To enable their effective use in AI systems, it is necessary
to translate these rules systematically into a formal language
that supports automated reasoning. In this study, we first conduct a linguistic analysis of the SLEEC rules pattern, which
justifies the translation of SLEEC rules into classical logic.
Then we investigate the computational complexity of reasoning about SLEEC rules and show how logical programming
frameworks can be employed to implement SLEEC rules in
practical scenarios. The result is a readily applicable strategy for implementing AI systems that conform to norms expressed as SLEEC rules.

1

Introduction

The rise of AI-based and autonomous systems is posing
concerns and causing apprehension due to potential negative repercussions arising from their behavior or decisions.
Philosophers, engineers, and legal experts are actively exploring avenues to regulate the actions of these systems,
which are becoming increasingly integrated into our daily
existence. One way to exert control over these systems involves the identification of rules dictating their conduct during collaboration and interaction with humans.
Normative multi-agent systems (Chopra et al. 2018) are
systems where the behaviour of the participants is affected
by the norms established therein. Townsend et al. (2022)
propose a methodology to elicit normative rules for multiagent systems. The process follows an iterative approach
which is:
1. identify high-level normative principles,
2. identify robot/system capabilities,

Compilation and Reasoning. This paper delves into an
exploration of the suitability of classical logic and logic programming frameworks for representing and reasoning about
Townsend et al.’s rules, emphasizing the simplicity and practicality of these approaches within this context.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22385

