The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ModWaveMLP: MLP-Based Mode Decomposition and Wavelet Denoising Model
to Defeat Complex Structures in Traffic Forecasting
Ke Sun1 , Pei Liu1 , Pengfei Li2 , Zhifang Liao1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
2
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
224712262, 224712142@csu.edu.cn, li-pf22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zfliao@csu.edu.cn

Abstract

Zhang et al. 2018). Presently, graph neural network (GNN)
dominates this field, excelling in modeling complex spatiotemporal correlations(Jiang and Luo 2022; Jin et al. 2022).
The transformer(Vaswani et al. 2017), a prevailing sequential data architecture, also showcases remarkable performance in traffic prediction tasks(Jiang et al. 2023a). Recently, influenced by the ‘Large Model’ trend, researchers
favor Large Model for intricate tasks like traffic prediction.
On the one hand,unlike high-dimensional image(Han
et al. 2022) and natural language(Vaswani et al. 2017) data,
traffic timing data is simpler—sequential numerical information recorded at distinct time points(Tran et al. 2020).
Nonetheless, its periodic features and spatial dependencies
lead to complex temporal extraction designs. Recent approaches employ intricate models such as graph neural networks and transformer(Yan, Ma, and Pu 2021; Chen et al.
2022) variants to capture these traffic features. However, this
complexity entails larger parameters and greater hardware
demands for training and inference, prompting the query:
Are such elaborate models essential for this data? Doubts
about transformers’ effectiveness in time series prediction
have surfaced. Works like MTS-Mixer(Li et al. 2023b) and
the MLP-based traffic prediction model proposed by Oreshkin(Oreshkin et al. 2021; Shao et al. 2022a) challenge
transformer and graph neural network-based models. These
studies demonstrate the prowess of simpler MLP models
in time series prediction(Zeng et al. 2023). Given MLP’s
simplicity, training efficiency, and inference efficiency, it
might be a promising direction for traffic prediction, offering
strong performance without the complexity of transformers
and graph neural networks.
On the other hand, in order to improve the performance
of traffic prediction, new structures based on complex architectures have been designed to apply to unique characteristics, which further brings about model complexity and redundancy, such as new traffic features based on urban zones
and delayed diffusion influenced by road factors(Jiang et al.
2023a). However, these features might not universally apply
and the original data might lack corresponding information
for these features(Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017). Therefore,
manually selected features for prediction may lead to poor
generalization of the model or even partial feature selection
that increases the complexity of the model with no improvement in performance. In addition, previous researchers have

Traffic prediction is the core issue of Intelligent Transportation Systems. Recently, researchers have tended to use complex structures, such as transformer-based structures, for
tasks such as traffic prediction. Notably, traffic data is simpler to process compared to text and images, which raises
questions about the necessity of these structures. Additionally, when handling traffic data, researchers tend to manually design the model structure based on the data features,
which makes the structure of traffic prediction redundant
and the model generalizability limited. To address the above,
we introduce the ‘ModWaveMLP’—A multilayer perceptron (MLP) based model designed according to mode decomposition and wavelet noise reduction information learning concepts. The model is based on simple MLP structure, which achieves the separation and prediction of different traffic modes and does not depend on additional features introduced such as the topology of the traffic network.
By performing experiments on real-world datasets METRLA and PEMS-BAY, our model achieves SOTA, outperforms GNN and transformer-based models, and outperforms
those that introduce additional feature data with better generalizability, and we further demonstrate the effectiveness
of the various parts of the model through ablation experiments. This offers new insights to subsequent researchers
involved in traffic model design. The code is available at:
https://github.com/Kqingzheng/ModWaveMLP.

Introduction
Time series prediction, a cornerstone of time series analysis, entails forecasting future values using historical sequential data patterns and trends. In the specific context of traffic
prediction(James 2022), which includes forecasting traffic
flow, speed, and demand, its applications span route planning, vehicle scheduling, and congestion management(Lee
et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023a).
Neural networks have been extensively used in time series forecasting due to their powerful function-fitting capabilities(Zhou et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2021). Early on, convolutional neural network (CNN) captured spatial dependencies in grid-based traffic data, while recurrent neural network (RNN) learned temporal dynamics(Wu et al. 2018;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9035

