The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From Coarse to Fine: A Distillation Method for Fine-Grained Emotion-Causal
Span Pair Extraction in Conversation
Xinhao Chen1,2 , Chong Yang2 , Changzhi Sun3 , Man Lan1, 4 * , Aimin Zhou1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, P.R. China
2
AntGroup, Shanghai, P.R. China
3
Innovation Center for AI and Drug Discovery, East China Normal University, Shanghai, P.R. China
4
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, P.R. China
xinhaochen@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, yangchong.yang@antgroup.com,
changzhisun@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {mlan,amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
H1

Abstract
We study the problem of extracting emotions and the causes
behind these emotions in conversations. Existing methods
either tackle them separately or jointly model them at the
coarse-grained level of emotions (fewer emotion categories)
and causes (utterance-level causes). In this work, we aim to
jointly extract more fine-grained emotions and causes. We
construct a fine-grained dataset FG-RECCON, includes 16
fine-grained emotion categories and span-level causes. To further improve the fine-grained extraction performance, we propose to utilize the casual discourse knowledge in a knowledge distillation way. Specifically, the teacher model learns
to predict causal connective words between utterances, and
then guides the student model in identifying both the finegrained emotion labels and causal spans. Experimental results
demonstrate that our distillation method achieves the stateof-the-art performance on both RECCON and FG-RECCON
dataset.

You know, you did a really good job this
year, but I'd like to emphasize the way you
handled the project when it went wrong.

RECCON: happy
New: praise

H2

Well, I'm glad to hear that my work
has been recognized by you.

RECCON: happy

New: happy

New Response

I am very sorry for the deterioration

misunderstanding of the project!
CGEmotion

FGEmotion

Causal
Utterance

Causa
l Span

RECCON (Poria et al. 2022),
KEC (Li et al. 2022)

—

—

√

—

MGSAG (Bao et al. 2022),
UECA (Zheng et al. 2022),
ECPE-2D (Ding et al. 2022)

√

—

√

—

GoEmotions (Dem et al. 2022)

√

√

—

—

Ours

√

√

√

√

Methods

Figure 1: Illustration of the ECSPE task.including a conversation example from the RECCON, and a comparison of the
focus of our work with that of past studies.

Introduction
The task of Emotion-Causal Span Pair Extraction (ECSPE)
in conversations aims to recognize the emotions expressed
by speakers in a dialogue and identify the causal spans (i.e.,
emotion cause) for non-neutral utterances. As illustrated in
Figure 1(I), the speaker demonstrates an emotion (denoted
as happy) in H2 in the dialogue, the cause of which is highlighted in H1. The ECSPE task is essential for many downstream tasks, such as empathy generation (Kim and Kim
2021) and emotional support (Liu et al. 2021b).
Existing works present various frameworks for emotion
recognition (Shen et al. 2021; Ghosal et al. 2019; Zhu
et al. 2021) and cause reasoning (Poria et al. 2021), most
of which can be grouped into two categories according to
the task objectives, as shown in Fig 1: (a) Cause identification only: such as RECCON (Poria et al. 2021) and
KEC (Li et al. 2022). These approachs required the construction of an emotion recognition module in a pipeline for
real-world scenarios, which suffers from error propagation.
(b) Joint identification of emotions and causes: such as

MGSAG (Bao et al. 2022), UECA (Zheng et al. 2022) and
ECPE-2D (Ding, Xia, and Yu 2020), etc. These approachs
performed coarse-grained Emotion-Cause Pair Extraction
(ECPE), which have faced two major challenges. On the one
hand, previous works only focused on the six basic emotions
defined by Emkan (Ekman 1992). Utterances with nuanced
emotions beyond these six categories defy straightforward
classification. For example in Figure 1, the genuine emotion for H1 is praise but it has to be labeled as happy. Although GoEmotions (Demszky et al. 2020) have proposed
fine-grained datasets for comments, the lack of a conversation reasoning dataset with fine-grained emotions hinders
the progress. On the other hand, most of previous work (Li
et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022) mainly focused on utterancelevel cause recognition. However, informal dialogue utterances may contain multiple clauses with different emotions.
Not all clauses within the utterance contribute equally to the
reasoning of the emotion, and some may even lead to confusion and misunderstanding as shown in Figure 1(I)(Gao
et al. 2021). Therefore, identifying causal spans within utterances in dialogues is essential. Overall, there is a progres-

* Man Lan is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17790

