The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Unfolded Network with Intrinsic Supervision for Pan-Sharpening
Hebaixu Wang, Meiqi Gong, Xiaoguang Mei, Hao Zhang, Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{wanghebaixu, meixiaoguang, zhpersonalbox, jyma2010}@gmail.com, meiqigong@whu.edu.cn

𝐏𝐀𝐍

Abstract
Existing deep pan-sharpening methods lack the learning of
complementary information between PAN and MS modalities in the intermediate layers, and exhibit low interpretability due to their black-box designs. To this end, an interpretable deep unfolded network with intrinsic supervision for
pan-sharpening is proposed. Building upon the observation
degradation process, it formulates the pan-sharpening task
as a variational model minimization with spatial consistency
prior and spectral projection prior. The former prior requires
a joint component decomposition of PAN and MS images to
extract intrinsic features. By being supervised in the intermediate layers, it can selectively provide high-frequency information for spatial enhancement. The latter prior constrains
the intensity correlation between MS and PAN images derived from physical observations, so as to improve spectral
fidelity. To further enhance the transparency of network design, we develop an iterative solution algorithm following
the half-quadratic splitting to unfold the deep model. It rigorously adheres to the variational model, significantly enhancing the interpretability behind network design and efficiently
alternating the optimization of the network. Extensive experiments demonstrate the advantages of our method compared
to state-of-the-arts, showcasing its remarkable generalization
capability to real-world scenes. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/Baixuzx7/DISPNet.

𝐏𝐀𝐍

Task-irrelevant

Task
Loss

𝐌𝐒

Hypothetical
Loss

𝐌𝐒

Task-biased

Task-biased
(a)
𝐏𝐀𝐍

(b)
𝐏𝐀𝐍

Black-box design
Task
Loss

𝐌𝐒

Task-irrelevant

Interpretable
design

Task Loss
...

Task-biased 𝐌𝐒
Task Loss

Intrinsic Supervision

(c)
Data
flow

Convolution
layer

Stage
block

(d)
Task-relevant
Gradients backward
Intermediate
computation
feature
Forward computation

Figure 1: The overview of the four pan-sharpening training
paradigm methods. (a) Supervised Learning; (b) Unsupervised Learning; (c) Progressive Supervision Learning; (d)
Ours. Task loss supervises the output by references, and the
hypothetical loss constrains the output with the source images based on simplified physical observations.

Introduction

while incorporating the spectral richness of the MS image.
For the excellent characteristics of HRMS images, the pansharpening technology holds significant importance across
diverse domains (Casagli et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023).
The traditional pan-sharpening techniques can be divided into three categories, namely Component Substitution (CS), Multi-resolution Analysis (MRA), and Modelbased Optimization (MO). CS methods utilize reversible
projection algorithms to extract specific components from
both the MS and PAN images, which are then replaced or
merged to restore the pan-sharpened image (Ghahremani
and Ghassemian 2016). In the MRA approaches, a multiresolution decomposition technique is employed to extract
high-frequency spatial details from the PAN image. These
details are subsequently injected into the resized MS component, aiming to enhance the spatial textures (Alparone et al.
2016). These two types of methods involve a trade-off between the preservation of spectral accuracy and the enhance-

Due to the physical limitations in satellite systems, it is difficult to achieve high spatial resolution and high spectral resolution simultaneously through the equipped sensors (Zhang
et al. 2022). Fortunately, the captured multi-spectral (MS)
images and panchromatic (PAN) images offer complementary information, making it possible to generate ideal highresolution multi-spectral (HRMS) images. Specifically, MS
images offer rich spectral information across multiple bands
with lower spatial resolution. The single-band PAN images
possess higher spatial resolution at the expense of spectral richness. In this context, pan-sharpening has emerged
as a viable technique (Vivone et al. 2020), which aims to
fuse the MS image and PAN image to produce HRMS images that preserve the spatial resolution of the PAN image,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5419

