The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multilevel Attention Network with Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation for
Drug-Target Prediction
Zhousan Xie1 , Shikui Tu1 * , Lei Xu1,2*
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Guangdong Institute of Intelligence Science and Technology, Zhuhai, Guangdong 519031, China
{waduhek, tushikui, leixu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

docking and molecular simulations have shown great success in drug discovery (Cheng et al. 2012), but they are limited for being computationally resource-intensive and relying on the availability of 3D structure data. Methods including machine learning approaches (Faulon et al. 2008; Wang
et al. 2021; Meng et al. 2017) perform well in predicting
DTIs for known drug-target pairs, while their performance
tends to deteriorate when applied to unknown structures.
With the accumulation of a large volume of labeled DTI
data in recent years, numerous end-to-end deep learning
methods have been employed for predicting DTIs. From
the perspective of the input data, DTI prediction models
can be categorized into three groups. The first category
is sequence-based models, where drugs are represented as
Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System (SMILES)
or Extended-Connectivity Fingerprints (ECFP) and proteins are treated as amino acid sequences. These models
commonly utilize 1D-CNN (Öztürk, Özgür, and Ozkirimli
2018; Lee, Keum, and Nam 2019; Zhao et al. 2022; Bai
et al. 2023) or transformer architectures (Chen et al. 2020;
Huang et al. 2022). Secondly, drug molecules can be represented as graphs (Nguyen et al. 2021; Tsubaki, Tomii, and
Sese 2019; Huang et al. 2022) or images (Qian, Wu, and
Zhang 2022). Similarly, protein distance maps can serve as
a 2D abstraction of their 3D structural information (Zheng
et al. 2020), enabling the use of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2008), Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016), and Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). Thirdly, the incorporation of 3D
structural data such as protein pockets (Yazdani-Jahromi
et al. 2022) or molecular dynamics simulation data (Wu et al.
2022) undoubtedly improves model performance and reduces computational complexity compared to those directly
using the whole 3D data as input (Wallach, Dzamba, and
Heifets 2015; Stepniewska-Dziubinska, Zielenkiewicz, and
Siedlecki 2018). Nonetheless, they are still constrained by
the limited availability of 3D structural data.
Despite these remarkable development, deep learning
methods still face several challenges. The first challenge is
the restriction of limited labeled data. Previous works have
primarily concentrated on utilizing the available labeled data
and learn interactions on a few thousands labeled drug-target
pairs (Öztürk, Özgür, and Ozkirimli 2018; Lee, Keum, and
Nam 2019; Tsubaki, Tomii, and Sese 2019; Nguyen et al.

Prediction of drug-target interactions (DTIs) is a crucial step
in drug discovery, and deep learning methods have shown
great promise on various DTI datasets. However, existing approaches still face several challenges, including limited labeled data, hidden bias issue, and a lack of generalization
ability to out-of-domain data. These challenges hinder the
model’s capacity to learn truly informative interaction features, leading to shortcut learning and inferior predictive performance on novel drug-target pairs. To address these issues, we propose MlanDTI, a semi-supervised domain adaptive multilevel attention network (Mlan) for DTI prediction.
We utilize two pre-trained BERT models to acquire bidirectional representations enriched with information from unlabeled data. Then, we introduce a multilevel attention mechanism, enabling the model to learn domain-invariant DTIs at
different hierarchical levels. Moreover, we present a simple
yet effective semi-supervised pseudo-labeling method to further enhance our model’s predictive ability in cross-domain
scenarios. Experiments on four datasets show that MlanDTI
achieves state-of-the-art performances over other methods
under intra-domain settings and outperforms all other approaches under cross-domain settings. The source code is
available at https://github.com/CMACH508/MlanDTI.

Introduction
The process of drug discovery and development is characterized by its high costs and time-intensive nature. Bringing a first-in-class drug to the market typically requires several decades and substantial investments amounting to billions of dollars. Predicting drug-target interactions (DTIs)
is an essential task in drug discovery and drug repurposing
(Paul et al. 2010), which hold significant value in the field of
biomedicine (Agamah et al. 2020; Ezzat et al. 2019). While
traditional techniques like high-throughput screening, proteomics, and genomics remain prevalent, they suffer from
time and cost constraints due to the vast chemical space
involved (Broach, Thorner et al. 1996; Bakheet and Doig
2009).
In order to expedite the drug discovery process and reduce costs, virtual screening (VS) techniques have been developed to aid in silico (Rifaioglu et al. 2019). Molecular
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

329

