The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LRS: Enhancing Adversarial Transferability through Lipschitz Regularized
Surrogate
Tao Wu1 , Tie Luo1 * , Donald C. Wunsch II2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Missouri University of Science and Technology
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology
{wuta, tluo, dwunsch}@mst.edu

Abstract
The transferability of adversarial examples is of central importance to transfer-based black-box adversarial attacks. Previous works for generating transferable adversarial examples focus on attacking given pretrained surrogate models
while the connections between surrogate models and adversarial trasferability have been overlooked. In this paper, we
propose Lipschitz Regularized Surrogate (LRS) for transferbased black-box attacks, a novel approach that transforms
surrogate models towards favorable adversarial transferability. Using such transformed surrogate models, any existing
transfer-based black-box attack can run without any change,
yet achieving much better performance. Specifically, we impose Lipschitz regularization on the loss landscape of surrogate models to enable a smoother and more controlled optimization process for generating more transferable adversarial examples. In addition, this paper also sheds light on the
connection between the inner properties of surrogate models and adversarial transferability, where three factors are
identified: smaller local Lipschitz constant, smoother loss
landscape, and stronger adversarial robustness. We evaluate our proposed LRS approach by attacking state-of-theart standard deep neural networks and defense models. The
results demonstrate significant improvement on the attack
success rates and transferability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/TrustAIoT/LRS.

Figure 1: The loss landscape of original and transformed surrogate model: corrugated vs. smooth. Transformed surrogate
models offer more stable input gradients and make the generated AE more generalizable, enabling more potent attacks.
including model structures, parameters and weights, data
and loss functions used to train the models. Therefore, they
can add such perturbation to benign images that the loss on
the perturbed images is maximized. An efficient way to do
this involves iteratively incorporating the gradient of the loss
w.r.t. input (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry
et al. 2018) into perturbations. White-box attacks are important for evaluating and developing robust models, and also
serve as the backend method for many black-box attacks.
However, they are limited by the requirement of having to
know the internal details of target models. In the black-box
setting, adversaries do not need insider knowledge about target models other than their external interface (type/format of
input and output), and usually take two types of approaches,
query-based or transfer-based. Query-based approaches attempt to estimate the gradients of a target model’s loss function by querying it with a large number of input samples and
inspecting the outputs. Such frequent queries make it easy
to be detected and defend them. On the other hand, transferbased approaches use surrogate models to generate transferable AE which can attack a wide range of models, and
hence are more effective to form stronger and more covert
black-box attacks.
The transferability of AE is of central importance for
transfer-based attacks. Unveiling principles of adversarial
transferability provides insight into understanding the working mechanism of DNNs and designing robust DNNs. In the
literature, several directions have been explored to improve
the transferability of AE from the attackers’ perspective.
These include optimization-based (Dong et al. 2018; Lin
et al. 2020), smoothing-based (Dong et al. 2019; Xie et al.
2019; Wu et al. 2019; Guo, Li, and Chen 2020), attention-

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are the workhorse of a broad
variety of computer vision tasks and have made resounding
success in classification (He et al. 2016a), object detection
(Redmon et al. 2016), segmentation (Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox 2015), and so on. However, they are vulnerable
to adversarial examples (AE), which are data samples that
are perturbed by human-imperceptible noises yet result in
misclassifications. This lack of adversarial robustness can
cause serious safety and security consequences in applications such as healthcare, neuroscience, finance, self-driving,
and reconnaissance, to name a few.
Adversarial attacks are commonly launched under two
settings, white-box and black-box attacks. In the white-box
setting, adversaries have full knowledge of target models,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6135

