The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Closing the Gap: Achieving Better Accuracy-Robustness Tradeoffs against
Query-Based Attacks
Pascal Zimmer1 , Sébastien Andreina2 , Giorgia Azzurra Marson2 , Ghassan Karame1
1

Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany
2
NEC Labs Europe, Germany
{pascal.zimmer, ghassan.karame}@rub.de, {sebastien.andreina, giorgia.marson}@neclab.eu

Abstract

mimics many real-world applications, such as existing machine learning as a service (MLaaS) deployments. Querybased black-box attacks can be categorized as score-based
or decision-based attacks (Chen, Jordan, and Wainwright
2020; Maho, Furon, and Le Merrer 2021). The former category assumes that the adversary can acquire information
from the output score of the classifier, while the latter mimics a more realistic setting where the adversary has only access to the top-1 label of the classifier’s prediction.
In an attempt to design defensive strategies to mitigate
adversarial inputs, an arms race has been sparked in the
community. A number of proposals have explored the use
of randomization to improve adversarial robustness. While
most randomization strategies are ineffective in the original
white-box setting (Athalye et al. 2018; Athalye, Carlini, and
Wagner 2018), recent findings suggest that embedding random noise within the input could effectively mitigate querybased black-box attacks (Byun, Go, and Kim 2022). As
such, while randomization-based defenses could be effective in thwarting query-based attacks, they inevitably damage the classifier’s clean accuracy (Tsipras et al. 2019). For
example, the random noise defense (Qin et al. 2021) (using
the noise level σ = 0.07 as a hyperparameter) can increase
the robust accuracy against PopSkipJump (PSJA) (SimonGabriel, Sheikh, and Krause 2021), the strongest known
black-box attack against randomized classifiers, by almost
13% at the cost of a significant drop of almost 30% in main
task accuracy in the CIFAR-10 dataset.
In this work, we set forth to establish a stronger accuracyrobustness tradeoff against query-based black-box attacks
by leveraging a different hyperparameter grounded on the
confidence τ of classifying incoming inputs. Our approach
relies on the insight that, while query-based attacks necessarily need to explore low-confidence regions, most genuine inputs are classified with relatively high confidence. By
cleverly differentiating between low- and high-confidence
regions, we aim to establish a strong tradeoff between adversarial robustness and the model’s clean accuracy. To do
so, we propose to obstruct the search for adversarial inputs by activating a defensive layer (e.g., based on input
randomization) only for low-confidence inputs. That is, we
propose to only activate (existing) randomization defenses
on inputs x such that maxi fi (x) < τ , for an appropriate
threshold 0 ≤ τ ≤ 1, while high-confidence inputs (with

Although promising, existing defenses against query-based
attacks share a common limitation: they offer increased robustness against attacks at the price of a considerable accuracy drop on clean samples. In this work, we show how to
efficiently establish, at test-time, a solid tradeoff between robustness and accuracy when mitigating query-based attacks.
Given that these attacks necessarily explore low-confidence
regions, our insight is that activating dedicated defenses, such
as random noise defense and random image transformations,
only for low-confidence inputs is sufficient to prevent them.
Our approach is independent of training and supported by
theory. We verify the effectiveness of our approach for various existing defenses by conducting extensive experiments
on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. Our results confirm that our proposal can indeed enhance these defenses by
providing better tradeoffs between robustness and accuracy
when compared to state-of-the-art approaches while being
completely training-free.

Introduction
Even though deep neural networks (DNNs) are currently enjoying broad applicability, they are unfortunately fragile to
(easily realizable) manipulations of their inputs. Namely, adversarial samples pose a severe threat to the deployment of
DNNs in safety-critical applications, e.g., autonomous driving and facial recognition. For instance, in the context of
image classification, adversarial samples can deceive a classifier with carefully crafted and visually almost imperceptible perturbations applied to an input image. This results in
(un-)targeted misclassification with identical semantic information to the human eye.
Initially, all attack strategies were designed in the socalled white-box model (Biggio et al. 2013; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), in which the attacker has full
domain knowledge, e.g., model architecture, trained parameters, and training data. More recent attacks, such as querybased attacks, consider a better grounded and more realistic threat model, in which the attacker has no knowledge
about the classifier’s internals and training data and is only
able to observe outputs to supplied inputs, i.e., through oracle access to the classifier. This black-box setting faithfully
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21859

