The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Revisiting Document-Level Relation Extraction
with Context-Guided Link Prediction
Monika Jain1 , Raghava Mutharaju1 , Ramakanth Kavuluru2 , Kuldeep Singh3
1

Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi, India
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, United States
3
Cerence GmbH and Zerotha Research, Germany
{monikaja, raghava.mutharaju@iiitd.ac.in}, ramakanth.kavuluru@uky.edu, kuldeep.singh1@cerence.com
2

Abstract

coreference-mediated). However, even after considering features between the entity pairs and executing the reasoning
process, DocRE is still hard due to the latent and unspecific/imprecise contexts.
Consider the sentence in Figure 1 and its labeled relation
applies to jurisdiction (Congress, US) from the DocRED
dataset (Yao et al. 2019). Even with the inclusion of multihop and co-reference reasoning, inferring the correct relation becomes challenging because the relation depends on
multiple sentences and cannot be identified based on the language used in the sentence.

Document-level relation extraction (DocRE) poses the challenge of identifying relationships between entities within a
document as opposed to the traditional RE setting where a
single sentence is input. Existing approaches rely on logical reasoning or contextual cues from entities. This paper reframes document-level RE as link prediction over a knowledge graph with distinct benefits: 1) Our approach combines
entity context with document-derived logical reasoning, enhancing link prediction quality. 2) Predicted links between
entities offer interpretability, elucidating employed reasoning. We evaluate our approach on three benchmark datasets:
DocRED, ReDocRED, and DWIE. The results indicate that
our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art models
and suggests that incorporating context-based link prediction
techniques can enhance the performance of document-level
relation extraction models.

Introduction
Relation extraction is the task of extracting semantic links
or connections between entities from an input text (Baldini Soares et al. 2019). In recent years, document-level relation extraction problem (DocRE) evolved as a new subtopic
due to the widespread use of relational knowledge in knowledge graphs (Yu et al. 2017) and the inherent manifestation
of cross-sentence relations involving multi-hop reasoning.
Thus, as compared to traditional RE, DocRE has two major challenges: subject and object entities in a given triple
might be dispersed across distinct sentences, and certain entities may have aliases in the form of distinct entity mentions. Consequently, the signal (hints) needed for DocRE
is not confined to a single sentence. A common approach
to solve this problem is by taking the input sentences and
constructing a structured graph based on syntactic trees, coreferences, or heuristics to represent relation information between all entity pairs (Nan et al. 2020). A graph neural network model is applied to the constructed graph, which performs multi-hop graph convolutions to derive features of the
involved entities. A classifier uses these features to make
predictions (Zhang et al. 2020). Another approach (Xu,
Chen, and Zhao 2021a, 2023) explicitly models the reasoning process of different reasoning skills (e.g., multi-hop,

Figure 1: A partial document and labeled relation from DocRED. Blue color represents concerned entities, pink color
represents other mentioned entities, and yellow color denotes the sentence number.
For these kinds of sentences, external context (knowledge) can play a vital role in helping the model capture more
about the involved entities. For the above example, using the
Wikidata knowledge base (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014)
and WordNet (Miller 1995), we can get details, such as the
entity types, synonyms, and other direct and indirect relations between entities (if they exist) on the Web. For these
kinds of sentences, external context (knowledge) can play a
vital role in helping the model capture more about the involved entities. For the above example, using the Wikidata

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18327

