The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Which Is More Effective in Label Noise Cleaning, Correction or Filtering?
Gaoxia Jiang1 , Jia Zhang1 , Xuefei Bai1 , Wenjian Wang1 * , Deyu Meng2
2

1
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China
School of Mathematics and Statistics and Ministry of Education Key Lab of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
jianggaoxia@sxu.edu.cn, 774924867@qq.com, {baixuefei, wjwang}@sxu.edu.cn, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

to removing suspicious noisy samples (Song, Kim, and Lee
2019; Wu et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022).
It has been verified that both correction and filtering are
effective in dealing with label noises, but they still have respective drawbacks, such as wrong corrections and overcleaning. Specifically, empirical results show that there are
still about 15% wrong labels after correction on CIFAR-100
with 40% uniform noise (Wu et al. 2021). Although the label
purity (correct rate) of the filtered dataset approaches 100%,
at least 10% of correctly labeled samples are removed in filtering on CIFAR-100 with 30% pair flip noise (Wu et al.
2020). Most noise cleaning methods adopt one of the correction and filtering modes to generate robust models. How
to select a proper cleaning mode is a fundamental problem
in label noise cleaning.
To the best of our knowledge, correction and filtering have
not been systematically compared and integrated from the
error-bound perspective. We investigate three key properties:
(1) Effectiveness. Which could yield a lower generalization
error (bound)? (2) Applicability. What kind of noise is the
cleaning mode suitable for handling? (3) Hyper-parameter
insensitivity. Which is less sensitive to an imperfect hyperparameter? The motivation is to guide the selection of cleaning modes for designing effective algorithms.
Error bound is a remarkable theoretical tool in machine
learning. However, existing bounds are mainly deduced in
noise-free conditions. We rebuild the error bound in learning
with uniform label noise to compare correction and filtering.
Based on this, we develop the first fusion cleaning framework of correction and filtering (FCF) to deal with different
types of suspicious labels. The main contributions are:

Most noise cleaning methods adopt one of the correction and
filtering modes to build robust models. However, their effectiveness, applicability, and hyper-parameter insensitivity
have not been carefully studied. We compare the two cleaning modes via a rebuilt error bound in noisy environments. At
the dataset level, Theorem 5 implies that correction is more
effective than filtering when the cleaned datasets have close
noise rates. At the sample level, Theorem 6 indicates that confident label noises (large noise probabilities) are more suitable to be corrected, and unconfident noises (medium noise
probabilities) should be filtered. Besides, an imperfect hyperparameter may have fewer negative impacts on filtering than
correction. Unlike existing methods with a single cleaning
mode, the proposed Fusion cleaning framework of Correction and Filtering (FCF) combines the advantages of different
modes to deal with diverse suspicious labels. Experimental
results demonstrate that our FCF method can achieve stateof-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Large-scale datasets with sufficient and accurate labels make
supervised learning models, especially for deep neural networks, possible to update their parameters and achieve excellent performances. However, these labels may be noisy
due to insufficient information or inexperienced labeling
workers (Han et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2021). The label noise
usually misguides the model training and raises the generalization risk (Frenay and Verleysen 2014). Cleaning noisy
data and learning with label noise are critical and challenging in supervised learning and complicated real applications (Wu et al. 2020; Shu, Yuan, and Meng 2023).
Noise-robust modeling and noisy data cleaning are the
main directions in dealing with label noise. Compared with
noise-robust modeling, noisy data cleaning is more generic
and flexible. It has been considered the most competitive
noisy-label learning strategy (Kim et al. 2021; Li, Socher,
and Hoi 2020). The noisy labels can be cleaned by correction or filtering. The former aims to change the corrupted
labels to the true ones (Zheng et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021;
Li and Sun 2022; Li et al. 2023). And noise filtering refers

• Rebuilt error bound for label noise. We rebuild the error bound for uniform label noise (Theorem 1) which
can be viewed as a generalized form of the conventional
bound. It provides a powerful tool to analyze the performance in learning with label noise.
• Cleaning mode comparison and selection. Correction
and filtering are compared in effectiveness, applicability,
and hyper-parameter insensitivity. It tells us what kind of
noise is suitable for correction/filtering.
• Fusion of correction and filtering. We develop a feasible fusion cleaning framework as shown in Figure 1 by
combining the advantages of correction and filtering.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12866

