The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A PAC Learning Algorithm for LTL and Omega-Regular Objectives in MDPs
Mateo Perez, Fabio Somenzi, Ashutosh Trivedi
University of Colorado Boulder
Mateo.Perez@colorado.edu, Fabio@colorado.edu, Ashutosh.Trivedi@colorado.edu

Abstract

Tennenholtz 2003). These algorithms usually provide sample bounds in terms of the sizes of the state and action spaces
of the Markov decision process (MDP) that describes the environment. Finite-horizon and discounted reward both have
the property that small changes to the transition probabilities result in small changes to the value of the objective. This
means that the sample complexity is independent of the transition probabilities of the MDP. However, infinite-horizon,
undiscounted objectives, like average reward and the satisfaction of LTL properties, are sensitive to small changes
in probabilities, and their sample complexity is dependent
on some knowledge of the transition probabilities. Hence,
if only the number of state/action pairs is allowed, alongside 1/ε and 1/δ, as parameters, creating a PAC learning algorithm for undiscounted, infinite-horizon properties is not
possible. Specifically for LTL, this has been observed by
Yang, Littman, and Carbin (2021) and Alur et al. (2022).
Example 1 (Intractability of LTL). Figure 1 is an example
adopted from (Alur et al. 2022) that shows the number of
samples required to learn safety properties is dependent on
some property of the transition structure. The objective in
this example is to stay in the initial state s0 forever. This
can be specified with average reward (a reward of 1 in s0
and 0 otherwise) and in LTL (φ = Gs0 ). The transition
from s0 to s1 under action b must be observed in order to
distinguish action a from action b and produce an ε-optimal
policy for any ε < 1. The number of samples required to see
this transition with high probability is affected by the value
of p. Smaller values of p means it takes longer for a policy’s
finite behavior to match its infinite behavior.
This non-PAC-learnability may motivate using discounted
versions of LTL (Littman et al. 2017; Alur et al. 2023),
which, however, have significantly different semantics from

Linear temporal logic (LTL) and ω-regular objectives—a superset of LTL—have seen recent use as a way to express
non-Markovian objectives in reinforcement learning. We introduce a model-based probably approximately correct (PAC)
learning algorithm for ω-regular objectives in Markov decision processes (MDPs). As part of the development of our
algorithm, we introduce the ε-recurrence time: a measure of
the speed at which a policy converges to the satisfaction of
the ω-regular objective in the limit. We prove that our algorithm only requires a polynomial number of samples in the
relevant parameters, and perform experiments which confirm
our theory.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) is a
sampling-based approach to learning a controller. Inspired
by models of animal behavior, the RL agent interacts with
the environment and receives feedback on its performance
in terms of a numerical reward, that either reinforces or
punishes certain behaviors. This learning approach has produced impressive results in recent years (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2016). However, failure to precisely capture
designer’s intent in reward signals can lead to the agent
learning unintended behavior (Amodei et al. 2016). As a
response, formal languages—in particular linear temporal
logic (LTL) and ω-regular languages—have been proposed
to unambiguously capture learning objectives. While these
languages have enjoyed practical success (Hahn et al. 2019;
Bozkurt et al. 2020), their theoretical complexity is relatively underexplored. In this paper we propose and study a
model-based probably approximately correct RL algorithm
for LTL and ω-regular languages.
Probably approximately correct (PAC) learning (Valiant
1984) is a framework for formalizing guarantees of a learning algorithm: a user selects two parameters, ε > 0 and
δ > 0. A learning algorithm is then (efficient) PAC if it returns a solution that is ε close to optimal with probability at
least 1 − δ using a polynomial number of samples. In RL,
many PAC learning algorithms have been proposed for both
discounted and average reward (Kakade 2003; Brafman and

a

s0

p

b

s1

a, b

1−p
Figure 1: Example adopted from (Alur et al. 2022). The objective is to remain in s0 forever.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21510

