The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SasWOT: Real-Time Semantic Segmentation Architecture Search
WithOut Training
Chendi Zhu1 * , Lujun Li2 * , Yuli Wu3 , Zhengxing Sun 1†
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Institute of Imaging and Computer Vision, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
chendi.zhu@smail.nju.edu.cn, lilujunai@gmail.com, yuli.wu@lfb.rwth-aachen.de, szx@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we present SasWOT, the first training-free Semantic segmentation Architecture Search (SAS) framework
via an auto-discovery proxy. Semantic segmentation is widely
used in many real-time applications. For fast inference and
memory efficiency, Previous SAS seeks the optimal segmenter by differentiable or RL Search. However, the significant computational costs of these training-based SAS limit
their practical usage. To improve the search efficiency, we
explore the training-free route but empirically observe that
the existing zero-cost proxies designed on the classification
task are sub-optimal on the segmentation benchmark. To address this challenge, we develop a customized proxy search
framework for SAS tasks to augment its predictive capabilities. Specifically, we design the proxy search space based
on the some observations: (1) different inputs of segmenter
statistics can be well combined; (2) some basic operators can
effectively improve the correlation. Thus, we build computational graphs with multiple statistics as inputs and different
advanced basis arithmetic as the primary operations to represent candidate proxies. Then, we employ an evolutionary
algorithm to crossover and mutate the superior candidates in
the population based on correlation evaluation. Finally, based
on the searched proxy, we perform the segmenter search without candidate training. In this way, SasWOT not only enables
automated proxy optimization for SAS tasks but also achieves
significant search acceleration before the retrain stage. Extensive experiments on Cityscapes and CamVid datasets demonstrate that SasWOT achieves superior trade-off between accuracy and speed over several state-of-the-art techniques. More
remarkably, on Cityscapes dataset, SasWOT achieves the performance of 71.3% mIoU with the speed of 162 FPS.

Figure 1: Kendall-Tau (left) and Spearman (right) Correlation on Segmentation Benchmark.
Method

Algorithm

Cost

Auto-DeepLab (Liu et al. 2019)
GAS (Li et al. 2019a)
CAS (Zhang et al. 2019)
DF-Seg (Li et al. 2019b)
FasterSeg (Chen et al. 2020)
SasWOT

Gradient
Graph
Gradient
Pruning
Gradient
Training-free

72 h
160 h
200 h
9600 h
48 h
1.8 h

Table 1: Comparison of various SAS methods. h indicates
GPU-hour.

them suffer from high computational resources and memory budget (Liu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Li and Jin 2022;
Li et al. 2023a, 2022b,a, 2020; Li 2022; Shao et al. 2023).
To tackle this challenge, there are many lightweight architectural engineering(Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla
2017; Paszke et al. 2016) proposed to allow the segmenter
to deploy on resource-constrained platforms. For example,
ICNet (Zhao et al. 2018a) uses an image cascade network
to incorporate multi-resolution inputs. BiSeNet (Yu et al.
2018a), and DFANet allocate more computing resources to
feature fusion modules and utilize lightweight backbones.
However, this architectural engineering also requires extensive expert design and lots of experimental trial and error.
To address this issue, some semantic segmentation architecture search (SAS) methods have been presented by
building search spaces and processes. For example, AutoDeepLab (Liu et al. 2019) first searches cell structures and
the downsampling strategy to optimize resolutions. CAS
(Zhang et al. 2019) searches for operators and decoders in

Introduction
Semantic segmentation predicts pixel-level annotations of
different semantic categories for an image. Recently, many
real-time applications like autonomous driving require segmenter to fast inference on low-power edge devices and
guarantee satisfied performance. However, many state-ofthe-art models stack convolutions, fuse multi-scale features
and increase the resolution to improve accuracy, making
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7722

