The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Memory Asymmetry Creates Heteroclinic Orbits to Nash Equilibrium
in Learning in Zero-Sum Games* †
Yuma Fujimoto1,2,3 , Kaito Ariu3,4 , Kenshi Abe3,5
1
SOKENDAI
The University of Tokyo
3
CyberAgent
4
KTH
5
The University of Electro-Communications
fujimoto yuma xa@cyberagent.co.jp
2

Abstract

learning algorithms have been proposed, such as replicator dynamics (Börgers and Sarin 1997; Hofbauer, Sigmund
et al. 1998; Sato, Akiyama, and Farmer 2002) and gradient
ascent (Singh, Kearns, and Mansour 2000; Zinkevich 2003;
Bowling and Veloso 2002; Bowling 2004). The dynamics of
these algorithms have undergone extensive study, with findings indicating a cycling behavior around the Nash equilibrium in zero-sum games (Mertikopoulos and Sandholm
2016; Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras 2018).
Memory, referring to an agent’s ability to alter their subsequent actions based on past decisions, is often incorporated
into games to investigate more sophisticated strategies and
explore the decision-making processes of real agents, such
as humans. Such memory introduces greater complexity and
diversity into games. A celebrated study in economics has
shown that players with memory can take various strategies in the Nash equilibria (Fudenberg and Maskin 2009).
Indeed, in prisoner’s dilemma games, agents with memory
can achieve cooperation (Axelrod and Hamilton 1981) and
asymmetric degree of cooperation (Fujimoto and Kaneko
2019), even though those without memories cannot cooperate in the Nash equilibrium. Memory also complicates learning dynamics such as chaotic dynamics (Barfuss, Donges,
and Kurths 2019) and divergence from the Nash equilibrium (Fujimoto, Ariu, and Abe 2023) in zero-sum games.
In recent years, theoretical approaches to games with memories have garnered significant interest (Barfuss 2020; Usui
and Ueda 2021; Meylahn, Janssen et al. 2022; Ueda 2023).
How learning changes depending on memory length is
an interesting question in games with memory. Indeed, this
question has often been discussed in prisoner’s dilemma
games. It is reported that agents with longer memories can
cooperate more cleverly (Hilbe et al. 2017; Murase and Baek
2020). Furthermore, the difference in payoffs emerges between agents with different memory lengths in various learning algorithms such as Q-learning (Sandholm and Crites
1996), coupled replicator dynamics (Fujimoto and Kaneko
2021), and evolutionary dynamics (Baek et al. 2016; Schmid
et al. 2022). This suggests that an asymmetry in memory capacities could potentially lead to the exploitation of the opponent’s payoff in zero-sum games. Despite this, the impact

Learning in games considers how multiple agents maximize
their own rewards through repeated games. Memory, an ability that an agent changes his/her action depending on the history of actions in previous games, is often introduced into
learning to explore more clever strategies and discuss the
decision-making of real agents like humans. However, such
games with memory are hard to analyze because they exhibit complex phenomena like chaotic dynamics or divergence from Nash equilibrium. In particular, how asymmetry in memory capacities between agents affects learning in
games is still unclear. In response, this study formulates a
gradient ascent algorithm in games with asymmetry memory
capacities. To obtain theoretical insights into learning dynamics, we first consider a simple case of zero-sum games. We
observe complex behavior, where learning dynamics draw a
heteroclinic connection from unstable fixed points to stable
ones. Despite this complexity, we analyze learning dynamics
and prove local convergence to these stable fixed points, i.e.,
the Nash equilibria. We identify the mechanism driving this
convergence: an agent with a longer memory learns to exploit the other, which in turn endows the other’s utility function with strict concavity. We further numerically observe
such convergence in various initial strategies, action numbers,
and memory lengths. This study reveals a novel phenomenon
due to memory asymmetry, providing fundamental strides in
learning in games and new insights into computing equilibria.

Introduction
Learning in games discusses how players learn their strategies through repeated games (Fudenberg and Levine 1998).
Here, whether or not players learn their optimal strategies,
called Nash equilibrium, is a nontrivial problem because
each player’s optimal strategy depends on the strategy of
his/her opponent. This problem becomes further exacerbated
in zero-sum games, where both the players conflict in their
utility functions. In order to approach this problem, various
* The full version is at https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13619
†
The codes that we used are available at https://github.com/
CyberAgentAILab/learning games with-memory asymmetry
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17398

