The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Segment beyond View: Handling Partially Missing Modality for Audio-Visual
Semantic Segmentation
Renjie Wu, Hu Wang, Feras Dayoub, Hsiang-Ting Chen
The University of Adelaide
{renjie.wu, hu.wang, feras.dayoub, tim.chen}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Augmented Reality (AR) devices, emerging as prominent
mobile interaction platforms, face challenges in user safety,
particularly concerning oncoming vehicles. While some solutions leverage onboard camera arrays, these cameras often
have limited field-of-view (FoV) with front or downward perspectives. Addressing this, we propose a new out-of-view semantic segmentation task and Segment Beyond View (SBV),
a novel audio-visual semantic segmentation method. SBV
supplements the visual modality, which miss the information
beyond FoV, with the auditory information using a teacherstudent distillation model (Omni2Ego). The model consists
of a vision teacher utilising panoramic information, an auditory teacher with 8-channel audio, and an audio-visual student that takes views with limited FoV and binaural audio as
input and produce semantic segmentation for objects outside
FoV. SBV outperforms existing models in comparative evaluations and shows a consistent performance across varying
FoV ranges and in monaural audio settings.

Figure 1: Pedestrian in the image can only see objects in
the field of view (FoV) but hear the oncoming out-of-view
vehicle and determine its general location and what kind of
vehicle it is. The right image describes our novel task, with
only FoV and binaural audio, the model can semantically
segment the in- and out-of-view vehicles in the panorama.

Introduction

obstacles along the path of pedestrians. Nonetheless, the focus on compactness and user comfort in mobile devices limit
the placement of the camera system, resulting in a restricted
field of view (FoV) that only marginally exceeding human
vision. As a consequence, rendering both the user and the
AI model blind to potential road hazards, which frequently
originate from areas outside the current FoV. Researchers
also explored the use of audio signal to infer the out-of-view
objects (Manori et al. 2018; Mizumachi et al. 2014; Rovetta,
Mnasri, and Masulli 2020), yet these approaches often lack
precision in locating the position of upcoming vehicles.
Recognising this challenge, we introduce a new semantic
segmentation task for objects beyond the field of view, with
a benchmark that focuses on identifying oncoming vehicles for HMD users safety. This introduces a novel partially
missing modality problem, where the model only has access
to partial information within a specific modality, such as a
constrained FoV or monaural audio signals to the surrounding environment. This problem formulation diverges from
both the conventional multi-modality problem, which aims
to enhance downstream tasks, such as tracking or segmentation accuracy, by leveraging multiple modalities (Valverde,
Hurtado, and Valada 2021; Chakravarthula et al. 2023; Zürn
and Burgard 2022; Kim and Kim 2023), and the cross-

Over the span of 2009 to 2018 in Australia, there were
1,711 pedestrian fatalities and over 30,000 recorded hospitalizations stemming from injuries incurred in road accidents (Department of Infrastructure and Government 2018).
These alarming statistics underline the growing concern over
pedestrian safety in the era of mobile technology. The issue
of pedestrian distraction may be further exacerbated by the
rapid advancement of head-mounted displays (HMDs) and
extended reality technologies. Despite all the potential benefits, HMDs compete for users’ limited attentional resources,
just like smart phones. Studies have shown that Augmented
Reality (AR) application usage increases the risk of pedestrian hazards, such as colliding with obstacles or being unaware of approaching vehicles (Serino et al. 2016).
A few research works address the road safety issue by
leveraging the cameras on mobile devices and HMDs. For
examples, Wang et al. (2012) and Tong, Jia, and Bao (2021)
used the onboard cameras to detect and predict vehicle trajectories and warn the user of potential collision. Kang, Lee,
and Han (2019) presented a system for detecting the ground
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6100

