The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TAPE: Leveraging Agent Topology for Cooperative Multi-Agent Policy Gradient
Xingzhou Lou1,2 * , Junge Zhang1,2† , Timothy J. Norman3 , Kaiqi Huang1,2 , Yali Du4
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Southampton
4
King’s College London
louxingzhou2020@ia.ac.cn, jgzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, t.j.norman@soton.ac.uk
kqhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yali.du@kcl.ac.uk
Abstract

Multi-Agent Policy Gradient (MAPG) has made significant
progress in recent years. However, centralized critics in
state-of-the-art MAPG methods still face the centralizeddecentralized mismatch (CDM) issue, which means suboptimal actions by some agents will affect other agent’s policy
learning. While using individual critics for policy updates
can avoid this issue, they severely limit cooperation among
agents. To address this issue, we propose an agent topology
framework, which decides whether other agents should be considered in policy gradient and achieves compromise between
facilitating cooperation and alleviating the CDM issue. The
agent topology allows agents to use coalition utility as learning
objective instead of global utility by centralized critics or local
utility by individual critics. To constitute the agent topology,
various models are studied. We propose Topology-based multiAgent Policy gradiEnt (TAPE) for both stochastic and deterministic MAPG methods. We prove the policy improvement
theorem for stochastic TAPE and give a theoretical explanation for the improved cooperation among agents. Experiment
results on several benchmarks show the agent topology is able
to facilitate agent cooperation and alleviate CDM issue respectively to improve performance of TAPE. Finally, multiple
ablation studies and a heuristic graph search algorithm are
devised to show the efficacy of the agent topology.

1

Introduction

Recent years has witnessed dramatic progress of reinforcement learning (RL) and multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) in real life applications, such as unmanned vehicles (Liu et al. 2022), traffic signal control (Noaeen et al.
2022) and on-demand delivery (Wang et al. 2023). Taking
advantage of the centralized training decentralized execution
(CTDE) (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Kraemer and
Banerjee 2016) paradigm, current cooperative MARL methods (Du et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2020a,b; Peng et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2021; Zhou, Lan, and Aggarwal 2022) adopt
value function factorization or a centralized critic to provide centralized learning signals to promote cooperation and
achieve implicit or explicit credit assignment. Multi-agent
*Work done while visiting King’s College London
†

Correspondence
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17496

policy gradient (MAPG) (Lowe et al. 2017; Foerster et al.
2018; Zhou et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Zhou, Lan, and
Aggarwal 2022; Du et al. 2019) applies RL policy gradient
techniques (Sutton and Barto 2018; Silver et al. 2014; Lillicrap et al. 2015) to the multi-agent context. In CTDE, MAPG
methods adopt centralized critics or value-mixing networks
(Rashid et al. 2020b,a; Wang et al. 2020a) for individual
critics so that agents can directly update their policies to maximize the global Q value Qπ
tot in their policy gradient. As a
result, agents cooperate more effectively and obtain better
expected team rewards.
The centralized critic approach has an inherent problem
known as centralized-decentralized mismatch (CDM) (Wang
et al. 2020c; Chen et al. 2022). The CDM issue refers to
sub-optimal, or explorative actions of some agents negatively
affecting policy learning of others, causing catastrophic miscoordination. The CDM issue arises because sub-optimal or
explorative actions may lead to a small or negative centralized global Q value Qπ
tot , even if other agents take good or
optimal actions. In turn, the small Qπ
tot will make the other
agents mistake their good actions as bad ones and interrupt
their policy learning. The Decomposed Off-Policy (DOP) approach (Wang et al. 2020c) deals with sub-optimal actions of
other agents by linearly decomposed individual critics, which
ignore the other agents’ actions in the policy gradient. But
the use of individual critics severely limits agent cooperation.
We give an example to illustrate the issue of learning with centralised critics and individual critics respectively. Consider an one-step matrix game with two agents
A, B where each agent has two actions a0 , a1 . Reward
R(a0 , a0 ) = 2, R(a0 , a1 ) = −4, R(a1 , a0 ) = −1 and
R(a1 , a1 ) = 0. Assume agent A has a near-optimal policy with probability ϵ choosing non-optimal action a1
and is using the COMA centralized critic (Foerster et al.
2018) for policy learning. If agent A takes optimal action a0 and B takes the non-optimal action a1 , agent A’s
counterfactual advantage AdvA (a0 , a1 ) = Qπ
tot (a0 , a1 ) −
π
[(1 − ϵ) Qπ
tot (a0 , a1 ) + ϵQtot (a1 , a1 )] = −4ϵ < 0, which
means agent A will mistakenly think a0 as a bad action. Consequently, the sub-optimal action of agent B causes agent
A to decrease the probability of taking optimal action a0
and deviate from the optimal policy. Similar problems will
occur with other centralized critics. If we employ individual critics, however, cooperation will be limited. Assume

