The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Federated Graph Learning under Domain Shift with Generalizable Prototypes
Guancheng Wan, Wenke Huang, Mang Ye*
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
{guanchengwan, wenkehuang, yemang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Graph Learning is a privacy-preserving collaborative approach for training a shared model on graph-structured
data in the distributed environment. However, in real-world
scenarios, the client graph data usually originate from diverse
domains, this unavoidably hinders the generalization performance of the final global model. To address this challenge, we
start the first attempt to investigate this scenario by learning
a well-generalizable model. In order to improve the performance of the global model from different perspectives, we
propose a novel framework called Federated Graph Learning with Generalizable Prototypes (FGGP). It decouples the
global model into two levels and bridges them via prototypes.
These prototypes, which are semantic centers derived from
the feature extractor, can provide valuable classification information. At the classification model level, we innovatively
eschew the traditional classifiers, then instead leverage clustered prototypes to capture fruitful domain information and
enhance the discriminative capability of the classes, improving the performance of multi-domain predictions. Furthermore, at the feature extractor level, we go beyond traditional
approaches by implicitly injecting distinct global knowledge
and employing contrastive learning to obtain more powerful
prototypes while enhancing the feature extractor generalization ability. Experimental results on various datasets are presented to validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Figure 1: Problem illustration. We illustrate the scenarios of
represents nodes from differFGL with domain shift.
ent domains, represents unlabeled nodes, is activated
by global model in server. Considering attribute and structure shifts, the global model has poor generalization ability, which can be evaluated from two aspects: (a) A singular
classifier fails to capture comprehensive information from
multi-domain features, thus losing its ability to make generalizable predictions. (b) The feature extractor only generates
features in the global direction (yellow) and does not blend
signals from different domains (green).

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (Yang et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2023d) is a decentralized machine learning technique that
enables multiple parties to collaboratively train a shared
model without sharing their private data (Huang et al. 2022;
Fang, Ye, and Yang 2023). However, the heterogeneous
data from different clients has emerged as a significant issue impacting the performance of the global model, primarily due to divergent optimization directions during local training. While previous works have proposed some solutions to this issue, their applications have been predominantly in the realms of image and natural language processing (Yang, Huang, and Ye 2023). However, this problem is also inevitable when dealing with graph-structured

data (Wang et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2023) due to the inherent non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
nature of graphs. Therefore, a series of Federated Graph
Learning (FGL) (Fu et al. 2022; Liu and Yu 2022) methods have been proposed. These methods allow for effective
local graph learning while maintaining data privacy, improving the overall performance of the global model.
With the objective of obtaining a better shared global
model, existing works in FGL usually achieve collaborative
training between subgraphs owners by dealing with missing
links (Zhang et al. 2021; Baek et al. 2022), which mainly focused on analyzing distributed graphs within homogeneous
domains (Huang et al. 2023a; Yao et al. 2022). However,

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15429

