The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MathAttack: Attacking Large Language Models towards Math Solving Ability
Zihao Zhou1 2 , Qiufeng Wang1 * , Mingyu Jin3 , Jie Yao1 2
Jianan Ye1 2 , Wei Liu4 , Wei Wang1 , Xiaowei Huang2 , Kaizhu Huang5
1

School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Northwestern University
4
ShanghaiTech University
5
Duke Kunshan University
zihao.zhou@liverpool.ac.uk, Qiufeng.Wang@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the boom of Large Language Models (LLMs), the research of solving Math Word Problem (MWP) has recently
made great progress. However, there are few studies to examine the robustness of LLMs in math solving ability. Instead of
attacking prompts in the use of LLMs, we propose a MathAttack model to attack MWP samples which are closer to the
essence of robustness in solving math problems. Compared
to traditional text adversarial attack, it is essential to preserve the mathematical logic of original MWPs during the attacking. To this end, we propose logical entity recognition to
identify logical entries which are then frozen. Subsequently,
the remaining text are attacked by adopting a word-level attacker. Furthermore, we propose a new dataset RobustMath
to evaluate the robustness of LLMs in math solving ability.
Extensive experiments on our RobustMath and two another
math benchmark datasets GSM8K and MultiAirth show that
MathAttack could effectively attack the math solving ability of LLMs. In the experiments, we observe that (1) Our
adversarial samples from higher-accuracy LLMs are also effective for attacking LLMs with lower accuracy (e.g., transfer from larger to smaller-size LLMs, or from few-shot to
zero-shot prompts); (2) Complex MWPs (such as more solving steps, longer text, more numbers) are more vulnerable
to attack; (3) We can improve the robustness of LLMs by
using our adversarial samples in few-shot prompts. Finally,
we hope our practice and observation can serve as an important attempt towards enhancing the robustness of LLMs
in math solving ability. The code and dataset is available at:
https://github.com/zhouzihao501/MathAttack.

Figure 1: Different input of Large Language Models
(LLMs). (a) Clean input, (b) Adversarial sample generated
by Prompt-Attack (Zhu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a), (c)
Adversarial sample generated by our MathAttack.

and LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT) can provide correct reasoning
process and the final answer for simple math word problems. Subsequently, they have been progressively applied in
the field of intelligence education (Macina et al. 2023; Wang
and Demszky 2023; Wang et al. 2023d; Handa et al. 2023).
Therefore, it becomes essential to examine the robustness
of LLMs in math solving ability, but this has not attracted
much attention so far. To the best of our knowledge, there
are only a few works (Zhu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a) to
evaluate the robustness of LLMs through attacking prompts
(Figure 1(b)). By comparing to prompt-attack, we argue that
attacking MWP samples themselves is more direct to reflect
the robustness of LLMs in math solving ability, like Figure 1(c).
On the other hand, general text adversarial attack has
made great progress (Li et al. 2019, 2020; Ye et al. 2022;
Qian et al. 2022). This task aims to generate an adversarial text x′ that is semantically similar to the original text x,
while victim model f can correctly classify x but incorrectly
classify x′ (Jin et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020). However, it tends
to change mathematical logic by directly applying such techniques of general text adversarial attack. For example, if the
word 140 in Figure 1(c) is modified to another number, the
mathematical logic will be changed and the original groundtruth will be no longer the correct answer. Therefore, it is essential to preserve the mathematical logic of MWPs, which

Introduction
Solving Math Word Problem (MWP) aims to infer a final answer from the natural language description of a math problem (Wang, Liu, and Shi 2017). With the boom of Large
Language Models (LLMs), the research of solving MWP has
recently made great progress (Qiao et al. 2022; Uesato et al.
2022; Chang et al. 2023). Most of them work on prompt
engineering to improve math solving ability of LLMs (Wei
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023a; Kojima et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2022; Fu et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2023c; Yao et al. 2023),
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19750

