The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UVAGaze: Unsupervised 1-to-2 Views Adaptation for Gaze Estimation
Ruicong Liu, Feng Lu*
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{liuruicong, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

camera2

camera1
arbitrarily
placed

Gaze estimation has become a subject of growing interest in
recent research. Most of the current methods rely on singleview facial images as input. Yet, it is hard for these approaches to handle large head angles, leading to potential inaccuracies in the estimation. To address this issue, adding
a second-view camera can help better capture eye appearance. However, existing multi-view methods have two limitations. 1) They require multi-view annotations for training,
which are expensive. 2) More importantly, during testing,
the exact positions of the multiple cameras must be known
and match those used in training, which limits the application scenario. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel 1-view-to-2-views (1-to-2 views) adaptation solution in
this paper, the Unsupervised 1-to-2 Views Adaptation framework for Gaze estimation (UVAGaze). Our method adapts
a traditional single-view gaze estimator for flexibly placed
dual cameras. Here, the “flexibly” means we place the dual
cameras in arbitrary places regardless of the training data,
without knowing their extrinsic parameters. Specifically, the
UVAGaze builds a dual-view mutual supervision adaptation
strategy, which takes advantage of the intrinsic consistency of
gaze directions between both views. In this way, our method
can not only benefit from common single-view pre-training,
but also achieve more advanced dual-view gaze estimation.
The experimental results show that a single-view estimator,
when adapted for dual views, can achieve much higher accuracy, especially in cross-dataset settings, with a substantial improvement of 47.0%. Project page: https://github.com/
MickeyLLG/UVAGaze.

Single-view data

Flexible dual views
adapt for

Train

error

unique

Gaze estimator
error

Mutual supervision
head
angle

Sensitive to head angle
Traditional 1-view

Intrinsic
consistency
gaze1

gaze2

1-to-2 views adaptation

More accurate
error

Test

Before
After

head
angle

Robust to head angle
Flexible 2-views

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed unsupervised 1-viewto-2-views adaptation method for gaze estimation. A singleview estimator can be adapted for flexible dual views.

2016; Park, Spurr, and Hilliges 2018; Zhang, Liu, and Lu
2022; Zhang et al. 2017a; Wang and Li 2023) and adaptation/optimization methods (Bao et al. 2022; Cheng, Bao,
and Lu 2022; Liu et al. 2021; Park et al. 2019; Yu, Liu, and
Odobez 2019) have been proposed in the last decade.
However, the majority of existing gaze estimation methods still use single-view facial images as input. As shown in
Tab. 1, although using single-view facial images is simple
and effective for learning-based approaches, it poses several
challenges. A drawback of traditional single-view gaze estimation is its limited reliable output range for head poses.
Empirically and experimentally, when the camera is facing
the side of the face, the testing accuracy is significantly reduced due to occlusion and deformation problems.
To address this challenge, a natural solution is to add a
second-view camera to better capture the eye appearance. In
this paper, we also demonstrate the benefits of using dual
cameras. Concurrently, several existing studies have paid attention to gaze estimation in multi-view settings (Arar and
Thiran 2017; Kim and Jeong 2020; Lian et al. 2018; Cheng
and Lu 2023). However, all these methods require training
with at least two views. Their models consistently utilize input images from multiple cameras during both training and
testing, predominantly employing feature concatenation or
fusion to leverage multi-view information. Such methodologies exhibit two main limitations, as outlined in Tab. 1: 1)

Introduction
Gaze estimation is a crucial indicator of user attention and
has been widely adopted in various applications, including human-robot interaction (Admoni and Scassellati 2017;
Terzioğlu, Mutlu, and Şahin 2020; Wang et al. 2015), semiautonomous driving (Demiris 2007; Majaranta and Bulling
2014; Park, Jain, and Sheikh 2013), medical diagnostics
(Castner et al. 2020), and augmented/virtual reality games
(Burova et al. 2020; Konrad, Angelopoulos, and Wetzstein
2020; Wang et al. 2020). With the advancements in deep
learning, numerous gaze estimation networks (Krafka et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3693

