The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identification of Necessary Semantic Undertakers in the Causal View
for Image-Text Matching
Huatian Zhang, Lei Zhang, Kun Zhang, Zhendong Mao*
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{huatianzhang, kkzhang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-text matching bridges vision and language, which is
a fundamental task in multimodal intelligence. Its key challenge lies in how to capture visual-semantic relevance. Finegrained semantic interactions come from fragment alignments between image regions and text words. However, not
all fragments contribute to image-text relevance, and many
existing methods are devoted to mining the vital ones to measure the relevance accurately. How well image and text relate depends on the degree of semantic sharing between them.
Treating the degree as an effect and fragments as its possible
causes, we define those indispensable causes for the generation of the degree as necessary undertakers, i.e., if any of
them did not occur, the relevance would be no longer valid.
In this paper, we revisit image-text matching in the causal
view and uncover inherent causal properties of relevance generation. Then we propose a novel theoretical prototype for
estimating the probability-of-necessity of fragments, PNf ,
for the degree of semantic sharing by means of causal inference, and further design a Necessary Undertaker Identification Framework (NUIF) for image-text matching, which
explicitly formalizes the fragment’s contribution to imagetext relevance by modeling PNf in two ways. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art on
benchmarks Flickr30K and MSCOCO.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of necessary undertakers. (a) Although
the man in blue box spuriously corresponds to text in
fragmental aligning, removing it will not break image-text
match. If the man in red box is removed, the matched relationship will no longer hold, i.e., the man in red box is necessary. (b) Basin is the critical conflict that causes image-text
unmatch. Removing the basin will affect the degree of semantic sharing between image and text, but the pan will not,
i.e., the basin is necessary to this unmatched relationship.

Wehrmann, Kolling, and Barros 2020; Chen and Luo 2020;
Liu et al. 2020) constructed thoughtful aligning rules to
capture fine interactions. (Diao et al. 2021) explored selfattention reasoning as an aggregation mechanism to enhance
meaningful alignments. (Zhang et al. 2022a) assigned high
confidence to image regions consistent with the global semantics in aggregating. (Pan, Wu, and Zhang 2023) proposed to eliminate redundant or irrelevant fragment alignments from the perspective of information coding. In general, not all fragments contribute to image-text relevance,
and a large branch of existing methods is devoted to mining the vital ones to measure the relevance accurately.
Normally, how well image and text relate depends on the
degree to which they overlap into shared semantics. Fragments that contribute to image-text relevance are those that,
if any of them did not occur, the relevance would be no
longer valid, i.e., they are necessary to image-text relevance.
In other words, these fragments are necessary undertakers of
the degree of semantic sharing between image and text. Although the unnecessary ones may also locally correspond to
the other modality, identifying necessity can filter out such
spurious correspondences from image-text relevance measure by their low necessity, to reduce the impact on match-

Introduction

Image-text matching aims to search for semantically relevant images given text or retrieve descriptive texts given image, which is a fundamental task in multimodal intelligence
facilitating many applications, such as information database
search and e-commerce recommendation. Despite considerable development in recent years, image-text matching remains the challenge in capturing visual-semantic relevance.
Extensive research has been done to study the semantic
relevance from interactions of cross-modal contents. A common framework is aligning constituent fragments (image regions or text words) semantically and aggregating the resulted alignments accordingly. (Lee et al. 2018) proposed a
cross-attention mechanism to capture all latent alignments
by attending to regions and words with each other as context, and inspires a bunch of studies. (Zhang et al. 2020b;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7105

