The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MELO: Enhancing Model Editing with Neuron-Indexed Dynamic LoRA
Lang Yu1,2 , Qin Chen 1,2 * , Jie Zhou 1,2 , Liang He 1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, East China Normal University
lyu@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {qchen, jzhou, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Yes

Inter Miami CF

Without LoRA

LoRA Block Index = 1
d
h

Abstract
MELO

Large language models (LLMs) have shown great success in
various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, whist they
still need updates after deployment to fix errors or keep pace
with the changing knowledge in the world. Researchers formulate such problem as Model Editing and have developed
various editors focusing on different axes of editing properties. However, current editors can hardly support all properties and rely on heavy computational resources. In this paper, we propose a plug-in Model Editing method based on
neuron-indexed dynamic LoRA (MELO), which alters the
behavior of language models by dynamically activating certain LoRA blocks according to the index built in an inner vector database. Our method satisfies various editing properties
with high efficiency and can be easily integrated into multiple LLM backbones. Experimental results show that our proposed MELO achieves state-of-the-art editing performance
on three sequential editing tasks (document classification,
question answering and hallucination correction), while requires the least trainable parameters and computational cost.

d

h
Pretrained
Weights

Pretrained
Weights m

W  R md

W  R md


d

x

x

m

m

Layer with Dynamic LoRA

Layer with Dynamic LoRA

Clusters
● Inter Miami CF
K1 = Where does Messi play?
V1 = LoRA [1]
K2 = What club dose Messi play for?
V2 = LoRA [4]
● National Geographic Channel
K1 = In what network is Beast Hunter
V1 = LoRA [1]

Introduction
With well-designed architectures and ever-growing size,
large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al. 2020; Touvron
et al. 2023) have become the paradigm for solving many
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. However, they
still need updates after deployment to calibrate hallucination and keep pace with the changing knowledge over time.
Meanwhile, it’s infeasible to frequently re-train or fine-tune
LLMs on upstream datasets due to high computational cost.
This indicates a need to develop editors enabling effective
but cheap updates for large pre-trained models.
Researchers formulate such problem as Model Editing
(Yao et al. 2023) and have proposed various editors focusing
on different axes of editing properties. Prior studies MEND
and SERAC (Mitchell et al. 2022a,b) primarily define the
fundamental properties Edit Success and Locality, which
require effective updates to LLMs within a domain of interest, while ensure no performance degradation on other inputs. Whereas, their work relies on extra training data for
editing. ROME and MEMIT (Meng et al. 2022a,b) support

Cluster
Radius

Vector Database

X1=Is the HCN X2 = Which team
poisonous ? does Messi play for ?

Figure 1: MELO integrates dynamic LoRA modules into
LLMs, which are indexed in an inner vector database. During training, the edits are learned with non-overlapping
LoRA blocks. In the inference phase, the inputs X1 and X2
are searched in the vector database, and certain LoRA blocks
(or none) are activated for post-edit response.

large-scale direct edits by locating knowledge in specific
layers of GPT, and further achieves Generality for associated inputs, yet the inputs are restricted to the directional
(s, r, o) relations. Recent studies GRACE (Hartvigsen et al.
2022) and T-Patcher (Huang et al. 2023) investigate Sequential Editing for streaming edits, which utilize external memory of hidden states or neurons to solve catastrophic forgetting, but large amount of training time and computational resources are required for extensive edits. Despite the promis-

* Corresponding author: Qin Chen (qchen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19449

