The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Chain-of-Thought Improves Text Generation with Citations in Large Language
Models
Bin Ji, Huijun Liu* , Mingzhe Du, See-Kiong Ng
National University of Singapore
{jibin, mingzhe, seekiong}@nus.edu.sg, liuhuijun01@gmail.com

Question

Abstract

Q: When did the US break away from England?
Retrieved Documents

Previous studies disclose that Large Language Models
(LLMs) suffer from hallucinations when generating texts,
bringing a novel and challenging research topic to the public, which centers on enabling LLMs to generate texts with
citations. Existing work exposes two limitations when using LLMs to generate answers to questions with provided
documents: unsatisfactory answer correctness and poor citation quality. To tackle the above issues, we investigate using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) to elicit LLMs’ ability to synthesize correct answers from multiple documents, as well as
properly cite these documents. Moreover, we propose a Citation Insurance Mechanism, which enables LLMs to detect
and cite those missing citations. We conduct experiments on
the ALCE benchmark with six open-source LLMs. Experimental results demonstrate that: (1) the CoT prompting strategy significantly improves the quality of text generation with
citations; (2) the Citation Insurance Mechanism delivers impressive gains in citation quality at a low cost; (3) our best approach performs comparably as previous best ChatGPT-based
baselines. Extensive analyses further validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

[1] Decolonization of
the Americas: ...
independence from GB
Corpus on July 2, 1776 ...
Case #1

LLM

[2] Decolonization: ...
It was officially adopted
by Congress on July 4,
1776 ...

The US took the first step
towards gaining
independence from GB when
it declared independence on
July 2, 1776[1]. The Treaty
of Paris was later signed on
September 3, 1783, formally
separating the United States
from the British Empire[3].

[3] American Revolution: ... The Treaty of
Paris was signed
September 3, 1783 ...

...

Case #2

The US took the first step towards gaining
independence from GB when it declared
independence on July 2, 1776 (although
the event is now commemorated on July
4, 1776, the date when the Declaration of
Independence was officially adopted by
Congress)[1][2]. The Treaty of Paris
was later signed on September 3, 1783,
formally separating the United States
from the British Empire.

Gold Answer

The US took the first step towards gaining independence from GB when
it declared independence on July 2, 1776 (although the event is now
commemorated on July 4, 1776, the date when the Declaration of
Independence was officially adopted by Congress)[1][2]. The Treaty
of Paris was later signed on September 3, 1783, formally separating the
United States from the British Empire[3].

Figure 1: Case studies of LLMs’ outputs. We re-use the
ALCE example (Gao et al. 2023). Case #1 shows that the
LLM fails to consider the document [2] in its generated
answer. Case #2 exhibits that the LLM misses citing the document [3].

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained extensive research attention due to their powerful capability to understand human instructions and generate responses accordingly (Zhao et al. 2023). However, these responses may
be unreliable since LLMs suffer from hallucinations, which
puts forward demands to authenticate their factuality. Aimed
at this issue, the research topic of enabling LLMs to generate texts with citations is brought to the public (Gao et al.
2023). It is easy for a human being to verify the factuality of
LLMs’ generations by checking their citations.
The majority of existing studies focus on adding citations
to LLMs’ generations in the scenarios of commercial search
engines, e.g., Bing Chat1 , and they use closed-source LLMs
like ChatGPT2 and GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023). Unfortunately, it
is hard to automatically evaluate the generation correctness

and the citation quality in these scenarios, which instead
calls for low-efficiency and high-cost human evaluations
(Liu, Zhang, and Liang 2023). Motivated by the above fact,
Gao et al. (2023) propose the first reproducible benchmark,
ALCE, to automatically evaluate LLMs’ generations with
citations. ALCE consists of three datasets and defines three
automatic evaluation metrics, i.e., Fluency, Correctness, and
Citation Quality. Unlike those search engine-based studies,
ALCE assumes natural-language questions paired with relevant retrieval corpora, which necessitates comprehensive
systems to generate answers to questions using retrieved
documents, as well as properly cite these documents. A series of LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT, LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023),
Vicuna (Chiang et al. 2023), and Oasst (Köpf et al. 2023),
have shown their exceptional abilities on ALCE. However,
they still expose several limitations. One of the primary limitations lies in that they struggle to synthesize multiple documents in context and properly cite them (Gao et al. 2023),

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.bing.com/new
2
https://chat.openai.com/chat

18345

