The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DISC OUNT: Counting in Large Image Collections with Detector-Based
Importance Sampling
Gustavo Perez, Subhransu Maji* , Daniel Sheldon*
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{gperezsarabi,smaji,sheldon}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

humans to perform the counting tasks in the available time.
Therefore, a common strategy is to train a computer vision
detection model using labeled data and run it exhaustively
on the images.
The task is interesting because the goal is not to generalize, but to achieve the scientific counting goal with sufficient accuracy for a fixed image collection. The best use of
human effort is unclear: it could be used for model development, labeling training data, or even directly solving the
counting task! A particular challenge occurs when the detection task is very difficult, so the accuracy of counts made on
the entire collection is questionable even with huge investments in training data and model development. Some works
resort to human screening of the detector outputs (Norouzzadeh et al. 2018; Nurkarim and Wijayanto 2023; Perez et al.
2022), which while faster than manual counting, is still very
labor intensive.
These considerations motivate statistical approaches to
counting. Instead of screening detector outputs for all images, a human can “spot-check” images to estimate accuracy, and, more importantly, use statistical techniques to
obtain unbiased estimates of counts across unscreened images. In a related context, Meng et al. (2022) proposed
IS-count, which employs importance sampling to estimate
counts across a collection when (satellite) images are expensive to obtain by using spatial covariates.
Our work draws inspiration from two distinct applications: an environmental application to count bird roosts and
a societal one assess building damage. In both cases, the cost
model differs from IS-count: images are readily available,
and the goal is to minimize the human effort dedicated to
screening. The first application is counting bird roosts across
space and time in US weather radar data (§ 4.1). These
counts reveal species’ response to climate change (Deng
et al. 2023) and provide urgently needed information to
conserve bird populations. However, the detection problem
is difficult, so fully automated methods are not accurate
enough even after substantial investment in training data collection and model development. The second application is
building damage assessment for disaster response (§ 4.2).
Aid organizations assess building damage using satellite images (Deng and Wang 2022) to plan humanitarian response
after a natural disaster. However, pre-trained detection models are often not accurate enough when applied to a new dis-

Many applications use computer vision to detect and count
objects in massive image collections. However, it may not
be possible to train accurate enough counting models when
the task is very difficult or requires a fast response time. For
example, during disaster response, aid organizations aim to
quickly count damaged buildings in satellite images to plan
relief missions, but pre-trained building and damage detectors often perform poorly due to domain shifts. In such cases,
there is a need for human-in-the-loop approaches that can accurately count with minimal human effort. We propose DISC OUNT– a detector-based importance sampling framework
for counting in large image collections. DISC OUNT uses
an imperfect detector and human screening to estimate lowvariance unbiased counts. We propose techniques for counting over multiple spatial or temporal regions using a small
amount of screening and estimate confidence intervals. This
enables end-users to stop screening when estimates are sufficiently accurate, which is often the goal in real-world applications. We demonstrate our method with two applications:
counting birds in radar imagery to understand responses to
climate change, and counting damaged buildings in satellite
imagery for damage assessment in regions struck by a natural
disaster. On the technical side we develop variance reduction
techniques based on control variates and prove the (conditional) unbiasedness of the estimators. DISC OUNT leads to a
9-12× reduction in the labeling costs to obtain the same error
rates compared to naive screening for tasks we consider, and
surpasses alternative covariate-based screening approaches.

1

Introduction

Many applications of AI—especially to science, society,
and the environment—use computer vision to detect and
count objects in massive image collections. Examples include wildlife population monitoring (Wu et al. 2023) and
the mapping of agriculture (Singh et al. 2022; Turkoglu et al.
2021) or poverty (Ayush et al. 2021; Yeh et al. 2020) from
satellite images. We are interested in two particular applications: (1) counting bird roosts in radar to understand population responses to climate change and aid conservation, and
(2) counting damaged buildings in satellite images to inform
disaster response. These image collections are too large for
* Equal advising contribution.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22294

