The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

STEM: Unleashing the Power of Embeddings for Multi-Task Recommendation
Liangcai Su * 1 , Junwei Pan * 2 , Ximei Wang2 , Xi Xiao1† , Shijie Quan2 , Xihua Chen2 , Jie Jiang2 ,
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent Inc.
sulc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiaox@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{jonaspan, messiwang, justinquan, tinychen, zeus}@tencent.com

Abstract

AUC on Like Task

0.700

Multi-task learning (MTL) has gained significant popularity
in recommender systems as it enables simultaneous optimization of multiple objectives. A key challenge in MTL is negative transfer, but existing studies explored negative transfer
on all samples, overlooking the inherent complexities within
them. We split the samples according to the relative amount of
positive feedback among tasks. Surprisingly, negative transfer
still occurs in existing MTL methods on samples that receive
comparable feedback across tasks. Existing work commonly
employs a shared-embedding paradigm, limiting the ability of
modeling diverse user preferences on different tasks. In this
paper, we introduce a novel Shared and Task-specific EMbeddings (STEM) paradigm that aims to incorporate both shared
and task-specific embeddings to effectively capture taskspecific user preferences. Under this paradigm, we propose a
simple model STEM-Net, which is equipped with an All Forward Task-specific Backward gating network to facilitate the
learning of task-specific embeddings and direct knowledge
transfer across tasks. Remarkably, STEM-Net demonstrates
exceptional performance on comparable samples, achieving
positive transfer. Comprehensive evaluation on three public
MTL recommendation datasets demonstrates that STEM-Net
outperforms state-of-the-art models by a substantial margin.
Our code is released at https://github.com/LiangcaiSu/STEM.

Finish-Overwhelming

Comparable

0.925

0.825

0.675

0.900

0.800

0.650

0.875

0.775

0.625

0.850
ST

MM

oE PLE

t

-Ne

EM
ST

Like-Overwhelming

0.750
ST

oE PLE

MM

S

M
TE

-Ne

t

ST

MM

oE PLE

EM

ST

-Ne

t

Figure 1: Existing MTL models such as MMoE and PLE
suffer from negative transfer on the comparable subset of
TikTok test samples, while STEM-Net achieves positive
transfer. STEM-Net also outperforms MMoE and PLE on
task-overwhelming subsets. ST: Single-Task.

Chen et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2023) have also been employed
to alleviate gradient conflicts.
Existing methods tend to treat all samples in a task as
a whole, overlooking the inherent intricacies within them.
Consequently, it remains unclear where negative transfer occurs. To address this concern, we split the test set of TikTok, a public MTL recommendation dataset, into three subsets according to the relative amount of feedback between
task Finish and Like: Finish-Overwhelming, Comparable, and Like-Overwhelming. We then evaluate the performance of two popular MTL models, MMoE and PLE,
and the single-task model on task Like over these subsets, since it has much fewer positive samples and therefore suffers from negative transfer. As shown in Figure 1,
compared to the single task model, both MMoE and PLE
demonstrate a notable performance lift on the FinishOverwhelming subset by incorporating additional knowledge of task Finish to resolve the feedback sparsity on
Like. They also have a slight performance boost on the
Like-Overwhelming subset where task Like itself can already learn well, but stills benefits from the complementary
knowledge from Finish. However, to our surprise, on the
subset that receives comparable positive feedback from both
tasks, the performance of existing methods is inferior to that
of the single-task model.
The performance drop of existing MTL methods on the
comparable subset prompts us to reconsider the design of
MTL recommendation models. Intuitively, users may possess diverse and sometimes even conflicting preferences
over items across various tasks, which become more pro-

Introduction
Recently, multi-task learning has drawn great interest in recommender systems since they are able to optimize multiple
objectives (e.g., Like, Share, Finish) simultaneously.
The effectiveness of multi-task recommendation (MTR) depends on leveraging knowledge from other tasks to help the
learning of each task. However, prior works have identified negative transfer (Torrey et al. 2010) and seesaw phenomenon (Tang et al. 2020), whereby multi-task learning
models may not always outperform single-task models. To
address negative transfer, MMoE (Ma et al. 2018a) and
PLE (Tang et al. 2020) incorporate task-specific gate networks and experts, respectively. Additionally, techniques
such as gradient clipping (Yu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2018;
He et al. 2022) and task-aware optimizer (Yu et al. 2020;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9002

