The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BAND: Biomedical Alert News Dataset
Zihao Fu1 , Meiru Zhang1 , Zaiqiao Meng2,1 ,
Yannan Shen3 , David Buckeridge3 , Nigel Collier1
1

Language Technology Lab, University of Cambridge
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow
3
School of Population and Global Health, McGill University
{zf268, mz468, nhc30}@cam.ac.uk, zaiqiao.meng@glasgow.ac.uk
yannan.shen@mail.mcgill.ca, david.buckeridge@mcgill.ca
2

Abstract

News
Las Vegas public health officials say dozens of people linked to a
tuberculosis outbreak at a neonatal unit have tested positive for the
disease. The Southern Nevada Health District reported on Monday
that of the 977 people tested, 59 showed indications of the disease
and 2 showed signs of being contagious…

Infectious disease outbreaks continue to pose a significant
threat to human health and well-being. To improve disease surveillance and understanding of disease spread, several surveillance systems have been developed to monitor
daily news alerts and social media. However, existing systems lack thorough epidemiological analysis in relation to
corresponding alerts or news, largely due to the scarcity of
well-annotated reports data. To address this gap, we introduce the Biomedical Alert News Dataset (BAND), which includes 1,508 samples from existing reported news articles,
open emails, and alerts, as well as 30 epidemiology-related
questions. These questions necessitate the model’s expert reasoning abilities, thereby offering valuable insights into the
outbreak of the disease. The BAND dataset brings new challenges to the NLP world, requiring better inference capability
of the content and the ability to infer important information.
We provide several benchmark tasks, including Named Entity
Recognition (NER), Question Answering (QA), and Event
Extraction (EE), to demonstrate existing models’ capabilities
and limitations in handling epidemiology-specific tasks. It is
worth noting that some models may lack the human-like inference capability required to fully utilize the corpus. To the
best of our knowledge, the BAND corpus is the largest corpus
of well-annotated biomedical outbreak alert news with elaborately designed questions, making it a valuable resource for
epidemiologists and NLP researchers alike.

Which infectious disease caused the outbreak? tuberculosis
US
In which country is the outbreak taking place?
Nevada
In which province is the outbreak taking place?
In which city/town is the outbreak taking place? Las Vegas
No
Did the outbreak involve the intentful release?
Cannot Infer
Are the victims healthcare workers?
No
Did victims acquire the disease from animals?
Did the outbreak happen after a natural disaster? No
…
…

Figure 1: The BAND dataset consists of 30 disease
outbreak-related questions designed by epidemiologists.
Annotators are required to infer answers based on their understanding of the context when the answer is not explicitly
provided in the context (e.g. the answers in green color).
there is a dearth of systems that offer automatic and comprehensive epidemiological analysis of corresponding alerts
or news. For instance, epidemiologists require such systems
that can identify cases where the disease is deliberately released or affects vulnerable populations, such as the elderly
or children. The automatic identification of these cases can
facilitate preventive measures and prompt rescue efforts.
The limited capacity of existing systems can partly be attributed to the scarcity of well-annotated report data, which
is critical for training machine learning systems for domain
experts. Although several existing datasets (Torres Munguı́a
et al. 2022; Carlson et al. 2023) have been annotated to extract outbreak events, they mostly focus on the statistics (e.g.
location, disease names, etc.) of the outbreak event rather
than providing a thorough epidemiological analysis for further investigation.
To enrich the capabilities of existing surveillance systems, we present a newly annotated dataset, namely the
Biomedical Alert News Dataset (BAND)1 . This dataset
comprises 1,508 samples extracted from recently reported
news articles, open emails, and alerts, accompanied by 30
epidemiology-related questions. These questions cover most

Introduction
In spite of advancements in healthcare, infectious disease
outbreaks continue to pose a substantial threat to human
health and well-being. To enhance disease surveillance and
deepen our understanding of disease transmission, several
surveillance systems have been established, including BioCaster (Meng et al. 2022), GPHIN (Mawudeku et al. 2013),
ProMED-mail (Yu and Madoff 2004), HealthMap (Freifeld
et al. 2008) and EIOS. These systems perform real-time
surveillance and analysis of disease outbreaks by monitoring daily news alerts and social media platforms.
Despite the notable achievements of current surveillance
systems, most of them concentrate on the detection of outbreak events using social media and news sources. However,

1

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Our
dataset
and
code
https://github.com/fuzihaofzh/BAND

18012

are

available

at

