The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

From Past to Future: Rethinking Eligibility Traces
Dhawal Gupta1 * , Scott M. Jordan2 , Shreyas Chaudhari1 ,
Bo Liu3 , Philip S. Thomas1 , Bruno Castro da Silva1
1

University of Massachusetts,
2
University of Alberta,
3
Amazon
{dgupta, schaudhari, pthomas, bsilva}@cs.umass.edu, sjordan@ualberta.ca, boliucs@amazon.com
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a fresh perspective on the challenges of credit assignment and policy evaluation. First, we
delve into the nuances of eligibility traces and explore instances where their updates may result in unexpected credit assignment to preceding states. From this investigation emerges
the concept of a novel value function, which we refer to as
the bidirectional value function. Unlike traditional state value
functions, bidirectional value functions account for both future
expected returns (rewards anticipated from the current state
onward) and past expected returns (cumulative rewards from
the episode’s start to the present). We derive principled update
equations to learn this value function and, through experimentation, demonstrate its efficacy in enhancing the process
of policy evaluation. In particular, our results indicate that
the proposed learning approach can, in certain challenging
contexts, perform policy evaluation more rapidly than TD( )—
a method that learns forward value functions, v ⇡ , directly.
Overall, our findings present a new perspective on eligibility
traces and potential advantages associated with the novel value
function it inspires, especially for policy evaluation.

v (St) St+1
v (St 1)

v (St) St+1

St

v (St 1)

v (St 2) St 1

v (St 2) St 1

v (St 3) St 2

St 3

v (St 3) St 2
(b)

St 3

…

…

(a)

St

Figure 1: Implementation of the backward view via TD( ),
adapted from Sutton and Barto (2018). Arrow sizes denote the
magnitude of updates: (a) Expected update direction of past
state values under the backward view, or TD( ). (b) Potential
misalignment in updates due to reliance on outdated gradient
memory for past states (especially when using non-linear
function approximation), which deviated from (a).

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) offers a robust framework for
tackling complex sequential decision-making problems. The
growing relevance of RL in diverse applications—–from controlling nuclear reactors (Radaideh et al. 2021; Park et al.
2022) to guiding atmospheric balloons (Bellemare et al. 2020)
and optimizing data centers (Li et al. 2019)—– underscores
the need for more efficient solutions. Central to these solutions is addressing the credit assignment problem, which
involves determining which actions most contributed to a
particular outcome—a key challenge in sequential decisionmaking. The outcome of actions in RL may be delayed, posing a challenge in correctly attributing credit to the most
relevant prior states and actions. This often requires a large
number of samples or interactions with the environment. In
real-world settings, this might be a constraint as system interactions are often risky or costly. Minimizing the sample
and computational complexity of existing algorithms not
only addresses these challenges but also facilitates the wider
adoption of RL in various future applications.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12253

Addressing the credit assignment problem given a temporal sequence of states and actions has been and continues to
be an active area of research. A key concept in addressing
this challenge is the Temporal Difference (TD) methods (Sutton 1984). In the context of TD methods, the backward view
(Sutton and Barto 2018) offers an intuitive approach under
which the agent aims to adjust the value of previous states
to align with recent observations. As depicted in Figure 1(a),
observing a positive outcome at a given time step, t, prompts
the agent to increase the value estimates of all preceding
states. This adjustment incorporates a level of discounting,
accounting for the diminishing influence of distant preceding
states on the observed outcome. This approach assumes that
every prior state should share credit for the resultant outcome.
One advantage of the backward view, discussed later, is that
it can be efficiently implemented online and incrementally.
The TD( ) method is a widely adopted algorithmic implementation of the backward view (Sutton 1984). Initially introduced for settings involving linear parameterizations of the
value function, it has become standard in policy evaluation
RL problems. However, as the complexity of RL problems
increases with novel applications, there has been a shift to-

