The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Structural Hardness of Answer Set Programming: Can Structure Efficiently
Confine the Power of Disjunctions?*
Markus Hecher1 , Rafael Kiesel2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
2
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
hecher@mit.edu, rkiesel@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a generic problem modeling and solving framework with a strong focus on knowledge
representation and a rapid growth of industrial applications.
So far, the study of complexity resulted in characterizing hardness and determining their sources, fine-grained insights in
the form of dichotomy-style results, as well as detailed parameterized complexity landscapes. Unfortunately, for the
well-known parameter treewidth disjunctive programs require
double-exponential runtime under reasonable complexity assumptions. This quickly becomes out of reach. We deal with
the classification of structural parameters for disjunctive ASP
on the program’s rule structure (incidence graph).
First, we provide a polynomial kernel to obtain singleexponential runtime in terms of vertex cover size, despite
subset-minimization being not represented in the program’s
structure. Then we turn our attention to strictly better structural
parameters between vertex cover size and treewidth. Here, we
provide double-exponential lower bounds for the most prominent parameters in that range: treedepth, feedback vertex size,
and cliquewidth. Based on this, we argue that unfortunately
our options beyond vertex cover size are limited. Our results
provide an in-depth hardness study, relying on a novel reduction from normal to disjunctive programs, trading the increase
of complexity for an exponential parameter compression.

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczyński 2011; Gebser et al. 2012) is a prominent declarative modeling and solving framework, enabling to efficiently
solve problems in knowledge representation and artificial
intelligence. Indeed, in the last couple of years, ASP has
been extended several times and it grew into a rich modeling
language, where solvers like clasp (Gebser, Kaufmann, and
Schaub 2009) or wasp (Alviano et al. 2019) are readily available. This makes ASP a suitable target language for many
problems, e.g., (Balduccini, Gelfond, and Nogueira 2006;
Niemelä, Simons, and Soininen 1999; Nogueira et al. 2001;
Guziolowski et al. 2013; Schaub and Woltran 2018; Abels
et al. 2019), where problems are encoded in a logic program,
which is a set of rules whose solutions are called answer sets.
* Extended version at http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03539
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Unfortunately, in terms of computational complexity, there
is a catch to ASP’s modeling comfort. Indeed, while there
exist NP-complete fragments (Bidoı́t and Froidevaux 1991;
Marek and Truszczyński 1991; Ben-Eliyahu and Dechter
1994), the consistency problem of deciding whether a disjunctive program admits an answer set is inherently hard,
yielding ΣP
2 -completeness (Eiter and Gottlob 1995), even if
we restrict rule body sizes to a constant (Truszczynski 2011).
How do we deal with this high complexity? Parameterized
complexity (Cygan et al. 2015; Niedermeier 2006; Downey
and Fellows 2013; Flum and Grohe 2006), offers a framework, enabling to analyze a problem’s hardness in terms of
certain parameter(s), which has been extensively applied to
ASP (Gottlob, Scarcello, and Sideri 2002; Gottlob, Pichler,
and Wei 2010; Lackner and Pfandler 2012; Fichte, Kronegger,
and Woltran 2019). For ASP there is growing research on
the prominent structural parameter treewidth (Jakl, Pichler,
and Woltran 2009; Calimeri et al. 2016; Bichler, Morak, and
Woltran 2020; Bliem et al. 2020; Eiter, Hecher, and Kiesel
2021). Intuitively, the measure treewidth enables the solving
of numerous combinatorially hard problems in parts. This
parameter indicates the maximum number of variables of
these parts one has to investigate during problem solving. Unfortunately, there is still a catch: Under the Exponential Time
Hypothesis (ETH) (Impagliazzo, Paturi, and Zane 2001), the
evaluation of disjunctive programs is prohibitively expensive,
being inherently double exponential in its treewidth (Hecher
k
2022). Indeed this is a bad worst case; 22 is larger than the
(est.) number of atoms in the universe, already for k=9.
This motivates our search for preferably small structural
parameters that enable single-exponential runtimes, i.e., we
aim for structural properties strong enough to be significantly
more exploitable than treewidth. We thereby consider the
program’s rule structure (incidence graph representation) and
we only study parameters smaller than the vertex cover size,
which is the number of vertices needed to cover every edge
of a graph. We focus on the following structural parameters
that are more generally applicable than treewidth, but smaller
than vertex cover size, and state their intuitive meaning1 .
• Treedepth: How close is the structure to being a star?
• Feedback vertex number: How many atoms or rules need
to be removed to obtain an acyclic graph structure?
1

10535

For formal definitions, see the preliminaries.

