The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DeepBern-Nets: Taming the Complexity of Certifying Neural Networks Using
Bernstein Polynomial Activations and Precise Bound Propagation
Haitham Khedr, Yasser Shoukry
University of California, Irvine
{hkhedr, yshoukry}@uci.edu

Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018; Xu et al. 2018; Mehrabi et al.
2021; Khedr and Shoukry 2022), and correctness (Yang and
Rinard 2019).
While certifying the robustness, fairness, and correctness
of NNs with respect to formal properties is shown to be
NP-hard (Katz et al. 2017), state-of-the-art certifiers rely
on computing upper/lower bounds on the output of the NN
and its intermediate layers (Wang et al. 2021; Khedr, Ferlez, and Shoukry 2021; Ferrari et al. 2022; Bak 2021; Henriksen and Lomuscio 2021). Accurate bounds can significantly reduce the complexity and computational effort required during the certification process, facilitating more efficient and dependable evaluations of the network’s behavior
in diverse and challenging scenarios. Moreover, computing
such bounds has opened the door for a new set of “certified
training” algorithms (Zhang et al. 2022; Lyu et al. 2021;
Müller et al. 2022b) where these bounds are used as a regularizer that penalizes the worst-case violation of robustness
or fairness, which leads to training NNs with favorable properties. While computing such lower/upper bounds is crucial,
current techniques in computing lower/upper bounds on the
NN outputs are either computationally efficient but result in
loose lower/upper bounds or compute tight bounds but are
computationally expensive. In this paper, we are interested
in algorithms that can be both computationally efficient and
lead to tight bounds.
This work follows a Design-for-Certifiability approach
where we ask the question; can we replace the ReLU activation function with one that allows us to compute tight
upper/lower bounds efficiently? Introducing such novel activation functions designed with certifiability in mind makes
it possible to create NNs that are easier to analyze and certify during their training. Our contributions in this paper can
be summarized as follows:
1. We introduce DeepBern-Nets, a NN architecture with a
new activation function based on Bernstein polynomials.
Our primary motivation is to shift some of the computational efforts from the certification phase to the training
phase. By employing this approach, we can train NNs
with known output (and intermediate) bounds for a predetermined input domain which can accelerate the certification process.
2. We present Bern-IBP, an Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) algorithm that computes tight bounds of

Abstract
Formal certification of Neural Networks (NNs) is crucial for
ensuring their safety, fairness, and robustness. Unfortunately,
on the one hand, sound and complete certification algorithms
of ReLU-based NNs do not scale to large-scale NNs. On
the other hand, incomplete certification algorithms are easier to compute, but they result in loose bounds that deteriorate with the depth of NN, which diminishes their effectiveness. In this paper, we ask the following question; can we
replace the ReLU activation function with one that opens the
door to incomplete certification algorithms that are easy to
compute but can produce tight bounds on the NN’s outputs?
We introduce DeepBern-Nets, a class of NNs with activation functions based on Bernstein polynomials instead of the
commonly used ReLU activation. Bernstein polynomials are
smooth and differentiable functions with desirable properties
such as the so-called range enclosure and subdivision properties. We design a novel Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) algorithm, called Bern-IBP, to efficiently compute tight bounds
on DeepBern-Nets outputs. Our approach leverages the properties of Bernstein polynomials to improve the tractability
of neural network certification tasks while maintaining the
accuracy of the trained networks. We conduct experiments
in adversarial robustness and reachability analysis settings
to assess the effectiveness of the approach. Our proposed
framework achieves high certified accuracy for adversariallytrained NNs, which is often a challenging task for certifiers of
ReLU-based NNs. This work establishes Bernstein polynomial activation as a promising alternative for improving NN
certification tasks across various NNs applications.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (NNs) have revolutionized numerous
fields with their remarkable performance on various tasks,
ranging from computer vision and natural language processing to healthcare and robotics. As these networks become integral components of critical systems, ensuring their safety,
security, fairness, and robustness is essential. It is unsurprising, then, the growing interest in the field of certified machine learning, which resulted in NNs with enhanced levels of robustness to adversarial inputs (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016;
Song et al. 2018; Szegedy et al. 2013), fairness (Zhang,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21232

