The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Layer Compression of Deep Networks with Straight Flows
Chengyue Gong1 , Xiaocong Du2 , Bhargav Bhushanam2 , Lemeng Wu1 , Xingchao Liu1 ,
Dhruv Choudhary2 , Arun Kejariwal2 , Qiang Liu1
1

University of Texas at Austin,
2
Meta, Inc.

Abstract

a well-trained deep network into a shallow version without
loss of accuracy, is a critical problem. Considering tiny networks are not easy to get trained well in practice (Graham
et al. 2021; Gong et al. 2021), knowledge distillation (KD)
is usually leveraged to greatly improve model performance.
In this work, we are especially interested in building up a
general and theory-guided algorithm to derive a shallow network, which can be regarded as a kind of knowledge distillation. Inspired by recent works in straight neural flow models,
we propose to extend this method from image generation to
model compression.
Correspondingly, our training method consists of three
phases: ➀ Instead of directly distilling from a deep teacher
to a shallow student, we first learn a time-continuous model
to mimic a given teacher model. ➁ Then, using the recent methods in straight and transport-cost aware flows (Liu,
Gong, and Liu 2022; Lipman et al. 2022), we apply ReFlow
operator (Liu, Gong, and Liu 2022) to reduce the transport
cost which makes the time-continuous network easy to compress to one step (a.k.a., fast simulation). ➂ Finally, we use
KD to refine the one-step model to yield even better performance. Similar to existing works for training shallow or
weight-shared networks (Yang et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2020),
we create multi-stage training and have additional objectives
before the final-step KD. Different from previous heuristic
strategies ,e.g., weight-sharing networks (Yang et al. 2021),
layer-wise progressively distillation (Sun et al. 2020), our
method is inspired by recent studies in neural flow models. Viewing reducing the number of simulation steps as the
same as compressing the number of blocks, we convert compression to reducing simulation steps for neural flow models. Notice that reducing transport cost comes to an easyto-compress flow model. We propose to first learn an easyto-compress flow model by eliminating the transport cost;
after having a flow with low transport cost, we then refine a
one-step simulation flow model with knowledge distillation.
In the following part, we first discuss the background and
related works in Section . After introducing the method in
Section , we verify the performance on multiple datasets
and tasks in Section . We evaluate our model performance
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, upon vision transformers and
ResNet. We then transfer the model to the semantic segmentation task, to test whether ours also benefits the downstream
tasks. We also demonstrate that our flow model can serve as

Very deep neural networks lead to significantly better performance on various real tasks. However, it usually causes slow
inference and is hard to be deployed on real-world devices.
How to reduce the number of layers to save memory and
to accelerate the inference is an eye-catching topic. In this
work, we introduce an intermediate objective, a continuoustime network, before distilling deep networks into shallow networks. First, we distill a given deep network into
a continuous-time neural flow model, which can be discretized with an ODE solver and the inference requires passing through the network multiple times. By forcing the flow
transport trajectory to be straight lines, we find that it is easier to compress the infinite step model into a one-step neural flow model, which only requires passing through the flow
model once. Secondly, we refine the one-step flow model together with the final head layer with knowledge distillation
and finally, we can replace the given deep network with this
one-step flow network. Empirically, we demonstrate that our
method outperforms direct distillation and other baselines on
different model architectures (e.g. ResNet, ViT) on image
classification and semantic segmentation tasks. We also manifest that our distilled model naturally serves as an early-exit
dynamic inference model.

Introduction
It has been widely observed that increasing model depth
leads to significantly better performance on various real
tasks, e.g., image generation (Rombach et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021a), image classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), and
NLP applications (Brown et al. 2020; Xue et al. 2020). However, very deep networks increase the cost during inference,
and some of them even require distributedly deployment to
multiple nodes. To alleviate this problem, there has been a
growing interest in developing algorithms for compressing
deep models into shallow or thin networks, using pruning or
knowledge distillation (KD) techniques.
In this work, we propose a new method to train shallow
and efficient neural networks. Compare to thin but deep networks, shallow networks are believed to be easier to get deployed with faster inference speed on the Internet of things
(IoT) devices (Mandal et al. 2019). Thus, how to convert
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12181

