The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Discovering and Merging for Incremental Novel Class Discovery
Guangyao Chen1 , Peixi Peng2, 3∗ , Yangru Huang1 , Mengyue Geng1 , Yonghong Tian1, 2, 3 *
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China.
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China.
{gy.chen, pxpeng, yrhuang, mygeng, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
One important desideratum of lifelong learning aims to discover novel classes from unlabelled data in a continuous manner. The central challenge is twofold: discovering and learning novel classes while mitigating the issue of catastrophic
forgetting of established knowledge. To this end, we introduce a new paradigm called Adaptive Discovering and Merging (ADM) to discover novel categories adaptively in the incremental stage and integrate novel knowledge into the model
without affecting the original knowledge. To discover novel
classes adaptively, we decouple representation learning and
novel class discovery, and use Triple Comparison (TC) and
Probability Regularization (PR) to constrain the probability
discrepancy and diversity for adaptive category assignment.
To merge the learned novel knowledge adaptively, we propose a hybrid structure with base and novel branches named
Adaptive Model Merging (AMM), which reduces the interference of the novel branch on the old classes to preserve the
previous knowledge, and merges the novel branch to the base
model without performance loss and parameter growth. Extensive experiments on several datasets show that ADM significantly outperforms existing class-incremental Novel Class
Discovery (class-iNCD) approaches. Moreover, our AMM
also benefits the class-incremental Learning (class-IL) task
by alleviating the catastrophic forgetting problem. The source
code is included in the supplementary materials.

Figure 1: Illustration of incremental novel class discovery
with an elastic learner. The novel model adaptively discovers novel classes from the unlabeled data of the current task
based on the previous base model. The novel learner should
not only affect the knowledge of the base model but also integrate with the base model.

continuous manner. Compared with other settings, models
in class-iNCD can not access data in previously seen categories, while still having to perform well across all classes.
This paper focuses on developing efficient neural network models for the class-iNCD task. To achieve continuous
learning without revisiting past knowledge, two significant
challenges emerge as paramount. The first pertains to the
discovery of new categories from unlabeled data, requiring
the model to discern and learn novel patterns without explicit annotations. The second challenge is the notorious issue of catastrophic forgetting. As the model learns new concepts, it risks overwriting or diminishing prior knowledge.
To discover new categories and learn from unlabeled
data, most existing methods (Han et al. 2020; Zhong et al.
2021a,b; Jia et al. 2021; Fini et al. 2021) rely on pseudolabels for both data annotation and model supervision. However, the quality of the pseudo-label greatly affects the performance of novel category discovery. To address this issue,
we propose to separate representation learning and category
discovery in the incremental novel category discovery stage.
Specifically, the model learns representations directly from
unlabeled data through contrastive learning, while the classifiers are optimized independently with adaptive category
discovery. To further enhance the quality of pseudo-label

Introduction
A long-standing goal of machine learning is to build Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems that can mimic human-level
performance in an open and online manner. Neural networks, originally inspired by human brain structures, should
also be flexible enough to incrementally absorb novel concepts (or classes) after acquiring previous knowledge. To
evaluate the ability of novel class discovery and memory
in the open world, several tasks (Han et al. 2020; Han,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2019; Zhong et al. 2021a,b; Fini
et al. 2021; Roy et al. 2022) are proposed to continuously identify new classes while leveraging some previously
learned knowledge. Among these task settings, the classincremental Novel Class Discovery (class-iNCD) (Roy et al.
2022) aims at discovering novel concepts sequentially in a
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11276

