The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MID-FiLD: MIDI Dataset for Fine-Level Dynamics
Jesung Ryu1 , Seungyeon Rhyu1 , Hong-Gyu Yoon1 ,
Eunchong Kim1 , Ju Young Yang2 , Taehyun Kim1 *
1

Pozalabs, Republic of Korea
Duke University, United States
{jesung, seungyeon, honggyu, eunchong, taehyun}@pozalabs.com, juyoung.yang@duke.edu
2

Abstract
One of the challenges in generating human-like music is articulating musical expressions such as dynamics, phrasing,
and timbre, which are difficult for computational models to
mimic. Previous efforts to tackle this problem have been insufficient due to a fundamental lack of data containing information about musical expressions. In this paper, we introduce
MID-FiLD, a MIDI dataset for learning fine-level dynamics
control. Notable properties of MID-FiLD are as follows: (1)
All 4,422 MIDI samples are constructed by professional music writers with a strong understanding of composition and
musical expression. (2) Each MIDI sample contains four different musical metadata and control change #1 (CC#1) value.
We verify that our metadata is a key factor in MID-FiLD, exerting a substantial influence over produced CC#1 values. In
addition, we demonstrate the applicability of MID-FiLD to
deep learning models by suggesting a token-based encoding
methodology and reveal the potential for generating controllable, human-like musical expressions.

Introduction
Figure 1: Example illustrating variations in Melspectrogram according to alterations in expressive dynamics. As the value of expressive dynamics fluctuates, the
intensity of the sound signal varies over time. It can be seen
that expressive dynamics affect the amplitude of a specific
frequency in music, which leads to changes in loudness.

Expressive dynamics is an essential element for improving the quality and completeness of music (Todd 1992). As
shown in the spectrogram in Figure 1, expressive dynamics control the loudness of an instrument, which is a subjective perception of sound pressure. In a performance, the
performer focuses not only on performing the correct pitch
and duration of the notes but also on conveying musical expression including loudness intended by the composer (J˛edrzejewska, Zjawiński, and Stasiak 2018). In order to create
high-quality and realistic music using deep learning techniques, recent studies have aimed to mimic characteristics of
human performances including expressive dynamics (Huang
et al. 2018; Huang and Yang 2020). Furthermore, expressive
dynamics has been regarded as a crucial factor in controllable generation of music (Tan, Luo, and Herremans 2020;
Wu et al. 2022).
Duly recognizing the significance of conveying expressive dynamics, a majority of studies dealing with MIDI data
focused on generating note-level MIDI velocity, which can
adjust the loudness of each note (Cancino-Chacón et al.

2018; Jeong et al. 2019b; Lauly 2010). Likewise, in the
area of audio synthesis, previous studies have made efforts
to reflect the loudness of music when rendering MIDI data
(Castellon, Donahue, and Liang 2020; Wu et al. 2022). To
accomplish this, most studies extracted the loudness features
directly from the frequency and amplitude of the audio signal without using domain-specific annotations.
However, these previous attempts are bound by two inherent limitations. Primarily, note-level expressive dynamics
are insufficient to reenact musical expression performed by
most western instruments. Except for piano or percussion, in
which the attack of a note defines the loudness, most western
instruments can induce variation in the loudness of a single
note. For example, a string, woodwind, or brass instrument
can perform a crescendo that stretches within a note (Berndt

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

222

