The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Uncertainty-Aware Temporally-Extended Actions
Joongkyu Lee1 * , Seung Joon Park2 * , Yunhao Tang3 , Min-hwan Oh1
1

Seoul National University
2
Samsung Research
3
Google DeepMind
jklee0717@snu.ac.kr, soonjun.park@samsung.com, robintyh@deepmind.com, minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, temporal abstraction in the action
space, exemplified by action repetition, is a technique to facilitate policy learning through extended actions. However, a primary limitation in previous studies of action repetition is its potential to degrade performance, particularly when sub-optimal
actions are repeated. This issue often negates the advantages
of action repetition. To address this, we propose a novel algorithm named Uncertainty-aware Temporal Extension (UTE).
UTE employs ensemble methods to accurately measure uncertainty during action extension. This feature allows policies
to strategically choose between emphasizing exploration or
adopting an uncertainty-averse approach, tailored to their specific needs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of UTE through
experiments in Gridworld and Atari 2600 environments. Our
findings show that UTE outperforms existing action repetition
algorithms, effectively mitigating their inherent limitations
and significantly enhancing policy learning efficiency.

Introduction
Temporal abstraction is a promising approach to solving
complex tasks in reinforcement learning (RL) with complex
structures and long horizons (Fikes, Hart, and Nilsson 1972;
Dayan and Hinton 1992; Parr and Russell 1997; Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Precup 2000; Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017; Barreto et al. 2019; Machado, Barreto, and Precup
2021). Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) enables
the decomposition of this sequential decision-making problem into simpler lower-level actions or subtasks. Intuitively,
an agent explores the environment more effectively when
operating at a higher level of abstraction and solving smaller
subtasks (Machado, Barreto, and Precup 2021). One of the
most prominent approaches for HRL is the option framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Precup 2000), which
describes the hierarchical structure in decision making in
terms of temporally-extended courses of action. Temporallyextended actions have been shown to speed up learning, potentially providing more effective exploration compared to
single-step explorative action and requiring a smaller number of high-level decisions when solving a problem (Stolle
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13391

and Precup 2002; Biedenkapp et al. 2021). From a cognitive perspective, such observations are also coherent with
how humans learn, generalize from experiences, and perform
abstraction over tasks (Xia and Collins 2021).
There has been a line of works that propose repetition
of action for an extended period as a specialized form
of temporal abstraction (Lakshminarayanan, Sharma, and
Ravindran 2017; Sharma, Srinivas, and Ravindran 2017;
Dabney, Ostrovski, and Barreto 2020; Metelli et al. 2020;
Biedenkapp et al. 2021; Park, Kim, and Kim 2021).1 Hence,
the action-repetition methods address the problem of learning
when to perform a new action while repeating an action for
multiple time-steps (Dabney, Ostrovski, and Barreto 2020;
Biedenkapp et al. 2021). The extension length, the interaction steps to repeat the same action, is learned by an agent
along with what action to execute (Sharma, Srinivas, and
Ravindran 2017; Biedenkapp et al. 2021). As shown by the
improved empirical performances (Dabney, Ostrovski, and
Barreto 2020; Biedenkapp et al. 2021), these action repetition
approaches can be well justified by the commitment to action
for deriving a deeper exploration. These approaches can help
suppress the dithering behavior of the agent that can result in
short-sighted exploration in a local neighborhood.
However, simple action repetition alone cannot guarantee
performance improvement. Repetition of a sub-optimal action for an extended period can lead to severe deterioration
in the performance. For example, a game may terminate due
to reckless action repetition when an agent is in a dangerous
region. A more uncertainty-averse behavior would be helpful
in this scenario. On the other hand, an agent may linger in the
local neighborhood due to a lack of optimism, especially in
sparse reward settings. In that case, a more exploration-favor
behavior can be beneficial. In either case, a suitable control
of uncertainty of value estimates over longer horizons can be
a crucial element. In particular, the calibration of how much
exploration the agent can take, or how uncertainty-averse the
agent should be, can definitely depend on an environment.
Thus, the degree of uncertainty to be considered should be
1
In fact, action repetition for a fixed number of steps was one
of the strategies deployed in solving Atari 2600 games (Mnih et al.
2015; Machado et al. 2018). Despite its simplicity, the action repetition provided sufficient performance gains so that almost all modern
methods of solving Atari games are still implementing such action
repetitions.

