The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Accelerating Cutting-Plane Algorithms via Reinforcement Learning Surrogates
Kyle Mana1 , Fernando Acero1,2 , Stephen Mak3 , Parisa Zehtabi1 , Michael Cashmore1 ,
Daniele Magazzeni1 , Manuela Veloso1
1

J.P. Morgan AI Research
University College London
3
University of Cambridge
{kyle.mana, parisa.zehtabi, michael.cashmore, daniele.magazzeni, manuela.veloso}@jpmorgan.com,
fernando.acero@ucl.ac.uk, sm2410@cam.ac.uk
2

Abstract

General-purpose solvers typically rely on a mixture of
branch-and-bound and cutting-plane methods to achieve this
(Bonami et al. 2008). Despite advancements in cutting and
branching techniques, large-scale problems remain heavily
dependent on domain-specific algorithms that exploit
problem structure for more efficient convergence. In this
paper, we propose a procedure that leverages reinforcement
learning for accelerating cutting-plane algorithms. We focus
on the domain-specific cutting-plane algorithms of Benders
decomposition (applied to stochastic optimization) and a
cutting-plane method for solving regression problems with
L0 regularization. Our proposed method is generalizable
to any cutting-plane procedure and not isolated to the two
examples given.
The first of the two cutting-plane procedures we consider,
Benders decomposition (BD), is a method that aims
to exploit a unique block structure commonly found
in stochastic optimization (SO) problems. Considering
each scenario as a unique block, the global problem is
decomposed into a master problem (MP) and a collection
of scenario-specific sub-problems (SP). Each SP ingests
decisions from the MP, and shares loss information back to
the MP in the form of constraints. Iteratively, the MP gains
a better understanding of global loss exhibited by each SP,
and eventually converges (Benders 1962).
The second procedure we enhance is aimed at solving
machine learning problems with sparsity enforced via
an L0 regularization term. In settings such as medical
imaging (Daducci et al. 2014), economics (Fan, Lv, and
Qi 2011), or causal learning (Idé et al. 2021), sparsity
via L0 regularization plays a critical role. Furthermore,
it has been shown that regularization techniques such
as lasso (L1 ), ridge (L2 ), and elastic-net (L1 , L2 ) can
improve out-of-sample performance (Zou and Hastie
2005). Typically, sparse regression is implemented via
an L1 regularization term (i.e. lasso), eliminating the
necessity to optimize over support of the coefficient set.
Louizos, Welling, and Kingma (2018) note that using L0
penalties in parametric models is generally intractable
due to non-differentiability and the combinatorial nature
of cardinality regularization. Despite its complexity,
the importance of L0 regularization is advocated
for by Bertsimas, King, and Mazumder (2016), who
argue that using L1 regularization to achieve sparsity

Discrete optimization belongs to the set of N P-hard
problems, spanning fields such as mixed-integer
programming and combinatorial optimization. A current
standard approach to solving convex discrete optimization
problems is the use of cutting-plane algorithms, which
reach optimal solutions by iteratively adding inequalities
known as cuts to refine a feasible set. Despite the existence
of a number of general-purpose cut-generating algorithms,
large-scale discrete optimization problems continue to suffer
from intractability. In this work, we propose a method for
accelerating cutting-plane algorithms via reinforcement
learning. Our approach uses learned policies as surrogates
for N P-hard elements of the cut generating procedure
in a way that (i) accelerates convergence, and (ii) retains
guarantees of optimality. We apply our method on two types
of problems where cutting-plane algorithms are commonly
used: stochastic optimization, and mixed-integer quadratic
programming. We observe the benefits of our method when
applied to Benders decomposition (stochastic optimization)
and iterative loss approximation (quadratic programming),
achieving up to 45% faster average convergence when
compared to modern alternative algorithms.

Introduction
A large number of problems require discrete decisions.
Examples include the decision to purchase an item in
whole units, schedule tasks with finite resources, or plan
the shortest route through given locations. Even seemingly
simple problems can become incredibly challenging to solve
when they necessitate discrete decisions (Parker and Rardin
2014). In some cases, discrete optimization problems are
provably unsolvable in polynomial time, e.g., it is known
that integer programs with quadratic constraints are not
solvable at all by Turing machines (Jeroslow 1973). Indeed,
problems that would otherwise take fractions of a second to
solve can take hours, if not days in discrete space.
When faced with discrete decisions, heuristic methods
such as rounding can offer fast solutions, but at an
unknown cost of sub-optimality and if not careful,
infeasibility. Due to these issues, there is a strong desire to
generate naturally integer, and provably optimal solutions.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20786

