The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unknown-Aware Graph Regularization for
Robust Semi-supervised Learning from Uncurated Data
Heejo Kong1 , Suneung Kim2 , Ho-Joong Kim2 , Seong-Whan Lee2
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
hj_kong@korea.ac.kr, se_kim@korea.ac.kr, hojoong_kim@korea.ac.kr, sw.lee@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in semi-supervised learning (SSL) have relied on the optimistic assumption that labeled and unlabeled
data share the same class distribution. However, this assumption is often violated in real-world scenarios, where unlabeled
data may contain out-of-class samples. SSL with such uncurated unlabeled data leads training models to be corrupted.
In this paper, we propose a robust SSL method for learning
from uncurated real-world data within the context of openset semi-supervised learning (OSSL). Unlike previous works
that rely on feature similarity distance, our method exploits
uncertainty in logits. By leveraging task-dependent predictions of logits, our method is capable of robust learning even
in the presence of highly correlated outliers. Our key contribution is to present an unknown-aware graph regularization (UAG), a novel technique that enhances the performance
of uncertainty-based OSSL frameworks. The technique addresses not only the conflict between training objectives for
inliers and outliers but also the limitation of applying the
same training rule for all outlier classes, which are existed
on previous uncertainty-based approaches. Extensive experiments demonstrate that UAG surpasses state-of-the-art OSSL
methods by a large margin across various protocols. Codes
are available at https://github.com/heejokong/UAGreg.

(a) Uncorrelated outliers

(b) Correlated outliers

Figure 1: An illustration of the example for uncorrelated and
correlated outliers. The classes marked with red and blue
box share the same superclass, animal and transportation,
respectively. In an uncorrelated setting, out-of-class data do
not share a same superclass with labeled classes, whereas in
a correlated setting, they share the same superclass space.

is desirable that the training models not only classify samples from known categories, i.e., inliers, but also identify
samples from novel classes as outliers. This task is known as
open-set semi-supervised learning (OSSL) (Yu et al. 2020).
While OSSL is more realistic and practical for various applications, it has been rarely considered in previous literature.
In OSSL problem, the challenge lies in the absence of supervision for distinguishing unknown from known samples.
Recent notable approaches (Yu et al. 2020; Saito, Kim, and
Saenko 2021) have tackled this problem by utilizing similarity distances in feature space. Based on intra- or inter-class
distances of known categories, they aim to identify unknown
samples, which deviate significantly from in-distribution
(ID) data, and consider the samples as outliers. Although
the techniques have substantially improved the performance
of OSSL, they are still quite limited for general use. As discussed in (Saito, Kim, and Saenko 2021), similarity-based
measures can fail to detect highly correlated outliers that
exhibit similar visual characteristics to ID data. It is evident that this limitation is more pronounced when unknown
classes share the same superclass space with inliers, defined
as correlated outliers in Fig. 1. In a scenario where the scale
of unlabeled data is larger, the correlated outliers are more
natural, but it has never been considered in prior studies.
As an alternative to the feature similarity, some OSSL
works (He et al. 2022; Sun and Wang 2022) exploit uncertainty in logit space to resolve the open-set decision prob-

Introduction
Recent advances in deep supervised learning have been
driven by the availability of large-scale annotated datasets.
However, constructing such training data is labor-intensive
and time-consuming due to the labeling process. As a remedy, significant efforts have been dedicated to the field of
semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Lee et al. 2013; Xie et al.
2020; Sohn et al. 2020; Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2021; Zheng
et al. 2022). They have provided effective solutions to leverage abundant unlabeled data with only a fraction of manual
annotations, and shown their promising performances.
All the positive results observed in SSL are typically
based on the optimistic assumption that both labeled and unlabeled data are drawn from the identical class distribution.
However, in practical scenarios, the unlabeled dataset often
includes out-of-class data, i.e., outlier, which easily violates
this assumption. This uncurated unlabeled data severely degrade the performance of SSL (Oliver et al. 2018). Hence, it
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13265

