The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Blind Face Restoration under Extreme Conditions: Leveraging 3D-2D Prior
Fusion for Superior Structural and Texture Recovery
Zhengrui Chen1 , Liying Lu3 , Ziyang Yuan2 , Yiming Zhu2, 3
Yu Li3 * † , Chun Yuan2 * , Weihong Deng1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Tsinghua University
3
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)

Abstract
Blind face restoration under extreme conditions entails reconstructing high-quality facial images from severely degraded
inputs, often characterized by poor quality and extreme facial poses. These challenges lead to errors in facial structure
and unnatural artifacts in restored images. This paper demonstrates the efficacy of leveraging 3D priors to address structural deficiencies in 2D priors while preserving texture details. We introduce FREx (Face Restoration under Extreme
conditions), which integrates structure-accurate 3D priors and
texture-rich 2D priors into pretrained generative networks.
To fuse information from 3D and 2D priors, we propose an
adaptive weight module that adjusts feature importance based
on input image conditions. This approach enables our model
to restore accurate facial structures and natural appearances,
even when images suffer significant information loss due to
degradation and extreme poses. Extensive experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of
our approach.

Figure 1: Restoration results of some challenging real-world
cases produced by our method. Our method could generate rational facial structures and fine details even when the
majority of information is lost in the input images, and our
method could handle various head poses.

Introduction

the restoration process. Prior-based methods (Wang et al.
2021; Chan et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022;
Gu et al. 2022) have been developed to address this challenge, with previous approaches primarily utilizing 2D priors, such as reference priors (Zhou et al. 2022; Gu et al.
2022) and generative priors (Wang et al. 2021; Chan et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2021).
Reference prior-based methods (Zhou et al. 2022; Gu
et al. 2022) typically employ vector quantized codebooks (Van Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017) learned by selfreconstruction to predict high-quality facial codes from lowquality inputs. On the other hand, recent generative priorbased methods (Wang et al. 2021; Chan et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2021) encode low-quality images into the latent space
and subsequently decode the latent code into high-quality
images using a pre-trained generator (Karras et al. 2020).
While these methods are effective in generating complex facial details, they often produce erroneous facial structures
when dealing with images under extreme facial poses, as
they lack 3D information.
To tackle the challenge of restoring severely degraded facial images, we propose to use both 3D and 2D priors simultaneously to achieve superior results. The rationale behind this is twofold: firstly, 3D priors are useful in providing

Blind face restoration has demonstrated remarkable potential in restoring high-quality facial images from unknown
degradations, including low resolution (Dong et al. 2014;
Lim et al. 2017), blur (Kupyn et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2018),
noise (Zhang et al. 2017), and compression artifacts (Dong
et al. 2015; Li et al. 2014). With the development of deep
learning techniques, existing methods (Wang et al. 2021;
Zhou et al. 2022) are becoming increasingly effective in enhancing the visual quality of facial images. However, these
methods often struggle to restore rational facial structures
and details when dealing with images with extremely severe
degradations.
In this paper, we present the FREx method, which is designed to handle extreme scenarios such as very severe noise
and blur. It is also capable of restoring facial images with
large head pose, which is a challenging task in the field of
blind face restoration.
Since severely degraded images contain limited useful information, it is crucial to employ prior knowledge to aid in
* Corresponding Authors.
†

Project Lead.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1263

