The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SimDistill: Simulated Multi-Modal Distillation for BEV 3D Object Detection
Haimei Zhao1 , Qiming Zhang1 , Shanshan Zhao1 Zhe Chen2 Jing Zhang1 , Dacheng Tao1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia,
School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, La Trobe University, Australia
hzha7798@uni.sydney.edu.au, qzha2506@uni.sydney.edu.au, sshan.zhao00@gmail.com, zhe.chen@latrobe.edu.au,
jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Large Camerabased Detector

Camera

Multi-view camera-based 3D object detection has become
popular due to its low cost, but accurately inferring 3D geometry solely from camera data remains challenging and may
lead to inferior performance. Although distilling precise 3D
geometry knowledge from LiDAR data could help tackle
this challenge, the benefits of LiDAR information could be
greatly hindered by the significant modality gap between different sensory modalities. To address this issue, we propose
a Simulated multi-modal Distillation (SimDistill) method
by carefully crafting the model architecture and distillation
strategy. Specifically, we devise multi-modal architectures
for both teacher and student models, including a LiDARcamera fusion-based teacher and a simulated fusion-based
student. Owing to the “identical” architecture design, the student can mimic the teacher to generate multi-modal features
with merely multi-view images as input, where a geometry compensation module is introduced to bridge the modality gap. Furthermore, we propose a comprehensive multimodal distillation scheme that supports intra-modal, crossmodal, and multi-modal fusion distillation simultaneously in
the Bird’s-eye-view space. Incorporating them together, our
SimDistill can learn better feature representations for 3D object detection while maintaining a cost-effective camera-only
deployment. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness
and superiority of SimDistill over state-of-the-art methods,
achieving an improvement of 4.8% mAP and 4.1% NDS over
the baseline detector. The source code will be released at
https://github.com/ViTAE-Transformer/SimDistill.

LiDAR
Fusion-based
Detector

KD
Camera-based
Detector

Camera

(a) Intra-modal Distillation
LiDAR-based
Detector

LiDAR

KD
Simulated
LiDAR
Camera

Simulated
Fusion-based
Detector

(c) Simulated multi-modal Distillation

KD
Camera

Camera

Camera-based
Detector

(b) Cross-modal Distillation

Camera Path
(Simulated) LiDAR Path
Knowledge Distillation

Figure 1: Comparison of our SimDistill with previous distillation frameworks. (a) Intra-modal distillation between
camera-only teacher and student models cannot learn accurate 3D information due to the limited capacity of the
teacher model for inferring 3D geometry. (b) Cross-modal
distillation between the LiDAR teacher and Camera student
enables learning useful 3D information from the teacher but
suffers from the large cross-modal gap. (c) Our simulated
multi-modal distillation enables effective knowledge distillation within/between modalities and fully takes advantage
of complementary information from different modalities.

To address this issue, researchers attempt to impose LiDAR data to provide accurate 3D geometry information.
Some multi-view camera-based methods (Li et al. 2023b,a)
generate ground truth depth from LiDAR point cloud and
use it as the supervisory signal for depth estimation to
help transform image features to the Bird’s-eye-view (BEV)
space (Zhao et al. 2022) accurately. Except for directly using LiDAR as supervision during training, some recent work
employs LiDAR information by applying the knowledge
distillation (KD) technique (Gou et al. 2021) to improve the
detection performance of camera-based methods. KD-based
3D object detection methods usually leverage the informative features or predictions of a well-trained teacher model
to facilitate the learning of the student model. One straightforward approach is intra-modal distillation (Li et al. 2022a;
Zhang et al. 2022) between a large teacher model and a
small student model, as shown in Figure 1 (a), which con-

Introduction
3D object detection is a pivotal technique with extensive applications in fields such as autonomous driving, robotics, and
virtual/augmented reality (Zhang and Tao 2020). In recent
years, camera-based 3D object detection methods, which infer objects’ 3D locations from multi-view images (Huang
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023b), have attracted great attention
from both academia and industry because of the high perceptual ability of dense color and texture information with low
deployment cost. However, due to the lack of accurate 3D
geometry reasoning ability, their detection performance falls
largely behind LiDAR-based methods, which poses a challenge to the practical deployment of camera-based methods.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7460

