The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MASTER: Market-Guided Stock Transformer for Stock Price Forecasting
Tong Li 1 * , Zhaoyang Liu 2 , Yanyan Shen 1† , Xue Wang 2 , Haokun Chen 2 , Sen Huang 2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Alibaba Group
{2017lt, shenyy}@sjtu.edu.cn, {jingmu.lzy, xue.w, hankel.chk, huangsen.huang}@alibaba-inc.com

time

Abstract

stocks

Stock price forecasting has remained an extremely challenging problem for many decades due to the high volatility of the
stock market. Recent efforts have been devoted to modeling
complex stock correlations toward joint stock price forecasting. Existing works share a common neural architecture that
learns temporal patterns from individual stock series and then
mixes up temporal representations to establish stock correlations. However, they only consider time-aligned stock correlations stemming from all the input stock features, which
suffer from two limitations. First, stock correlations often occur momentarily and in a cross-time manner. Second, the feature effectiveness is dynamic with market variation, which affects both the stock sequential patterns and their correlations.
To address the limitations, this paper introduces MASTER, a
MArkert-Guided Stock TransformER, which models the momentary and cross-time stock correlation and leverages market information for automatic feature selection. MASTER elegantly tackles the complex stock correlation by alternatively
engaging in intra-stock and inter-stock information aggregation. Experiments show the superiority of MASTER compared with previous works and visualize the captured realistic
stock correlation to provide valuable insights.

attention map
or
graph
stock sequences

representations

correlation module

predictions

Figure 1: The framework of existing works. The dashed lines
represent the underlying momentary and cross-time stock
correlations, which reside between some (stock1 , time1 ),
(stock2 , time2 ) pairs.
other. While these methods provide insights into the relations between stocks, they do not account for real-time stock
correlations. For example, different stocks within the same
industry can experience opposite price movements on a particular day. Additionally, the pre-defined relationships may
not be generalizable to new stocks in an evolving market
where events such as company listing, delisting, or changes
in the main business happen normally. Another line of research (Yoo et al. 2021) follows the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) and uses the self-attention mechanism to compute dynamic stock correlations. This datadriven manner is more flexible and applicable to the timevarying stock sets in the market. Despite different schemes
for establishing stock correlations, the existing methods generally follow a common two-step computation flow. As depicted in Figure 1, the first step is using a sequential encoder
to summarize the historical sequence of stock features and
obtain stock representation, and the second step is to refine
each stock representation by aggregating information from
correlated stocks using graph encoders or attention mechanism. However, such a flow suffers from two limitations.
First, existing works distill an overall stock representation and blur the time-specific details of stock sequence,
leading to weakness in modeling the de-facto stock correlations, which often occurs momentarily and in a cross-time
manner (Bennett, Cucuringu, and Reinert 2022). To be specific, the stock correlation is highly dynamic and may reside in misaligned time steps rather than holding through the
whole lookback period. This is because the dominating factors of stock prices constantly change, and different stocks
may react to the same factors with different delays. For instance, upstream companies’ stock prices may react faster to

Introduction
Stock price forecasting, which utilizes historical data collected from the stock market to predict future trends, is a
vital technique for profitable stock investment. Unlike stationary time series that often exhibit regular patterns such
as periodicity and steady trends, the dynamics in the stock
price series are intricate because stock prices fluctuate subject to multiple factors, including macroeconomic factors,
capital flows, investor sentiments, and events. The mixing
of factors interweaves the stock market as a correlated network, making it difficult to precisely predict the individual
behavior of stocks without taking other stocks into account.
Most previous works (Feng et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021, 2022; Wang, Qu, and Chen 2022) in the
field of stock correlation have relied on predefined concepts,
relationships, or rules and established a static correlation
graph, e.g., stocks in the same industry are connected to each
* This work was done during her internship at Alibaba Group.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

162

