The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Provably Powerful Graph Neural Networks for Directed Multigraphs
Béni Egressy1, 2 Luc von Niederhäusern1, 2 , Jovan Blanuša2 , Erik Altman3 , Roger Wattenhofer1 ,
Kubilay Atasu2
1

ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
IBM Research Europe, Zurich, Switzerland
3
IBM Watson Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
begressy@ethz.ch, lucv@ethz.ch, jov@zurich.ibm.com, ealtman@us.ibm.com, wattenhofer@ethz.ch, kat@zurich.ibm.com
2

Abstract
This paper analyses a set of simple adaptations that transform
standard message-passing Graph Neural Networks (GNN) into
provably powerful directed multigraph neural networks. The
adaptations include multigraph port numbering, ego IDs, and
reverse message passing. We prove that the combination of
these theoretically enables the detection of any directed subgraph pattern. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed
adaptations in practice, we conduct experiments on synthetic
subgraph detection tasks, which demonstrate outstanding performance with almost perfect results.
Moreover, we apply our proposed adaptations to two financial crime analysis tasks. We observe dramatic improvements
in detecting money laundering transactions, improving the
minority-class F1 score of a standard message-passing GNN
by up to 30%, and closely matching or outperforming treebased and GNN baselines. Similarly impressive results are
observed on a real-world phishing detection dataset, boosting
three standard GNNs’ F1 scores by around 15% and outperforming all baselines. An extended version with appendices
can be found on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11586.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the go-to machine learning models for learning from relational data.
GNNs are used in various fields, ranging from biology,
physics, and chemistry to social networks, traffic, and weather
forecasting (Bongini, Bianchini, and Scarselli 2021; Zhou
et al. 2020; Derrow-Pinion et al. 2021; Shu, Wang, and
Liu 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Keisler 2022; Zhang et al. 2019;
Battaglia et al. 2016). More recently, there has been growing
interest in using GNNs to identify financial crime (Cardoso,
Saleiro, and Bizarro 2022; Kanezashi et al. 2022; Weber et al.
2019, 2018; Nicholls, Kuppa, and Le-Khac 2021).
Our motivating task is to detect financial crimes manifesting as subgraph patterns in transaction networks. For
example, see Fig. 1, which depicts established money laundering patterns. But note that similar patterns are relevant for
graph tasks in many areas, ranging from chemistry to traffic
forecasting. The task seems to lend itself nicely to the use of
GNNs. Unfortunately, current GNNs are ill-equipped to deal
with financial transaction networks effectively.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11838

Firstly, financial transaction networks are, in fact, directed
multigraphs, i.e., edges (or transactions) have a direction, and
there can be multiple edges between two nodes (or accounts).
Secondly, most GNNs cannot detect some subgraph patterns,
such as cycles (Chen et al. 2020, 2019). There have been
many efforts to overcome this limitation (You et al. 2021;
Huang et al. 2022; Papp and Wattenhofer 2022; Zhang and Li
2021; Loukas 2019; Sato, Yamada, and Kashima 2019), all
focusing on simple (undirected) graphs. But even on simple
graphs, the problem is far from solved. Until very recently, for
example, there was no linear-time permutation-equivariant
GNN that could count 6-cycles (Huang et al. 2022).
This paper addresses both of these issues. To our knowledge, this is the first GNN architecture designed specifically
for directed multigraphs. Secondly, we first prove that the
proposed architecture can theoretically detect any subgraph
pattern in directed multigraphs and then empirically confirm
that our proposed architecture can detect the patterns illustrated in Fig. 1. Our proposed architecture is based on a set
of simple adaptations that can transform any standard GNN
architecture into a directed multigraph GNN. The adaptations
are reverse message passing (Jaume et al. 2019), port numbering (Sato, Yamada, and Kashima 2019), and ego IDs (You
et al. 2021). Although these individual building blocks are
present in existing literature, the theoretical and empirical
power of combining them has not been explored. In this work,
we fill this gap: We combine them, adapt them to directed
multigraphs, and showcase the theoretical and empirical advantages of using them in unison.
Our contributions. (1) We propose a set of simple and intuitive adaptations that can transform message-passing GNNs
into provably powerful directed multigraph neural networks.
(2) We prove that suitably powerful GNNs equipped with ego
IDs, port numbering, and reverse message passing can identify any directed subgraph pattern. (3) The theory is tested
on synthetic graphs, confirming that GNNs using these adaptations can detect a variety of subgraph patterns, including
directed cycles up to length six, scatter-gather patterns, and
directed bicliques, setting them apart from previous GNN
architectures. (4) The improvements translate to significant
gains on two financial datasets. The adaptations boost GNN
performance dramatically on money laundering and phishing datasets, matching or surpassing state-of-the-art financial
crime detection models on both simulated and real data.

