The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Unified View on Forgetting and Strong Equivalence Notions
in Answer Set Programming
Zeynep G. Saribatur, Stefan Woltran
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
{zeynep.saribatur,stefan.woltran}@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

within KR appear in action theories (Luo et al. 2020), explanations for planning (Vasileiou and Yeoh 2022) and argumentation (Berthold, Rapberger, and Ulbricht 2023; Baumann and Berthold 2022).
The theoretical underpinnings of forgetting has been investigated for classical logic and logic programming for over
decades. Answer Set Programming (ASP), is a well established logic programming language, characterized by nonmonotonic declarative semantics. Its non-monotonic nature
resulted in various forgetting operators satisfying different
desirable properties (see recent survey (Gonçalves, Knorr,
and Leite 2023)). The property strong persistence (SP)
(Knorr and Alferes 2014) is considered to best capture the
essence of forgetting in the context of ASP. The aim is to
preserve all existing relations between the remaining atoms,
by requiring that there be a correspondence between the answer sets of a program before and after forgetting a set of
atoms, which is preserved in the presence of additional rules.
This correspondence is formally defined as

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a prominent rule-based
language for knowledge representation and reasoning with
roots in logic programming and non-monotonic reasoning.
The aim to capture the essence of removing (ir)relevant details in ASP programs led to the investigation of different
notions, from strong persistence (SP) forgetting, to faithful
abstractions, and, recently, strong simplifications, where the
latter two can be seen as relaxed and strengthened notions of
forgetting, respectively. Although it was observed that these
notions are related, especially given that they have characterizations through the semantics for strong equivalence, it remained unclear whether they can be brought together. In this
work, we bridge this gap by introducing a novel relativized
equivalence notion, which is a relaxation of the recent simplification notion, that is able to capture all related notions from
the literature. We provide necessary and sufficient conditions
for relativized simplifiability, which shows that the challenging part is for when the context programs do not contain all
the atoms to remove. We then introduce an operator that combines projection and a relaxation of (SP)-forgetting to obtain
the relativized simplifications. We furthermore present complexity results that complete the overall picture.

AS (P ∪ R)|A = AS (f (P, A) ∪ R)

(1)

for all programs R over the universe U without containing
atoms from A, where f (P, A) is the resulting program of applying an operator f on P to forget about the set A of atoms,
AS (·) denotes the collection of answer sets of a program,
and AS (·)|A is their projection onto the remaining atoms.
When nothing is forgotten, (SP) matches the notion of
strong equivalence (SE) (Lifschitz, Pearce, and Valverde
2001) among programs, denoted as AS (P ∪ R) = AS (Q ∪
R) for all programs R. Gonçalves et al. (2020) showed that
(SP)-forgetting can only be done when the SE-models of the
program adheres to certain conditions, which is motivated
by relativized strong equivalence (Woltran 2004; Eiter, Tompits, and Woltran 2005), a relaxation of strong equivalence
where the context programs can exclude some atoms.
The motivation to obtain ASP programs with a reduced
signature also led to notion of abstraction by omission (Saribatur and Eiter 2018) by means of over-approximation, i.e.,
any answer set in program P can be mapped to some answer set in the abstracted program Q, which is denoted by
AS (P )|A ⊆ AS (Q), and also has been referred as weakened
Consequence (wC) within forgetting (Gonçalves, Knorr, and
Leite 2016a). Saribatur and Eiter (2018) introduce a syntactic operator that obtains abstracted programs, and an auto-

Introduction
Forgetting or discarding information that are not deemed
necessary is crucial in human reasoning, as it allows to focus on the important details and to abstract over the rest.
Such active or intentional forgetting is argued to enhance
decision-making through flexibility under changing conditions and the ability to generalize (Richards and Frankland 2017). Over the years, the desire to abstract over details led to different theories (e.g., (Giunchiglia and Walsh
1992)) and applications of abstraction in various areas of AI,
among many are planning (Knoblock 1994), constraint satisfaction (Bistarelli, Codognet, and Rossi 2002), and model
checking (Clarke, Grumberg, and Long 1994). Getting rid of
(ir)relevant details through forgetting continues to motivate
works in different subfields of AI (Beierle and Timm 2019),
such as knowledge representation and reasoning (KR) (Eiter
and Kern-Isberner 2018) and symbolic machine learning
(Siebers and Schmid 2019). Recent examples of forgetting
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10687

