The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Inference and Learning in Dynamic Decision Networks
Using Knowledge Compilation
Gabriele Venturato1 , Vincent Derkinderen1 , Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires2 , Luc De Raedt1,2
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
Örebro University, Sweden
firstname.lastname@kuleuven.be, pedro.zuidberg-dos-martires@oru.se
2

M

Decision making under uncertainty in dynamic environments
is a fundamental AI problem in which agents need to determine which decisions (or actions) to make at each time step to
maximise their expected utility. Dynamic decision networks
(DDNs) are an extension of dynamic Bayesian networks with
decisions and utilities, and can be used to compactly represent
Markov decision processes (MDPs). We propose a novel algorithm called mapl-cirup that leverages knowledge compilation techniques developed for (dynamic) Bayesian networks to perform inference and gradient-based learning in
DDNs. Specifically, we knowledge-compile the Bellman update present in DDNs into dynamic decision circuits and evaluate them within an (algebraic) model counting framework.
In contrast to other exact symbolic MDP approaches, we obtain differentiable circuits that enable gradient-based parameter learning.

1

t+1

t

Abstract

H

H′

B

B′

H B M R(H, B, M )
h ∗ ∗
−10
∗ b ∗
−4
∗ ∗ m
−1
∗ ∗ ∗
0

R

H M P (h′ |H, M )
h
∗
0.2
¬h m
0.5
¬h ¬m
0.8

H H ′ B P (b′ |H, H ′ B)
h
h′
b
0.54
h ¬h′ b
0.3
¬h h′
b
0.48
¬h ¬h′ b
0.06
∗
∗ ¬b
0

Figure 1: DDN for Example 1. DDNs provide a graphical
representation of the dependencies between variables at time
t and t + 1, the latter represented by using a primed symbol
such as B ′ . For DDNs representing MDPs, the current state
is fully observed, i.e., all non primed state variables are evidence (gray nodes). The ‘∗’ in the tables represent unspecified truth values. The reward table represents an additive
reward function (Russell and Norvig 2020, Chapter 16.4.2).

Introduction

Bayesian networks (BNs) have been widely adopted to
model real-world processes under uncertainty (Koller and
Friedman 2009; Russell and Norvig 2020). Unfortunately,
inference in BNs is computationally hard (#P-hard) (Roth
1996). To deal with this hardness, state-of-the-art techniques
apply knowledge compilation (KC), exploiting conditional
independencies as well as local structures (Chavira and Darwiche 2008). More recently, KC has also been successfully
applied for inference in dynamic models (Vlasselaer et al.
2016), exploiting not only local, but also repeated structure
over time.
Dynamic decision networks (DDNs) combine dynamic
(Dean and Kanazawa 1989; Murphy 2002) and decisiontheoretic (Howard and Matheson 1984; Bhattacharjya and
Shachter 2007) Bayesian networks into a single modelling
language (Kanazawa and Dean 1989; Russell and Norvig
2020), capable of representing, for instance, Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Bellman 1957).

step. Your decision and current state hence influence the next
state (primed variables). If the monkey misses, it gets angrier
and focuses more on its task, increasing the probability to hit
you. Moving decreases the probability of being hit. There is
a reward (R) associated with every state and decision.
Derkinderen and De Raedt (2020) explored a KC approach to model and solve a single-stage maximisation problem under uncertainty. Crucially, they leveraged the algebraic model counting framework (Kimmig, Van den Broeck,
and De Raedt 2017) where compiling once allows for solving a variety of tasks on top of the same compiled diagram. In this work we investigate how to apply a similar
approach to the dynamic setting, solving dynamic decision
networks. To illustrate the benefit of applying the algebraic
model counting framework, we then use the same compiled
diagram of the decision task for parameter learning.
Our main contribution is the introduction of
mapl-cirup (Markov planning with circuit updates),
read as ‘maple syrup’. mapl-cirup is a variation of the
classic value iteration algorithm that uses KC to exploit

Example 1 (Monkey DDN, Figure 1). A monkey tries to
hit (H) you with suspicious mud. You can decide to move
(M ) or not. If you get hit, you might smell bad (B), but the
monkey celebrates and is less likely to hit you in the next time
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20567

