The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Building Minimal and Reusable
Causal State Abstractions for Reinforcement Learning
Zizhao Wang* 1 , Caroline Wang* 1 , Xuesu Xiao2 , Yuke Zhu1 , Peter Stone1, 3
1

The University of Texas at Austin,
2
George Mason University,
3
Sony AI
zizhao.wang@utexas.edu, caroline.l.wang@utexas.edu, xiao@gmu.edu, yukez@cs.utexas.edu, pstone@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract

(a)

Two desiderata of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are
the ability to learn from relatively little experience and the
ability to learn policies that generalize to a range of problem
specifications. In factored state spaces, one approach towards
achieving both goals is to learn state abstractions, which only
keep the necessary variables for learning the tasks at hand.
This paper introduces Causal Bisimulation Modeling (CBM),
a method that learns the causal relationships in the dynamics
and reward functions for each task to derive a minimal, taskspecific abstraction. CBM leverages and improves implicit
modeling to train a high-fidelity causal dynamics model that
can be reused for all tasks in the same environment. Empirical validation on manipulation environments and Deepmind
Control Suite reveals that CBM’s learned implicit dynamics
models identify the underlying causal relationships and state
abstractions more accurately than explicit ones. Furthermore,
the derived state abstractions allow a task learner to achieve
near-oracle levels of sample efficiency and outperform baselines on all tasks.

task 1: move

when sunny

𝟙

&

in goal region

task 2: move

𝟙

in goal region

What is the minimal state abstraction for each task?

(b) CDL

causal dynamics
fully-connected
(fc) reward

(c) Denoised MDP, TIA

fc dynamics
specific to
abstraction 1

fc dynamics
specific
to abstraction 2

(d) Causal Bisimulation Modeling (ours)
reusable
causal dynamics
causal reward

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general paradigm that
enables autonomous decision-making in unknown environments. A common deficiency of deep RL algorithms is their
sample inefficiency and lack of generalization to unseen
states, thus limiting their applicability in data-expensive or
safety-critical tasks. One way to improve sample efficiency
and generalization is to learn a state abstraction which reduces the task learning space and eliminates unnecessary
information that may lead to spurious correlations. Determining the optimal abstraction necessitates understanding which
state variables affect the reward and how those variables are
influenced by others during state transitions.
Prior methods obtain the desired abstractions by searching
for the smallest subset of state variables that can predict the reward accurately while ensuring the subset is self-predictable
in dynamics. Yet, their dense dynamics models are specific
to the subset and thus have to be learned from scratch for
each new task (Fu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a; Zhang
et al. 2020b), as shown in Fig. 1. Such approaches overlook
* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15778

Figure 1: (a) Two tasks are defined by rewards R1 , R2 , and
consist respectively of moving the blue and green blocks to
their goal regions. Task 1 additionally requires moving the
block only when it is sunny. Variables that are ignored by a
state abstraction are semi-transparent. (b) CDL (Wang et al.
2022b) learns causal dependencies in the dynamics, but its
derived state abstraction keeps all controllable state variables
and ignores action-irrelevant ones, and thus the abstraction
is non-minimal for task 2 and cannot learn task 1 due to its
omission of the sun. (c) TIA and Denoised MDP (Fu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2022a) can learn more concise abstractions (minimal in this example), but they require training
fully-connected dynamics from scratch for each task. (d) In
addition to the implicit causal dynamics that can be reused
for all tasks, CBM identifies which variables affect the reward and derives a minimal state abstraction from the causal
reward models.
a key characteristic of realistic problems: we often wish to
build agents that solve multiple instances of tasks in the same
environment, e.g. different cooking skills in a kitchen. To
learn multi-task dynamics models, recent works seek to learn

