The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedCD: Federated Semi-Supervised Learning
with Class Awareness Balance via Dual Teachers
Yuzhi Liu1 , Huisi Wu1 * , Jing Qin2
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in deep learning have greatly improved
the efficiency of auxiliary medical diagnostics. However, concerns over patient privacy and data annotation costs restrict
the viability of centralized training models. In response, federated semi-supervised learning has garnered substantial attention from medical institutions. However, it faces challenges arising from knowledge discrepancies among local
clients and class imbalance in non-independent and identically distributed data. Existing methods like class balance
adaptation for addressing class imbalance often overlook
low-confidence yet valuable rare samples in unlabeled data
and may compromise client privacy. To address these issues,
we propose a novel framework with class awareness balance
and dual teacher distillation called FedCD. FedCD introduces
a global-local framework to balance and purify global and
local knowledge. Additionally, we introduce a novel class
awareness balance module to effectively explore potential
rare classes and encourage balanced learning in unlabeled
clients. Importantly, our approach prioritizes privacy protection by only exchanging network parameters during communication. Experimental results on two medical datasets under
various settings demonstrate the effectiveness of FedCD. The
code is available at https://github.com/YunzZ-Liu/FedCD.

Figure 1: Comparisons of the test accuracy curves showed
that our proposed FedCD method with dual teacher distillation outperformed the variant with only mean teacher distillation. The performance of the model relying solely on the
mean teacher declined due to the inherent limitations of local
knowledge. However, after incorporating the dual teacher
distillation and class awareness balance modules, the issue
of localized knowledge limitation was substantially mitigated, resulting in remarkable performance improvements.

Introduction

centralized (Liu et al. 2020; Huynh, Nibali, and He 2022).
In light of these difficulties, the advent of federated semisupervised learning (FSSL) has offered a promising solution. The fundamental objective of FSSL is to facilitate collaborative model training within a distributed setting. This
is achieved by harnessing a finite pool of labeled data in
conjunction with a more copious supply of unlabeled data
(Kassem et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2021; Long et al. 2020).
This innovative paradigm synergistically combines the principles of semi-supervised learning and federated learning.
It thereby enables numerous clients, each in possession of
a restricted private cache of labeled data, to contribute to
the incremental refinement of a shared model while upholding stringent data privacy safeguards. Existing approaches to
FSSL can be categorized into three primary types based on
the distribution of labeled data: centralized on servers (Jiang
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023), scattered across all clients
(Yang et al. 2022) or siloed on individual clients (Liang et al.
2022). In this paper, we focus on the third type, utilizing a
small number of labeled clients and a large number of unla-

Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized machine learning
framework, allowing multiple entities to collectively refine a
model while upholding data confidentiality by not divulging
raw data (Li et al. 2020a; Mammen 2021; Huang et al.
2023). Particularly within medical image diagnostics, FL
emerges as a transformative force in healthcare (Chen et al.
2022b; Zhu and Luo 2022). By harnessing the combined
expertise of disparate healthcare providers while meticulously safeguarding data privacy, FL provides a pathway for
more precise diagnoses. It concurrently fulfills the necessity for collaborative learning in healthcare, while ensuring
stringent patient confidentiality and data security (Dong and
Voiculescu 2021; Antunes et al. 2022). Nonetheless, annotating medical image data presents formidable challenges,
primarily driven by its considerable expenses, time-intensive
demands, and the potential risk to privacy and security when
* Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3837

