The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A General Implicit Framework for Fast NeRF Composition and Rendering
Xinyu Gao1 , Ziyi Yang1 , Yunlu Zhao1 , Yuxiang Sun2 , Xiaogang Jin1 * , Changqing Zou1,2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang Lab
{22121052, Ingram14, yunlu.zhao}@zju.edu.cn, sunyuxiangyx@gmail.com
jin@cad.zju.edu.cn, changqing.zou@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

The development of virtual worlds has revealed a strong
preference for neural techniques. Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF), an image-based rendering method (Mildenhall et al.
2020), has shown its proficiency in rendering with high fidelity while also offering the added advantage of compression capabilities, resulting in a low storage footprint. As a
result, NeRF has been extensively studied in human face
editing (Wang et al. 2022a; Jiang et al. 2022), autonomous
driving (Tancik et al. 2022; Kundu et al. 2022), stylization
(Gu et al. 2022), mesh reconstruction (Wang et al. 2021; Sun
et al. 2022), inverse rendering (Boss et al. 2021a,b; Zhang
et al. 2021), and so on.
Although a number of NeRF composition methods (Ma
et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022; Shuai et al.
2022; Ost et al. 2021) have achieved impressive results and

improved the flexibility by modeling a scene as multiple semantic parts rather than as whole, compositing neural radiance fields in real-time still remains under-explored. Existing acceleration methods, such as implicit methods (Kurz
et al. 2022; Neff et al. 2021) that rely on a limited scope
of camera activity, hybrid methods (Liu et al. 2020; Müller
et al. 2022) that require a complex spatial structure for
querying, or pre-computing methods (Hedman et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2023) that incur significant storage costs, are far
from straightforward in this task due to various challenges,
let alone forming a general pipeline. First, it is difficult to
satisfy low memory-storage cost and real-time speed while
maintaining arbitrary affine transformations for implicit objects. Second, as the number of objects to be composed
grows (e.g., a simple duplicate of 1k balls), rendering the
entire scene (especially considering shadows among implicit
objects) takes long, and the cost of hybrid or pre-computing
methods becomes prohibitively expensive.
To address the aforementioned issues, we present a general implicit framework that can quickly perform compositing and shadow casting of NeRF objects without querying any complex structure, thereby avoiding the excessive memory-storage costs. Meanwhile, we propose Neural
Depth Fields (NeDF), a novel implicit representation for implicit surface that aims for fast and precise depth estimation
under a flexible camera activity scope and arbitrary affine
transformations of objects, overcoming critical issues associated with previous implicit acceleration methods while
retaining the benefits of implicit methods with a low storage cost. When working with a single object in a composed
scene, manipulation speeds can even reach real-time in our
CUDA implementation. Notably, we use the classic concept
of shadow mapping based on NeDF for efficient rendering
of dynamic shadows cast by either point light or parallel
light sources, which represents a significant advancement
over previous NeRF works aimed at acceleration.
Our work is able to provide users a fast NeRF scene composition tool allowing a quick preview of the composited
results, as users may prefer interactive-level speed over perfect quality when manipulating each NeRF object. The key
technical contributions are summarized below:

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• A novel framework that enables interactive previewing
of the NeRF composition process at a low storage cost,
thereby providing a new interactive way to create novel

A variety of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) methods have
recently achieved remarkable success in high render speed.
However, current accelerating methods are specialized and
incompatible with various implicit methods, preventing realtime composition over various types of NeRF works. Because
NeRF relies on sampling along rays, it is possible to provide general guidance for acceleration. To that end, we propose a general implicit pipeline for composing NeRF objects
quickly. Our method enables the casting of dynamic shadows
within or between objects using analytical light sources while
allowing multiple NeRF objects to be seamlessly placed and
rendered together with any arbitrary rigid transformations.
Mainly, our work introduces a new surface representation
known as Neural Depth Fields (NeDF) that quickly determines the spatial relationship between objects by allowing
direct intersection computation between rays and implicit surfaces. It leverages an intersection neural network to query
NeRF for acceleration instead of depending on an explicit
spatial structure.Our proposed method is the first to enable
both the progressive and interactive composition of NeRF objects. Additionally, it also serves as a previewing plugin for a
range of existing NeRF works.

Introduction

1833

