The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Limited Query Graph Connectivity Test
Mingyu Guo, Jialiang Li, Aneta Neumann, Frank Neumann, Hung Nguyen
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Australia
{mingyu.guo, j.li, aneta.neumann, frank.neumann, hung.nguyen}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

and the algorithms behind. Nevertheless, our design choices
are heavily influenced by the cyber security use case.
Microsoft Active Directory (AD) is the default security
management system for Windows domain networks. An
AD environment is naturally described as a graph where
the nodes are accounts/computers/groups, and the directed
edges represent accesses. There are many open source
and commercial tools for analysing AD graphs. B LOOD H OUND1 is a popular AD analysis tool that is able to enumerate attack paths that an attacker can follow through from
a source node to the admin node. I MPRO H OUND2 is another
tool that is able to flag tier violations (i.e., this tool warns if
there exist paths that originate from low-privilege nodes and
reach high-privilege nodes). Existing tools like the above are
able to identify attack paths, but they do not provide directly
implementable fixes. In our context, a fix is a set of edges
(accesses) that can be safely removed to eliminate all attack
paths. Unfortunately, this cannot be found via minimum cut.
Some edges may appear to be redundant but their removal
could cause major disruptions (this is like refactoring legacy
code – it takes effort). Consistent with industry practise, we
assume that every edge removal is manually examined and
approved, which is therefore costly. Our vision is a tool that
acts like an “intelligent wizard” that guides the IT admin. In
every step, the wizard would propose one edge to remove.
The IT admin either approves it or rejects it. The wizard acts
adaptively in the sense that past proposals and their results
determine the next edge to propose. The wizard’s goal is to
minimize the expected number of proposals. Ultimately, the
goal is to save human effort during the algorithm-human
collaboration. We conclude the process if all attack paths
have been eliminated, or we have established that elimination is impossible.3 We also conclude if the number of proposals reaches a preset limit.

We propose a combinatorial optimisation model called Limited Query Graph Connectivity Test. We consider a graph
whose edges have two possible states (O N/O FF). The edges’
states are hidden initially. We could query an edge to reveal
its state. Given a source s and a destination t, we aim to test
s − t connectivity by identifying either a path (consisting of
only O N edges) or a cut (consisting of only O FF edges). We
are limited to B queries, after which we stop regardless of
whether graph connectivity is established. We aim to design a
query policy that minimizes the expected number of queries.
Our model is mainly motivated by a cyber security use case
where we need to establish whether attack paths exist in a
given network, between a source (i.e., a compromised user
node) and a destination (i.e., a high-privilege admin node).
Edge query is resolved by manual effort from the IT admin,
which is the motivation behind query minimization.
Our model is highly related to Stochastic Boolean Function
Evaluation (SBFE). There are two existing exact algorithms
for SBFE that are prohibitively expensive. We propose a significantly more scalable exact algorithm. While previous exact algorithms only scale for trivial graphs (i.e., past works
experimented on at most 20 edges), we empirically demonstrate that our algorithm is scalable for a wide range of much
larger practical graphs (i.e., graphs representing Windows domain networks with tens of thousands of edges).
We also propose three heuristics. Our best-performing heuristic is via limiting the planning horizon of the exact algorithm. The other two are via reinforcement learning (RL) and
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS). We also derive an algorithm for computing the performance lower bound. Experimentally, we show that all our heuristics are near optimal.
The heuristic building on the exact algorithm outperforms
all other heuristics, surpassing RL, MCTS and eight existing
heuristics ported from SBFE and related literature.

Introduction

Formal Model Description

Model Motivation

Definition 1 (Limited Query Graph Connectivity Test).
The Limited Query Graph Connectivity Test problem in-

We propose a model called Limited Query Graph Connectivity Test, which is mainly motivated by a cyber security
use case. We start by describing this use case to motivate
our model and also to better explain the model design rationales. The main focus of this paper is the theoretical model

1

https://github.com/BloodHoundAD/BloodHound
https://github.com/improsec/ImproHound
3
If we cannot eliminate all attack paths via access removal that
are safe, then the IT admin needs to resort to more “invasive” defensive measures, such as banning accounts or splitting an account
into two — one for daily usage and one for admin tasks.
2

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20718

