The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

One at a Time: Progressive Multi-Step Volumetric Probability Learning for
Reliable 3D Scene Perception
Bohan Li1, 2 , Yasheng Sun3 , Jingxin Dong2 , Zheng Zhu4 , Jinming Liu1, 2 , Xin Jin2 * , Wenjun Zeng1, 2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
4
PhiGent Robotics, Beijing, China
{bohan li, jmliu206}@sjtu.edu.cn, sun.y.aj@m.titech.ac.jp,
jingxin dong@outlook.com, zhengzhu@ieee.org, {jinxin, wenjunzengvp}@eias.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Miao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a). The existing 2D-based approaches implicitly learned 3D features by harnessing contextual information (Mayer et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2020,
2021), which often struggle with precise geometric modeling due to the inherent ambiguity of 2D representations.
On the other hand, some researchers have sought to enforce
geometric constraints by utilizing 3D probability volumes
to model correspondences across various depth hypothesis
planes, which attracts growing attention (Yin, Darrell, and
Yu 2019; Gu et al. 2020; Ding et al. 2022).
Nevertheless, many complex real-world scenarios, characterized by incomplete observations and intricate reflection conditions, pose substantial challenges when striving
for precise geometric modeling. Existing 3D probability
volume-based approaches have made strides by devising sophisticated architectures (Gu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020;
Ding et al. 2022) and refining loss functions (Peng et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022b) to acquire reliable probability volumes. However, these methods generally resolve the problem with a single-step approximation solution, imposing a
substantially heavy burden on the learning process. To mitigate these learning challenges, another line of research has
introduced GRU-based architectures (Yao et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2022a; Xu et al. 2023) to facilitate the acquisition of
a dependable 3D volumetric representation through iterative
refinement. Nevertheless, these approaches typically rely on
2D convolutional GRU mechanisms, which are susceptible
to cumulative errors (Li et al. 2018; Mao and Sejdić 2022).
This, in turn, motivates us to explore the potential of iterative
refinement in the context of 3D volumetric probability.
Based on the above analysis, we propose a Volumetric
Probability Diffusion (VPD) framework, which progressively models the volumetric probability and thus achieves
reliable geometry estimation in the MVS and SSC tasks. As
depicted in Fig. 1, the core idea is to devise a multi-step
learning scheme that models the probability volumes and
progressively refine them. Inspired by the powerful probability distribution modeling capabilities exhibited by generative diffusion models (Saharia et al. 2022; Müller et al.
2023), we propose a progressive optimization paradigm
based on the diffusion process for reliable probability volume modeling. To leverage the geometry prior extracted

Numerous studies have investigated the pivotal role of reliable 3D volume representation in scene perception tasks,
such as multi-view stereo (MVS) and semantic scene completion (SSC). They typically construct 3D probability volumes
directly with geometric correspondence, attempting to fully
address the scene perception tasks in a single forward pass.
However, such a single-step solution makes it hard to learn
accurate and convincing volumetric probability, especially in
challenging regions like unexpected occlusions and complicated light reflections. Therefore, this paper proposes to decompose the complicated 3D volume representation learning into a sequence of generative steps to facilitate fine and
reliable scene perception. Considering the recent advances
achieved by strong generative diffusion models, we introduce a multi-step learning framework, dubbed as VPD, dedicated to progressively refining the Volumetric Probability
in a Diffusion process. Specifically, we first build a coarse
probability volume from input images with the off-the-shelf
scene perception baselines, which is then conditioned as the
basic geometry prior before being fed into a 3D diffusion
UNet, to progressively achieve accurate probability distribution modeling. To handle the corner cases in challenging areas, a Confidence-Aware Contextual Collaboration (CACC)
module is developed to correct the uncertain regions for reliable volumetric learning based on multi-scale contextual
contents. Moreover, an Online Filtering (OF) strategy is designed to maintain representation consistency for stable diffusion sampling. Extensive experiments are conducted on scene
perception tasks including multi-view stereo (MVS) and semantic scene completion (SSC), to validate the efficacy of our
method in learning reliable volumetric representations. Notably, for the SSC task, our work stands out as the first to surpass LiDAR-based methods on the SemanticKITTI dataset.

Introduction
Obtaining a dependable 3D representation is of critical importance in the realm of computer vision, particularly for
tasks involving 3D scene perception, such as multi-view
stereo (MVS) (Yao et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2020) and semantic scene completion (SSC) (Li et al. 2023b;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3028

