The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bias-Conflict Sample Synthesis and Adversarial Removal Debias Strategy for
Temporal Sentence Grounding in Video
Zhaobo Qi1 , Yibo Yuan1 , Xiaowen Ruan1 , Shuhui Wang2 ,
Weigang Zhang1 * , Qingming Huang2, 3 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
qizb@hit.edu.cn, {yuanyibo21,22s130489}@stu.hit.edu.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn,
wgzhang@hit.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Temporal Sentence Grounding in Video (TSGV) is troubled
by dataset bias issue, which is caused by the uneven temporal
distribution of the target moments for samples with similar
semantic components in input videos or query texts. Existing
methods resort to utilizing prior knowledge about bias to artificially break this uneven distribution, which only removes
a limited amount of significant language biases. In this work,
we propose the bias-conflict sample synthesis and adversarial
removal debias strategy (BSSARD), which dynamically generates bias-conflict samples by explicitly leveraging potentially spurious correlations between single-modality features
and the temporal position of the target moments. Through
adversarial training, its bias generators continuously introduce biases and generate bias-conflict samples to deceive its
grounding model. Meanwhile, the grounding model continuously eliminates the introduced biases, which requires it to
model multi-modality alignment information. BSSARD will
cover most kinds of coupling relationships and disrupt language and visual biases simultaneously. Extensive experiments on Charades-CD and ActivityNet-CD demonstrate the
promising debiasing capability of BSSARD. Source codes
are available at https://github.com/qzhb/BSSARD.

Figure 1: The spurious correlation between query words and
temporal location of target moments. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the normalized starting time and duration of the target moment, respectively. The color represents
the text-video pair density, which is obtained by using kernel density estimation with the Gaussian kernel.

input video or query text, the bias originates from the uneven temporal distribution of the corresponding target moments. As shown in Figure 1, in the widely used ActivityNet
dataset, for samples containing the word “see” in the query
text, their target moments tend to be concentrated in the first
half of the video, and only a few target moments are located
elsewhere in the video. This uneven distribution leads to unexpected spurious correlations between query words and target moments, which are easily captured by TSGV models.
Once the query contains the word “see”, the model will predict the target moment as the first half of the video with a
high probability. Similar phenomena also exist in the visual
modality. Hence, generating samples to break these correlations and form a uniform temporal distribution of target
moments is an effective debiasing strategy.
However, due to the rich semantic content in the video
and text, we can not enumerate all the coupling relationships between the target moment and the semantic component of the video/text to generate corresponding samples. It
is impossible to construct an ideal dataset without dataset
biases. Therefore, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2021c) modify
the relative positions of target moments through video clipping to form a more uniform temporal distribution of target
moments. Liu et al. (Liu, Qu, and Hu 2022) replace certain
verbs or nouns in the query with similar vocabulary from
the dataset to obtain negative samples for the coupling re-

Introduction
Temporal sentence grounding in video (TSGV) aims to locate the target video clip corresponding to the query sentence, which plays a vital role in fields such as video creation and video monitoring. With the help of deep learning,
TSGV has achieved promising performance (Zhang et al.
2020b; Ghosh et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020a; Yuan et al.
2019; Zheng et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023). However, recent studies (Otani et al. 2020; Liu, Qu, and Hu 2022; Yang
et al. 2021) have shown that TSGV models are susceptible
to dataset biases. They perform the grounding task through
shortcuts created by dataset biases rather than the alignment
between query texts and corresponding visual regions, resulting in poor generalization performance.
From the perspective of the dataset distribution, given
samples that contain similar semantic components in the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4533

