The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

G2P-DDM: Generating Sign Pose Sequence from Gloss Sequence
with Discrete Diffusion Model
Pan Xie1 , Qipeng Zhang1 , Peng Taiying1 , Hao Tang2 * , Yao Du1 , Zexian Li1
1

Beihang University
Carnegie Mellon University
{panxie, zhangqipeng, taiyi, duyaoo}@buaa.edu.cn, bjdxtanghao@gmail.com, lizexian0427@gmail.com
2

Abstract
t=0

The Sign Language Production (SLP) project aims to automatically translate spoken languages into sign sequences. Our approach focuses on the transformation of sign gloss sequences
into their corresponding sign pose sequences (G2P). In this
paper, we present a novel solution for this task by converting
the continuous pose space generation problem into a discrete
sequence generation problem. We introduce the Pose-VQVAE
framework, which combines Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)
with vector quantization to produce a discrete latent representation for continuous pose sequences. Additionally, we propose
the G2P-DDM model, a discrete denoising diffusion architecture for length-varied discrete sequence data, to model the
latent prior. To further enhance the quality of pose sequence
generation in the discrete space, we present the CodeUnet
model to leverage spatial-temporal information. Lastly, we
develop a heuristic sequential clustering method to predict
variable lengths of pose sequences for corresponding gloss
sequences. Our results show that our model outperforms stateof-the-art G2P models on the public SLP evaluation benchmark. For more generated results, please visit our project page:
https://slpdiffusier.github.io/g2p-ddm.

t = T/4

t = T/2

t = 3T/4

t=T

Figure 1: The forward diffusion process applied to a pose
sequence. The first line (t=0) represents the original pose
sequence. From top to bottom (t from 0 to T), the level of
noise increases gradually.
Existing G2P methods can be broadly categorized
as autoregressive (Saunders, Bowden, and Camgöz
2020; Saunders, Camgöz, and Bowden 2020) or nonautoregressive (Huang et al. 2021), depending on their decoding strategies. Autoregressive models generate the next pose
frame based on previous frames, utilizing the teacher forcing strategy (Williams and Zipser 1989). However, during
inference, recurrent decoding can lead to error propagation
over time due to exposure bias (Schmidt 2019). To overcome this bottleneck, non-autoregressive methods have been
proposed to enable the decoder to generate all target predictions simultaneously (Gu et al. 2018; Ghazvininejad et al.
2019). Huang et al. (Huang et al. 2021) introduced a nonautoregressive G2P model that generates sign pose sequences
in a one-shot decoding scheme, using an External Aligner
(EA) for sequence alignment learning.
Inspired by the remarkable results achieved by the recently
developed Discrete Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (D3PMs) (Hoogeboom et al. 2021; Austin et al. 2021;
Gu et al. 2021) for language and vector quantized image
generation, we propose a two-stage approach in this paper.
Our method involves transforming the continuous pose sequence into discrete tokens and modeling the discrete prior
space using the denoising diffusion architecture. The proposed method is an iterative non-autoregressive approach
that performs parallel refinement on the generated results,

Introduction
Sign Language Production (SLP) is a crucial task for the
Deaf community, involving the provision of continuous sign
videos for spoken language sentences. Due to the distinct
linguistic systems between sign languages and spoken languages (Pfau, Salzmann, and Steinbach 2018), sign languages
have different sign orders, making direct alignment mapping between them challenging. To address this issue, prior
works first translate spoken languages into glosses1 , followed
by generating sign pose sequences based on the gloss sequences (G2P)(Saunders, Bowden, and Camgöz 2020; Saunders, Camgöz, and Bowden 2020). Finally, the generated sign
pose sequence can optionally be used to produce a photorealistic sign video(Saunders, Camgoz, and Bowden 2020).
As such, G2P is the crucial procedure of this task, and this
paper focuses on it.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Sign glosses are minimal lexical items that match the meaning
of signs and correspond to spoken language words.

6234

