The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

TurboSVM-FL: Boosting Federated Learning through SVM Aggregation for Lazy
Clients
Mengdi Wang* , Anna Bodonhelyi* , Efe Bozkir, Enkelejda Kasneci
Chair for Human-Centered Technologies for Learning, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany
{mengdi.wang, anna.bodonhelyi, efe.bozkir, enkelejda.kasneci}@tum.de

Abstract

models and synchronizes local models of clients with the
latest aggregated one. With such a process, FL provides a
primary privacy guarantee to a large extent since the server
does not require data sharing and is hence preferred in many
privacy-preserving scenarios where sensitive data is utilized.
Based on the characteristics of participating entities, FL
can be further categorized into cross-silo FL and crossdevice FL (Kairouz et al. 2021). In cross-silo FL, the target clients are often large-scale institutions such as hospitals, data centers, educational organizations, and hightech companies. Such stakeholders commonly possess decent resource for computing, storage, and internet connection, while the number of attending institutions is relatively
low. Therefore, the probability that each client takes part in
all aggregation rounds is high. In contrast to cross-silo FL,
cross-device FL focuses more on training on end-user devices like smartphones and personal computers using user
data. The scale of participating clients in cross-device FL
can be fairly large, while each client may be strongly limited
by its computing power and connectivity. As a consequence,
only a (small) portion of clients could share their models
during a global aggregation. An additional critical aspect of
cross-device FL is that each client might only contain data
collected from a single user, which exacerbates data heterogeneity across clients.
Despite recent advancements in FL, its implementation
in practice is still facing some challenges. Among these,
the slow convergence is a primary concern: a significantly
greater number of aggregation rounds are often needed
to reach convergence compared to non-FL setups. Several factors contribute to this inefficiency according to (Wu
et al. 2023), such as client drift caused by data heterogeneity (Karimireddy et al. 2020), lack of adaptive optimization (Reddi et al. 2020), and the increase in model complexity and data size. One trivial solution proposed in (McMahan et al. 2017) is to increase client computation load by
a larger number of local training iterations. Although this
solution vastly speeds up the convergence, it multiplies the
computation load on the client side, which can be problematic when clients are constrained by computing power, like
in cross-device FL case. Other existing solutions mainly target at either client drift or adaptive optimization. The former
often requires to optimize additional objective functions on
the client side, which in turn also increases the client com-

Federated learning is a distributed collaborative machine
learning paradigm that has gained strong momentum in recent years. In federated learning, a central server periodically
coordinates models with clients and aggregates the models
trained locally by clients without necessitating access to local
data. Despite its potential, the implementation of federated
learning continues to encounter several challenges, predominantly the slow convergence that is largely due to data heterogeneity. The slow convergence becomes particularly problematic in cross-device federated learning scenarios where
clients may be strongly limited by computing power and storage space, and hence counteracting methods that induce additional computation or memory cost on the client side such as
auxiliary objective terms and larger training iterations can be
impractical. In this paper, we propose a novel federated aggregation strategy, TurboSVM-FL, that poses no additional
computation burden on the client side and can significantly
accelerate convergence for federated classification task, especially when clients are “lazy” and train their models solely
for few epochs for next global aggregation. TurboSVM-FL
extensively utilizes support vector machine to conduct selective aggregation and max-margin spread-out regularization
on class embeddings. We evaluate TurboSVM-FL on multiple datasets including FEMNIST, CelebA, and Shakespeare
using user-independent validation with non-iid data distribution. Our results show that TurboSVM-FL can significantly
outperform existing popular algorithms on convergence rate
and reduce communication rounds while delivering better test
metrics including accuracy, F1 score, and MCC.

Introduction
With the increasing importance of data privacy, a giant stride
in distributed machine learning has been observed in recent years. As one promising distributed machine learning
paradigm, federated learning (FL) has been growing at an
astounding rate after its introduction (McMahan et al. 2017).
In the common FL settings, data is distributed over numerous end clients, while the central server possesses no data by
itself. After the server initiates a model and sends the model
to clients, each client trains the model locally using its own
data. The server periodically aggregates the locally trained
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15546

