The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dual-Prior Augmented Decoding Network for Long Tail Distribution
in HOI Detection
Jiayi Gao1 , Kongming Liang1 * , Tao Wei2 , Wei Chen2 , Zhanyu Ma1 , Jun Guo1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Space AI, Li Auto
{gaojiayi, liangkongming, mazhanyu, guojun}@bupt.edu.cn, {weitao, chenwei10}@lixiang.com

Abstract
Human object interaction detection aims at localizing humanobject pairs and recognizing their interactions. Trapped by
the long-tailed distribution of the data, existing HOI detection methods often have difficulty recognizing the tail categories. Many approaches try to improve the recognition of
HOI tasks by utilizing external knowledge (e.g. pre-trained
visual-language models). However, these approaches mainly
utilize external knowledge at the HOI combination level and
achieve limited improvement in the tail categories. In this paper, we propose a dual-prior augmented decoding network by
decomposing the HOI task into two sub-tasks: human-object
pair detection and interaction recognition. For each subtask,
we leverage external knowledge to enhance the model’s ability at a finer granularity. Specifically, we acquire the prior
candidates from an external classifier and embed them to
assist the subsequent decoding process. Thus, the long-tail
problem is mitigated from a coarse-to-fine level with the corresponding external knowledge. Our approach outperforms
existing state-of-the-art models in various settings and significantly boosts the performance on the tail HOI categories. The
source code is available at https://github.com/PRIS-CV/DPADN.

Figure 1: HICO-DET dataset (Chao et al. 2017) exhibits
a severe long-tail distribution at the object, verb, and HOI
combination levels. Inspired by the above observation, we
utilize external knowledge to enhance the model’s recognition capabilities for tail categories from the object and the
verb levels, which further improves the model’s ability to
recognize tail categories in HOI detection.

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) Detection aims at localizing human-object pairs and recognizing the interactions between them, which is a significant task to make the machine
understand human activities in a still image. It can benefit
many high-level computer vision tasks, e.g. image captioning, visual grounding, visual question answering, etc.
Current HOI detection methods can be summarized into
two paradigms: one-stage methods (Xie et al. 2023), and
two-stage methods (Gao, Zou, and Huang 2018; Qi et al.
2018; Kim et al. 2021). These two paradigms have made
significant progress with the development of deep learning. However, in compliance with gaps in the frequency of
various categories of interactions and objects in the natural world, existing HOI data presents an extremely longtailed distribution. This poses a challenge for the recent algorithms to effectively learn the tail categories. As a common way to address the long-tailed distribution problem,

external knowledge (e.g vision-language pretraining model)
is utilized to enhance the model’s ability on HOI detection
(Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021, 2022a; Bao et al. 2022).
These vision-language models are trained on large-scale image text data and show great zero-shot performances in a variety of downstream tasks. Therefore, they can be regarded
as a reliable external knowledge source for HOI detection
(Wu et al. 2022a; Ning et al. 2023). For instance, Gen-VLKT
(Liao et al. 2022) transfers the semantic representation of
HOI combinations from CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) to the
model via knowledge distillation, endowing the model with
enhanced HOI recognition ability and zero-shot detection
capability.
However, there are still issues with the way it utilizes external knowledge, among which the most questionable is
that such a strategy has not led to significant improvements
in model performance on the tail categories where external
knowledge is most needed. How to effectively migrate external knowledge to HOI detection remains an open question.
According to the explanation of VCL (Hou et al. 2020), The

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1806

