The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards a Theoretical Understanding of Why Local Search Works for Clustering
with Fair-Center Representation
Zhen Zhang1,2 , Junfeng Yang1,2 , Limei Liu1,2 , Xuesong Xu1,2∗ , Guozhen Rong3 , Qilong Feng4,2 *
1

School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Hunan University of Technology and Business, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, China
3
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, China
csuzz@foxmail.com, b12100031@hnu.edu.cn, seagullm@163.com, xuxs@hutb.edu.cn,
rongguozhen@csust.edu.cn, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn
Abstract

race and gender) is necessary, and classical clustering algorithms are not guaranteed to yield the desired results since
they tend to minimize the clustering cost without concerning
the attributes of the facilities. Motivated thus, lots of attention has been paid on clustering with fair-center representation, where the number of opened facilities from each demographic group is constrained to ensure fairness across demographics (Kleindessner, Awasthi, and Morgenstern 2019;
Chiplunkar, Kale, and Ramamoorthy 2020; Thejaswi, Ordozgoiti, and Gionis 2021; Thejaswi et al. 2022; Angelidakis
et al. 2022; Nguyen, Nguyen, and Jones 2022; Hotegni, Mahabadi, and Vakilian 2023).
Clustering with fair-center representation was recently
formalized as the representative k-median (R EP -k-M ED)
problem (Thejaswi, Ordozgoiti, and Gionis 2021; Thejaswi
et al. 2022). As in the classical k-median problem, the goal
of R EP -k-M ED is to open at most k facilities such that the
sum of the distances from the clients to the nearest opened
facilities is minimized. In R EP -k-M ED, however, the data
points are partitioned into ` disjoint demographic groups and
it is required that at least a given number of opened facilities
are belong to each group. Formally, R EP -k-M ED is defined
as follows.

The representative k-median problem generalizes the classical clustering formulations in that it partitions the data points
into several disjoint demographic groups and poses a lowerbound constraint on the number of opened facilities from
each group, such that all the groups are fairly represented by
the opened facilities. Due to its simplicity, the local-search
heuristic that optimizes an initial solution by iteratively swapping at most a constant number of closed facilities for the
same number of opened ones (denoted by the O(1)-swap
heuristic) has been frequently used in the representative kmedian problem. Unfortunately, despite its good performance
exhibited in experiments, whether the O(1)-swap heuristic
has provable approximation guarantees for the case where the
number of groups is more than 2 remains an open question for
a long time. As an answer to this question, we show that the
O(1)-swap heuristic
(i) is guaranteed to yield a constant-factor approximation
solution if the number of groups is a constant, and
(ii) has an unbounded approximation ratio otherwise.
Our main technical contribution is a new approach for theoretically analyzing local-search heuristics, which derives the
approximation ratio of the O(1)-swap heuristic via linearly
combining the increased clustering costs induced by a set of
hierarchically organized swaps.

1

Definition 1 (R EP -k-M ED) An instance of R EP -k-M ED is
specified by a metric space (X , d) with distance function
d, a set C ⊆ X of clients, a set F ⊆ X of facilities,
a collection G = {G1 , . . . , G` } of ` disjoint subsets of
S`
F satisfying t=1 Gt = F , an integer k ∈ [1, |F|], and
a vector ~r = (r[1], . . . , r[`]) of ` positive integers satisP`
fying t=1 r[t] ≤ k. A feasible solution to the instance
is a subset S ⊆ F of facilities satisfying |S| ≤ k and
|S P
∩ Gt | ≥ r[t] ∀ t ∈ {1, . . . , `}. The cost of such a solution
is j∈C d(j, S), where d(j, S) denotes the distance from j
to its nearest facility in S. The goal of R EP -k-M ED is to find
a feasible solution with minimal cost.

Introduction

Center-based clustering is one of the fundamental problems
in the field of unsupervised learning, which aims to locate facilities (or called clustering centers) to serve a set of clients
as cheaply as possible. This problem is useful in the task
of data summarization, where the set of opened facilities
is viewed as a summary of the data set. Despite its simplicity and popularity, algorithms for center-based clustering can yield unfair representations of the underlying groups
of clients. One such example is in image searching for occupations (Kay, Matuszek, and Munson 2015). Here, the
search result is a small but representative subset of the image database, in which fairly reflecting demographics (e.g.,

Thejaswi, Ordozgoiti, and Gionis (2021) experimentally
showed that a multi-swap local-search heuristic yields highquality solutions for R EP -k-M ED in real-world datasets, albeit how to analyze its approximation ratio was left as an
open question. Starting with an arbitrary feasible solution,
such a heuristic iteratively swaps a set of closed facilities

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16953

