The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Encodings for Constructive Neural Combinatorial Optimization Needs to
Regret
Rui Sun1 * , Zhi Zheng1 * , Zhenkun Wang2†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing and Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
{sunr2020, zhengz2020}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com
Abstract

Deep-reinforcement-learning (DRL) based neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) methods have demonstrated efficiency without relying on the guidance of optimal solutions.
As the most mainstream among them, the learning constructive heuristic (LCH) achieves high-quality solutions through
a rapid autoregressive solution construction process. However, these LCH-based methods are deficient in convergency,
and there is still a performance gap compared to the optimal. Intuitively, learning to regret some steps in the solution construction process is helpful to the training efficiency
and network representations. This article proposes a novel
regret-based mechanism for an advanced solution construction process. Our method can be applied as a plug-in to any
existing LCH-based DRL-NCO method. Experimental results
demonstrate the capability of our work to enhance the performance of various NCO models. Results also show that
the proposed LCH-Regret outperforms the previous modification methods on several typical combinatorial optimization
problems. The code and Supplementary File are available at
https://github.com/SunnyR7/LCH-Regret.

Introduction
Many real-world applications involve combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) (Korte et al. 2011) like vehicle routing
problems (Toth and Vigo 2002, 2014) and job scheduling
problems (Taillard 1993). The optimization of combinatorial optimization problems is difficult due to its NP-hardness
(Ausiello et al. 2012; Papadimitriou and Steiglitz 1998). In
practice, it is crucial to obtain a near-optimal solution with
less time and space consumption.
Neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) has recently
demonstrated its superiority in dealing with various
COPs (Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019; Drakulic et al.
2023; Luo et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Li, Zhang, and
Wang 2021; Zhang et al. 2023). Especially, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based methods demonstrate excellent
performance without utilizing the optimal solution as groundtruth labels for model training (Bello et al. 2017; Chen and
Tian 2019; Wu et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20803

According to the differences in the generation process of solutions, DRL-NCO methods can be broadly classified into two
categories: learning improvement heuristics (LIH) (Wu et al.
2022; Zheng et al. 2023) and learning constructive heuristics (LCH) (Kwon et al. 2020; Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost
2021). Previous studies indicate that LCH methods develop
faster inference speed and demonstrate advantages in generalization ability (Ma et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023). The
current network architecture of LCH-based DRL-NCO methods, such as Attention Model (AM) (Kool, van Hoof, and
Welling 2019), Pointerformer (Jin et al. 2023), and POMO
(Kwon et al. 2020), adopts a lightweight decoder and a heavy
encoder with large numbers of parameters. Moreover, LCH
methods always generate the solution sequentially in an autoregressive manner which selects a node at each step, and
the node encodings obtained from the encoder are repeatedly
involved in decoder calculations. Therefore, in the training
process, it is significant to converge encoders faster and attain
better encodings. However, the greedy decoding policy of
the LCH-based DRL-NCO method is more likely to lead to
a local optimum, making it difficult to achieve high-quality
encodings (Kim, Park, and Park 2022; Yuan et al. 2023).
Recently, some methods have been proposed to modify
the LCH-based DRL-NCO method. Some of them focus on
designing a better decoder (Xin et al. 2021; Grinsztajn et al.
2023) while the others add auxiliary losses for some implicit
regulations of the encodings (Kim, Park, and Park 2022; Yuan
et al. 2023). These methods achieve a clear improvement in
performance and the speed of convergence. Due to the significant difference in the parameter size between the encoder
and the decoder, we can mainly attribute the improvement
in performance to the optimization of the encodings. These
modifications, however, remain the autoregressive solution
construction process unchanged. It calls for a more effective
solution construction process for better convergence.
In this work, we propose a regret-enabled LCH method
named LCH-Regret to obtain better encodings. It contains a
novel regret mechanism that allows rolling back to the previous node while constructing solutions step by step. In practice, we introduce a learnable vector termed Regret encoding
to represent the features of the regret mechanism. Moreover,
By learning a regret operation, LCH-Regret is the first method
to modify the solution construction process. We demonstrate
that this novel solution generation process contributes a lot to

