The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

OUTFOX: LLM-Generated Essay Detection Through In-Context Learning
with Adversarially Generated Examples
Ryuto Koike1 , Masahiro Kaneko2,1 , Naoaki Okazaki1
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology
2
MBZUAI
ryuto.koike@nlp.c.titech.ac.jp, masahiro.kaneko@mbzuai.ac.ae, okazaki@c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved human-level
fluency in text generation, making it difficult to distinguish
between human-written and LLM-generated texts. This poses
a growing risk of misuse of LLMs and demands the development of detectors to identify LLM-generated texts. However, existing detectors lack robustness against attacks: they
degrade detection accuracy by simply paraphrasing LLMgenerated texts. Furthermore, a malicious user might attempt
to deliberately evade the detectors based on detection results,
but this has not been assumed in previous studies. In this paper, we propose OUTFOX, a framework that improves the
robustness of LLM-generated-text detectors by allowing both
the detector and the attacker to consider each other’s output.
In this framework, the attacker uses the detector’s prediction
labels as examples for in-context learning and adversarially
generates essays that are harder to detect, while the detector uses the adversarially generated essays as examples for
in-context learning to learn to detect essays from a strong attacker. Experiments in the domain of student essays show that
the proposed detector improves the detection performance on
the attacker-generated texts by up to +41.3 points F1-score.
Furthermore, the proposed detector shows a state-of-the-art
detection performance: up to 96.9 points F1-score, beating
existing detectors on non-attacked texts. Finally, the proposed
attacker drastically degrades the performance of detectors
by up to -57.0 points F1-score, massively outperforming the
baseline paraphrasing method for evading detection.

Figure 1: In our OUTFOX framework, there are three steps.
1 : The detector outputs prediction labels to texts in a
Step ⃝
⃝: The attacker uses the detector’s predictraining set. Step 2
tion labels as examples for in-context learning to generate
3 :
more sophisticated attacks against a training set. Step ⃝
The detector uses these adversarially generated texts by a
strong attacker to detect texts in a test set.
detection performance (Kirchenbauer et al. 2023; Mitchell
et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023a; Tang, Chuang, and Hu 2023).
Unfortunately, existing detectors often perform poorly
against simple attacks (e.g., paraphrasing), as highlighted by
recent studies (Sadasivan et al. 2023; Krishna et al. 2023). A
recent survey called for developing robust detection methods
against other potential attacks designed to deceive the detectors (Tang, Chuang, and Hu 2023). Given the human-like
generative abilities of LLMs, there’s the unexplored risk that
malicious users might exploit LLMs to create texts specifically designed to evade detection.
Motivated by this need, we propose OUTFOX, a novel
framework designed to enhance the robustness and applicability of LLM-generated text detectors. As illustrated in
Figure 1, OUTFOX introduces an approach where both the
detector and the attacker learn from each other’s output. The
attacker uses the detector’s predictions as examples for incontext learning to generate more sophisticated attacks. In
contrast, the detector uses these adversarially generated texts
as examples for in-context learning to improve its detection
abilities against a strong attacker. To validate our approach
in a realistic domain, we create a dataset of native-speaker
student essay writing to detect LLM-generated essays. Our
dataset contains 15,400 triplets of essay problem statements,

Introduction
LLMs, characterized by their enormous model size and vast
training data, have demonstrated emergent abilities with impressive performance across various tasks (Wei et al. 2022).
These abilities include a high degree of language comprehension, fluent generation, and the capacity to handle tasks
unseen during training through in-context learning (Brown
et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022; Sanh et al. 2022).
Despite these successes, there are growing concerns about
the potential misuse of LLMs. A notable example is in education, where students might copy and paste text generated
by LLMs, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023c), for their assignments. This concern has led to the development of detectors designed to identify LLM-generated text with promising
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21258

