The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GAD-PVI : A General Accelerated Dynamic-Weight Particle-Based Variational
Inference Framework
Fangyikang Wang1 , Huminhao Zhu1 , Chao Zhang* 1,2 , Hanbin Zhao1,2 , Hui Qian1,3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Advanced Technology Institute, Zhejiang University
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
{wangfangyikang, zhuhuminhao, zczju, zhaohanbin, qianhui}@zju.edu.cn
probability space and design two types of refined particle
systems with either accelerated position update or dynamic
weight adjustment.

Abstract
Particle-based Variational Inference (ParVI) methods approximate the target distribution by iteratively evolving finite
weighted particle systems. Recent advances of ParVI methods reveal the benefits of accelerated position update strategies and dynamic weight adjustment approaches. In this paper, we propose the first ParVI framework that possesses
both accelerated position update and dynamical weight adjustment simultaneously, named the General Accelerated
Dynamic-Weight Particle-based Variational Inference (GADPVI) framework. Generally, GAD-PVI simulates the semiHamiltonian gradient flow on a novel Information-Fisher-Rao
space, which yields an additional decrease on the local functional dissipation. GAD-PVI is compatible with different dissimilarity functionals and associated smoothing approaches
under three information metrics. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate the faster convergence
and reduced approximation error of GAD-PVI methods over
the state-of-the-art.

• Accelerated position update. By considering the secondorder Riemannian information of the Wasserstein probability space, different accelerated position update strategies have been proposed(Liu et al. 2019; Taghvaei and
Mehta 2019): Liu et al. (2019) follows the accelerated
gradient descend methods in the Wasserstein probability space (Liu et al. 2017; Zhang and Sra 2018) and derives the WNES and WAG methods, which update the
particles’ positions with an extra momentum; the ACCEL method (Taghvaei and Mehta 2019) directly discretizes the Hamiltonian gradient flow in the Wasserstein
space and update the position with the damped velocity
field, which effectively decrease the Hamiltonian potential of the particle system. Later, Wang and Li (2022)
consider the Hamiltonian gradient flow for general information probability space (Lafferty 1988), and derive
novel accelerated position update strategies according to
the Kalman-Wasserstein/Stein Hamiltonian flow. They
theoretically show that the Hamiltonian flow usually has
a faster convergence to the equilibrium compared with
the original first-order counterpart under mild condition.
Numerous experimental studies demonstrate that these
accelerated position update strategies usually drift the
particle system to the target distribution more efficiently
(Liu et al. 2019; Wang and Li 2022).

Introduction
Particle-based Variational Inference (ParVI) methods have
gained significant attention in the Bayesian inference literature owing to their effectiveness in providing approximations of the target posterior distribution π (Liu and Wang
2016; Zhu, Liu, and Zhu 2020; Dong et al. 2020; Shen,
Heinonen, and Kaski 2021; Dong et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022; Li et al. 2023). The essence of ParVI lies in deterministically evolving a system of finite weighted particles by
simulating the probability space gradient flow of certain dissimilarity functional F (µ) := D(µ|π) vanishing at µ = π
(Liu et al. 2019). Since the seminal work Stein Variational
Gradient Descent (SVGD) (Liu and Wang 2016), classical
ParVI focuses on simulating the first-order gradient flow in
Wasserstein space. By using different dissimilarity and associated smoothing approaches, various effective ParVI methods have been proposed, including the BLOB method(Chen
et al. 2018a), the GFSD method(Liu et al. 2019), and the
KSDD method(Korba et al. 2021).
To improve the efficiency of ParVIs, recent works explore
different aspects of the underlying geometry structures in the

• Dynamic weight adjustment. Delving into the orthogonality structure of the Wasserstein-Fisher-Rao(WFR)
space, Zhang et al. (2022) developed the first dynamicweight ParVI (DPVI) methods. Specifically, they derive
effective dynamical weight adjustment approaches by
mimicing the reaction variational step in a JKO splitting scheme of first-order WFR gradient flow (Gallouët
and Monsaingeon 2017; Rotskoff et al. 2019). Compared
with the commonly used fixed weight strategy, these dynamical weight adjustment schemes usually lead to less
approximation error, especially when the number of particles is limited (Zhang et al. 2022).
Contribution: In this paper, we propose the first ParVI
methods which possess both accelerated position update
and dynamical weight adjustment simultaneously. Specif-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15466

