The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning-Augmented Online Algorithm for Two-Level Ski-Rental Problem
Keyuan Zhang1 , Zhongdong Liu1 , Nakjung Choi2 , Bo Ji1
1

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
Nokia Bell Labs, Murray Hill, NJ, USA
keyuanz@vt.edu, zhongdong@vt.edu, nakjung.choi@nokia-bell-labs.com, boji@vt.edu
2

Abstract

where multiple levels of decisions are involved. Consider
cloud computing as an example. An organization may request multiple types of server instances (e.g., HPC instances
for complex system simulations, Memory instances for storing data, and GPU instances for AI tasks) from the cloud
vendors such as Amazon EC2, Microsoft Azure, and Google
Cloud (Miguel 2023). The cloud vendors usually offer multiple pricing options: i) pay-as-you-go: the cost only depends on the demand; ii) instance reservation: paying an
upfront cost to cover the demand for that type of instance
within a certain period; iii) combo offers: offering increased
discounts for reserving multiple types of instances. Hence,
making choices wisely among these plans is crucial to reducing expenses on cloud resources. Additionally, similar scenarios are common for individual users. For example, when
subscribing to various digital services (e.g., Amazon offers
video, music, and games), users often face choices among
multiple plans: renting specific content, subscribing to one
single service, or subscribing to a combo membership that
grants full access to multiple services. Other applications,
such as mobile data plans or Bahncard reservations, also offer similar payment options (Wu, Bao, and Yuan 2021).

In this paper, we study the two-level ski-rental problem,
where a user needs to fulfill a sequence of demands for multiple items by choosing one of the three payment options:
paying for the on-demand usage (i.e., rent), buying individual items (i.e., single purchase), and buying all the items (i.e.,
combo purchase). Without knowing future demands, the user
aims to minimize the total cost (i.e., the sum of the rental,
single purchase, and combo purchase costs) by balancing the
trade-off between the expensive upfront costs (for purchase)
and the potential future expenses (for rent). We first design
a robust online algorithm (RDTSR) that offers a worst-case
performance guarantee. While online algorithms are robust
against the worst-case scenarios, they are often overly cautious and thus suffer a poor average performance in typical
scenarios. On the other hand, Machine Learning (ML) algorithms typically show promising average performance in
various applications but lack worst-case performance guarantees. To harness the benefits of both methods, we develop
a learning-augmented algorithm (LADTSR) by integrating
ML predictions into the robust online algorithm, which outperforms the robust online algorithm under accurate predictions while ensuring worst-case performance guarantees even
when predictions are inaccurate. Finally, we conduct numerical experiments on both synthetic and real-world trace data
to corroborate the effectiveness of our approach.

To model multiple levels of decisions, we consider the
two-level ski-rental problem introduced in Wu, Bao, and
Yuan (2021). Specifically, it considers scenarios where a
user needs to fulfill the demands for multiple items in a
given but unknown time horizon. Upon the arrival of one
demand for some item, the user can cover the demand by
choosing one of the three payment options: i) rent, ii) single
purchase, and iii) combo purchase. Rent is an on-demand
payment with no upfront cost; a single purchase incurs an
upfront cost (denoted by Cs ) but covers the demands for
that specific item since then and onward; a combo purchase
has a higher upfront cost (denoted by Cc ≥ Cs ) while covering the demands for all the items till the end. While the
ski-rental problem only considers rent and single purchases,
a unique challenge in the two-level ski-rental problem lies in
the intricate decision-making between single purchases and
a combo purchase covering multiple items. To minimize the
total cost (i.e., the sum of the rental, single purchase, and
combo purchase costs), Wu, Bao, and Yuan (2021) propose
online algorithms that make decisions without knowing any
future information. Competitive ratio (CR) is employed to
evaluate the algorithms, which is defined as the ratio be-

Introduction
Decision-making under uncertainty is crucial in many realworld scenarios, such as buying or leasing a car, purchasing
a daily or annual parking permit, and so on. Such problems
are often modeled as online rent-or-buy problems. One classic example is the ski-rental problem, where a skier goes
skiing for an unknown number of days and can choose to
rent skis at a lower daily cost or buy them at a higher price
to ski freely thereafter. The ski-rental problem and its variants have been extensively studied and found applications
in cloud computing (Khanafer, Kodialam, and Puttaswamy
2013), power management (Antoniadis et al. 2021), serverless edge computing (Pan et al. 2022), etc.
However, the ski-rental problem only involves making a
binary decision (i.e., rent or buy for one item only), which
makes it inadequate to model more sophisticated scenarios
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20293

