The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Scaling Few-Shot Learning for the Open World
Zhipeng Lin1 , Wenjing Yang1 , Haotian Wang1 , Haoang Chi2, 1 , Long Lan1 , Ji Wang1 *
1

State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, National University of DefenseTechnology
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Academy of Military Science
{linzhipeng13, wenjing.yang, wanghaotian13, long.lan, wj}@nudt.edu.cn, haoangchi618@gmail.com

M e a n a c c u ra c y (% )

Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to enable learning models with
the ability to automatically adapt to novel (unseen) domains
in open-world scenarios. Nonetheless, there exists a significant disparity between the vast number of new concepts
encountered in the open world and the restricted available
scale of existing FSL works, which primarily focus on a
limited number of novel classes. Such a gap restricts the
practical applicability of FSL in realistic scenarios. To narrow this gap, we propose a new problem named Few-Shot
Learning with Many Novel Classes (FSL-MNC) by substantially enlarging the number of novel classes, exceeding the
count in the traditional FSL setup by over 500-fold. This
new problem exhibits two major challenges, including the increased computation overhead during meta-training and the
degraded classification performance by the large number of
classes during meta-testing. To overcome these challenges,
we propose a Simple Hierarchy Pipeline (SHA-Pipeline).
Due to the inefficiency of traditional protocols of EML, we
re-design a lightweight training strategy to reduce the overhead brought by much more novel classes. To capture discriminative semantics across numerous novel classes, we effectively reconstruct and leverage the class hierarchy information during meta-testing. Experiments show that the proposed SHA-Pipeline significantly outperforms not only the
ProtoNet baseline but also the state-of-the-art alternatives
across different numbers of novel classes.

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
30 2040 80 160 320 6401k12802560 0
P ro to N e t
S im p le S h o t

5 9 .8
5 2 .7

1 .3 2 .2

4 .3

8 .3

1 6 .8

3 2 .5

1 2 1 .9

C o m p u t a t io n t im e (h o u r )

1000
8
70
0
60
50
40

Abstract

W a y

Figure 1: Mean accuracy and computation overhead of
ProtoNet and SimpleShot with different scales of novel
class (5shot, Vit-Small DINO pre-trained). For traditional fsl
methods, as the number of ways increases, the average accuracy experiences a rapid decline. The computation cost of
ProtoNet (red bar) in the meta-training stage increases significantly.

to master prior knowledge of the number of novel classes in
practice.
Pointed by recent studies of Willes et al. (2022) and Parmar et al. (2023), a realistic open world learner for the FSL
should handle over thousands of novel classes, e.g., iNaturalist (Parmar et al. 2023). In response to such viewpoints,
we narrow the gap between FSL and a realistic open world
by developing a new problem named Few-Shot Learning
with Many Novel Classes (FSL-MNC). The core advance
of our FSL-MNC compared to traditional FSL is that the
open world exhibits a large scale of unseen knowledge with
more than 2000 novel classes1 , surpassing the traditional
FSL setting by over 10-fold. The ratio of novel class set

Introduction
The remarkable progress achieved by Few-Shot Learning (FSL) (Wang et al. 2021) has equipped learning models with capabilities for rapid exploration of the open world,
e.g., adapting to new visual concepts. However, traditional
scenarios for FSL commonly explore with restrictions on the
“scale” of the open world, as the number of novel classes is
limited from 5 to 160 (Dhillon et al. 2020). On the contrary,
the realistic open world often exhibits a large amount of unseen knowledge (classes), which is far beyond the protocols
adopted by previous FSL scenarios. Furthermore, taking the
number of novel classes into consideration is important for
promoting the practicality of FSL, as it is nearly impossible

1

Note that few-shot tasks are organized as N -way K-shot
episodes. “way” and “shot” are the number of novel classes and
annotated samples for each novel class respectively. For the sake of
clarity, we will use “ways” to denote the number of novel classes
throughout this paper.

* Lin and Yang are co-first authors of the article. Corresponding

author (J. Wang).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13846

