The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DocNLC: A Document Image Enhancement Framework with Normalized and
Latent Contrastive Representation for Multiple Degradations
Ruilu Wang, Yang Xue* , Lianwen Jin
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
ruiluwang2rylonw@gmail.com, {yxue, eelwjin}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Document Image Enhancement (DIE) remains challenging
due to the prevalence of multiple degradations in document images captured by cameras. In this paper, we respond an interesting question: can the performance of pretrained models and downstream DIE models be improved
if they are bootstrapped using different degradation types
of the same semantic samples and their high-dimensional
features with ambiguous inter-class distance? To this end,
we propose an effective contrastive learning paradigm for
DIE — a Document image enhancement framework with
Normalization and Latent Contrast (DocNLC). While existing DIE methods focus on eliminating one type of degradation, DocNLC considers the relationship between different types of degradation while utilizing both direct and latent
contrasts to constrain content consistency, thus achieving a
unified treatment of multiple types of degradation. Specifically, we devise a latent contrastive learning module to enforce explicit decorrelation of the normalized representations
of different degradation types and to minimize the redundancy between them. Comprehensive experiments show that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art DIE models in both
pre-training and fine-tuning stages on four publicly available
independent datasets. In addition, we discuss the potential
benefits of DocNLC for downstream tasks. Our code is released at https://github.com/RylonW/DocNLC.

Figure 1: The depiction of the document image degradation process provides a valuable guideline for our contrastive
learning design. According to data processing inequality
theory (Cover 1999), the amount of mutual information
I(x, ·) between a document image and the original sample
decreases over a series of editing, interaction, and collection processes. Therefore, it is crucial not to simply mix the
datasets, but to focus on exploring the relationships between
them.

The process of document image degradation can be divided into three distinct phases: editing, interaction and collection. In the editing phase, the background of the document varies, depending on the material used to write or
print it. Also, the watermarks could be added. In the interaction phase, the document interacts with the environment
in which it is placed. The light in the physical environment and the moisture in the air will continue to interact
with the document entity, causing shadows, wrinkles and
corrosion (Ma et al. 2018; Das et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019;
Xie et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2021). In addition, human behaviour can exacerbate the degradation of the document image, such as stamping images or making notes on the original document. Finally, during the collection phase, motion
blurring in different directions can occur due to instability in the shooting equipment. Thermal noise in the camera
electronics or multiple compressions and decompressions of
the image during storage and transmission can also introduce noise, further degrading the quality of document images. The degradation of document images is therefore a
multi-stage process. This complex degradation process creates difficulties in reading documents and challenges in recovering document images. The simplest way to solve this
problem is to train specific networks for each type of degra-

Introduction
Document preservation can be hampered by a variety of
degradations such as watermarks, blurring, noise, backgrounds, ink bleed, and uneven ambient light (Lin, Chen,
and Chuang 2020; Anvari and Athitsos 2021). As a result, a number of deep learning-based correction methods
have been proposed for specific types of degradation, including document watermark removal (Souibgui and Kessentini
2020) , blurring removal (Ljubenović and Figueiredo 2019;
Tran et al. 2021) , noise removal (Gangeh et al. 2021) , and
shadow removal (Lin, Chen, and Chuang 2020) . However,
most of them focus on a specific type of degradation and are
therefore less applicable in practice to other types of degradation.
*Corresponding author: Yang Xue
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5563

