The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Discriminatively Fuzzy Multi-View K-means Clustering with Local Structure
Preserving
Jun Yin1 , Shiliang Sun2 * , Lai Wei1 , Pei Wang1
1

College of Information Engineering, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 201306, China
2
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
junyin@shmtu.edu.cn, shiliangsun@gmail.com, weilai@shmtu.edu.cn, w823701615@163.com

Abstract

often gathered from diverse domains and different sensors,
resulting in the emergence of multi-view data (Sun 2013).
Multi-view data refers to situations in which a singular object or entity can be represented using various data sources
or distinct feature sets. Each data source or feature set can
be considered as a distinct view, and capable of independent
utilization in clustering analysis. It is important to note that
there exist inherent connections as well as variations among
these different views, highlighting the diversity in data representation. For example, for medical image data, ultrasound
image, CT image and MRI image can be seen as multiple
views; for data acquisition using sensors, data acquired by
different sensors can be used as different views of the same
data. Multi-view data can provide common semantics to improve the learning effectiveness (Asano et al. 2020; Peng
et al. 2020).
Multi-view clustering is a clustering method for multiview data that aims to improve the quality of clustering
results by integrating information from different views. In
multi-view clustering, each view corresponds to a distinct
aspect or feature representation of the data. By combining
multiple views, we can obtain different perspectives of the
data, allowing us to capture more comprehensive and accurate information. In recent years, researchers have proposed lots of multi-view clustering models and algorithms
(Zhang et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2022; Nie
et al. 2017), and have made great progress. Among them,
multi-view clustering methods based on co-training aim at
maximizing mutual agreement among all views and reaching the broadest consensus. Kumar et al. (Kumar, Rai, and
Daume 2011) proposed a co-regularized multi-view clustering method that applies the graph Laplacian operator to all
views and regularizes the feature vectors of the Laplacian
operator to obtain consistent clustering results. Ye et al. (Ye
et al. 2016) proposed a co-regularized kernel K-means algorithm that automatically learns the weights of different views
from the data.
In contrast, the graph-learning-based multi-view clustering methods aim to find a fused graph among all views and
then use graph-cutting algorithms or other clustering techniques to obtain the clustering results. Wang et al. (Wang,
Yang, and Liu 2019) fused the data graph matrices of all
views to generate a unified graph matrix for improving the
data graph matrix of each view and directly derived the final

Multi-view K-means clustering successfully generalizes Kmeans from single-view to multi-view, and obtains excellent
clustering performance. In every view, it makes each data
point close to the center of the corresponding cluster. However, multi-view K-means only considers the compactness of
each cluster, but ignores the separability of different clusters,
which is of great importance to producing a good clustering result. In this paper, we propose Discriminatively Fuzzy
Multi-view K-means clustering with Local Structure Preserving (DFMKLS). On the basis of minimizing the distance between each data point and the center of the corresponding
cluster, DFMKLS separates clusters by maximizing the distance between the centers of pairwise clusters. DFMKLS also
relaxes its objective by introducing the idea of fuzzy clustering, which calculates the probability that a data point belongs
to each cluster. Considering multi-view K-means mainly focuses on the global information of the data, to efficiently use
the local information, we integrate the local structure preserving into the framework of DFMKLS. The effectiveness
of DFMKLS is evaluated on benchmark multi-view datasets.
It obtains superior performances than state-of-the-art multiview clustering methods, including multi-view K-means.

Introduction
As an important unsupervised learning method, clustering
has been extensively studied and applied in various fields
such as data mining, pattern recognition and machine learning (Xu and Wunsch 2005; Wang et al. 2020). K-means is
a popular and widely used clustering method. MacQueen
(MacQueen 1967) introduced the K-means algorithm, which
aims to find a partition that minimizes the squared error between the empirical mean of a cluster and the data points
within that cluster. Based on this, Cheung (Cheung 2003)
proposed a generalized version of the traditional K-means
algorithm, which is not only suitable for partitioning elliptical data, but also partitions correctly without pre-assigning
exact cluster numbers.
With the rapid advancement of information technology,
data volumes across various fields are experiencing exponential growth. In numerous practical applications, data is
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16478

