The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SHaRPose: Sparse High-Resolution Representation for Human Pose Estimation
Xiaoqi An1,2 , Lin Zhao1,2 * , Chen Gong1 , Nannan Wang2 , Di Wang2 , Jian Yang1 *
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
{xiaoqi.an, linzhao, chen.gong, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, {nnwang, wangdi}@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract
Coarse stage: Identify body parts

High-resolution representation is essential for achieving good
performance in human pose estimation models. To obtain
such features, existing works utilize high-resolution input images or fine-grained image tokens. However, this dense highresolution representation brings a significant computational
burden. In this paper, we address the following question:
“Only sparse human keypoint locations are detected for human pose estimation, is it really necessary to describe the
whole image in a dense, high-resolution manner?” Based on
dynamic transformer models, we propose a framework that
only uses Sparse High-resolution Representations for human
Pose estimation (SHaRPose). In detail, SHaRPose consists
of two stages. At the coarse stage, the relations between
image regions and keypoints are dynamically mined while
a coarse estimation is generated. Then, a quality predictor
is applied to decide whether the coarse estimation results
should be refined. At the fine stage, SHaRPose builds sparse
high-resolution representations only on the regions related
to the keypoints and provides refined high-precision human
pose estimations. Extensive experiments demonstrate the outstanding performance of the proposed method. Specifically,
compared to the state-of-the-art method ViTPose, our model
SHaRPose-Base achieves 77.4 AP (+0.5 AP) on the COCO
validation set and 76.7 AP (+0.5 AP) on the COCO test-dev
set, and infers at a speed of 1.4× faster than ViTPose-Base.
Code is available at https://github.com/AnxQ/sharpose.

Shared Modules
Image
Encoder

Keypoint
Decoder

Fine Stage: Sparse High-Resolution

Figure 1: A brief view of SHaRPose. The coarse stage selects image parts contributed to the keypoints, and the fine
stage builds high-resolution representations upon them.

In recent years, great progress has been made in human
pose estimation (Toshev and Szegedy 2014; Newell, Yang,
and Deng 2016; Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018; Wang et al.
2021a; Chen et al. 2017). Most of the leading methods output heatmaps and then take the peak of heatmaps as the
keypoint position. Hence, similar to other dense prediction
tasks such as semantic segmentation (Ke et al. 2022; Guo
et al. 2022) and depth estimation (Shen et al. 2021; Luo
et al. 2020), it’s necessary to obtain high-resolution representation to ensure the inference accuracy (Badrinarayanan,
Kendall, and Cipolla 2017; Lin et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018).
For example, Stacked Hourglass (Newell, Yang, and Deng
2016) achieves high-quality image representation by stacking a symmetric encoding-decoding structure, while HRNet (Wang et al. 2021a) utilizes multiple parallel convolution branches to preserve high-resolution feature representations. ViTPose (Xu et al. 2022b) achieves notable performance using an 8 × 8 fine-grained patch splitting setting.
However, it is observed that increasing the resolution of
feature representation (i.e., the number of image tokens for
transformer-based methods) results in an intensive computational burden. As shown in Table.1, this is particularly
significant in Transformer-based methods because the complexity of Transformers is quadratic to the number of tokens (Khan et al. 2022). In this paper, we aim to improve the
efficiency of transformer-based models for human pose estimation, and we think about the following question: Since we

Introduction
2D human pose estimation (HPE) is a fundamental task in
the field of computer vision. Its main goal is to locate a
set of anatomical keypoints that correspond to the human
body’s joints and limbs in an image. HPE has been well
studied (Guo 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Chang et al. 2020)
and forms the foundation for many downstream tasks such
as action recognition (Kawai, Yoshida, and Liu 2022; Chao
et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2022a; Duan et al. 2022) and abnormal
behavior detection (Tang et al. 2021; Qiu et al. 2022). Due
to its potential applications in the real world, HPE remains
an active area of research (Niemirepo, Viitanen, and Vanne
2020; Yu et al. 2021; Zhang, Zhu, and Ye 2019; Li et al.
2022, 2021c; Jiang et al. 2023).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

691

