The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

LAMPAT: Low-Rank Adaption for Multilingual Paraphrasing Using Adversarial
Training
†

Khoi M. Le1, 2 * , Trinh Pham2 * , Tho Quan2 , Anh Tuan Luu3

1
VinAI Research, Vietnam
Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT), VNU-HCM, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
v.khoilm1@vinai.io, phkhanhtrinh23@gmail.com, qttho@hcmut.edu.vn, anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg

2

Abstract
Paraphrases are texts that convey the same meaning while using different words or sentence structures. It can be used as
an automatic data augmentation tool for many Natural Language Processing tasks, especially when dealing with lowresource languages, where data shortage is a significant problem. To generate a paraphrase in multilingual settings, previous studies have leveraged the knowledge from the machine
translation field, i.e., forming a paraphrase through zero-shot
machine translation in the same language. Despite good performance on human evaluation, those methods still require
parallel translation datasets, thus making them inapplicable
to languages that do not have parallel corpora. To mitigate
that problem, we proposed the first unsupervised multilingual paraphrasing model, LAMPAT (Low-rank Adaptation
for Multilingual Paraphrasing using Adversarial Training),
by which monolingual dataset is sufficient enough to generate a human-like and diverse sentence. Throughout the experiments, we found out that our method not only works well for
English but can generalize on unseen languages as well. Data
and code are available at https://github.com/phkhanhtrinh23/
LAMPAT.

Figure 1: The training process of LAMPAT consists of multiple stages. Firstly, we create a synthetic parallel corpus using unsupervised monolingual data. Next, we utilize LoRA
to effectively fine-tune our model. Finally, we obtain the
self-supervised model LAMPAT through the utilization of
Virtual Adversarial Training.

Thompson and Post (2020a) to translate between the same
source and target languages with a special decoding algorithm to reduce the lexical overlaps, creating a paraphrase
of the input text. Meanwhile, round-trip translation (Federmann, Elachqar, and Quirk 2019), which creates a pivot
language for source language to translate forth and back to
create a different wording output, is another approach for
paraphrase generation.
While the machine translation approach is widely recognized for its effectiveness in multilingual paraphrasing, it encounters various limitations. One primary hurdle is the necessity of obtaining reliable parallel corpora of high quality
for machine translation, which can be challenging to obtain
in real-world scenarios. Another drawback lies in the lack
of diversity in the generated output, often resulting in output
sequences that closely resemble the input and fail to preserve crucial information present in the original input, as
depicted in Table 1. Many MNMT models utilize heuristic blocking techniques during inference to avoid generating output sequences that are identical to the input. However, this approach limits the model’s ability to alter word
order or employ diverse syntactic structures, such as inversion or active-to-passive transformations. Consequently, the
generation lacks diversity. Furthermore, these blocking algorithms heavily rely on the distribution of the vocabulary.
For instance, Thompson and Post (2020b) reduce the probability of selecting subsequent subwords in n-grams to encourage the model to choose different subwords. Neverthe-

Introduction
Paraphrase generation involves the transformation of a given
sentence or phrase into its equivalent form while preserving
its semantic content. By leveraging the power of NLP techniques, paraphrase generation can enhance several applications, such as machine translation (Freitag et al. 2020), information retrieval (Lewis et al. 2020), question-answering
systems (Gan and Ng 2019), and text summarization (Cao
et al. 2017). However, most existing approaches in paraphrase generation focus on a single language such as English, limiting their effectiveness in multilingual scenarios
where accurate and contextually appropriate paraphrases are
crucial.
Most of the current approaches for multilingual paraphrasing are built around the mechanism of machine translation. Thompson and Post (2020b) make use of the multilingual neural machine translation (MNMT) model from
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18435

