The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SENCR: A Span Enhanced Two-Stage Network with Counterfactual Rethinking
for Chinese NER
Hang Zheng1 , Qingsong Li1 , Shen Chen1 , Yuxuan Liang2 , Li Liu1 *
1

School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
{202124131086,202124131092,202124131089}@stu.cqu.edu.cn, yuxliang@outlook.com, dcsliuli@cqu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and semantic features into the model’s encoder input or the
character representations. However, the lexicon-based approaches are suffering two main limits. Firstly, the performance of these approaches heavily relies on the quality of
the lexicon, and acquiring and maintaining a high-quality
lexicon can be quite costly, especially in some special domains. Secondly, the fusing strategy needs to be carefully
designed to avoid introducing external noise and biases into
models. These limitations have instigated our pursuit of a
lexicon-free framework while achieving comparable performance.
Prior to formulating our model, we investigated the
widely used Chinese NER datasets (Weibo (Peng and
Dredze 2015), MSRA (Levow 2006), Resume (Zhang and
Yang 2018) and CLUENER (Xu et al. 2020)). We calculated the occurrence frequency for entity boundary characters in the training sets (see Table 1) and found that the entity
boundaries are dominated by a few characters, i.e., boundary characters appearing with particularly high frequency.
This high-mention coverage aligns with the character-level
zipf’s law in Chinese languages and will contaminate NER
models’ generalization ability by misleading NER models
to simply memorize keywords in those high-frequency mentioned boundary characters rather than leverage semantic
features (Liang and Leung 2021; Lin et al. 2020). As a result, during inference on the test set, the NER model performs better on entities with high mention frequency boundary characters but exhibits lower performance on entities
with less emphasized or new boundary characters. We consider this phenomenon as boundary bias and argue that it
predominantly affects the identification of entity boundaries
by building spurious correlations between boundary character mentions and the ground truth labels. This arises from
the fact that contextual features hold greater significance in
defining entity boundaries compared to character mentions.
Previous studies (Liang and Leung 2021; Zeng et al.
2020) apply entity-level data manipulations to re-balance the
entity distribution in the training set so as to improve the
generalization ability of NER models. However, manipulating data at the boundary-level can significantly alter the semantic meaning of words and sentences, which may greatly
undermine the effectiveness of NER models. Fortunately,
counterfactual inference (Pearl 2021) is promising in tackling the above spurious correlation issue caused by the unfair

Recently, lots of works that incorporate external lexicon information into character-level Chinese named entity recognition (NER) to overcome the lackness of natural delimiters of
words, have achieved many advanced performance. However,
obtaining and maintaining high-quality lexicons is costly, especially in special domains. In addition, the entity boundary bias caused by high mention coverage in some boundary characters poses a significant challenge to the generalization of NER models but receives little attention in the existing literature. To address these issues, we propose SENCR, a
Span Enhanced Two-Stage Network with Counterfactual Rethinking for Chinese NER, that contains a boundary detector
for boundary supervision, a convolution-based type classifier
for better span representation and a counterfactual rethinking (CR) strategy for debiased boundary detection in inference. The proposed boundary detector and type classifier are
jointly trained with the same contextual encoder and then the
trained boundary detector is debiased by our proposed CR
strategy without modifying any model parameters in the inference stage. Extensive experiments on four Chinese NER
datasets show the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) aims to detect the span
and recognize the category of named entities, such as persons, locations, and organizations, in raw sentences. NER is
a fundamental task in the field of natural language processing (NLP), which is necessary for many downstream NLP
applications such as relation extraction (Miwa and Bansal
2016), question answering (Mollá, Van Zaanen, and Smith
2006), and knowledge graph construction (Ji et al. 2021).
Compared with English NER, Chinese NER is more challenging owing to its lackness of natural delimiters in sentences (Zhu, Wang, and Karlsson 2019).
To tackle this thorny problem, lots of lexicon-based approaches (Zhang and Yang 2018; Gui et al. 2019a; Li et al.
2020; Zhao et al. 2021, 2023) were proposed to incorporate
lexicon information into character-level Chinese NER models. These approaches match the input character sequence
with outer lexicon and fuse the matched words’ boundary
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19679

