The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unifying Visual and Vision-Language Tracking via Contrastive Learning
Yinchao Ma1 , Yuyang Tang1 , Wenfei Yang1 , Tianzhu Zhang1 * , Jinpeng Zhang2 , Mengxue Kang2
1

Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology
of China
2
Intelligent Science Technology Academy of CASIC
{imyc,yuyangtang,yangwf}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Modality-Specific Tracker

Single object tracking aims to locate the target object in
a video sequence according to the state specified by different modal references, including the initial bounding box
(BBOX), natural language (NL), or both (NL+BBOX). Due
to the gap between different modalities, most existing trackers are designed for single or partial of these reference settings and overspecialize on the specific modality. Differently,
we present a unified tracker called UVLTrack, which can simultaneously handle all three reference settings (BBOX, NL,
NL+BBOX) with the same parameters. The proposed UVLTrack enjoys several merits. First, we design a modalityunified feature extractor for joint visual and language feature learning and propose a multi-modal contrastive loss to
align the visual and language features into a unified semantic space. Second, a modality-adaptive box head is proposed,
which makes full use of the target reference to mine everchanging scenario features dynamically from video contexts
and distinguish the target in a contrastive way, enabling robust
performance in different reference settings. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that UVLTrack achieves promising performance on seven visual tracking datasets, three
vision-language tracking datasets, and three visual grounding datasets. Codes and models will be open-sourced at
https://github.com/OpenSpaceAI/UVLTrack.

"cat climbing down
a tree"
initialize
BBOX Tracker

"cat climbing down +
a tree"

initialize
NL Tracker

initialize
NL+BBOX Tracker

(a) Pervious solutions for different reference settings
"cat climbing down a tree"

"cat climbing down a tree"
+

initialize
UVLTrack

(b) Our solution for different reference settings

Figure 1: Comparison between previous solutions and UVLTrack. BBOX, NL, NL+BBOX tracker means the tracker is
designed to utilize the bounding box, natural language, or
both as the target reference respectively. Our UVLTrack can
simultaneously handle three different reference settings.

Introduction
Single object tracking is one of the fundamental research
topics in computer vision, aiming to locate the target object
in a video sequence according to the reference specified by
the initial bounding box (BBOX) (Alper et al. 2006), natural
language (NL) (Li et al. 2017), or both (NL+BBOX) (Wang
et al. 2021b). It has a wide range of applications in robotics,
video surveillance, autonomous driving, human-computer
interaction and so on (Chen et al. 2022b). Although great
progress has been achieved for specific reference settings, it
is still challenging to design a unified tracker that performs
well across all three reference settings.
Most trackers (Li et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020; Yan et al.
2021) utilize the target bounding box in the first frame as
the reference (BBOX). They commonly crop a template according to the given bounding box and locate the target in

subsequent frames by interacting with the cropped template.
Representatively, one-stream trackers (Ye et al. 2022a; Cui
et al. 2022) combine feature extraction and interaction of
the template and search region in Transformer architectures,
achieving superior performance. However, the bounding box
has no direct target semantics, which may lead to ambiguity (Wang et al. 2021b). Different from the above tracking paradigm, tracking by natural language specification (Li
et al. 2017) provides a novel manner of human-computer
interaction, which specifies the target based on the natural
language reference (NL). This task can be roughly divided
into two steps. 1) locating the target in the first frame based
on the language description. 2) tracking the target based on
the language description and the predicted bounding box.
Recently, JointNLT (Zhou et al. 2023) proposes a unified
network to jointly conduct locating and tracking, enabling

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4107

