The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

I Open at the Close:
A Deep Reinforcement Learning Evaluation of Open Streets Initiatives
R. Teal Witter* , Lucas Rosenblatt*
New York University
{rtealwitter, lucas.rosenblatt}@nyu.edu

Abstract

positive impacts, including on the physical health of the
participants (Cohen et al. 2016; Sharples 2014). But there
is some evidence that opening streets also improves traffic
and safety. Two prominent examples are Times Square and
Herald Square in Manhattan, NYC, which were turned into
pedestrian plazas in 2009. After the squares opened, there
was a reduction of approximately 15% travel times for routes
along Broadway and a 63% reduction in injuries to drivers
and passengers on the avenue (Grynbaum 2010).
Numerous exogenous variables make an empirical analysis of the effects of opening streets challenging. As a result, cities generally use a proposal process to identify which
streets to open. Identifying candidate streets for opening has
been studied (Youn, Jeong, and Gastner 2008; Rhoads et al.
2021); however, previous work does not simulate the effects
of proposed open streets nor does it systematically consider
the impact of open streets on public safety and vehicular
congestion. In this work, we do both.
Contributions In the first part of our work, we build
an improved model for predicting collisions, evaluated on
granular and comprehensive data. We consider a wider time
frame (days, months and years) and a larger space (the
entirety of Manhattan) for predicting collisions than prior
work. We are the first to: (1) use years of data that account for seasonal and annual variations in traffic and exogenous variables like weather (prior work only used several
months), (2) use all negative and positive examples (prior
work subsampled to enforce class balance), and (3) take a
global view of the road network, predicting collisions at the
city level while taking into account local information (prior
work used only a few block radius around a collision). We
compare several models for the prediction task. Our best
model uses recurrent layers to capture short-term temporal
dependencies and graph convolutional layers to capture spatial dependencies of our data. Finally, we analyze the importance of features in the best model and discuss connections
to prior work in the transportation literature.
In the second part of our work, we use a deep learning approach to evaluating the efficacy of the NYC Open
Streets program. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to formulate the problem of opening roads in the language of reinforcement learning. We simulate road openings in real historical days. For each simulated day, we estimate traffic as the total car density per capacity of each

The open streets initiative “opens” streets to pedestrians and
bicyclists by closing them to cars and trucks. The initiative,
adopted by many cities across North America, increases community space in urban environments. But could open streets
also make cities safer and less congested? We study this question by framing the choice of which streets to open as a reinforcement learning problem. In order to simulate the impact
of opening streets, we first compare models for predicting
vehicle collisions given network and temporal data. We find
that a recurrent graph neural network, leveraging the graph
structure and the short-term temporal dependence of the data,
gives the best predictive performance. Then, with the ability
to simulate collisions and traffic, we frame a reinforcement
learning problem to find which streets to open. We compare
the streets in the NYC Open Streets program to those proposed by a Q-learning algorithm. We find that the streets proposed by the Q-learning algorithm have reliably better outcomes, while streets in the program have similar outcomes to
randomly selected streets. We present our work as a step toward principally choosing which streets to open for safer and
less congested cities.

Introduction
Traffic congestion is at its best inconvenient and at its worst
very dangerous. In 2022, American drivers spent an average of 51 hours stuck in traffic, representing an estimated
81 billion dollars in productivity loss (INRIX 2022). Furthermore, a by-product of increased traffic in urban areas
is an increase in traffic collisions (Retallack and Ostendorf
2019). Both traffic and collisions can be mitigated by intelligent road network design, but urban road networks are
already built and new infrastructure projects in cities can be
prohibitively expensive (Siemiatycki 2015).
One potential solution is to “open1 ” existing roads to
pedestrians and bicyclists by closing them to cars and trucks
(Kuhlberg et al. 2014; Bertolini 2020). Generally, open
streets initiatives provide a communal space for people living in urban environments. As expected, the initiatives have
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this work, we will use “open” to mean closing a street to
vehicular traffic and opening a street to pedestrians and cyclists.

22429

