The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Online Submodular Maximization via Online Convex Optimization
Tareq Si Salem1 , Gözde Özcan1 , Iasonas Nikolaou2 , Evimaria Terzi2 , Stratis Ioannidis1
1

Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
2
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
1
{sisalem, gozcan, ioannidis}@ece.neu.edu, 2 {nikolaou, evimaria}@bu.edu

Abstract

optimal comparator sequence instead of an optimal static decision in hindsight. Optimistic OCO (Rakhlin and Sridharan
2013; Dekel et al. 2017; Mohri and Yang 2016) takes advantage of benign sequences, in which reward functions are
predictable: the decision maker attains tighter regret bounds
when predictions are correct, falling back to the existing
OCO regret guarantees when predictions are unavailable or
inaccurate. Bandit OCO algorithms (Hazan and Levy 2014;
Kleinberg 2004; Flaxman, Kalai, and McMahan 2005) study
the aforementioned bandit setting, where again only rewards
(i.e., function evaluations) are observed.
We make the following contributions:

We study monotone submodular maximization under general
matroid constraints in the online setting. We prove that online
optimization of a large class of submodular functions, namely,
weighted threshold potential functions, reduces to online convex optimization (OCO). This is precisely because functions
in this class admit a concave relaxation; as a result, OCO policies, coupled with an appropriate rounding scheme, can be
used to achieve sublinear regret in the combinatorial setting.
We show that our reduction extends to many different versions
of the online learning problem, including the dynamic regret,
bandit, and optimistic-learning settings.

Introduction
In online submodular optimization (OSM) (Streeter, Golovin,
and Krause 2009), submodular reward functions chosen by an
adversary are revealed over several rounds. In each round, a
decision maker first commits to a set satisfying, e.g., matroid
constraints. Subsequently, the reward function is revealed and
evaluated over this set. The objective is to minimize α-regret,
i.e., the difference of the cumulative reward accrued from the
one attained by a static set, selected by an α-approximation
algorithm operating in hindsight. OSM has received considerable interest recently, both in the full information (Harvey,
Liaw, and Soma 2020; Matsuoka, Ito, and Ohsaka 2021;
Streeter, Golovin, and Krause 2009; Niazadeh et al. 2021)
and bandit setting (Niazadeh et al. 2021; Matsuoka, Ito, and
Ohsaka 2021; Wan et al. 2023), where only the reward values
(rather than the entire functions) are revealed.
Online convex optimization (OCO) studies a similar online setting in which reward functions are concave, and decisions are selected from a compact convex set. First proposed
by Zinkevich (2003), who showed that projected gradient
ascent attains sublinear regret, OCO generalizes previous online problems like prediction with expert advice (Littlestone
and Warmuth 1994), and has become widely influential in
the learning community (Hazan 2016; Shalev-Shwartz 2012;
McMahan 2017). Its success is evident from the multitude of
OCO variants in literature: in dynamic regret OCO (Zinkevich 2003; Besbes, Gur, and Zeevi 2015; Jadbabaie et al.
2015; Mokhtari et al. 2016), the regret is evaluated w.r.t. an
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15038

• We provide a methodology for reducing OSM to OCO,
when submodular functions selected by the adversary
are bounded from above and below by concave relaxations and coupled with an opportune rounding. We
prove that algorithms and regret guarantees in the OCO
setting transfer to α-regret guarantees in the OSM setting, via a transformation that we introduce. Ratio α is
determined by how well concave relaxations approximate the original submodular functions.
• We show that the above condition is satisfied by a
wide class of submodular functions, namely, weighted
threshold potential (WTP) functions. This class strictly
generalizes weighted coverage functions (Karimi et al.
2017; Stobbe and Krause 2010), and includes many
important applications, including influence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), facility location (Krause and Golovin 2014; Frieze 1974), cache
networks (Ioannidis and Yeh 2016; Li et al. 2021), similarity caching (Si Salem, Neglia, and Carra 2022), demand forecasting (Ito and Fujimaki 2016), and team
formation (Li et al. 2018), to name a few.
• We show our reduction also extends to the dynamic
regret and optimistic settings, reducing such fullinformation OSM settings to the respective OCO variants. To the best of our knowledge, our resulting algorithms are the first to come with guarantees for the
dynamic regret and optimistic settings in the context
of OSM with general matroid constraints. Finally, we
also provide a different reduction for the bandit setting,
again for all three (static, dynamic regret, and optimistic)
variants; this reduction applies to general submodular
functions, but is restricted to partition matroids.

