The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

H ON GAT: Graph Attention Networks in the Presence of High-Order Neighbors
Heng-Kai Zhang, Yi-Ge Zhang, Zhi Zhou, Yu-Feng Li*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{zhanghk,zhangyg,zhouz,liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Attention Networks (GATs) that compute node representation by its lower-order neighbors, are state-of-the-art architecture for representation learning with graphs. In practice,
however, the high-order neighbors that turn out to be useful,
remain largely unemployed in GATs. Efforts on this issue remain to be limited. This paper proposes a simple and effective
high-order neighbor GAT (H ON GAT) model to both effectively exploit informative high-order neighbors and address
over-smoothing at the decision boundary of nodes. Two tightly
coupled novel technologies, namely common neighbor similarity and new masking matrix, are introduced. Specifically,
high-order neighbors are fully explored by generic high-order
common-neighbor-based similarity; in order to prevent severe
over-smoothing, typical averaging range no longer works well
and a new masking mechanism is employed without any extra
hyperparameter. Extensive empirical evaluation on real-world
datasets clearly shows the necessity of the new algorithm in
the ability of exploring high-order neighbors, which promisingly achieves significant gains over previous state-of-the-art
graph attention methods.

Introduction
Deep neural networks such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in various
tasks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Zhou, Jin, and Li
2024; Ge et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024; Wei et al. 2022; Jia
et al. 2024; Shi, Wei, and Li 2024). However, architectures in
CNNs are typically designed for grid-like structures, which
can not process graph-structured data that widely exist in
real applications. For example, social networks are naturally graphs, where people are represented by nodes and
friendships or interactions between them are represented by
edges. Models that are able to exploit the rich information
encoded in graph-structured data are highly desirable. Therefore, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gori, Monfardini,
and Scarselli 2005; Scarselli et al. 2008) are introduced to
provide powerful frameworks for encoding arbitrarily structured graphs by iteratively aggregating node representations.
Nowadays, GNNs have been widely applied in various fields
such as knowledge graphs (Hamaguchi et al. 2017), protein
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16750

prediction (Fout et al. 2017), language processing (Yao, Mao,
and Luo 2019), social networks (Wu et al. 2020), etc.
Recently, graph attention network (GAT) shows a promising framework by combining GNNs with attention mechanism in handling graphs with arbitrary structures (Veličković
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020). The attention mechanism allows dealing with variable sized input while focusing on
the most relevant parts, and has been widely used in sequence modelling (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Devlin
et al. 2019; Vaswani et al. 2017), machine translation (Luong,
Pham, and Manning 2015), and visual processing (Xu et al.
2015). The GAT model further introduces attention module
into graphs, where the hidden representations of the nodes
are computed by repeatedly attending over the features of
their neighbors, and the weighting coefficients are calculated
inductively based on a self-attention strategy. State-of-the-art
performance has been obtained on tasks of node embedding
and classification.
The attention in GAT is computed mainly based on the
content of the nodes; the structures of the graph, on the other
hand, are simply used to mask the attention, e.g., only onehop neighbors will be attended. However, rich structural information revealed by high-order neighbors should provide
a more valuable guidance on learning node representations.
For example, in social networks or biological networks, a
community or pathway is oftentimes composed of nodes that
are densely inter-connected with each other but several hops
away. Therefore, it can be quite beneficial if a node can attend to high-order neighbors from the same community, even
if they show no direct connections. To achieve this, simply
checking k-hop neighbors would seem insufficient; on the
other hand, simply exploring high-order information with
increased model layers would also cause performance degeneration (over-smoothing phenomenon (Li, Han, and Wu
2018; Oono and Suzuki 2020), where the increased GNN layers lead to an overbroad average of neighbor representations
for each node (Xu et al. 2018)). A thorough exploration of
structural landscapes of the graph becomes necessary.
In order to fully exploit rich, high-order structural details
in graph attention networks, we propose a new model called
H ON GAT. The key idea is to first adaptively augment the
high-order neighbor similarity calculation with a general
framework, and then learn valuable high-order neighbors
through masking in the aggregation stage, so as to increase

