The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Copula-Based Survival Analysis for Dependent Censoring with
Identifiability Guarantees
Weijia Zhang1* , Chun Kai Ling2 , Xuanhui Zhang3
1

School of Information and Physical Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Australia
2
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3
School of Information Management, Nanjing University, China
weijia.zhang.xh@gmail.com, chunkail@cs.cmu.edu, xuanhui@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

(Ondrusek et al. 1998). For example, in clinical follow-up
study designed to evaluate the effect of radiology, the period
of relapse-free survival can only be observed if a participant exhibits the expected symptoms during the span of the
follow-up. However, the true time-to-event time remains unobservable if the participant withdraws prematurely or the
study concludes prior to the cancer relapse. This inherent
uncertainty requires algorithms that account for censoring.
Neglecting censored observations can result in loss of efficiency and estimation bias unless the observations are missing completely at random (Leung, Elashoff, and Afifi 1997).
A common assumption underpinning most machine learning and statistical survival analysis stipulates that censoring and survival are conditionally independent given the observed covariates (Wang, Li, and Reddy 2019). This assumption allows censored observations to be utilized by simultaneously maximizing the log-likelihood for both censored
and uncensored samples. Unfortunately, as only marginal
distributions of event and censoring are available from data,
the independent-censoring assumption cannot be verified
from observational data (Tsiatis 1975) in the similar sense
that the unconfoundedness assumption is unverifiable in
causal inference (Rubin 1974).
In many real world applications, censoring mechanisms
are in fact dependent (Kaplan and Meier 1958; Leung,
Elashoff, and Afifi 1997; Templeton, Amir, and Tannock
2020). For example, participants in clinical trials often prematurely remove themselves from the trial if they find the
drug to be ineffective or experience adverse effects (Scharfstein, Rotnitzky, and Robins 1999), Similarly, in observational epidemiology, patients with a more advanced disease
might be more likely to miss their follow-up clinic visits
(Howe et al. 2010). Ignoring this dependence can result in
biased survival estimations (Kleinbaum 2012).
One recent approach to account for dependencies between
observed and censored times is to assume that their true dependencies are known to the practitioner (Emura et al. 2018;
Deresa and Keilegom 2021; Gharari et al. 2023). These
methods utilize copulas, which are powerful statistical tools
which model dependencies between random variables in
isolation from their marginals. That is, if the copula between observed and censored times is known, then survival
marginals may be unbiasedly estimated even in the presence of censored data. These methods face two significant

Censoring is the central problem in survival analysis where
either the time-to-event (for instance, death), or the time-tocensoring (such as loss of follow-up) is observed for each
sample. The majority of existing machine learning-based survival analysis methods assume that survival is conditionally
independent of censoring given a set of covariates; an assumption that cannot be verified since only marginal distributions is available from the data. The existence of dependent censoring, along with the inherent bias in current estimators has been demonstrated in a variety of applications,
accentuating the need for a more nuanced approach. However, existing methods that adjust for dependent censoring require practitioners to specify the ground truth copula. This
requirement poses a significant challenge for practical applications, as model misspecification can lead to substantial
bias. In this work, we propose a flexible deep learning-based
survival analysis method that simultaneously accommodate
for dependent censoring and eliminates the requirement for
specifying the ground truth copula. We theoretically prove
the identifiability of our model under a broad family of copulas and survival distributions. Experiments results from a
wide range of datasets demonstrate that our approach successfully discerns the underlying dependency structure and
significantly reduces survival estimation bias when compared
to existing methods.

Introduction
Survival analysis is a branch of statistical methods that focuses on modeling the time it takes for certain events to occur, with seminal work tracing back to mid-twentieth century such as the Kaplan-Meier estimator (Kaplan and Meier
1958) and Cox partial likelihood (Cox 1972). Survival analysis has been widely applied in many disciplines, with applications in healthcare such as epidemiology (Selvin 2008),
clinical trials (Emmerson and Brown 2021), and personalized medicine (Zhang et al. 2017), as well as equipment failure time analysis (Voronov, Frisk, and Krysander 2018).
The most prominent challenge of survival analysis is the
existence of censoring, which occurs when the event time of
a sample is not fully observed. Censoring is ubiquitous in
clinical trials because a participant has the right to withdraw
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20613

