The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Large Certified Radius in Randomized Smoothing Using
Quasiconcave Optimization
Bo-Han Kung, Shang-Tse Chen
National Taiwan University
d10922019@csie.ntu.edu.tw, stchen@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

it may also be incomplete. One the other hand, theoretical defenses can be categorized into deterministic verification and probabilistic verification. Deterministic verification methods, such as mixed-integer programming (MIP)
(Tjeng, Xiao, and Tedrake 2018), interval bound propagation (IBP)(Ehlers 2017; Weng et al. 2018; Gowal et al.
2018; Mueller et al. 2022) and Lipschitz-bounded networks
(Singla and Feizi 2021; Singla, Singla, and Feizi 2022; Xu,
Li, and Li 2022), offer theoretical robustness guarantees for
a DNN model. The verification in these cases is deterministic. In contrast, probabilistic verification methods, such as
randomized smoothing (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019;
Lecuyer et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020), provide a provable
defense that ensures that there are no adversarial examples
within a specific ball with a radius R. Notably, this guarantee
is accompanied by a degree of randomness that is independent of input images.
Among those methods, only randomized smoothing (RS)
can scale to state-of-the-art deep neural networks and
real-world datasets. Randomized smoothing first builds a
smoothed classifier for a given data point via a Gaussian filter and Monte Carlo sampling, and then it estimates a confidence lower bound for the highest-probability class. Next,
it determines a certified radius for the class and promise that
there is no adversarial example within this radius.
Although randomized smoothing is effective, it suffers
from two main disadvantages. First, randomized smoothing applies the same constant-variance Gaussian filter to
every data point when constructing a smoothed classifier. This makes the certified radius dramatically underestimated. Second, randomized smoothing adopts a confidence
lower bound (Clopper-Pearson lower bound) to estimate the
highest-probability class, which also limits the certified radius. As a result, when evaluating radius-accuracy curve, a
truncation fall often occurs (see the gray curve in the upper right of Fig. 1). This is called truncation effect or waterfall effect (Súkenı́k, Kuvshinov, and Günnemann 2021),
which shows the conservation aspect in randomized smoothing. Other issues such as fairness (Mohapatra et al. 2021),
dimension (Kumar et al. 2020b), and time-efficiency (Chen
et al. 2022) also limit its application.
To alleviate truncation effect and improve the certified
radii, a more precise workflow is necessary. Prior work
(Chen et al. 2021; Alfarra et al. 2022) proposed input-

Randomized smoothing is currently the state-of-the-art
method that provides certified robustness for deep neural networks. However, due to its excessively conservative nature,
this method of incomplete verification often cannot achieve
an adequate certified radius on real-world datasets. One way
to obtain a larger certified radius is to use an input-specific
algorithm instead of using a fixed Gaussian filter for all data
points. Several methods based on this idea have been proposed, but they either suffer from high computational costs or
gain marginal improvement in certified radius. In this work,
we show that by exploiting the quasiconvex problem structure, we can find the optimal certified radii for most data
points with slight computational overhead. This observation
leads to an efficient and effective input-specific randomized
smoothing algorithm. We conduct extensive experiments and
empirical analysis on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. The results
show that the proposed method significantly enhances the certified radii with low computational overhead.

Introduction
Although deep learning has achieved tremendous success
in various fields (Wang, Bochkovskiy, and Liao 2022; Zhai
et al. 2022), it is known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al. 2013). This kind of attack crafts an
imperceptible perturbation on images (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014) or voices (Carlini and Wagner 2018) to
make the AI system predict incorrectly. Many adversarial
defense methods have been proposed to defend against adversarial attacks. Adversarial defenses can be categorized
into empirical defenses and theoretical defenses. Common
empirical defenses include adversarial training (Madry et al.
2017; Shafahi et al. 2019; Wong, Rice, and Kolter 2020) and
preprocessing-based methods (Samangouei, Kabkab, and
Chellappa 2018; Das et al. 2018). Though effective, empirical defenses cannot guarantee robustness.
Different from empirical defenses, theoretical defenses
provide robustness verification with mathematical guarantees (Li, Xie, and Li 2023). The verification must be sound,
thereby preventing false positives. However, while it has
the potential to be complete, ensuring no false negatives,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21285

