The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-View People Detection in Large Scenes via Supervised View-Wise
Contribution Weighting
Qi Zhang1 , Yunfei Gong1 , Daijie Chen2,1 , Antoni B. Chan3 , Hui Huang1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
qi.zhang.opt@gmail.com, gongyunfei2021@email.szu.edu.cn, chendaijie2022@email.szu.edu.cn,
abchan@cityu.edu.hk, hhzhiyan@gmail.com
m

Abstract
Recent deep learning-based multi-view people detection
(MVD) methods have shown promising results on existing
datasets. However, current methods are mainly trained and
evaluated on small, single scenes with a limited number of
multi-view frames and fixed camera views. As a result, these
methods may not be practical for detecting people in larger,
more complex scenes with severe occlusions and camera calibration errors. This paper focuses on improving multi-view
people detection by developing a supervised view-wise contribution weighting approach that better fuses multi-camera
information under large scenes. Besides, a large synthetic
dataset is adopted to enhance the model’s generalization ability and enable more practical evaluation and comparison. The
model’s performance on new testing scenes is further improved with a simple domain adaptation technique. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
in achieving promising cross-scene multi-view people detection performance.

CVCS

80

CityStreet

72

36
25

0

Wildtrack
MultiviewX

12 16

58

90

m

Figure 1: The scene area comparison of CVCS, CityStreet,
Wildtrack, and MultiviewX. The scene size of the latter two
datasets is quite smaller than the first two.

Introduction
Multi-view people detection (MVD) has been studied to
detect people’s locations on the ground of the scenes via
synchronized and calibrated multi-cameras, which could be
used for many different applications, such as public safety,
autonomous driving, etc. Recent multi-view people detection methods are mainly based on deep learning, which
train convolution neural networks (CNNs) with synchronized multi-view images as input and ground-plane occupancy map as output, and have achieved promising results
on existing datasets, such as Wildtrack (Chavdarova et al.
2018) and MultiviewX (Hou, Zheng, and Gould 2020).
However, the current DNNs-based multi-view people detection methods are trained and evaluated only on single
small scenes (see Figure 1) with limited numbers of frames
and fixed camera views. These datasets are collected on
small scenes with only hundreds of frames for training and
testing and several fixed camera views (7 in Wildtrack and
6 in MultiviewX). In summary, the weaknesses of current
methods are 3 folds: 1) The methods are evaluated on small
scenes (about 20m ∗ 20m), while real-world scenes could be

much larger, with more severe occlusions and camera calibration errors; 2) The methods are evaluated on datasets
containing limited frames and fixed camera views (e.g., 360
for training and 40 for testing, and 7 views in Wildtrack
dataset), which could not validate and compare different
methods thoroughly; 3) The methods cannot generalize to
other scenes well since they are trained on the same single
scenes, and potentially overfitted on the specific camera arrangement, making them not generalized to novel scenes and
camera layouts. These settings in current multi-view detection methods should be adjusted to better validate and compare different multi-view detection methods.
In this paper, we focus on the multi-view people detection
task in large scenes (eg. CVCS and CityStreet, see Figure 1)
with more occlusions and camera calibration errors, as well
as the model’s generalization ability to novel unseen scenes
in testing. We propose the supervised view-wise contribution weighting method to fuse multi-camera information on
the scene ground plane based on each view’s prediction on
the ground plane space. As shown in Figure 2, the pro-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7242

