The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Self-Supervised Bird’s Eye View Motion Prediction with Cross-Modality Signals
Shaoheng Fang1 , Zuhong Liu1 , Mingyu Wang2 , Chenxin Xu1 , Yiqi Zhong3 , Siheng Chen1,4
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Southern California
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{shfang, xcxwakaka, sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn, zuhong.liu@polytechnique.edu,
wangmingyu21a@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yiqizhon@usc.edu
2

Abstract
Learning the dense bird’s eye view (BEV) motion flow in a
self-supervised manner is an emerging research for robotics
and autonomous driving. Current self-supervised methods
mainly rely on point correspondences between point clouds,
which may introduce the problems of fake flow and inconsistency, hindering the model’s ability to learn accurate and
realistic motion. In this paper, we introduce a novel crossmodality self-supervised training framework that effectively
addresses these issues by leveraging multi-modality data to
obtain supervision signals. We design three innovative supervision signals to preserve the inherent properties of scene
motion, including the masked Chamfer distance loss, the
piecewise rigidity loss, and the temporal consistency loss.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our proposed self-supervised framework outperforms all previous
self-supervision methods for the motion prediction task.

Figure 1: Problems in current self-supervised motion learning methods that rely on point correspondence. (a) For static
objects (background building), points with correspondences
in the point cloud sequence may have completely different
locations, misleading the model to learn the fake flow. (b)
Due to the sparse nature of the point cloud, points within an
instance may learn highly varying flow.

Introduction
Accurate prediction of dynamic motion within a scene
is fundamental for the safe and robust planning of autonomous vehicles. Instead of predicting instance-level trajectories (Chen et al. 2020). An emerging trend is to predict the dense motion flow in the BEV (Bird’s Eye View)
map directly from raw sequential sensor input in an endto-end manner (Wu, Chen, and Metaxas 2020; Wang et al.
2022). This approach is less susceptible to perception errors
and possesses the capability to discern class-agnostic motion (Wu, Chen, and Metaxas 2020; Wong et al. 2020). Nevertheless, training flow prediction models with supervision
necessitates a substantial volume of annotations for sensor
data and annotating motion labels for sensor data proves to
be intricate and costly. Hence, the effective utilization of vast
amounts of unlabeled raw data for motion prediction training has emerged as a notable and encouraging challenge. Recently, many works have proposed various self-supervised
frameworks to learn the BEV motion without relying on
ground truth labels (Luo, Yang, and Yuille 2021; Li et al.
2023; Jia et al. 2023).
Inspired by self-supervised scene flow estimation, current self-supervised BEV motion prediction methods (Luo,
Yang, and Yuille 2021; Li et al. 2023) primarily rely on

chamfer distance loss to establish the point-level correspondences between point clouds. However, this heavy dependence on point-level correspondences leads to two major
problems when learning motion patterns from real-world LiDAR point cloud data.
The first problem is fake flows. Due to the alterations in
the viewpoint of the LiDAR sensor, points associated with
the background or static objects often exhibit flow that does
not exist, as shown in Figure 1(a). This fake flow will mislead the model to learn incorrect motion patterns, thereby
adversely affecting the accuracy of predictions. One previous work (Li et al. 2023) introduces a weakly supervised setting where foreground/background ground truth is available
to mitigate the impact of noise originating from background
points to alleviate the problem. However, the method still
remains limited as extra human annotation is indispensable.
The second problem is the inconsistent flows within one
single object; see an illustration in Figure 1(b). Owing to the
inherent sparsity in point cloud data, the point-level flows associated with the same objects may exhibit inconsistent motions when solely relying on the point correspondences. This
problem of inconsistency violates the object-level rigid con-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1726

