The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Find the Lady: Permutation and Re-synchronization of Deep Neural Networks
Carl De Sousa Trias1 , Mihai Petru Mitrea1 , Attilio Fiandrotti2 ,
Marco Cagnazzo3 , Sumanta Chaudhuri4 , Enzo Tartaglione4
1

Télécom SudParis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2
University of Turin, Italy
3
University of Padua, Italy
4
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
carl.de-sousa-trias@telecom-sudparis.eu
Abstract
Deep neural networks are characterized by multiple symmetrical, equi-loss solutions that are redundant. Thus, the order
of neurons in a layer and feature maps can be given arbitrary
permutations, without affecting (or minimally affecting) their
output. If we shuffle these neurons, or if we apply to them
some perturbations (like fine-tuning) can we put them back
in the original order i.e. re-synchronize? Is there a possible
corruption threat? Answering these questions is important for
applications like neural network white-box watermarking for
ownership tracking and integrity verification.
We advance a method to re-synchronize the order of permuted
neurons. Our method is also effective if neurons are further
altered by parameter pruning, quantization, and fine-tuning,
showing robustness to integrity attacks. Additionally, we provide theoretical and practical evidence for the usual means to
corrupt the integrity of the model, resulting in a solution to
counter it. We test our approach on popular computer vision
datasets and models, and we illustrate the threat and our countermeasure on a popular white-box watermarking method.

Figure 1: Given some model (left), let us assume we permute
the order of neurons and apply other types of corruption
(right): are integrity checks at the neuron’s level enough to
verify the integrity of the model? And what about retrieving
the signature in white-box watermarking? This problem resembles the “find the lady / three-card monte” game, where
the queen of hearts needs to be found out of shuffled cards.

Introduction
The deployment of deep neural networks for solving complex tasks became massive, for both industrial and end-useroriented applications. These tasks are instantiated in a huge
variety of applications, e.g. autonomous driving cars. In this
context, neural networks are in charge of safety-critical operations such as forecasting other vehicles’ trajectories, acting on commands to dodge pedestrians, etc. The interest
in protecting the integrity and the intellectual property of
such networks has steadily increased even for non-critical
tasks, like ChatGPT content detection (Uchida et al. 2017;
Adi et al. 2018; Li, Wang, and Barni 2021). Some watermarking techniques already allow embedding signatures inside deep models (Uchida et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019a;
Tartaglione et al. 2020), but these are designed to be robust
against conventional attacks, including fine-tuning, pruning,
or quantization, and assume the original location of the watermarked parameters remains unchanged. Neural networks,
however, have internal symmetries such that entire neurons
can be permuted, without impacting the overall computational graph. Once this happens, although the input-output

function for the whole model does not change, the ordering
of the parameters in the layer changes, and for instance, all
the aforementioned watermarking approaches fail in retrieving the signature of the model, despite it still being there.
This is referred to as geometric attack in the multimedia watermarking community (Wan et al. 2022), and we port the
same concept to deep neural networks: the input-output relationship is preserved, but the order of the neurons is permuted, disallowing the recovery of signatures (Fig. 1).
Some studies (Hecht-Nielsen 1990; Ganju et al. 2018; Li,
Wang, and Zhu 2022) already raised concerns about permutation in deep layers; yet, such a problem has not yet been
studied in its general form, nor has its formal definition been
stated. The first question we ask ourselves is whether the
original ordering for the neurons can be retrieved, even when
the applied permutation rule is lost. It is also a well-known
fact that deep neural networks are redundant (Setiono and
Liu 1997; Agliari et al. 2020; Wang, Li, and Wang 2021)
and some works enforce this towards improving the generalization capability of the neural network, like dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), while others detect such redundancies
and prune them away (Wang, Li, and Wang 2021; Chen et al.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21001

