The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Thompson Sampling for Real-Valued Combinatorial Pure Exploration of
Multi-Armed Bandit
Shintaro Nakamura1,2 , Masashi Sugiyama 2, 1
1

The University of Tokyo
2
RIKEN AIP
nakamurashintaro@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

the goal is to identify π ∗ , which is the optimal solution for
the following constraint optimization problem:

Abstract
We study the real-valued combinatorial pure exploration of
the multi-armed bandit (R-CPE-MAB) problem. In R-CPEMAB, a player is given d stochastic arms, and the reward of
each arm s ∈ {1, . . . , d} follows an unknown distribution
with mean µs . In each time step, a player pulls a single arm
and observes its reward. The player’s goal is to identify the
optimal action π ∗ = arg max µ⊤ π from a finite-sized real-

maximizeπ
subject to

µ⊤ π
π ∈ A,

(1)

where µ is a vector whose s-th element is the mean reward
of arm s and ⊤ denotes the transpose. One example of
the CPE-MAB is the shortest path problem shown in
Figure 1. Each edge s ∈ {1, . . . , 7} has a cost µs and A =
{(1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1)}.
In real-world applications, the cost of each edge (road) can
often be a random variable due to some traffic congestion,
and therefore the cost stochastically changes. We assume
we can choose an edge (road) each round, and conduct a
traffic survey for that edge (road). If we conduct a traffic
survey, we can observe a random sample of the cost of the
chosen edge. Our goal is to identify the best action, which
is a path from the start to the goal nodes.
Although CPE-MAB can be applied to many models
which can be formulated as (1), most of the existing works
in CPE-MAB (Chen et al. 2014; Wang and Zhu 2022; Gabillon et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Du, Kuroki, and Chen
2021; Chen, Gupta, and Li 2016) assume A ⊆ {0, 1}d . This
means that the player’s objective is to identify the best action
which maximizes the sum of the expected rewards. Therefore, although we can apply the existing CPE-MAB methods to the shortest path problem (Sniedovich 2006), topK arms identification (Kalyanakrishnan and Stone 2010),
matching (Gibbons 1985), and spanning trees (Pettie and
Ramachandran 2002), we cannot apply them to problems
where A ⊂ Rd , such as the optimal transport problem
(Villani 2008), the knapsack problem (Dantzig and Mazur
2007), and the production planning problem (Pochet and
Wolsey 2010). For instance, the optimal transport problem
shown in Figure 2 has a real-valued action set A. We have
five suppliers and four demanders. Each supplier i has si
goods to supply. Each demander j wants dj goods. Each
edge µij is the cost to transport goods from supplier i to
P5 P4
demander j. Our goal is to minimize i=1 j=1 πij µij ,
where πij (≥ 0) is the amount of goods transported to demander j from supplier i. Again, we assume that we can
choose an edge (road) each round, and conduct a traffic survey for that edge. Our goal is to identify the best action,
which is a transportation plan (matrix) that shows how much

π∈A

valued action set A ⊂ Rd with as few arm pulls as possible. Previous methods in the R-CPE-MAB require enumerating all of the feasible actions of the combinatorial optimization problem one is considering. In general, since the size of
the action set grows exponentially large in d, this is almost
practically impossible when d is large. We introduce an algorithm named the Generalized Thompson Sampling Explore
(GenTS-Explore) algorithm, which is the first algorithm that
can work even when the size of the action set is exponentially
large in d. We also introduce a novel problem-dependent sample complexity lower bound of the R-CPE-MAB problem,
and show that the GenTS-Explore algorithm achieves the optimal sample complexity up to a problem-dependent constant
factor.

Introduction
Pure exploration in the stochastic multi-armed bandit (PEMAB) is one of the important frameworks for investigating
online decision-making problems, where we try to identify
the optimal object from a set of candidates as soon as possible (Bubeck, Munos, and Stoltz 2009; Audibert, Bubeck,
and Munos 2010; Chen et al. 2014). One of the important
models in PE-MAB is the combinatorial pure exploration
task in the multi-armed bandit (CPE-MAB) problem (Chen
et al. 2014; Wang and Zhu 2022; Gabillon et al. 2016; Chen,
Gupta, and Li 2016; Chen et al. 2017). In CPE-MAB, we
have a set of d stochastic arms, where the reward of each
arm s ∈ {1, . . . , d} follows an unknown distribution with
mean µs , and a finite-sized action set A, which is a collection of subsets of arms with certain combinatorial structures.
The size of the action set can be exponentially large in d. In
each time step, a player pulls a single arm and observes a
reward from it. The goal is to identify the best action from
action set A with as few arm pulls as possible. Abstractly,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14414

