The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spectral Prompt Tuning:
Unveiling Unseen Classes for Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Wenhao Xu1, * , Rongtao Xu2,3, * , Changwei Wang2,3 , Shibiao Xu1,† ,
Li Guo1 , Man Zhang1 , Xiaopeng Zhang2
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence,University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
shibiaoxu@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Loss

Loss

Recently, CLIP has found practical utility in the domain of
pixel-level zero-shot segmentation tasks. The present landscape features two-stage methodologies beset by issues such
as intricate pipelines and elevated computational costs. While
current one-stage approaches alleviate these concerns and incorporate Visual Prompt Training (VPT) to uphold CLIP’s
generalization capacity, they still fall short in fully harnessing CLIP’s potential for pixel-level unseen class demarcation and precise pixel predictions. To further stimulate CLIP’s
zero-shot dense prediction capability, we propose SPT-SEG,
a one-stage approach that improves CLIP’s adaptability from
image to pixel. Specifically, we initially introduce Spectral
Prompt Tuning (SPT), incorporating spectral prompts into the
CLIP visual encoder’s shallow layers to capture structural intricacies of images, thereby enhancing comprehension of unseen classes. Subsequently, we introduce the Spectral Guided
Decoder (SGD), utilizing both high and low-frequency information to steer the network’s spatial focus towards more
prominent classification features, enabling precise pixel-level
prediction outcomes. Through extensive experiments on two
public datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of our method
over state-of-the-art approaches, performing well across all
classes and particularly excelling in handling unseen classes.

Spectral Guided Decoder

Text-Patch
Matching Decoder

Spectral Image
Prompts Encoder

Text
Encoder

a.SPT-SEG (Ours)
Loss
Stage1
Proposal
Generator

Semantic Masks
Assembly

Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

b. Plain one-stage methods
Stage2
Proposal-level
Classification
Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

c. Two-stage methods

Figure 1: (a) Our SPT-SEG method demonstrates outstanding performance across all classes. (b) While yielding favorable results within the seen classes, it exhibits relatively
poorer performance in the unseen classes. (c) Its performance is unsatisfactory across all classes.

them, zero-shot semantic segmentation tasks are particularly
challenging and appealing, as they require generating accurate semantic segmentation results with only the semantic
descriptions of the classes given.
To incorporate zero-shot capability into visual systems,
researchers have proposed large-scale vision-and-language
pretraining models, such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and
ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021a). Specifically, CLIP encodes semantic concepts into model parameters by contrastive training on a massive collection of image-text pairs, forming a
zero-shot knowledge base for downstream tasks. However,
contrastive pretraining mainly focuses on capturing imagelevel concepts. In CLIP, the training texts primarily describe
the global context of images, and the encoded image and
text embeddings are used together to compute contrastive
losses. Consequently, CLIP is more suitable for image-level
classification tasks (Zhou et al. 2022b,a; Lu et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2022). The pretrained visual-language model
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) has recently found applications in various dense prediction tasks, including semantic
segmentation (Pakhomov et al. 2021), referring segmentation (Wang et al. 2022), and object detection (Esmaeilpour

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in
computer vision, aiming to predict the class for each pixel
in an image (Xu et al. 2023d, 2021b; Chen et al. 2021;
Dong et al. 2021). Despite the existence of numerous related works (Lu et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2023b; Wang et al. 2023a), the success of deep semantic
segmentation models heavily relies on a large amount of annotated training images, which requires significant efforts.
In recent years, interest has been growing in unsupervised
or weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods, including semi-supervised (Chen et al. 2021), weakly supervised (Xu et al. 2023a,c; Wang et al. 2023b), few-shot (Xie
et al. 2021), and zero-shot semantic segmentation (Bucher
et al. 2019; Pastore et al. 2021; Xian et al. 2019). Among
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shibiao Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6369

