The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

M3D: Dataset Condensation by Minimizing Maximum Mean Discrepancy
Hansong Zhang1, 2 * , Shikun Li1, 2 * , Pengju Wang1, 2 , Dan Zeng3 , Shiming Ge1, 2†
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100092, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Department of Communication Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200040, China
{zhanghansong,lishikun,wangpengju,geshiming}@iie.ac.cn, dzeng@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Training state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep models often requires
extensive data, resulting in substantial training and storage
costs. To address these challenges, dataset condensation has
been developed to learn a small synthetic set that preserves
essential information from the original large-scale dataset.
Nowadays, optimization-oriented methods have been the primary method in the field of dataset condensation for achieving SOTA results. However, the bi-level optimization process
hinders the practical application of such methods to realistic
and larger datasets. To enhance condensation efficiency, previous works proposed Distribution-Matching (DM) as an alternative, which significantly reduces the condensation cost.
Nonetheless, current DM-based methods still yield less comparable results to SOTA optimization-oriented methods. In
this paper, we argue that existing DM-based methods overlook the higher-order alignment of the distributions, which
may lead to sub-optimal matching results. Inspired by this,
we present a novel DM-based method named M3D for
dataset condensation by Minimizing the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy between feature representations of the synthetic
and real images. By embedding their distributions in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, we align all orders of moments
of the distributions of real and synthetic images, resulting in
a more generalized condensed set. Notably, our method even
surpasses the SOTA optimization-oriented method IDC on
the high-resolution ImageNet dataset. Extensive analysis is
conducted to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Source codes are available at https://github.com/HansongZhang/M3D.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Illustration of the importance of the higher-order
alignment of distributions, where circles represent the representations of synthesized examples while crosses represent
the representations of original examples. (a) The misaligned
distributions with different second-order moments; (b) the
misaligned distributions with different third-order moments;
(c) the aligned distributions.

To alleviate the challenges associated with larger datasets,
Dataset Condensation (DC) (Wang et al. 2018) has emerged
to reduce the training cost by synthesizing a compact set
of informative images. Since its proposal, DC has attracted
significant attention for addressing the challenges posed by
the data burden (Cazenavette et al. 2022; Zhao and Bilen
2021b; Kim et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Zhao and Bilen
2023). Typically, DC condenses the dataset by minimizing the distance between real and synthetic images via a
pre-defined metric. Based on whether to perform a costly
bi-level optimization (Liu et al. 2021), these methods can
be generally categorized into two groups: (1) OptimizationOriented methods (Zhao and Bilen 2021b; Kim et al. 2022;
Zhao and Bilen 2021a; Cazenavette et al. 2022), which
usually generate condensed examples by conducting performance matching or parameter matching via a bi-level
optimization (Yu, Liu, and Wang 2023); (2) DistributionMatching(DM)-based methods (Wang et al. 2022; Zhao and
Bilen 2023), which focus on aligning the feature distributions between real and synthetic data. Optimization-oriented
methods have faced criticism for their inefficiency, primarily
due to the involvement of bi-level optimization modules and
time-consuming network updating processes (Zhang et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2022; Zhao and Bilen 2023). In contrast,
DM-based methods do not involve such nested optimization of models, which significantly reduces the computa-

Introduction
In the era of deep learning, the utilization of largescale datasets comprising millions of samples has become
an indispensable prerequisite for achieving state-of-the-art
(SOTA) models (Zhao and Bilen 2021a; Xia et al. 2022).
However, the associated storage expenses and computational
costs involved in training these models present formidable
challenges, often rendering them beyond the reach of startups and non-profit organizations (Wang et al. 2018; Coleman et al. 2019; Sorscher et al. 2022).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9314

