The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Conditional Backdoor Attack via JPEG Compression
Qiuyu Duan1 , Zhongyun Hua1,2 * , Qing Liao1,2 , Yushu Zhang3 , Leo Yu Zhang4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
4
Griffith University
duanqy39@gmail.com, {huazhongyun, liaoqing}@hit.edu.cn, yushu@nuaa.edu.cn, leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au
2

Abstract

tonomous driving systems, and thus pose a severe threat to
the security of these applications (Liu et al. 2017).
One trend of backdoor attacks is developing more invisible and dynamic triggers to make attacks stealthier. Some
early backdoor attacks use specific patterns as triggers, such
as image patches (Gu et al. 2019), watermarks (Liu et al.
2017), and sinusoidal strips (Barni, Kallas, and Tondi 2019),
which are visible to human observers. To further improve the
imperceptibility of triggers, many recently proposed backdoor attacks generate invisible and dynamic triggers using
image transformation techniques such as warping (Nguyen
and Tran 2021) and color quantization (Wang, Zhai, and Ma
2022). At the same time, some backdoor attacks use inputspecific tiny perturbations generated by the trained auxiliary
generator as triggers (Doan et al. 2021; Zhong, Qian, and
Zhang 2022). While all the aforementioned studies focus on
spatial-based backdoor attacks, some recent studies (Zeng
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2022) have started
exploring adding triggers in the frequency domain, aiming
to further enhance the imperceptibility of triggers.
In response to the excessive number of new backdoor
attacks, many backdoor defensive methods have been proposed, such as reverse engineering defenses (Wang et al.
2019; Zeng et al. 2022), neuron pruning defenses (Liu,
Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2018; Wu and Wang 2021), online
defense (Gao et al. 2019), knowledge distillation defense (Li
et al. 2021c) and GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017) based
defenses (Chou, Tramer, and Pellegrino 2020; Doan, Abbasnejad, and Ranasinghe 2020). In terms of robustness against
backdoor defenses, the general rule of thumb is that the more
invisible and dynamic a backdoor attack’s triggers are, the
more robust the attack will be. However, as validated in the
experiments, some denoising operations can inadvertently
eliminate these robust attacks.
Besides the arm-race of designing and detecting stealthier
attacks as above, the most recent trend is to use the wisdom in network security (Stallings 2003) to build backdoor
attacks with new triggering paradigms. The work in (Ning
et al. 2022) proposed the hibernated backdoor paradigm,
where the backdoor is planted in a hibernated mode and can
only be activated after the model has been fine-tuned. The
work in (Liu et al. 2022) proposed the opportunistic backdoor attack on speech recognition systems, where the triggers are audible, and the backdoor is passively triggering

Deep neural network (DNN) models have been proven vulnerable to backdoor attacks. One trend of backdoor attacks
is developing more invisible and dynamic triggers to make
attacks stealthier. However, these invisible and dynamic triggers can be inadvertently mitigated by some widely used passive denoising operations, such as image compression, making the efforts under this trend questionable. Another trend is
to exploit the full potential of backdoor attacks by proposing
new triggering paradigms, such as hibernated or opportunistic
backdoors. In line with these trends, our work investigates the
first conditional backdoor attack, where the backdoor is activated by a specific condition rather than pre-defined triggers.
Specifically, we take the JPEG compression as our condition
and jointly optimize the compression operator and the target
model’s loss function, which can force the target model to accurately learn the JPEG compression behavior as the triggering condition. In this case, besides the conditional triggering
feature, our attack is also stealthy and robust to denoising operations. Extensive experiments on the MNIST, GTSRB and
CelebA verify our attack’s effectiveness, stealthiness and resistance to existing backdoor defenses and denoising operations. As a new triggering paradigm, the conditional backdoor
attack brings a new angle for assessing the vulnerability of
DNN models, and conditioned over JPEG compression magnifies its threat due to the universal usage of JPEG.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently been widely
applied in many tasks, such as image classification (He
et al. 2016) and natural language processing (Vaswani et al.
2017). However, training a decent DNN model requires a
large number of good-quality data samples, computation resources and expert personnel. Thus, third-party services are
usually used to train DNN models to reduce the overhead.
However, when training DNN models using third-party services, the training process is non-transparent and cannot be
controlled by model users. As a result, these DNN models
are vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Gu et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2017). Backdoor attacks can be launched in many
DNNs-based applications, such as face recognition and au* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19823

