The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Making Learnware Specification and Market Evolvable
Jian-Dong Liu, Zhi-Hao Tan, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{liujd, tanzh, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

learning models, enabling users to build models by reusing
existing efforts instead of starting from scratch. A learnware
is a well-performed model with a specification representing its specialty and utility, enabling the model to be adequately identified for subsequent user tasks. Developers can
spontaneously submit their models on various tasks to the
market, which then assigns specifications to accepted ones.
The learnware market is also called learnware dock system,
which can organize and utilize the accepted learnwares to
solve new user tasks. Given a new task, the market can identify helpful learnwares based on the submitted user requirements. It is important to note that the learnware market has
access to the raw data of neither the developers nor the users.
A critical challenge in the learnware paradigm is how
to effectively and efficiently identify the most helpful learnware(s) in a continuously expanding market for a new user
task without accessing raw user data? This is particularly
crucial as the number of learnwares grow exponentially. The
key to the solution is the specification, which is the core of
the learnware paradigm, playing a crucial role in learnware
characterization and identification without leaking raw data.
Based on specifications, recent studies about the learnware
paradigm (Wu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2022,
2023; Xie et al. 2023) successfully identified helpful models
whose original training distribution align with the user task.
However, perfect matches are uncommon due to varying environments. Solely relying on initial training distribution for
model identification would ignore numerous beneficial models trained on tasks far from the user’s. Additionally, current
methods necessitate examining all learnwares in the market,
which is computationally infeasible in markets with continuously growing scale. Hence, two specific key issues arise:

The learnware paradigm aims to establish a market of numerous well-performed machine learning models, enabling
users to leverage existing helpful models for their tasks instead of starting from scratch. Each learnware in the market is
a model submitted by its developer, associated with a specification generated with the help of learnware market, representing the model’s specialty and utility and enabling it to be identified for new user tasks. As the market continuously scales
up, accommodating an ever-increasing number of learnwares,
the critical challenge of the learnware paradigm is to effectively and efficiently identify the most helpful learnware(s)
for a new user task without accessing the user’s raw data. In
this paper, to achieve increasingly accurate learnware characterization and identification along with a growing number of learnwares in the market, we propose an approach
called Evolvable Learnware Specification with Index (ELSI).
Specifically, based on the key idea of leveraging the task information within learnware specifications, we tackle the challenge of ascertaining the capabilities of models beyond their
original training tasks, thereby enabling learnware specifications and the entire market to evolve continuously. Furthermore, through organizing learnwares and constructing specification indexes, we design a practical procedure to accurately
and efficiently identify helpful learnwares without examining
the entire market. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments on a learnware market prototype encompassing thousands of models and covering six real-world scenarios validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has achieved significant success in various real-world applications, including medicine, robotics,
and ecology. However, developing a well-performed model
necessitates several essential conditions, such as sufficient
labeled data, adequate computational resources, and proficient training skills. Without these conditions, most ordinary
users can hardly produce high-quality models starting from
scratch. Besides, it is difficult to identify and reuse beneficial
models among different users due to data privacy concerns.
To tackle the above issues simultaneously, the learnware
paradigm (Zhou 2016; Zhou and Tan 2024) was proposed to
establish a learnware market containing numerous machine

• How to characterize model abilities beyond models’
original tasks for accurate learnware identification?
• How to avoid examining the entire market for efficient
learnware identification?
The fundamental difficulties of these issues stem mainly
from the absence of labeled data for evaluating model performance in various domains, as well as the lack of an effective learnware distance metric to organize models for efficient retrieval. Under the learnware paradigm, our pivotal
insight emerges: evaluating a model’s capability beyond its
initial training task could be feasible through the task infor-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13909

