The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Omega-Regular Decision Processes
Ernst Moritz Hahn* 1 , Mateo Perez* 2 , Sven Schewe* 3 ,
Fabio Somenzi* 2 , Ashutosh Trivedi* 2 , Dominik Wojtczak* 3
1

University of Twente, The Netherlands
University of Colorado Boulder, USA
3
University of Liverpool, UK
E.M.Hahn@utwente.nl, Mateo.Perez@colorado.edu, Sven.Schewe@liverpool.ac.uk,
Fabio@colorado.edu, Ashutosh.Trivedi@colorado.edu, D.Wojtczak@liv.ac.uk
2

Abstract

signal. To help address this problem, we extend MDPs with
a modeling primitive—called promises—that improves the
communication between the agent and the programmer. We
dub these processes ω-regular decision processes (ODPs).

Regular decision processes (RDPs) are a subclass of nonMarkovian decision processes where the transition and reward
functions are guarded by some regular property of the past
(a lookback). While RDPs enable intuitive and succinct representation of non-Markovian decision processes, their expressive power coincides with finite-state Markov decision
processes (MDPs). We introduce omega-regular decision processes (ODPs) where the non-Markovian aspect of the transition and reward functions are extended to an ω-regular lookahead over the system evolution. Semantically, these lookaheads can be considered as promises made by the decision
maker or the learning agent about her future behavior. In particular, we assume that if the promised lookaheads are not
fulfilled, then the decision maker receives a payoff of ⊥ (the
least desirable payoff), overriding any rewards collected by the
decision maker. We enable optimization and learning for ODPs
under the discounted-reward objective by reducing them to
lexicographic optimization and learning over finite MDPs. We
present experimental results demonstrating the effectiveness
of the proposed reduction.

Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are canonical models to
express decision making under uncertainty, where the optimization objective is defined as a discounted sum of scalar
rewards associated with various decisions. The optimal value
and the optimal policies for MDPs can be computed efficiently via dynamic programming (Puterman 1994). When
the environment is not explicitly known but can be sampled
in repeated interactions, reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton
and Barto 2018) algorithms combine stochastic approximation with dynamic programming to compute optimal values
and policies. RL, combined with deep learning (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016), has emerged as a leading human-AI collaborative programming paradigm generating novel and creative solutions with “superhuman” efficiency (Silver et al. 2016; Wurman et al. 2022; Mirhoseini
et al. 2020). A key shortcoming of this approach is the difficulty of translating designer’s intent into a suitable reward
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21125

Motivation. A key challenge in posing a decision problem as an MDP is to define a scalar reward signal that is
Markovian (history-independent) on the state space. While
some problems, such as reachability and safety, naturally lend
themselves to a reward-based formulation, such an interface
is often cumbersome and arguably error-prone. This difficulty
has been well documented, especially within the RL literature, under different terms including misaligned specification,
specification gaming, and reward hacking (Pan, Bhatia, and
Steinhardt 2022; Amodei et al. 2016; Yuan et al. 2019; Skalse
et al. 2022; Clark and Amodei 2016).
To overcome this challenge, automata and logic-based
reward gadgets—such as reward machines, ω-regular languages, and LTL—have been proposed to extend the MDP in
the context of planning (Baier and Katoen 2008) and, more recently, of RL (Icarte et al. 2018; Camacho et al. 2019; Sadigh
et al. 2014; Hahn et al. 2019; Fu and Topcu 2014). In these
works, an interpreter provides a reward for the actions of the
decision maker by monitoring the action sequences with the
help of the underlying reward gadget. While such reward
interface is convenient from the programmer’s perspective, it
limits the agency of the decision maker in claiming rewards
for her actions by making it opaque.
The formal study of non-Markovian MDPs in the planning setting was initiated by Brafman and De Giacomo
(2019), who proposed regular decision processes (RDPs)
as a tractable representation of non-Markovian MDPs. Abadi
and Brafman (2021) further extended this work by combining
Mealy machine learning with RL. In an RDP, the agent can
choose a given action and collect its associated reward as
long as the partial episode satisfies a certain regular property
provided as the guard for that action. This modeling feature
both permits and anticipates the agent to retain regular information about the past, enabling her to make optimal choices
when selecting her actions. Augmenting MDPs with such retrospective memory offers a succinct and transparent modeling
approach. However, adding memory as a regular language
does not increase the expressive power of MDPs and RDPs

