The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Loss Functions for Training Decision Trees with Noisy Labels
Jonathan Wilton, Nan Ye
School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland
jonathan.wilton@uq.edu.au, nan.ye@uq.edu.au

Abstract
We consider training decision trees using noisily labeled data,
focusing on loss functions that can lead to robust learning
algorithms. Our contributions are threefold. First, we offer
novel theoretical insights on the robustness of many existing
loss functions in the context of decision tree learning. We
show that some of the losses belong to a class of what we
call conservative losses, and the conservative losses lead to an
early stopping behavior during training and noise-tolerant predictions during testing. Second, we introduce a framework for
constructing robust loss functions, called distribution losses.
These losses apply percentile-based penalties based on an assumed margin distribution, and they naturally allow adapting
to different noise rates via a robustness parameter. In particular,
we introduce a new loss called the negative exponential loss,
which leads to an efficient greedy impurity-reduction learning
algorithm. Lastly, our experiments on multiple datasets and
noise settings validate our theoretical insight and the effectiveness of our adaptive negative exponential loss.

Introduction
Noisily labeled data often arise in machine learning, due to
reasons such as the difficulty of accurately labeling data and
the use of crowd-sourcing for labeling (Song et al. 2022).
Various approaches have been developed to handle the label
noise, including eliminating mislabeled examples (Brodley,
Friedl et al. 1996), implicit/explicit regularization (Tanno
et al. 2019; Lukasik et al. 2020), the use of robust loss functions (Manwani and Sastry 2013; Yang, Gao, and Li 2019),
with recent works mostly focusing on neural networks.
This paper focuses on robust loss functions for learning
decision trees from noisily labeled data. Tree-based methods
(e.g., random forests) are among the most effective machine
learning methods, particularly on tabular data (Grinsztajn,
Oyallon, and Varoquaux 2022; Kaggle 2021), and several
robust loss functions have been shown to be effective for neural network learning in the presence of label noise (e.g., see
(Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry 2017; Zhang and Sabuncu 2018)).
However, little attention has been paid to the understanding
and design of robust loss functions in the context of decision
tree learning. This is likely because decision tree learning
algorithms are often described as greedy impurity-reduction
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15859

algorithms in the literature, and it is less well-known that
the impurity-reduction algorithms are greedy algorithms for
minimizing certain losses (Yang, Gao, and Li 2019; Wilton
et al. 2022). Our work aims to address this research gap.
Our main contributions are three-fold.
• We offer novel theoretical insight on the robustness of
many existing loss functions. We show that some of them
belong to a class of what we call conservative losses,
which are robust due to an early stopping behavior during
training and noise-tolerant predictions during testing.
• We introduce a framework for constructing robust loss
functions, called distribution losses. These losses apply
percentile-based penalties based on an assumed margin
distribution. By using different assumed margin distributions, we can recover some commonly used loss functions,
which shed interesting insight on these existing functions.
An attractive property of the distribution loss is that they
naturally allow adapting to different noise rates via a robustness parameter. Importantly, we introduce a new loss
called the negative exponential loss, which leads to an
efficient impurity-reduction learning algorithm.
• Our extensive experiments validate our theoretical insight
and the effectiveness of our adaptive negative exponential
loss.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
first provide a more detailed discussion on related work, followed by some preliminary concepts. We then present the
conservative losses and their robustness properties. After that,
we describe our distribution-based robust loss framework and
the negative exponential loss. Finally, we present details on
experimental settings and results, with a brief conclusion. Our
source code is available at https://github.com/jonathanwilton/
RobustDecisionTrees.

Related Work
Our work is broadly related to the large body of approaches
developed for dealing with label noise in the literature, which
include filtering the noisy labels, learning a classifier and
model for the label noise simultaneously, implicit/explicit
regularization to avoid overfitting the noise, and designing
robust loss functions (see, e.g., for the excellent reviews
(Frénay and Verleysen 2013) or (Song et al. 2022) for detailed
discussions).

