The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Game-Theoretic Unlearnable Example Generator
Shuang Liu1, 2 , Yihan Wang1, 2 , Xiao-Shan Gao1, 2 *
1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
liushuang2020@amss.ac.cn, yihanwang@amss.ac.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn

Abstract
Unlearnable example attacks are data poisoning attacks aiming
to degrade the clean test accuracy of deep learning by adding
imperceptible perturbations to the training samples, which can
be formulated as a bi-level optimization problem. However,
directly solving this optimization problem is intractable for
deep neural networks. In this paper, we investigate unlearnable
example attacks from a game-theoretic perspective, by formulating the attack as a nonzero sum Stackelberg game. First,
the existence of game equilibria is proved under the normal
setting and the adversarial training setting. It is shown that the
game equilibrium gives the most powerful poison attack in
that the victim has the lowest test accuracy among all networks
within the same hypothesis space, when certain loss functions
are used. Second, we propose a novel attack method, called
the Game Unlearnable Example (GUE), which has three main
gradients. (1) The poisons are obtained by directly solving the
equilibrium of the Stackelberg game with a first-order algorithm. (2) We employ an autoencoder-like generative network
model as the poison attacker. (3) A novel payoff function is
introduced to evaluate the performance of the poison. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that GUE can effectively
poison the model in various scenarios. Furthermore, the GUE
still works by using a relatively small percentage of the training data to train the generator, and the poison generator can
generalize to unseen data well. Our implementation code can
be found at https://github.com/hong-xian/gue.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various
fields, including computer vision (He et al. 2016), natural
language processing, and large language models (Brown et al.
2020), where the acquisition of a substantial amount of training data is typically necessary. However, in practical scenarios, there exists a potential issue of collecting unauthorized
private data from the Internet to train these models. This
raises significant privacy concerns and underscores the need
to address how to protect personal data from exploitation.
To prevent unauthorized use of private data, several poisoning methods (Feng, Cai, and Zhou 2019; Huang et al. 2021;
Fowl et al. 2021; Yuan and Wu 2021; Tao et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2022; van Vlijmen et al. 2022; Sandoval-Segura et al. 2022b)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21349

have been proposed. These methods involve adding imperceptible perturbations to the training samples, thereby poisoning
the models and leading to poor performance on clean test
data, thus making the training data unlearnable. However, it
is generally agreed that the above methods are vulnerable
to adversarial training. In response, novel approaches such
as (Fu et al. 2022; Wen et al. 2023) have been proposed
to generate robust unlearnable examples that can withstand
adversarial training. Commonly referred to as "unlearnable
examples attack" or "availability attack", these poison attacks
have attracted significant attention.
In previous works (Feng, Cai, and Zhou 2019; Tao et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2022), unlearnable example attacks were
usually formulated as a bi-level optimization problem. But
directly solving the optimization problem is intractable, and
Feng, Cai, and Zhou (2019) used an alternative update and
Yuan and Wu (2021) used Neural Tangent Kernels (Jacot,
Gabriel, and Hongler 2018) to approximately optimize the bilevel objective. Yu et al. (2022) designed poison perturbations
that are easily learned by the model as “shortcuts” to prevent
learning the information from the real data.
In this paper, we formulate the unlearnable example attack
as a non-zero sum Stackelberg game, in which the attacker,
as the leader, crafts poison perturbation on the training data
with the aim of decreasing the test accuracy, while the classifier, as the follower, optimizes the network parameters on the
poisoned training dataset. We prove the existence of Stackelberg equilibria in both the normal and adversarial training
settings. Furthermore, we propose a novel and effective approach, namely Game Unlearnable Example (GUE), in which
we directly compute the Stackelberg game equilibrium using
a first-order algorithm (Liu et al. 2022) and select an appropriate payoff function for the poison attacker. It is noteworthy
that our GUE is not only applicable to standard natural training but can also extend to adversarial training.
Existing unlearnable example attacks typically require
modifying the entire training dataset. However, in practical scenarios, the continuous influx of new clean data over
time can render the unlearnable effect almost negligible. To
mitigate this problem, when there is a continuous stream of
new data, the user must go through the generation process
for the whole dataset repeatedly, which is time-consuming.
In order to overcome this problem, we use an autoencoderlike generator as the attacker, and show that a well-trained

