The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Mitigating the Impact of False Negatives in Dense Retrieval
with Contrastive Confidence Regularization
Shiqi Wang, Yeqin Zhang, Cam-Tu Nguyen*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{wangsky,zhangyeqin}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {ncamtu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

methods, such as BM25, exploit the frequency of words to
measure the relevance between a passage and a query. While
efficient, these methods often fall short of capturing intricate
relationships and contextual nuances of language. In contrast, dense retrieval methods aim to learn meaningful representations from the semantic content of passages and queries
effectively. These models can be trained based on a pretraining model (e.g. BERT, RoBERTa) as well as fine-tuned for
downstream QA tasks (Lewis et al. 2020b), offering easy
integration. In addition, it is possible to apply approximate
nearest neighbors (ANN) with dense retrieval (Xiong et al.
2021) for efficient retrieval.
This paper focuses on dense retrieval, where contrastive
learning is often employed to train passage and query encoders. The core principle of contrastive learning is to encode passages and queries such that relevant passages are
closer to their corresponding query in the embedding space,
while irrelevant passages are farther away. To train such encoders, we need a labeled dataset with queries annotated
with relevant passages (positive samples). However, due to
the vast number of candidate passages and the complexity
of questions, it is common for annotators to miss relevant
information (texts) during data preparation, leading to unlabeled positive examples (false negatives) in the training
set. Recent studies support this assumption. For instance,
Ni, Gardner, and Dasigi (2021) found that over half of 50
answerable questions from the IIRC dataset (Ferguson et al.
2020) had at least one missing piece of evidence. Similarly,
Qu et al. (2021) manually reviewed top-retrieved passages
not labeled as positives in MSMARCO (Nguyen et al. 2016)
and detected a 70% false negative rate. On the other hand, it
is essential to sample hard negatives for effective contrastive
learning. Here, hard negatives refer to passages obtained
from the top results of a pre-trained dense retrieval model
or BM25. Unfortunately, hard negative sampling is susceptible to higher false negative rates in noisy datasets because
such negative samples are more likely to be mislabeled ones.
Therefore, mitigating the impact of false negatives can potentially improve the performance of dense retrieval.
Several strategies have recently emerged to address the
problem of false negatives. Qu et al. (2021) use a highly effective but inefficient reranker based on a cross-encoder to
identify high-confidence negatives as true negatives, which
were then used to train the retrieval model. Ni, Gardner, and

In open-domain Question Answering (QA), dense retrieval
is crucial for finding relevant passages for answer generation. Typically, contrastive learning is used to train a retrieval
model that maps passages and queries to the same semantic space. The objective is to make similar ones closer and
dissimilar ones further apart. However, training such a system is challenging due to the false negative issue, where relevant passages may be missed during data annotation. Hard
negative sampling, which is commonly used to improve contrastive learning, can introduce more noise in training. This
is because hard negatives are those closer to a given query,
and thus more likely to be false negatives. To address this
issue, we propose a novel contrastive confidence regularizer
for Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) loss, a commonly
used loss for dense retrieval. Our analysis shows that the regularizer helps dense retrieval models be more robust against
false negatives with a theoretical guarantee. Additionally, we
propose a model-agnostic method to filter out noisy negative
passages in the dataset, improving any downstream dense retrieval models. Through experiments on three datasets, we
demonstrate that our method achieves better retrieval performance in comparison to existing state-of-the-art dense retrieval systems.

Introduction
Text retrieval involves searching for relevant information in
vast text collections based on user queries. Efficient and
effective methods for this task have revolutionized how
we interact with information systems. Recently, there has
been growing interest in augmenting large language models (LLMs) with text retrieval for question answering (QA)
(Lewis et al. 2020a; Guu et al. 2020; Glass et al. 2022;
Borgeaud et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023).
These approaches harness retrieval models to obtain external
knowledge and ground LLM outputs, reducing hallucinations and the need for frequent LLM updates. Interestingly,
augmenting an LM with a retrieval helps reduce the number of parameters required to achieve similar performance
as larger LMs (Mialon et al. 2023).
Text retrieval methods can be broadly categorized into
two main approaches: sparse and dense retrievals. Sparse
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19171

