The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Calibrated One Round Federated Learning with Bayesian Inference in the
Predictive Space
Mohsin Hasan1,2 , Guojun Zhang3 , Kaiyang Guo3 , Xi Chen3 , Pascal Poupart1,2
1

University of Waterloo
2
Vector Institute
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
mohsin.hasan@uwaterloo.ca, {guojun.zhang, guo.kaiyang, xi.chen4}@huawei.com, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca
Abstract

when each model has numerous parameters (e.g. neural
networks). Cost effective FL techniques therefore aim to
maximize the amount of local computation at each client,
while reducing the rounds of communication.
2. Performance with Heterogeneous Data: clients may
have different data distributions from each other. This
causes the local client models to drift apart, presenting
issues when aggregating them into a global model (Zhao
et al. 2018). In particular, when client datasets are heavily heterogeneous, global models tend to perform poorly
on clients’ local datasets.
3. Calibration: Clients’ data may have too few training
points, or too much variance. Therefore, a valuable goal
in FL is to produce models that are well-calibrated, or
in other words: make probabilistic predictions with accurate uncertainty estimates.

Federated Learning (FL) involves training a model over a
dataset distributed among clients, with the constraint that
each client’s dataset is localized and possibly heterogeneous.
In FL, small and noisy datasets are common, highlighting the
need for well-calibrated models that represent the uncertainty
of predictions. The closest FL techniques to achieving such
goals are the Bayesian FL methods which collect parameter
samples from local posteriors, and aggregate them to approximate the global posterior. To improve scalability for larger
models, one common Bayesian approach is to approximate
the global predictive posterior by multiplying local predictive posteriors. In this work, we demonstrate that this method
gives systematically overconfident predictions, and we remedy this by proposing β-Predictive Bayes, a Bayesian FL algorithm that interpolates between a mixture and product of
the predictive posteriors, using a tunable parameter β. This
parameter is tuned to improve the global ensemble’s calibration, before it is distilled to a single model. Our method is
evaluated on a variety of regression and classification datasets
to demonstrate its superiority in calibration to other baselines, even as data heterogeneity increases. Code available at
https://github.com/hasanmohsin/betaPredBayesFL. Our paper’s full version is at https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09817.

Many techniques frame FL as a distributed optimization
problem. For these, there is typically a trade-off between
achieving a low communication cost and good performance
on heterogeneous data: they improve global performance at
the cost of more communication (McMahan et al. 2017;
Woodworth, Patel, and Srebro 2020). Moreover, they do not
have any systematic way of calibrating the global model.
To alleviate these problems, an alternative branch of FL
techniques takes a Bayesian perspective on learning the
model. They approximate the Bayesian posterior distribution of each client model, and aggregate them into the global
Bayesian posterior (Al-Shedivat et al. 2021; Neiswanger,
Wang, and Xing 2014). This allows the training of more
effective global models on heterogeneous data by leveraging client uncertainty during aggregation (Al-Shedivat et al.
2021). Certain Bayesian FL methods also demonstrate how
to aggregate local posteriors in only a single round of communication (Neiswanger, Wang, and Xing 2014). Furthermore, these methods explicitly represent and adjust the uncertainty in model parameters, i.e., they should be wellcalibrated in principle.
In these methods, the Bayesian posterior is a distribution over model parameters, and it is expensive to represent
and manipulate. Therefore, it becomes necessary to apply
approximations to the posterior. Many methods work with
crude approximations to the client posterior (as e.g., a multivariate Gaussian) (Al-Shedivat et al. 2021; Neiswanger,

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm that
trains a statistical model using decentralized data stored on
client devices, with the constraint that client data is kept local (McMahan et al. 2017). FL has found use in smartphone
applications, as well as fields such as healthcare and finance
due to the abundance of use-cases where sensitive training
data is owned by separate entities (Zheng et al. 2022).
The workflow of a typical FL algorithm involves the local
training of models on each client, followed by the communication and aggregation of these into a single global model
on a central server. Many FL techniques alternate between
these two steps until some notion of convergence is reached.
For the purpose of this work, we are concerned with the
design of FL algorithms with three key metrics in mind:
1. Communication Cost: the transmission of models between clients and servers can be expensive, especially
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12313

