The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Fair Allocation of Items in Multiple Regions
Houyu Zhou1 * , Tianze Wei1 * † , Biaoshuai Tao2 * , Minming Li1 *
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{houyuzhou2-c, t.z.wei-8}@my.cityu.edu.hk, bstao@sjtu.edu.cn, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk

2

Abstract

items, e.g., some employees prefer to live in low-floor dormitories because it is convenient, while others prefer to live
in high-floor dormitories because it is quiet. A simple way is
to allocate those items equally to the employees in the same
region. One difficulty is that it may be impossible to divide
every item equally, e.g., every dormitory is unique because
of the building and the level it belongs to. In addition, the
employee may envy those in another region, though we can
achieve equity in the same region. Moreover, we cannot allocate those employees to those regions proportionally with
respect to the total valuation of each region since they may
have different preferences for those regions. For instance,
some employees may prefer inland cities because it is not
easy to get wet, while others prefer coastal cities because of
the cooler weather. Hence, different employees’ valuations
in the same region may vary.
One may also wonder how about if we divide the whole
allocation procedure into two steps: (1) assign agents to different regions based on their preferences; (2) use existing algorithms in fair allocation to allocate items to agents in each
region. The main drawback of this approach is that assigning agents to the regions only on their preferences may cause
some crowded regions, which means that every agent in this
region may get a low value. The situation may worsen, especially when agents assigned to the same region have similar preferences over items. Hence, we need an integrated
procedure to account for agents’ preferences over possible
solutions properly.
In addition, whether the items are divisible or not, the
well-established techniques such as Cut and Choose (Steinhaus 1948), Round-Robin and Envy-Cycles Procedure (Lipton et al. 2004) that are often used in the fair allocation of
the divisible items or a set of indivisible items cannot be directly applied to most cases in our setting. There are two
reasons: (1) in our setting, each agent can only obtain items
from one region, and (2) the current techniques cannot decide how to assign agents to regions. Although there have
been several works about fair allocation of multiple divisible items (Cloutier, Nyman, and Su 2010; Nyman, Su, and
Zerbib 2020; Hosseini, Igarashi, and Searns 2020), their settings are different from that of our paper, and the techniques
in these papers cannot be directly used in our model (See
details in Related Work). Hence, none of the previous work
fully captures the challenge that we face.

We initiate the study of fair allocation with the set of divisible
or indivisible items distributed in multiple regions. The key
requirement is that each agent can only obtain items from one
region. In this work, we consider two kinds of fairness concepts: envy-based notions including envy-freeness (EF) and
envy-freeness up to one/any item (EF1/EFX), and share-based
notions including proportionality (PROP) and proportionality up to one/any item (PROP1/PROPX). On the negative side,
we show NP-hardness and inapproximability results about the
aforementioned fairness notions. On the positive side, we propose several algorithms to compute the partial allocations that
satisfy envy-based notions and allocations that approximate
the above fairness notions.

Introduction
Fair allocation studies how to fairly allocate a set of items
(resources) among agents, which has attracted the attention
of many scholars in both theoretical and industrial fields
(Steinhaus 1949; Moulin 2004). For instance, network technology companies like Google and Meta use schedulers in
the cloud to allocate items (e.g., servers, memory, etc.) or
tasks (e.g., development, maintenance, etc.) among several
self-interested agents who want to maximize the utility of
their own allocations. We observe that there are many reallife scenarios, including the above case, where the items are
distributed in multiple regions, and each agent can only obtain the items from a single region. Such scenarios raise a
natural question.
How to allocate the items to a set of agents where
each agent can only obtain items from one region?
Before answering the question, we consider a scenario
where a multinational corporation with many branches in
different countries and regions wants to recruit employees.
The manager not only assigns employees who meet the requirements to different regions but also allocates different
items such as wages, housing, insurance, and medical care
to them. Different agents have different valuations for those
* The authors are listed in reverse alphabetical order.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9985

