The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Representations for Robust Human-Robot Interaction
Yen-Ling Kuo
University of Virginia
Department of Computer Science
ylkuo@virginia.edu

For robots to robustly and flexibly interact with humans,
they need to acquire skills to use across scenarios. One way
to enable the generalization of skills is to learn representations that are useful for downstream tasks. Learning a representation for interactions requires an understanding of what
(e.g., objects) as well as how (e.g., actions, controls, and
manners) to interact with. However, most existing language
or visual representations mainly focus on objects, for example, aligning language with world states via CLIP-like
method (Myers et al. 2023). These representations enable
robots to interpret intents such as which object to be picked
up. But such representations cannot be used to understand
sentences like “move slower so you don’t spill water” or
“help that person move the box.” To enable robust humanrobot interactions (HRI), we need a representation that is not
just grounded at the object level but to reason at the action
level. The ability to reason about an agent’s own actions and
other’s actions will be particularly important for long-tail interactions, e.g., interactions that are safety-critical or novel
interaction scenarios, as collecting large datasets for these
interactions will be costly or even impossible.
Specifically, my research focuses on leveraging the compositional nature of language and reward functions to learn
representations that generalize to novel scenarios. Together
with the information from multiple modalities, the learned
representation can reason about task progress, future behaviors, and the goals/beliefs of an agent. The above ideas have
been demonstrated in my research on language understanding and social interactions.
To build representations for language understanding, I utilize compositional linguistic structures like parse trees to
combine representation learned for different words to guide
motion planners to follow natural language commands (Kuo,
Katz, and Barbu 2020a,b). The structure of sentences is reflected in the structure of policy networks to enable robots to
understand novel commands and act rationally in new scenarios. When associating sentences with environment features and an agent’s past trajectory, the linguistic representation can scaffold the hypothesis of future trajectories (Kuo
et al. 2022). To build representations for social interactions,
I show how composing an agent’s own reward and the reward estimation of other agents can give rise to novel social

interactions between agents (Tejwani et al. 2022, 2023). The
recursive reward estimation improves an agent’s Theory of
Mind reasoning capability to enable robots to accurately reason about sequences of actions.
While continuing my research on building compositional
representations for HRI, my next research plan include exploring the desired properties of the learned representations
such as interpretability and fast inference (Jha et al. 2024)
and exploring solutions to adding these properties, which are
ongoing work in my group.

References
Jha, K.; Le, T. A.; Jin, C.; Kuo, Y.-L.; Tenenbaum, J. B.;
and Shu, T. 2024. Neural Amortized Inference for Nested
Multi-agent Reasoning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
Kuo, Y.-L.; Huang, X.; Barbu, A.; McGill, S. G.; Katz, B.;
Leonard, J. J.; and Rosman, G. 2022. Trajectory prediction
with linguistic representations. In International Conference
on Robotics and Automation.
Kuo, Y.-L.; Katz, B.; and Barbu, A. 2020a. Compositional
networks enable systematic generalization for grounded language understanding. In Findings of Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.
Kuo, Y.-L.; Katz, B.; and Barbu, A. 2020b. Deep compositional robotic planners that follow natural language commands. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation.
Myers, V.; He, A.; Fang, K.; Walke, H.; Hansen-Estruch, P.;
Cheng, C.-A.; Jalobeanu, M.; Kolobov, A.; Dragan, A.; and
Levine, S. 2023. Goal Representations for Instruction Following: A Semi-Supervised Language Interface to Control.
In Conference on Robot Learning.
Tejwani, R.; Kuo, Y.-L.; Shu, T.; Katz, B.; and Barbu, A.
2022. Social interactions as recursive MDPs. In Conference
on Robot Learning.
Tejwani, R.; Kuo, Y.-L.; Shu, T.; Stankovits, B.; Gutfreund, D.; Tenenbaum, J. B.; Katz, B.; and Barbu, A. 2023.
Zero-shot linear combinations of grounded social interactions with Linear Social MDPs. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22673

