The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

StegaStyleGAN: Towards Generic and Practical Generative Image Steganography
Wenkang Su1, 2 , Jiangqun Ni1, 3 * , Yiyan Sun1
1

Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
swk1004@gzhu.edu.cn, issjqni@mail.sysu.edu.cn, sunyy27@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
2

Sender

Abstract

Stego

The recent advances in generative image steganography have
drawn increasing attention due to their potential for provable security and bulk embedding capacity. However, existing generative steganographic schemes are usually tailored for specific tasks and are hardly applied to applications with practical constraints. To address this issue,
this paper proposes a generic generative image steganography scheme called Steganography StyleGAN (StegaStyleGAN) that meets the practical objectives of security, capacity,
and robustness within the same framework. In StegaStyleGAN, a novel Distribution-Preserving Secret Data Modulator (DP-SDM) is used to achieve provably secure generative image steganography by preserving the data distribution of the model inputs. Additionally, a generic and efficient Secret Data Extractor (SDE) is invented for accurate
secret data extraction. By choosing whether to incorporate
the Image Attack Simulator (IAS) during the training process, one can obtain two models with different parameters
but the same structure (both generator and extractor) for
lossless and lossy channel covert communication, namely
StegaStyleGAN-Ls and StegaStyleGAN-Ly. Furthermore, by
mating with GAN inversion, conditional generative steganography can be achieved as well. Experimental results demonstrate that, whether for lossless or lossy communication channels, the proposed StegaStyleGAN can significantly outperform the corresponding state-of-the-art schemes.

Recipient

Channel
Lossy channel

Stego

Data

Data
01101

Lossless channel

01101

Figure 1: Sketch of our proposed generative image steganography scheme.

Fridrich, and Denemark 2014; Li et al. 2014; Su et al. 2018,
2020, 2022; Yang et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2021) usually embed secret data by modifying the cover image. Although
these cover-modified steganographic schemes exhibit good
resistance to steganalyzers, their steganographic capacities
(Filler and Fridrich 2009) are still limited. To this end,
some end-to-end neural network-based cover-modified approaches (Zhang et al. 2019a; Baluja 2020; Zhang et al.
2020; Ying et al. 2021; Jing et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021)
have recently been developed, showing huge steganographic
capabilities. However, they are almost all Hiding-ImageswithIn-Images (HI3) schemes, and secret images can only be
recovered at the semantic level (i.e., similar in image content
only). Moreover, compared to the conventional hand-crafted
schemes, all these end-to-end neural network-based covermodified approaches have an inherent flaw in that they are
virtually invulnerable to detection by SOTA steganalyzers.
To improve resilience to steganalyzers, i.e., steganographic security, of the above deep learning-based schemes,
and to enable recovery of secret data at the bit level (i.e., consistent at each bit), generative image steganography has been
developed, which can automatically generate stego images
according to secret data. Although generated samples were
once considered “behavioral abnormal” from the perspective
of covert communication, they are now taken for granted
as generated media increasingly pervades our daily lives.
In general, with given generative models, the generative
steganography is empirically secure unless the generated
samples are regarded as virtually created. This is because the
generative schemes are cover-free in nature, which would
prevent the existing steganalyzers (Fridrich and Kodovský
2012; Ye, Ni, and Yi 2017; Boroumand, Chen, and Fridrich
2019) designed for cover-modified steganography to distin-

Introduction
Steganography (Fridrich 2009) is an important branch of
information hiding that aims to conceal secret data in innocuous multimedia, including images, audio, video, text,
etc. It is not only required to ensure that the secret data can
be recovered exactly by the recipient but also to make the
covert communication undetectable by the State-Of-The-Art
(SOTA) steganalyzer (Fridrich and Kodovský 2012; Ye, Ni,
and Yi 2017; Boroumand, Chen, and Fridrich 2019). Since
digital images are most widely used in our daily lives, the
majority of research on steganography has currently relied
on images as cover.
Regarding the current conventional image steganography methods, the prevalent steganographic schemes (Holub,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

240

