The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MESED: A Multi-Modal Entity Set Expansion Dataset with Fine-Grained Semantic
Classes and Hard Negative Entities
Yangning Li1,2 * , Tingwei Lu1 * , Hai-Tao Zheng1,2† , Yinghui Li1† ,
Shulin Huang1 , Tianyu Yu1 , Jun Yuan3 , Rui Zhang3
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
PengCheng Laboratory
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{yn-li23,ltw23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Semantic Class: US Cities

Abstract

Los Angeles

The Entity Set Expansion (ESE) task aims to expand a handful of seed entities with new entities belonging to the same
semantic class. Conventional ESE methods are based on monomodality (i.e., literal modality), which struggle to deal with
complex entities in the real world such as (1) Negative entities
with fine-grained semantic differences. (2) Synonymous entities. (3) Polysemous entities. (4) Long-tailed entities. These
challenges prompt us to propose novel Multi-modal Entity
Set Expansion (MESE), where models integrate information
from multiple modalities to represent entities. Intuitively, the
benefits of multi-modal information for ESE are threefold:
(1) Different modalities can provide complementary information. (2) Multi-modal information provides a unified signal
via common visual properties for the same semantic class or
entity. (3) Multi-modal information offers robust alignment
signals for synonymous entities. To assess model performance
in MESE, we constructed the MESED dataset which is the first
multi-modal dataset for ESE with large-scale and elaborate
manual calibration. A powerful multi-modal model MultiExpan is proposed which is pre-trained on four multimodal
pre-training tasks. The extensive experiments and analyses
on MESED demonstrate the high quality of the dataset and
the effectiveness of our MultiExpan, as well as pointing the
direction for future research. The benchmark and code are
public at https://github.com/THUKElab/MESED.

Washington, D.C.

Chicago

Mono-modal Expansion
1) Negative entities with fine-grained semantic differences share
Visual Clues
semantics on textual context
Example 1: …, Florida which is located in the southeastern region …
Explanation: US states which has semantic overlap with US cities
as they are both located in somewhere might be retrieved incorrectly.
2) Context-sensitive Synonymous entities
Multi-modal
Example 2: … take a vacation to SEA with …
Expansion
Example 3: … The Big Apple never fails to amaze me …
Explanation: whether abbreviations and nicknames refer to cities can’t
be determined without clear textual clues, resulting in the neglect.
3) Polysemous entities
Example 4: … Washington State government has announced that …
Explanation: features of entities with common tokens are close due to
the inherent characteristics of PLMs which may result in wrong retrieval.
4) Long-tailed entities
Example 5: … Pateros with 667 population in 2010 was established …
Explanation: model can’t comprehend long-tail entities due to paucity of
textual information about entities, resulting in their failure to be retrieved.

Figure 1: An example of tricky entities that a mono-modal
ESE model cannot handle.
information and sparse representation. Taking expanding US
Cities as an example, the mono-modal ESE methods struggle to deal with complex entities in the real world from the
following perspectives:
• Negative entities with fine-grained semantic differences refer to entities that belong to the same coarse-grained
semantic class as target class. These entities share semantics
on textual context and are consequently challenging to be
differentiated in detail. For instance, when expanding US
Cities, it’s inevitable to expand entities with the same parent class (i.e., US Location), such as Florida and Texas
that are also located in the US.
• Synonymous entities mean entities have a variety of
aliases. The ESE model can readily understand common
aliases, while failing to comprehend these context-sensitive
aliases (Henriksson et al. 2014; Schumacher and Dredze
2019) such as abbreviations and nicknames, since ascertaining the meaning of them necessitates explicit textual cues.
For example, SEA only means Seattle in certain contexts,
potentially leading to the omission of its retrieval.
• Polysemous entities, which stand for possible ambigu-

Introduction
The Entity Set Expansion (ESE) task aims to expand a handful of seed entities with new entities belonging to the same
semantic class based on the given candidate entity vocabulary
and corpus(Zhang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022a). For example,
given {Washington D.C., Chicago, Los Angeles}, ESE tries
to retrieve other entities with the target semantic class US
Cities, such as New York, NYC, Boston. ESE plays a significant role in knowledge mining and benefits a variety of
downstream NLP and IR applications (Chen, Cafarella, and
Jagadish 2016; Li et al. 2023b).
Conventional ESE methods are based on mono-modality
(i.e., literal modality), which typically suffer from limited
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8697

