The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Task-Disruptive Background Suppression for Few-Shot Segmentation
Suho Park, SuBeen Lee, Sangeek Hyun, Hyun Seok Seong, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{shms0706, leesb7426, hsi1032, gustjrdl95, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Few-shot segmentation aims to accurately segment novel target objects within query images using only a limited number of annotated support images. The recent works exploit
support background as well as its foreground to precisely
compute the dense correlations between query and support.
However, they overlook the characteristics of the background
that generally contains various types of objects. In this paper, we highlight this characteristic of background which
can bring problematic cases as follows: (1) when the query
and support backgrounds are dissimilar and (2) when objects in the support background are similar to the target object in the query. Without any consideration of the above
cases, adopting the entire support background leads to a misprediction of the query foreground as background. To address this issue, we propose Task-disruptive Background Suppression(TBS), a module to suppress those disruptive support background features based on two spatial-wise scores:
query-relevant and target-relevant scores. The former aims
to mitigate the impact of unshared features solely existing
in the support background, while the latter aims to reduce
the influence of target-similar support background features.
Based on these two scores, we define a query background
relevant score that captures the similarity between the backgrounds of the query and the support, and utilize it to scale
support background features to adaptively restrict the impact of disruptive support backgrounds. Our proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on standard few-shot
segmentation benchmarks. Our official code is available at
github.com/SuhoPark0706/TBSNet.

1

Problematic cases

Ideal cases

Abstract

SF is similar to QF

SB is dissimilar to QF & QB

Support & Fg mask
QF : Query Foreground
QB : Query Background
SF : Support Foreground
SB : Support Background



✓

Query & Fg mask



✓
SB is similar to QB

SB is similar to QF

(a) Problematic cases caused by disruptive support features

Query

Support

Baseline

Ours

Query

Support

Baseline

Ours

(b) Visualization of regions for top-5 support features similar to query foreground

Figure 1: The abbreviation Q, S, F, B are query, support,
foreground and background, respectively. (a) Two types of
disruptive SB can occur: (1) SB dissimilar to all Q can introduce ambiguity in the relationship between QB and SB.
(2) SB more similar to QF than QB can cause misclassification of QF as background. (b) We visualize the top-5 support
regions similar to QF at the feature level, the closer to the
top-1 the darker. In the first column, we illustrate cases with
query-irrelevant SB, while the second column demonstrates
scenarios where SB highly resembles QF. In both cases, our
approach effectively suppresses disruptive SB that exhibits
high similarity to QF, as indicated by the yellow boxes. A
more detailed analysis is shown in Section 5.3.

Introduction

With the advance of deep learning, semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2017;
Zhao et al. 2017; Seong et al. 2023) has achieved remarkable
performance. However, its performance relies on abundant
data for target classes and degrades noticeably with insufficient data. To resolve this, Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS)
has been proposed (Shaban et al. 2017a) to build a model
adaptable for novel classes with only a few number of labeled data. Briefly, FSS aims to learn a novel class with a
small number of labeled images, called a support set, to segment an unlabeled image, called a query set.

In Few-Shot Segmentation, affinity learning is a mainstream technique (Min, Kang, and Cho 2021; Shi et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020), learning pixel-wise
correlations. Early methods (Wang et al. 2020; Min, Kang,
and Cho 2021) utilize only the support foreground (SF) features to compute the correlations with the query features (Q).
However, they overlook that the support background (SB)
features also contain contextual information helpful for distinguishing between the query foreground (QF) and background (QB). For instance, the sky can be particularly use-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4442

