The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Active Measuring under Model Uncertainty
Merlijn Krale1 , Thiago D. Simão2 , Jana Tumova3 , Nils Jansen1,4
1
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands,
Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands,
3
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden,
4
Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany
merlijn.krale@ru.nl, t.simao@tue.nl, tumova@kth.se, nils.jansen@ru.nl
2

MoCap

Abstract
Partial observability and uncertainty are common problems
in sequential decision-making that particularly impede the
use of formal models such as Markov decision processes
(MDPs). However, in practice, agents may be able to employ costly sensors to measure their environment and resolve partial observability by gathering information. Moreover, imprecise transition functions can capture model uncertainty. We combine these concepts and extend MDPs to robust active-measuring MDPs (RAM-MDPs). We present an
active-measure heuristic to solve RAM-MDPs efficiently and
show that model uncertainty can, counterintuitively, let agents
take fewer measurements. We propose a method to counteract
this behavior while only incurring a bounded additional cost.
We empirically compare our methods to several baselines and
show their superior scalability and performance.

Measurement Request
Disturbance
Planned Path

Drone

Figure 1: A motivating example. A drone has to plan a path
through a corridor where (wind) disturbances introduce uncertainty in its position. An external Motion Capture (MoCap) system can provide the drone’s exact position, but this
uses some of its limited bandwidth. How should the risk of
a collision be weighed against the cost of using this system?

Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs; Puterman 1994) are
a standard sequential decision-making model (Kormushev,
Calinon, and Caldwell 2013; Lei et al. 2020; Sunberg
and Kochenderfer 2022). However, in MDPs, the decisionmaker has full knowledge of the dynamics of the environment and its current state, which is often unrealistic. Wellstudied frameworks exist to relax these assumptions. To represent model uncertainty, robust MDPs (RMDPs; Nilim and
Ghaoui 2005) extend MDPs by replacing transition probabilities with uncertainty sets. To represent state uncertainty,
partially observable MDPs (POMDPs; Kaelbling, Littman,
and Cassandra 1998) extend MDPs with an observation
function, which dictates how the agent gains information
while interacting with the environment.
Active-measure MDPs are a subset of the latter, where
agents have direct control over when and how they gather
information, which has an associated cost (Bellinger et al.
2021). For example, a drone may request information from a
motion capture system which has costs related to communication (Figure 1). Furthermore, this model can capture applications in predictive maintenance and healthcare, such as diagnostics (Jimenez-Roa et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2023). In these
applications, the cost or risk of gaining information needs to
be weighed against the value of obtaining more information.

Settings with both model and state uncertainty can be expressed as robust POMDPs (RPOMDPs; Osogami 2015).
However, even though uncertain and partially observable
settings have been studied extensively on their own, research
on RPOMDPs has been limited in part due to their complexity. Existing strategies for solving RPOMDPs are either exact but computationally expensive (Osogami 2015; Rasouli
and Saghafian 2018), or only consider policies with limited
memory (Suilen et al. 2020; Cubuktepe et al. 2021).
Aiming to achieve better performance and scalability, this
paper focuses on a subset of RPOMDPs with active measuring, which we formally define as robust active-measuring
MDPs (RAM-MDPs). We make the counter-intuitive observation that high model uncertainty may discourage measuring in certain environments. For solving a specific subset of
RAM-MDPs, we adopt a heuristic called act-then-measure
(ATM; Krale, Simão, and Jansen 2023) for standard activemeasure environments in an uncertain setting. This heuristic suggests partially ignoring future state uncertainty, which
drastically decreases policy computation times.
Next, we propose measurement leniency, a strategy to encourage measuring in settings with high model uncertainty.
This strategy allows the agent to make additional measurements when this would yield better results under a less
pessimistic model. We formalize this idea and prove that
measurement-lenient policies have a bounded lost return as

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21276

