The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NeRFail: Neural Radiance Fields-Based Multiview Adversarial Attack
Wenxiang Jiang * 1 , Hanwei Zhang * †2,5 , Xi Wang 3 , Zhongwen Guo †1 , Hao Wang 4,6
1

Ocean University of China
Institute of Intelligent Software, Guangzhou
3
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
4
Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
5
Saarland University
6
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, China
jiangwenxiang@stu.ouc.edu.cn, zhang@depend.uni-saarland.de, xi.wang@lix.polytechnique.fr, guozhw@ouc.edu.cn,
hawa@ntnu.no
2

Abstract

models’ resilience and trustworthiness. Adversarial attacks
have proven to be instrumental in examining these aspects
of classification models. Evident are across diverse scenarios, ranging from obfuscating the classification of traffic
signs (Brown et al. 2017; Hingun et al. 2022) to attacking more complicated data formats like 3D point clouds in
conjunction with images (Cao et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021;
Mu et al. 2022). These attacks underscore the importance of
evaluating models’ performance and resilience across varying dimensions, critical for ensuring safety and dependability in real-world applications.
Traditionally, most studies on adversarial attacks have
primarily focused on either individual images (Carlini and
Wagner 2017; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014;
Szegedy et al. 2013) or specific datasets (Moosavi-Dezfooli
et al. 2017; Mopuri et al. 2018). When examining adversarial
attacks at the image level, ongoing research predominantly
considers aspects such as the imperceptibility of adversarial perturbations (Zhang et al. 2020a; Luo et al. 2022), the
efficiency of the attack process (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi,
and Frossard 2016; Zhang et al. 2020b), or adversarial attacks within the context of black-box settings (Papernot,
McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016; Hu and Tan 2022). In
addition to these aspects, others focus on adversarial attacks targeting datasets, known as universal adversarial perturbations (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017; Mopuri et al.
2018), which are designed to effectively exploit vulnerabilities within a dataset, unable the networks to accurately recognize a large portion of images due to the presence of universal adversarial perturbations.
Living in a three-dimensional real world, the application
of adversarial perturbations, which primarily affects recognition from specific viewpoints of individual images or a
sparse subset of the dataset, might not be sufficient to address the emerging challenges faced by many of the aforementioned core tasks. This inadequacy stems from the fact
that real-world recognition occurs in a 3D context, involving
varying observing vantages: typical scenarios such as observations from passing vehicles or moving human targets.
Consequently, a natural and intuitive question arises:

Adversarial attacks, i.e. generating adversarial perturbations
with a small magnitude to deceive deep neural networks, are
important for investigating and improving model trustworthiness. Traditionally, the topic was scoped within 2D images without considering 3D multiview information. Benefiting from Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), one can easily
reconstruct a 3D scene with a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
from given 2D views and synthesize photo-realistic renderings of novel vantages. This opens up a door to discussing
the possibility of undertaking to attack multiview NeRF network with downstream tasks from different rendering angles,
which we denote Neural Radiance Fields-based multiview
adversarial Attack (NeRFail). The goal is, given one scene
and a subset of views, to deceive the recognition results of
agnostic view angles as well as given views. To do so, we
propose a transformation mapping from pixels to 3D representation such that our attack generates multiview adversarial
perturbations by attacking a subset of images with different
views, intending to prevent the downstream classifier from
correctly predicting images rendered by NeRF from other
views. Experiments show that our multiview adversarial perturbations successfully obfuscate the downstream classifier at
both known and unknown views. Notably, when retraining
another NeRF on the perturbed training data, we show that
the perturbation can be inherited and reproduced. The code
can be found at https://github.com/jiang-wenxiang/NeRFail.

Introduction
Since 2013 (Szegedy et al. 2013), Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) have demonstrated vulnerability to carefully crafted
adversarial perturbations in image space with subtle modifications leading the network’s predictions astray. This research domain, termed adversarial attacking, has received
increasing attention thanks to the foundational insights it offers in fortifying the robustness and reliability of DNN models, and is particularly critical for applications with heightened risks, e.g.: autonomous driving, medical imaging, and
human-centric AI systems. These tasks are profoundly reliant on DNN models for accurate perception, thereby rendering adversarial attacks a crucial means to scrutinize the
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal Contribution.
†
Corresponding Author.

Is it conceivable to generate multiview adversarial
perturbations for a scene that can deceive the model
across different viewpoints?

21197

