The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Improved Proxy-Based Deep Metric Learning via Data-Augmented
Domain Adaptation
Li Ren, Chen Chen, Liqiang Wang, Kien Hua
University of Central Florida
{Li.Ren, Chen.Chen, Liqiang.Wang, Kien.Hua}@ucf.edu

Space of Our Method

Space of the Original Proxy Method

Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) plays an important role in modern computer vision research, where we learn a distance metric for a set of image representations. Recent DML techniques
utilize the proxy to interact with the corresponding image
samples in the embedding space. However, existing proxybased DML methods focus on learning individual proxy-tosample distance, while the overall distribution of samples
and proxies lacks attention. In this paper, we present a novel
proxy-based DML framework that focuses on aligning the
sample and proxy distributions to improve the efficiency of
proxy-based DML losses. Specifically, we propose the DataAugmented Domain Adaptation (DADA) method to adapt the
domain gap between the group of samples and proxies. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to leverage domain
adaptation to boost the performance of proxy-based DML.
We show that our method can be easily plugged into existing
proxy-based DML losses. Our experiments on benchmarks,
including the popular CUB-200-2011, CARS196, Stanford
Online Products, and In-Shop Clothes Retrieval, show that
our learning algorithm significantly improves the existing
proxy losses and achieves superior results compared to the
existing methods. The code and Appendix are available at:
https://github.com/Noahsark/DADA

DADA

Data Sample

Proxy

Augmented Sample

Figure 1: The intuition of our Data-Augmented Domain
Adaptation (DADA). The classes are labeled with unique
colors. The initial distribution gap between the data samples and corresponding proxies causes ambiguity for proxybased deep metric learning. Our proposed method solves this
problem by aligning the data samples and proxies, assuming
they are from different data domains. We further augment
the data to a dense manifold with mixed features to support
this alignment.
With the increasing number of samples in the deep learning tasks, the basic pair or triplet losses face the difficulty
of high computational complexity. Some approaches select
informative samples by mining the hard or semi-hard samples (Wu et al. 2017; Katharopoulos and Fleuret 2018) while
another group is devoted to comparing the sample clusters
(Oh Song et al. 2017) or the statistics of the samples (Rippel
et al. 2016).
Unlike the pair-based DML methods, the proxy-based approaches try to learn a group of trainable vectors, named
proxy, instead of sweeping all sample pairs within the minibatch or cluster (Movshovitz-Attias et al. 2017; Kim et al.
2020). Thus, the proxies capture the semantic information
about the classes and optimize the uninformative samplesample comparison with the proxy-sample relations. Based
on the efficient proxy-sample distance metrics, later works
further select the most informative proxy (Zhu et al. 2020)
or assign each class with multiple proxies (Qian et al. 2019)
to capture the intra-class structures. However, those existing
proxy-based approaches simply guide the proxies by measuring their similarity with data samples where the learning process still faces a fundamental problem: the colossal

Introduction
The fundamental task of Deep Metric Learning (DML) focuses on learning deep representation with a known similarity metric. DML is a crucial topic in computer vision
since it has a wide range of applications, including image retrieval (Lee, Jin, and Jain 2008; Yang et al. 2018; Ren et al.
2021), person re-identification (Yi et al. 2014; Wojke and
Bewley 2018; Dai et al. 2019), and image localization (Lu
et al. 2015; Ge et al. 2020). Modern DML techniques utilize deep neural networks (DNN) to project image samples
into a hidden space where similar data points are grouped
within short distances while the dissimilar points are separated. The majority of DML approaches focus on optimizing
the similarities between pairwise samples with various loss
functions, ranging from contrastive losses (Hadsell, Chopra,
and LeCun 2006), triplet losses (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and
Philbin 2015) to cross-entropy losses (Boudiaf et al. 2020).
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14811

