The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Visual Imitation Learning with Inverse Dynamics Representations
Siyuan Li1 * , Xun Wang2 * , Rongchang Zuo1 , Kewu Sun2 , Lingfei Cui3 , Jishiyu Ding2 ,
Peng Liu1 , Zhe Ma2†
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy Limited of CASIC
3
Institute of Computer Application Technology, Norinco Group
siyuanli@hit.edu.cn, wxhelloworld@outlook.com

2

Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) has achieved considerable success in
solving complex sequential decision-making problems. However, current IL methods mainly assume that the environment
for learning policies is the same as the environment for collecting expert datasets. Therefore, these methods may fail to
work when there are slight differences between the learning
and expert environments, especially for challenging problems
with high-dimensional image observations. However, in realworld scenarios, it is rare to have the chance to collect expert trajectories precisely in the target learning environment.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel robust imitation learning approach, where we develop an inverse dynamics state representation learning objective to align the expert
environment and the learning environment. With the abstract
state representation, we design an effective reward function,
which thoroughly measures the similarity between behavior
data and expert data not only element-wise, but also from the
trajectory level. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed approach under various visual perturbations
and in diverse visual control tasks. Our approach can achieve
a near-expert performance in most environments, and significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art visual IL methods and
robust IL methods.

(a) Expert environment

(b) Learning environment

Figure 1: We refer the environment of collecting the expert
dataset as expert environment, and the environment of learning the target policy as learning environment.
simulator, which is similar to the target real-world environment, but has differences. The difference between the expert
environment and the target learning environment induces an
important challenge for current IL approaches, especially for
tasks with high-dimensional visual observations.
Behavior cloning (BC) (Pomerleau 1991; Torabi, Warnell, and Stone 2018a; Shafiullah et al. 2022) is a conventional IL method, which maximizes the likelihood of taking the demonstrated action in a supervised learning manner. Although simple, BC requires a large amount of expert
data and suffers from compounding error (Ross and Bagnell
2010; Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011). As there is no online interaction, BC cannot handle the difference between
the expert environment and the learning environment. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Ng and Russell 2000;
Ziebart et al. 2008; Han et al. 2022) is a popular learning
paradigm for IL problems, which generates rewards by measuring the difference between expert data and behavior data.
With the generated reward function, IRL employs an off-theshelf RL algorithm to learn policies. Note that in challenging
tasks with high-dimensional observation space, estimating
differences between observations is difficult. Furthermore,
when the learning environment and the expert environment
are not exactly the same, IRL approaches may misuse the
difference between environments to generate uninformative
rewards. For example, even if the robot positions in Figure
1(a) and Figure 1(b) are similar (both standing), the background in Figure 1(b) may disturb the reward generation,
which leads to a small reward to punish the observation in
Figure 1(b). In fact, as the underlying state of this observa-

Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) has gained encouraging success in
various domains, e.g., games (Scheller, Schraner, and Vogel
2020; Baker et al. 2022), robotics (Hua et al. 2021; Wang
and Chang 2021), and autonomous driving (Hawke et al.
2020; Hu et al. 2022). By learning behaviors directly from
expert demonstrations, IL provides a way of sparing the burden of designing delicate reward functions (Hussein et al.
2017; Arora and Doshi 2021). However, every coin has two
sides. Despite no dependence on the rewards, collecting expert datasets requires much effort. Furthermore, in some scenarios, it is quite difficult to collect expert trajectories exactly in the target learning environment. For example, although the aim is to learn a manipulation policy for a real
robot arm, since the hardware is sophisticated and expensive, the expert demonstrations could only be collected in a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13609

