The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hear You Say You: An Efficient Framework for Marine Mammal Sounds’
Classification
Xiangrui Liu, Xiaoou Liu, Shan Du, Julian Cheng
The University of British Columbia, Canada
assa89456@gmail.com, xiaoou12@mail.ubc.ca, {shan.du, julian.cheng}@ubc.ca

Abstract

harming the protected marine mammals. Machine learning
has been introduced to detect and classify marine mammals,
and it can be used to address the problem in two ways. One
approach is to analyze photos of marine mammals using machine learning models. For example, the Simple Linear Iterative Clustering technique was used to segment the aerial
images of dugongs (Maire, Alvarez, and Hodgson 2015) and
then train these images with convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), obtaining an F1 score of 0.406. In addition to aerial
images, an attempt has been made to compare three machine learning methods using photos of Commerson’s dolphins (Pollicelli, Coscarella, and Delrieux 2020), and the F1
score of the best model is 0.833. Another approach classifies
marine mammals using vocalizations recorded by passive
acoustic monitors since marine mammals produce sounds of
different frequencies and patterns. Taking advantage of the
complex networks and weights trained with large datasets,
different CNNs (Lu, Han, and Yu 2021; Zhong et al. 2020;
Allen et al. 2021; Duan et al. 2022) have been used to build
marine mammal sound classifiers to produce accurate predictions.
Indeed, machine learning has attracted interest because it
can accurately identify the sounds of marine mammals without the presence of specialists. However, there is still room
for improvement. First, existing work mainly focuses on the
application of transfer learning using different pre-trained
models. These models usually consist of complex and deep
neural networks, which have the advantage of being accurate, but at the expense of efficiency. In other words, their
training time and inference time can be shortened. Second,
most existing deep learning marine mammal sound classification work is trained on private datasets, so the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) and data size are unknown. The only
known open-source dataset used was the Watkins Marine
Mammals Sound Database (WMMSD)1 . The experiment
using WMMSD (Lu, Han, and Yu 2021) only tested the
model on the best sections of the database, which are the
high SNR audio sections. The noisy audio cuts were not explored; therefore, the robustness of the models is unknown.
Therefore, our goal is to develop a computationally friendly
and robust framework that efficiently recognizes the acoustic signals of marine mammals.

Marine mammals and their ecosystem face significant threats
from, for example, military active sonar and marine transportation. To mitigate this harm, early detection and classification of marine mammals are essential. While recent efforts have utilized spectrogram analysis and machine learning techniques, there remain challenges in their efficiency.
Therefore, we propose a novel knowledge distillation framework, named XCFSMN, for this problem. We construct a
teacher model that fuses the features extracted from an Xvector extractor, a DenseNet and Cross-Covariance attended
compact Feed-Forward Sequential Memory Network (cFSMN). The teacher model transfers knowledge to a simpler
cFSMN model through a temperature-cooling strategy for efficient learning. Compared to multiple convolutional neural
network backbones and transformers, the proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art efficiency and performance.
The improved model size is approximately 20 times smaller
and the inference time can be 10 times shorter without affecting the model’s accuracy.

Introduction
Marine mammals serve as vital components within marine
ecosystems (Bowen 1997), contributing significantly to their
health and stability. The top predators, such as killer whales
and certain dolphins, play an essential role in maintaining the balance of their prey populations. Furthermore, marine mammals serve as barometers of ecosystem well-being.
However, the population of marine mammals has been declining sharply (Taylor et al. 2007). Human-induced factors
such as habitat loss from construction, overfishing, and activities such as sonar and shipping contribute significantly to
this decline (Buck and Clavert 2005). Military sonar, in particular, emits sound waves that can cause severe harm, and
even fatalities, among marine mammals (Parsons 2017). Additionally, the frequency of active sonar disrupts the echolocation abilities crucial for whales’ hunting, further compromising their survival. Urgent action is required to protect
these marine creatures.
One way to protect marine mammals is to achieve advanced detection and classification so that ships can take a
detour and the Navy can reschedule its exercises to avoid
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

22250

https://cis.whoi.edu/science/B/whalesounds/index.cfm

