The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SuperJunction: Learning-Based Junction Detection for Retinal Image Registration
Yu Wang1 , Xiaoye Wang1,2 , Zaiwang Gu1 , Weide Liu1 , Wee Siong Ng1 , Weimin Huang1 , Jun
Cheng1 *
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
Department of Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
{yu wang, gu zaiwang, liu weide, wsng, wmhuang, cheng jun}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, wangxiaoye951@gmail.com

Abstract

carried out through optimizing similarity metric such as mutual information (Ritter et al. 1999) and correlation (Chanwimaluang, Fan, and Fransen 2006; Wang et al. 2006) to find
parameters of transformation function. However, the performances of mutual information based methods drop significantly when there is low overlapping area (Chanwimaluang, Fan, and Fransen 2006; Chen et al. 2010) or a substantial amount of change in texture or scale (Zana and
Klein 1999). Correlation coefficient based methods (Chanwimaluang, Fan, and Fransen 2006) rely on the vascular tree,
which restricts it from effective registration of low-quality
and disease affected retinal images (Ghassabi et al. 2013).
Another method, phase correlation (Wang et al. 2006), is robust to lighting variation, but fails to register images with
high translation and content changes (Ritter et al. 1999).
Although mathematically well-posed, intensity-based approaches are generally computationally intensive due to the
use of entire image content (Ghassabi et al. 2013) especially when image resolution is high, and are susceptible to
occlusion, background changes caused by pathologies, and
camera pose changes (Chen et al. 2010; Stewart, Tsai, and
Roysam 2003).

Keypoints-based approaches have shown to be promising for
retinal image registration, which superimpose two or more
images from different views based on keypoint detection and
description. However, existing approaches suffer from ineffective keypoint detector and descriptor training. Meanwhile,
the non-linear mapping from 3D retinal structure to 2D images is often neglected. In this paper, we propose a novel
learning-based junction detection approach for retinal image
registration, which enhances both the keypoint detector and
descriptor training. To improve the keypoint detection, it uses
a multi-task vessel detection to regularize the model training, which helps to learn more representative features and
reduce the risk of over-fitting. To achieve effective training
for keypoints description, a new constrained negative sampling approach is proposed to compute the descriptor loss.
Moreover, we also consider the non-linearity between retinal
images from different views during matching. Experimental
results on FIRE dataset show that our method achieves mean
area under curve of 0.850, which is 12.6% higher than 0.755
by the state-of-the-art method. All the codes are available at
https://github.com/samjcheng/SuperJunction.

Introduction

Keypoint-based approaches are often preferable over
intensity-based methods. The keypoint-based image registration usually consists of four main steps: 1) keypoint detection, 2) keypoint description, 3) matching, and 4) transformation estimation. An algorithm of keypoint detection
is designed to extract the local distinctive region, and an
algorithm of keypoint description is designed to represent
the detected local region with invariance to geometric deformations, illumination changes, etc. Detection and description of keypoints have been intensively studied (Rosten and
Drummond 2005; Leutenegger, Chli, and Siegwart 2011;
Alahi, Ortiz, and Vandergheynst 2012; Lowe 2004; Lee et al.
2015). One of the most successful and well-known keypointbased approaches is the Scale Invariant Feature Transform
(SIFT) (Ng and Henikoff 2003), which detects keypoints
using scale-space derivatives. Descriptor vectors are constructed on the same scale space to the detector, and the local area of detected keypoint is divided into non-overlapping
subareas to support formation of the final descriptor. Since
the success of SIFT, many similar approaches have been developed to improve the robustness of keypoint detection and
description (Leutenegger, Chli, and Siegwart 2011; Rublee

Image registration is to spatially align two or more images
into the same coordinate system. It has received much attention in the past years as it is often important to align multiple retinal images for ocular disease diagnosis and management (Lee et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2022; Motta, Casaca, and
Paiva 2019; Ding et al. 2023). There are many challenges
in retinal image registration. Firstly, large spatial displacements may exist and lead to imaging distortion. Secondly,
the images could be taken over time to reveal disease progression, which leads to morphological changes. The quality
of the retinal images could be adversely affected by various
pathologies or noise. Lastly, the various illumination from
different devices and settings often result in non-linear intensity changes.
Retinal image registration methods can be grouped
into intensity-based and keypoint-based (or feature-based)
(Oliveira and Tavares 2014). The first type of approaches is
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

292

