The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Incomplete Multi-View Learning Network
with Insufficient Label Information
Zhangqi Jiang1 , Tingjin Luo1 * , Xinyan Liang2
1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, Hunan, China
2
Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China
jiangzq@nudt.edu.cn, tingjinluo@hotmail.com, liangxinyan48@163.com

Abstract

MvC methods can successfully learn the consistency information of multi-view data and typically depend on an assumption that all of the training instances are with complete
features in all views and sufficient labels.
Unfortunately, in many real-world applications, multiview data often simultaneously exhibit the view missing and
label scarcity issues. For example, in the disease diagnostic system, only a small subset of patients receive a definite
diagnosis of the specific disease (or label), while the majority of patients fall into the unknown state in the hospital
database. Besides, not all of patients undergo the exact same
and all physical examinations, where items not performed
by the patient are regarded as missing views. To analyze this
kind of data, there are at least two challenges: (1) lack of
labeled data and (2) missing the view features. Due to the
double missing of labels and features, it will dramatically
decrease the classification performance and limit their wide
application of the existing MvC methods. How to design a
model for such incomplete multi-view semi-supervised classification (IMvSSC) problem is crucial but rarely studied. In
this paper, we will propose a novel deep method to tackle
these problems.
In literature, several methods have been proposed to address the two mentioned issues individually. To solve the
multi-view semi-supervised classification (MvSSC) problem, there are many MvSSC approaches proposed and can
be roughly divided into three major categories, i.e., cotraining based methods (Cheng et al. 2016; Xia et al. 2020),
alignment-based methods (Jing et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019),
and graph-based methods (Cai et al. 2013; Gong et al.
2016). These MvSSC methods concentrate on making full
use of the extrinsic information contained in unlabeled data
to enhance the classification performance, nonetheless, they
neglect the view missing issue. For the incomplete issue,
(Zhang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022b) have proposed many shallow and deep incomplete multi-view learning (IMvL) methods. These methods
can effectively learn informative representations from data
with missing views. However, these methods are unsupervised or fully supervised, and not suitable to the insufficient
label scenarios. As far as we know, only a few works with
the shallow model can tackle the double missing issues of
the IMvSSC problem. Yang et al. (2018) proposed a semisupervised multi-modal learning with incomplete modali-

Due to the efficiency of integrating semantic consensus and
complementary information across different views, multiview classification methods have attracted much attention in
recent years. However, multi-view data often suffers from
both the miss of view features and insufficient label information, which significantly decrease the performance of traditional multi-view classification methods in practice. Learning
for such simultaneous lack of feature and label is crucial but
rarely studied. To tackle these problems, we propose a novel
Deep Incomplete Multi-view Learning Network (DIMvLN)
by incorporating graph networks and semi-supervised learning in this paper. Specifically, DIMvLN firstly designs the
deep graph networks to effectively recover missing data with
assigning pseudo-labels of large amounts of unlabeled instances and refine the incomplete feature information. Meanwhile, to enhance the label information, a novel pseudo-label
generation strategy with the similarity constraints of unlabeled instances is proposed to exploit additional supervisory information and guide the completion module to preserve more semantic information of absent multi-view data.
Besides, we design view-specific representation extractors
with the autoencoder structure and contrastive loss to learn
high-level semantic representations for each view, promote
cross-view consistencies and augment the separability between different categories. Finally, extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our DIMvLN, attaining
noteworthy performance improvements compared to stateof-the-art competitors on several public benchmark datasets.
Code will be available at GitHub.

Introduction
For the potential to improve classification performance by
exploiting the relevant information from multiple views,
multi-view classification (MvC) (Zhao et al. 2017) has
been widely applied in real-world applications, such as autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2017) and computational
medicine (Gray et al. 2013). Generally, the target of MvC
methods (Andrew et al. 2013; Kan, Shan, and Chen 2016;
Wang et al. 2020) is to learn the view shared latent subspace and a discriminative classifier by exploring the consistency information from multi-view data. The traditional
* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12919

