The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Underwater Organism Color Fine-Tuning via Decomposition and Guidance
Xiaofeng Cong1 , Jie Gui1, 2, 3 * , Junming Hou4
2

1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision And Management, Southeast University, China
3
Ministry of Education, Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
cxf svip@163.com, guijie@seu.edu.cn, junming hou@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the wavelength dependent light attenuation and scattering, the color of the underwater organism usually appears
distorted. The existing underwater image enhancement methods mainly focus on designing networks capable of generating enhanced underwater organisms with fixed color. Due
to the complexity of the underwater environment, ground
truth labels are difficult to obtain, which results in the nonexistence of perfect enhancement effects. Different from the
existing methods, this paper proposes an algorithm with color
enhancement and color fine-tuning (CECF) capabilities. The
color enhancement behavior of CECF is the same as that of
existing methods, aiming to restore the color of the distorted
underwater organism. Beyond this general purpose, the color
fine-tuning behavior of CECF can adjust the color of organisms in a controlled manner, which can generate enhanced
organisms with diverse colors. To achieve this purpose, four
processes are used in CECF. A supervised enhancement process learns the mapping from a distorted image to an enhanced image by the decomposition of color code. A self reconstruction process and a cross-reconstruction process are
used for content-invariant learning. A color fine-tuning process is designed based on the guidance for obtaining various
enhanced results with different colors. Experimental results
have proven the enhancement ability and color fine-tuning
ability of the proposed CECF. The source code is provided
in https://github.com/Xiaofeng-life/CECF.

(a) x → ŷxm

m
(b) ŷx,g

(c) organism

(d) g

Figure 1: The color enhancement process and color finetuning process of CECF. The color enhancement process is
shown in (a), where the distorted underwater image x (in
the first row) is enhanced to an enhanced image ŷxm (in the
second row, where α = 0.3). The color fine-tuning process
is shown in (b) and (c). When guidances are given and the
controllable parameter α is set, the color of ŷxm will change
toward the guidance. The guidance g, as shown in (d), can
be an underwater image or a natural image.

quality of underwater images and organisms inside the images (Sun et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023), different UIE algorithms have been proposed. The current UIE algorithms
are mainly divided into two categories (Zheng et al. 2022;
Huang et al. 2022). They are non-deep learning-based UIE
algorithms (NDL-UIE) and deep learning-based UIE algorithms (DL-UIE), respectively.
Statistical assumptions and physical models are widely
adopted by the existing NDL-UIE methods, such as SMBL
(Song et al. 2020), MLLE (Zhang et al. 2022), and ICSP
(Hou et al. 2023a). In addition, digital image enhancement
methods (Raveendran, Patil, and Birajdar 2021; Jian et al.
2021) that do not utilize physical model and image formation model are also used in NDL-UIE. DL-UIE methods
mainly focus on learning the mapping from distorted images to clear images, such as UWNet (Naik, Swarnakar, and
Mittal 2021), ADMNNet (Yan et al. 2022), CLUIE (Li et al.
2023), and SGUIE (Qi et al. 2022).
The well-designed UIE algorithms may help underwater
photographers restore the color information of the underwater organism. However, existing research (Fu et al. 2022) has
shown that the color information of distorted image fails to
be restored perfectly. To alleviate this issue, UIESS (Chen
and Pei 2022) proposes to obtain diverse enhanced results

Introduction
Underwater image enhancement (UIE) (Wei, Zheng, and
Jia 2022; Mu, Qian, and Bai 2022; Tang et al. 2022) is an
important research topic in the field of computer vision.
Due to the absorption and attenuation of light, underwater images will suffer from color shift and detail distortion
(Xu et al. 2023; González-Sabbagh and Robles-Kelly 2023;
Jiang et al. 2022b). As the depth of water increases (Wang
et al. 2023), the red, orange, yellow, green and blue lights
gradually disappear, respectively. This means that blue and
green lights are the last to disappear. As a result, underwater
images that we typically observe tend to have a blue-green
or blue effect. Correspondingly, the colors of colorful underwater organisms also become dull. To improve the visual
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1389

