The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives under the Lens of Pairwise Distortion
Théo Delemazure1 , Jérôme Lang1 , Grzegorz Pierczyński2
1

CNRS, Paris Dauphine University, PSL
2
University of Warsaw

x ≻ y.1 On the other hand, we may have a strong intuition
that it is not the right choice, because the additional alternatives provide us some implicit information: the preference
x ≻ y of the first group of voters is most probably much
weaker than the preference y ≻ x of the second group.
However this argument lacked until now a quantitative
analysis. We argue that a recent research trend, ordinalcardinal voting distortion, that aims at measuring the loss of
social welfare (sum of individual utilities) caused by the use
of ordinal instead of cardinal information, provides a suitable framework for quantifying the impact of IIA on social
welfare. In our example above, if we had access to information about strength of preference, expressed as cardinal utilities, we would probably find that y has a higher social welfare than x. By denying access to information about strength
of preference, IIA makes us choose x against y, which leads
to what we call a pairwise distortion relative to x and y.
This being said, there are various ways of exploiting the
additional information given by the irrelevant alternatives,
and the question of which ones actually help reducing the
loss of social welfare is not trivial. On the latter example,
using plurality scores to choose between x and y still leads to
choosing x; and using Copeland scores too. But using Borda
scores leads this time to choosing y.
For choosing between two alternatives given a profile, we
define pairwise voting rules. They take as input two alternatives (say, x and y) and a preference profile on a set of
alternatives containing x and y, and output either x or y.
Now the most natural pairwise voting rule satisfying IIA is
the pairwise majority rule, that outputs the result of majority
voting between x and y for each x and y (note that this is the
only pairwise rule satisfying IIA and extending the majority
rule for elections with two alternatives). Of course, applying pairwise majority to all pairs of alternatives sometimes
returns a nontransitive relation over alternatives.
On the other hand, any social welfare function mapping
a preference profile to a collective ranking of alternatives
induces a (transitive) pairwise voting rule, where the choice
between x and y is made by projecting the collective ranking
on {x, y}. Thus, pairwise voting rules are a common frame-

Abstract
We give a quantitative analysis of the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) axiom. IIA says that the society’s preference between x and y should depend only on individual
preferences between x and y: we show that, in several contexts, if the individuals express their preferences about additional (or “irrelevant”) alternatives, this information helps to
estimate better which of x and y has higher social welfare.
Our contribution is threefold: (1) we provide a new tool to
measure the impact of IIA on social welfare (pairwise distortion), based on the well-established notion of voting distortion, (2) we study the average impact of IIA in both general
and metric settings, with experiments on synthetic data, and
its impact with real datasets; and (3) we study the worst-case
impact of IIA in the 1D-Euclidean metric space.

Introduction
Independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) states that a society’s preference between two alternatives x and y depends
only on how its individual members compare x and y (Arrow
1950), as opposed to taking into account the positions they
give to other alternatives. IIA is the key axiom of Arrow’s
impossibility theorem: in ordinal settings, with at least three
alternatives, IIA is incompatible with the unrestricted domain assumption, Pareto-efficiency, and non-dictatorship—
three properties that are hard to give up.
Arrow’s theorem has had, until today, a tremendous importance in social choice. It is often seen as negative, since
there are many compelling arguments in favor of IIA (see for
instance (Maskin 2020)). Still, IIA has been criticized for not
taking into account preference intensities, and this may result in a loss of social welfare. To understand this argument,
consider the following example:
51% of voters: x ≻ y ≻ z1 ≻ . . . ≻ z100
49% of voters: y ≻ z1 ≻ . . . ≻ z100 ≻ x
What should be the collective preference between x and y
here? If we exclude “irrelevant” alternatives z1 ,. . . , z100 ,
then the rational choice seems to use majority and conclude

1
As a consequence of May’s theorem (May 1952), IIA, together
with a set of very weak conditions (neutrality, anonymity, and positive responsiveness), implies that the collective preference between
x and y must be determined by majority voting between x and y.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9645

