The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Anchoring Path for Inductive Relation Prediction in Knowledge Graphs
Zhixiang Su1,2,3 , Di Wang2,3* , Chunyan Miao1,2,3,4* , Lizhen Cui4,5
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY), NTU, Singapore
3
WeBank-NTU Joint Research Institute on Fintech, NTU, Singapore
4
SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), Shandong University (SDU), China
5
School of Software, SDU, China
{zhixiang002, wangdi, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, clz@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract

entities are observed during training), real-world dynamic
graphs are constantly evolving. This necessitates models to
possess inductive capabilities to deal with unseen entities.
Most embedding-based and GNN-based methods generate
embeddings, which are shown as difficult to represent unseen entities. Comparatively, path-based methods are well
suited to handle the inductive cases by making predictions
based on a chain of relations between the head and tail entities. Such a chain of relations is usually regarded as the supporting evidence in this reasoning process. Once the path
information is learned, similar chains of relations can be extrapolated for predictions of unseen entities.

Aiming to accurately predict missing edges representing relations between entities, which are pervasive in real-world
Knowledge Graphs (KGs), relation prediction plays a critical role in enhancing the comprehensiveness and utility of
KGs. Recent research focuses on path-based methods due
to their inductive and explainable properties. However, these
methods face a great challenge when lots of reasoning paths
do not form Closed Paths (CPs) in the KG. To address this
challenge, we propose Anchoring Path Sentence Transformer
(APST) by introducing Anchoring Paths (APs) to alleviate
the reliance of CPs. Specifically, we develop a search-based
description retrieval method to enrich entity descriptions and
an assessment mechanism to evaluate the rationality of APs.
APST takes both APs and CPs as the inputs of a unified Sentence Transformer architecture, enabling comprehensive predictions and high-quality explanations. We evaluate APST on
three public datasets and achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in 30 of 36 transductive, inductive, and few-shot
experimental settings.

Explainability: Explainability holds significant importance
in relation prediction, encompassing a model’s ability to justify its predictive decisions by illustrating the essential reasoning process. Embedding-based and GNN-based methods
have difficulties in this aspect because their encoded information is incomprehensible to humans. Comparatively,
path-based methods inherently offer explainability, because
the paths themselves can serve as the supporting evidence
for predictions with explanations.

Introduction
As a structured representation of knowledge (e.g., real-world
facts), Knowledge Graphs (KGs) serve as the basis for various downstream tasks requiring reasoning, such as question
answering. KGs generally consist of a collection of triplets,
denoted as G(EG , RG ) = {(hi , ri , ti )|i = 1, 2, 3, .., m},
where entities (head and tails, hi , ti ∈ EG ) and relations
(ri ∈ RG ) are represented as nodes and edges, respectively.
However, real-world KGs are often incomplete, making relation prediction a necessary step to validate missing relations
and subsequently enhance the comprehensiveness and reasoning ability of KGs. Given a query triplet (h, r, t) with h
(or t) masked, relation prediction aims to predict the masked
entity, utilizing the incomplete knowledge stored in the KG.
Relation prediction approaches can generally be classified
into three different types: embedding-based, Graph Neural
Network (GNN)-based, and path-based methods. Recent research has focused on path-based methods (e.g., KRST (Su
et al. 2023)) due to their notable advantages as follows:
Inductiveness: Unlike traditional approaches that focus on
transductive situations (where the entity set is static and all

Recent approaches (e.g., BERTRL (Zha, Chen, and Yan
2022) and KRST (Su et al. 2023)) combined path-based
methods with pre-trained language models (PLMs). PLMs
take text descriptions as input, offering valuable auxiliary
information for encoding paths and triplets. These text descriptions may significantly enrich the semantic meanings of
entities and relations. By leveraging text descriptions, these
recent approaches achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on the most widely benchmarked datasets.
Despite the great success of path-based methods with
PLMs in achieving inductive explainable relation prediction, their performance is still limited. Specifically, pathbased methods make predictions by leveraging Closed Paths
(CPs), where paths are connected to both query head and
query tail entities. Therefore, when the given KGs are highly
incomplete, i.e., CPs between many head and tail entities are
absent, the performance of the existing approaches may be
greatly affected. On the other hand, a large portion of supporting evidence is not explicitly provided in the form of
CPs. For example, as shown in Figure 1, consider the query
triplet (Morgan, Profession, Actor) with Actor masked, a
piece of evidence that aligns with human commonsense

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9011

