The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A New Mechanism for Eliminating Implicit Conflict in Graph Contrastive
Learning
Dongxiao He1 , Jitao Zhao1 , Cuiying Huo1 * , Yongqi Huang1 , Yuxiao Huang2 , Zhiyong Feng1 *
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Department of Data Science, George Washington University, NW Washington DC, America
{hedongxiao, zjtao, huocuiying, yqhuang, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn, yuxiaohuang@email.gwu.edu
2

Abstract

are three mainstream paradigms in Graph Self-Supervised
Learning (GSSL). BGRL-like frameworks (Thakoor et al.
2021) design two encoders with non-shared parameters and
train one encoder to learn the output of the other encoder.
DGI-like frameworks (Veličković et al. 2019) generate a
new augmented view, and train the model by making it distinguish whether a node belongs to the original view or the
augmented view. However, the training objectives of these
two methods do not consider the intrinsic inconsistent relationships among the nodes of graph, which prevent downstream tasks from making effective distinctions.
The third paradigm, InfoNCE-based frameworks (Zhu
et al. 2020; You et al. 2020), leverage node inconsistent
relationships in datasets by negative sampling, enhancing
the distinguishability of the learned representations. Specifically, They generate augmented views through random perturbation. In the augmented views, two nodes generated
from the same source node are viewed as positive pairs,
while others are perceived as negative pairs. Then, the objective functions make encoder embed consistences between
positive pairs and differences between negative pairs (Liu
et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2023) by maximizing the similarity
between positive pairs and minimizing the similarity between negative pairs. Recently, a substantial volume of research focus on refining the data augmentation techniques
and sampling strategies of InfoNCE-based paradigm to improve model performance (Suresh et al. 2021; Zhu et al.
2021; Xia et al. 2022, 2021; Zhang et al. 2022). However,
these methods have failed to recognize a potential conflict
inherent in InfoNCE-based methods.
This kind of conflicts is ubiquitous in InfoNCE-based
methods, which is jointly induced by the InfoNCE objective function and the unique topological message-passing
mechanism (Zhou et al. 2020) of GNN encoders. Here, we
give a intuitive illustration, where the encoder only has a
single layer of Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf
and Welling 2017), meaning its topological receptive field
includes the node’s one-hop neighbors. As shown in Fig. 1
(a), during the forward propagation of encoder, the anchor
node v1 aggregates information from nodes v1 , v2 , and v3 .
Node v2 aggregates information from v1 and v2 , while node
v3 aggregates information from v2 and v3 . During loss calculation, nodes v2 and v3 both form negative pairs with v1 .
Considering the negative pair formed by v1 and v2 , as shown

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has attracted considerable attention because it can self-supervisedly extract lowdimensional representation of graph data. InfoNCE-based
loss function is widely used in graph contrastive learning,
which pulls the representations of positive pairs close to each
other and pulls the representations of negative pairs away
from each other. Recent works mainly focus on designing
new augmentation methods or sampling strategies. However,
we argue that the widely used InfoNCE-based methods may
contain an implicit conflict which seriously confuses models when learning from negative pairs. This conflict is engendered by the encoder’s message-passing mechanism and
the InfoNCE loss function. As a result, the learned representations between negative samples cannot be far away from
each other, compromising the model performance. To our
best knowledge, this is the first time to report and analysis this conflict of GCL. To address this problem, we propose a simple but effective method called Partial ignored
Graph Contrastive Learning (PiGCL). Specifically, PiGCL
first dynamically captures the conflicts during training by detecting the gradient of representation similarities. It then enables the loss function to ignore the conflict, allowing the
encoder to adaptively learn the ignored information without
self-supervised samples. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
gained significant attention due to their powerful capabilities
in graph data analysis (Wu et al. 2020a) and have been applied in a wide range of scenarios, such as electronic recommendation (Wu et al. 2019), community detection (Zhang
et al. 2020), and protein molecule prediction (Vlaic et al.
2018). However, training high-quality GNN encoders requires a large amount of manually annotated labels, thereby
requiring substantial human and material resources. To solve
the dependency on labels, numerous studies have concentrated on Self-Supervised Learning (SSL). SSL finds labels
within the data itself, and designs proxy tasks for training
without manual label, achieving significant success in the
fields of CV and NLP (Jaiswal et al. 2020). At present, there
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12340

