The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On the Outcome Equivalence of Extensive-Form
and Behavioral Correlated Equilibria
Brian Hu Zhang1 , Tuomas Sandholm1,2,3,4
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Strategy Robot, Inc.
3
Strategic Machine, Inc.
4
Optimized Markets, Inc.
{bhzhang, sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

player, upon reaching any of its decision points, observes only
the local recommendation given by the strategy profile at that
decision point. The distribution is considered an equilibrium
if no player has incentive to disobey any recommendations.
The two notions differ in how they treat players who have
disobeyed a past recommendation. In EFCE, a player who deviates from a recommendation receives no further recommendations from the mediator. In BCE, a player who disobeys a
recommendation continues to receive recommendations, and
must be incentivized to follow those recommendations even
though it has deviated in the past. These conditions would
seemingly make BCE a stronger notion than EFCE: a deviating player both gets more information (in the form of extra
recommendations) and has a stronger incentive constraint
(they must be incentivized to obey the extra recommendations). Indeed, Morrill et al. (2021b) show an explicit example
(which we discuss in Section 3) of a BCE that is not an EFCE.
There are several known techniques for computing EFCEs
and BCEs. Jiang and Leyton-Brown (2011) developed an
exact polynomial-time algorithm that finds an EFCE. Celli
et al. (2020) developed polynomial-time no-regret dynamics that converge to EFCE at rate poly(|H|, 1/ε) where |H|
is the number of nodes in the game tree. The main technique for computing BCE is no-regret learning. Morrill et al.
(2021b) and Zhang (2022) independently developed very similar algorithms for computing BCEs via no-regret learning.
Both of their algorithms, however, take time poly(bd , 1/ε)
where b is the branching factor and d is the depth—when
|H| ≪ bd , this is exponential in the size of the game2 . The
discrepancy between these bounds has led Song, Mei, and Bai
(2022) to define the K-EFCE, which interpolates between
EFCE (K = 1) and BCE (K = d) by allowing a deviating
player K deviations before it stops receiving recomendations.
They develop no-regret learning dynamics with convergence
rate poly(|H|, bK , 1/ε), thus matching the known results for
EFCE and BCE. To our knowledge, finding a BCE in time
poly(|H|, 1/ε) was an open problem.
Our main result is that, at least in some sense, the distinctions between EFCE and BCE are insignificant. More
formally, we show that every EFCE can be transformed into

We investigate two notions of correlated equilibrium for
extensive-form games: extensive-form correlated equilibrium
(EFCE) and behavioral correlated equilibrium (BCE). We
show that the two are outcome-equivalent, in the sense that
every outcome distribution achievable under one notion is
achievable under the other. Our result implies, to our knowledge, the first polynomial-time algorithm for computing a
BCE.

1

Introduction

Computing a Nash equilibrium is hard in general-sum games,
even for normal-form games with two players (Chen, Deng,
and Teng 2009). Further, Nash equilibrium assumes that the
players are playing independently, which may not hold in
practice—players may have access to a shared source of
randomness, or to a mediator that allows them to correlate
their behavior. These concerns motivate the definition of
notions of correlation in games.
A normal-form correlated equilibrium (NFCE) (Aumann
1974) is a distribution over strategy profiles from which a
player, after receiving a recommended strategy from this
distribution, has no incentive to disobey that recommendation.
This notion, although reasonable in normal-form games, is
unsuitable for extensive-form games, for at least two reasons:
first, no polynomial-time algorithm is known for computing
a normal-form correlated equilibrium in an extensive-form
game; second, a player seeking a profitable deviation from
an NFCE can condition its play on the entire game strategy
recommended by the mediator. In large games, this is not only
computationally difficult but also hard to justify. Therefore,
several notions of correlation have emerged for extensiveform games, as reasonable generalizations of the NFCE to
extensive-form games.
In this paper, we focus on two such notions: the extensiveform correlated equilibrium (EFCE) (von Stengel and
Forges 2008) and the behavioral correlated equilibrium
(BCE)1 (Morrill et al. 2021b; Zhang 2022). In both notions, a
strategy profile is first sampled from a known distribution. A
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This notion was independently defined by the two papers cited;
Zhang (2022) uses the name forgiving correlated equilibrium.

2

Zhang (2022) states their algorithm as having polynomial runtime, because their paper assumes uniform depth and branching
factor (so that |H| = Θ(bd )).

9969

