The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Distributional Off-Policy Evaluation for Slate Recommendations
Shreyas Chaudhari1 David Arbour2 , Georgios Theocharous2 , Nikos Vlassis2
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Adobe Research
schaudhari@cs.umass.edu, {arbour,theochar,vlassis}@adobe.com

Abstract

testing (Gomez-Uribe and Hunt 2015; Kohavi and Longbotham 2017; Feitelson, Frachtenberg, and Beck 2013). This
involves randomly assigning users to receive the item recommended by one of two candidate policies, and the relative
performance of each policy is directly measured. However,
A/B testing involves deploying the new policy online, which
may be infeasible in many settings due to practical or ethical considerations. As a result, it is often necessary to employ offline off-policy evaluation, in which interaction data
collected (offline) from previously deployed policies (offpolicy) is used to estimate statistics of the expected performance, risk and other metrics of interest for a new target policy, without actually deploying it online. This ensures that
policies with undesirable outcomes are not deployed online.
A large amount of literature addresses the problem of offpolicy evaluation in the non-slate setting (Dudı́k et al. 2014;
Wang, Agarwal, and Dudık 2017; Thomas, Theocharous,
and Ghavamzadeh 2015), where the majority of methods
rely on some version of importance sampling (Horvitz and
Thompson 1952). Applied to the slate setting, these methods result in very large importance weights that result in
high variance estimates due to the combinatorially large action space on which slate policies operate. Recent work addresses this deficiency, by introducing methods that leverage
the structure in slate actions and rewards to address the high
variance. Swaminathan et al. (2017); Vlassis et al. (2021)
leverage reward additivity across slot actions to propose estimators for estimation of the expected reward of target slate
policies. McInerney et al. (2020) propose a Markov structure
to the slate rewards for sequential interactions.
All the aforementioned methods provide solutions for estimating the expected reward for a target policy. However,
in many scenarios where recommendation systems are used,
such as those with large financial stakes and in healthcare applications, practitioners are concerned with evaluation metrics such as the behavior of the policy at extreme quantiles and the expected performance at a given risk tolerance (CVaR). These quantities need the full reward distribution for estimation, which renders prior work which estimates the expected reward inapplicable. A notable exception
is Chandak et al. (2021) who provide a method for off-policy
estimation of the target policy’s cumulative reward distribution using ideas similar to importance sampling, allowing
for the computation of various metrics of interest, but the

Recommendation strategies are typically evaluated by using previously logged data, employing off-policy evaluation
methods to estimate their expected performance. However,
for strategies that present users with slates of multiple items,
the resulting combinatorial action space renders many of
these methods impractical. Prior work has developed estimators that leverage the structure in slates to estimate the
expected off-policy performance, but the estimation of the
entire performance distribution remains elusive. Estimating
the complete distribution allows for a more comprehensive
evaluation of recommendation strategies, particularly along
the axes of risk and fairness that employ metrics computable
from the distribution. In this paper, we propose an estimator for the complete off-policy performance distribution for
slates and establish conditions under which the estimator is
unbiased and consistent. This builds upon prior work on offpolicy evaluation for slates and off-policy distribution estimation in reinforcement learning. We validate the efficacy of
our method empirically on synthetic data as well as on a slate
recommendation simulator constructed from real-world data
(MovieLens-20M). Our results show a significant reduction
in estimation variance and improved sample efficiency over
prior work across a range of slate structures.

Introduction
Recommendation services are ubiquitous throughout industry (Bobadilla et al. 2013; Lu et al. 2015). A common variant
of recommendation consists of suggesting multiple items to
a user simultaneously, often termed recommendation slates,
where each position, (a.k.a., a slot), can take multiple possible values (Sarwar et al. 2000). For example, webpage layouts of news or streaming services have separate slots for
each category of content where each slot can display any
of the items from the category for that slot. The items are
suggested to the user based on a recommendation strategy,
called a policy and the user response is encoded into a reward (Li et al. 2010). A crucial problem for selection and
improvement of recommendation strategies is to evaluate the
efficacy of a slate policy by estimating the expected reward
of that policy.
One of the simplest and most effective approaches to policy evaluation, often employed in industrial settings, is A/B
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8265

