The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Root Cause Explanation of Outliers under Noisy Mechanisms
Phuoc Nguyen, Truyen Tran, Sunil Gupta, Thin Nguyen, Svetha Venkatesh
A2I2, Deakin University
{phuoc.nguyen,truyen.tran,sunil.gupta,thin.nguyen,svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

from bandwidth limitations and network overhead (Zhang,
Branicky, and Phillips 2001). Given the intricate dependencies between monitoring nodes and the substantial volume
of data involved, manual analysis of root causes becomes
impractical.
Recent methods for root cause analysis (RCA) (Budhathoki et al. 2021, 2022) are based on a given causal structure of the system and a learned functional causal model (Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017) to explain the anomalous
observations at a leaf node. These methods work by first detecting the anomalous leaf, then utilising the causal structure
and counterfactual reasoning attribute the outlier scores to
ancestor nodes (Budhathoki et al. 2022). The causal structure of a system is a powerful tool enabling the formal analysis of the root cause of unexpected event (Budhathoki et al.
2022). It is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) composed of
nodes representing system components and directed edges
representing causal links or dependency connections from
parent nodes to child nodes. The observational data of nodes
are assumed to have additive noise, the edge connections
are assumed to be noise-free (Budhathoki et al. 2022). However, in computer networking systems, e.g., the connection
between components can be noisy or faulty due to varying
workloads, faulty hardware, wear and tear, or signal interference. Therefore, the root cause of an outlier can also arise
from an edge in addition to a node. This raises the question
of whether an anomalous edge could be detected by existing algorithms. In a recent work, Ni et al. (2017) attempted
to detect faulty edges in those networks. Nevertheless, to the
best of our knowledge, the study of noisy causal links as root
causes has not been considered.
In this paper, we aim to fill this gap by generalising existing frameworks to allow the detection of anomalous edges as
well as anomalous nodes. We consider changes at both the
individual edges and model them via a Bayesian linear regression, where the noise in the causal edges is represented
as the distribution of the regression weights.
In addition, we propose a causal contribution score called
Bayesian Integrated Gradient of Edge and Node noise (BIGEN) to attribute a leaf anomaly score to the ancestor nodes
and edges. First, given observations of outliers, we infer the
noise values of the causal edges represented by Bayesian
linear regression coefficients using the mode of the posterior
distribution (MAP estimate) (Bishop and Nasrabadi 2006).

Identifying root causes of anomalies in causal processes is vital across disciplines. Once identified, one can isolate the root
causes and implement necessary measures to restore the normal operation. Causal processes are often modelled as graphs
with entities being nodes and their paths/interconnections as
edge. Existing work only consider the contribution of nodes
in the generative process, thus can not attribute the outlier
score to the edges of the mechanism if the anomaly occurs
in the connections. In this paper, we consider both individual
edge and node of each mechanism when identifying the root
causes. We introduce a noisy functional causal model to account for this purpose. Then, we employ Bayesian learning
and inference methods to infer the noises of the nodes and
edges. We then represent the functional form of a target outlier leaf as a function of the node and edge noises. Finally,
we propose an efficient gradient-based attribution method to
compute the anomaly attribution scores which scales linearly
with the number of nodes and edges. Experiments on simulated datasets and two real-world scenario datasets show better anomaly attribution performance of the proposed method
compared to the baselines. Our method scales to larger graphs
with more nodes and edges.

Introduction
Understanding the root causes behind anomalies in complex
network systems holds significant importance across various disciplines, ranging from science to industry (Dhaou
et al. 2021; Pool et al. 2020; Yi and Park 2021). Once the
causes are identified, one can isolate and implement necessary measures to restore the normal operation of the process. Early fault recognition would prevent costly damage
to operations, services, and products. For example, in complex network systems within modern manufacturing industries and information services, the cost of system failure is
notably high (Ni et al. 2017), reaching as much as $20, 000
per minute of downtime in an automotive manufacturing
plant (Djurdjanovic, Lee, and Ni 2003). The monitoring data
and logs obtained from the processing nodes of these systems often contain noise attributed to random fluctuations in
nodes and the links between them. In communication systems, for instance, random delays between nodes can arise
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20508

