The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Neural Embeddings for kNN Search in Biological Sequence
Zhihao Chang1 , Linzhu Yu2 , Yanchao Xu2 , Wentao Hu3
1

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Zhejiang Police College, Hangzhou, China
{changzhihao, linzhu, xuyanchao, wthu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

rely on alignment based on dynamic programming. In this
paper, we focus on the global similarity between sequences,
evaluated by the widely used Needleman-Wunsch (NW) algorithm (Needleman and Wunsch 1970). While the NW algorithm is proficient in calculating sequence similarity with
precision, its inherent quadratic complexity poses significant challenges for rapid analysis, particularly when dealing
with large-scale datasets comprising sequences that extend
to hundreds or even thousands of amino acids or nucleotides.
In recent years, embedding-based approaches have
emerged as a promising paradigm for expediting sequence
similarity analysis. These approaches involve projecting sequences into a geometric embedding space through an embedding function, such that the distance between sequences
can be approximated by the distance in the embedding
space, which offers a computationally efficient alternative.
These approaches can be broadly divided into two categories
based on the core idea of the embedding function: rule-based
and neural network-based. Rule-based approaches (Sims
et al. 2009; Gao and Qi 2007; Ulitsky et al. 2006; Haubold
et al. 2009; Leimeister and Morgenstern 2014) often rely
on some predefined encoding rules. Several studies (Corso
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022) have indicated that, in multiple
tasks, these approaches exhibit inferior performance compared to neural network-based ones. Given this context, we
will not delve into rule-based approaches, and instead concentrate on exploring neural network-based approaches.
Existing research on neural network-based methods (Zheng et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022; Zhang, Yuan, and
Indyk 2019; Dai et al. 2020; Corso et al. 2021) primarily
focused on various components such as encoding models
and loss functions. These components are tailored to the
task for which the learned embeddings are used. Notably,
certain approaches (Zhang, Yuan, and Indyk 2019; Dai et al.
2020) focus on the learning objective aimed at preserving
distance orders within the embedding space to facilitate
kNN searches. To achieve this goal, these approaches
employ triplet loss (Weinberger and Saul 2009; Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017) and use intuitive methods to select
triplets in the form (Sacr , Spos , Sneg ) for training, in which
Sacr is the anchor sequence, Spos is the positive sequence
that has smaller distance to Sacr than the negative sequence
Sneg . However, we found that the models trained by these
methods exhibit proficiency in distance order recognition

Biological sequence nearest neighbor search plays a fundamental role in bioinformatics. To alleviate the pain of
quadratic complexity for conventional distance computation, neural distance embeddings, which project sequences
into geometric space, have been recognized as a promising
paradigm. To maintain the distance order between sequences,
these models all deploy triplet loss and use intuitive methods
to select a subset of triplets for training from a vast selection
space. However, we observed that such training often enables
models to distinguish only a fraction of distance orders, leaving others unrecognized. Moreover, naively selecting more
triplets for training under the state-of-the-art network not only
adds costs but also hampers model performance.
In this paper, we introduce Bio-kNN: a kNN search framework for biological sequences. It includes a systematic triplet
selection method and a multi-head network, enhancing the
discernment of all distance orders without increasing training
expenses. Initially, we propose a clustering-based approach
to partition all triplets into several clusters with similar properties, and then select triplets from these clusters using an
innovative strategy. Meanwhile, we noticed that simultaneously training different types of triplets in the same network
cannot achieve the expected performance, thus we propose
a multi-head network to tackle this. Our network employs
a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract local features shared by all clusters, and then learns a multi-layer perception (MLP) head for each cluster separately. Besides, we
treat CNN as a special head, thereby integrating crucial local features which are neglected in previous models into our
model for similarity recognition. Extensive experiments show
that our Bio-kNN significantly outperforms the state-of-theart methods on two large-scale datasets without increasing the
training cost.

Introduction
Biological sequence nearest neighbor search plays a fundamental role in bioinformatics research and serves as the
cornerstone for numerous tasks, including gene prediction (Chothia and Lesk 1986), homology analysis (Sander
and Schneider 1991), sequence clustering (Steinegger and
Söding 2018; Li and Godzik 2021), etc. Traditional methods
for measuring global or local similarity between sequences
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

38

