The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarially Balanced Representation for Continuous Treatment Effect
Estimation
Amirreza Kazemi, Martin Ester
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
{aka208, ester}@sfu.ca

Abstract

the outcomes from the representation using an outcome prediction network. However, the majority of the representation
learning methods have been proposed for binary treatments
(Hassanpour and Greiner 2019; Zhang, Liu, and Li 2021;
Yao et al. 2018), and incorporating continuous treatments
into their architectures is challenging (Chu et al. 2023). We
elaborate on the associated challenges with continuous treatments in the following.
i) Balancing representation for continuous treatments
To achieve a balanced representation Z, most existing methods minimize the shift in terms of Integral Probability Metric (IPM) distance 1 (Sriperumbudur et al. 2009) between
the distributions of P (Z, T ) and P (Z) P (T ) as it allows
bounding the counterfactual prediction error (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017). Given that the marginal distribution P (Z) is unknown, (Bellot, Dhir, and Prando 2022) proposed minimizing the IPM distance between P (Z, T = t)
and P (Z, T = ¬t) where t denotes a treatment value in
the data and ¬t denotes all treatments except t. Similarly,
(Wang et al. 2022a) suggested discretizing the treatment
range into intervals and minimized the maximum IPM distance between the distributions of the two intervals. Despite
minimizing an upper bound, these methods involve nonparametric approximations of several IPM distances in practice, which may be inaccurate for high-dimensional representation and small training data (Liang 2019). Furthermore,
IPMs are by definition worst-case distances and and obtaining a treatment-invariant representation through IPM might
be overly restrictive, potentially excluding important confounding factors for outcome prediction (Zhang, Bellot, and
van der Schaar 2020).
There are also non-IPM representation learning methods.
For instance, (Du et al. 2021; Berrevoets et al. 2020) adopt
an adversarial discriminator in order to balance the distributions in the latent representation, (Yao et al. 2018) proposed preserving the local similarity in the representation
space, (Hassanpour and Greiner 2019; Wu et al. 2022) learn
a disentangled representation to distinguish different latent
factors, (Zhang, Bellot, and van der Schaar 2020) enforce
invertibility of the encoder function to prevent the loss of
covariate information, and (Alaa and van der Schaar 2017)

Individual treatment effect (ITE) estimation requires adjusting for the covariate shift between populations with different
treatments, and deep representation learning has shown great
promise in learning a balanced representation of covariates.
However the existing methods mostly consider the scenario
of binary treatments. In this paper, we consider the more practical and challenging scenario in which the treatment is a continuous variable (e.g. dosage of a medication), and we address
the two main challenges of this setup. We propose the adversarial counterfactual regression network (ACFR) that adversarially minimizes the representation imbalance in terms of
KL divergence, and also maintains the impact of the treatment value on the outcome prediction by leveraging an attention mechanism. Theoretically we demonstrate that ACFR
objective function is grounded in an upper bound on counterfactual outcome prediction error. Our experimental evaluation on semi-synthetic datasets demonstrates the empirical
superiority of ACFR over a range of state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Estimating the individual treatment effect (ITE) from observational datasets has important applications in domains such
as personalized medicine (Kent, Steyerberg, and van Klaveren 2018; Prosperi et al. 2020), economics (Varian 2016),
and recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2020). The observational dataset contains units with their covariates X,
the assigned treatment T , and outcome after intervention Y
(also known as the factual outcome). Since the treatment
assignment policy is unknown, there typically exists an inherent treatment-selection bias stemming from confounding
covariates that influence both the treatment assignment and
the outcome. Consequently, a causal ITE estimator requires
adjusting for the covariate shift among different treatment
populations (Bareinboim, Tian, and Pearl 2014; Bareinboim
and Pearl 2012).
In recent years, the representation learning approach (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016; Shalit, Johansson, and
Sontag 2017) has demonstrated remarkable success in adjusting for covariate shift. Briefly, the idea is to learn a balanced representation of covariates (rather than balancing the
covariates themselves) using an encoder and then predicting

1


R
IP MG (p, q) = supg∈G S g(s) p(s)−q(s) ds, where specifying G leads to different distributional distance.

Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13085

