The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Novelty vs. Potential Heuristics:
A Comparison of Hardness Measures
for Satisficing Planning
Simon Dold, Malte Helmert
University of Basel, Switzerland
{simon.dold, malte.helmert}@unibas.ch
The Novelty Width1 (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012) is
an alternative measure that looks at the degree of interrelatedness between state variables of a planning task from
a different angle. It is based on the novelty of a state. The
novelty of a state is k if at least k facts must be considered at once to detect that a state was not yet generated
in the search. Lipovetzky and Geffner (2012) implemented
a novelty based search algorithm with run time exponential only in k. Later they refined the approach (Lipovetzky
and Geffner 2014), combined it with heuristics, and showed
competitiveness (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2017b). Yet another usage of novelty is to have it as a companion for heuristic search (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2017a; Francès et al.
2018; Corrêa and Seipp 2022).
The two mentioned measures have a core difference. One
talks about the search from the initial state to a goal state,
the other about walks to a goal state from any state that is
reachable and solvable.
To build a bridge for comparison we introduce a new measure, the river measure. It essentially is equal to the correlation complexity but is only interested in the descending
walks starting in the initial state. This is less restrictive and
more natural. We demonstrate the relationship of the river
measure to both the correlation complexity and variants of
the novelty width. Furthermore, we introduce a task conversion that reduces the river measure to 2, which highlights an
oddity of this hardness measure.

Abstract
Classical planning considers a given task and searches for a
plan to solve it. Some tasks are harder to solve than others.
We can measure the “hardness” of a task with the novelty
width and the correlation complexity. In this work, we compare these measures.
Additionally, we introduce the river measure, a new measure
that is based on potential heuristics and therefore similar to
the correlation complexity but also comparable to the novelty
width. We show that the river measure is upper bounded by
the correlation complexity and by the novelty width +1.
Furthermore, we show that we can convert a planning task
with a polynomial blowup of the task size to ensure that a
heuristic of dimension 2 exists that gives rise to backtrackfree search.

Introduction
In satisficing planning we search for a solution to a planning
task without considering the length or cost of the plan. As
the search space of planning tasks is often extremely large,
uninformed searches like blind search are infeasible. Therefore, this problem is tackled with informed search such as
heuristic search. A heuristic guides the search by providing
an estimate of which parts of the search space should be explored earlier. Potential heuristics are a class of heuristics
introduced by Pommerening et al. (2015). Their expressiveness depends on their dimension.
Potential heuristics are mostly used in optimal planning.
Pommerening et al. (2015), and Pommerening, Helmert, and
Bonet (2017) showed that low dimensional potential heuristics with interesting properties for optimal planning can be
synthesized in polynomial time. Corrêa and Pommerening
(2019) looked at the dimension necessary to express the perfect heuristic on IPC domains. Seipp et al. (2016) introduced
correlation complexity, a measure that checks what dimension is necessary for a potential heuristic to give rise to
backtrack-free search for satisficing planning. It expresses
the degree of inter-relatedness between state variables of a
planning task. In other words, how many conjunct facts have
to be taken into account for a planning task.

Background
We consider planning tasks in the SAS+ formalism
(Bäckström and Nebel 1995). A planning task is a tuple
Π = ⟨V, I, O, γ⟩. V is the finite set of state variables, each
v ∈ V corresponds to a finite domain dom(v). A fact is a tuple of a state variable and an element of its domain (v 7→ d)
with v ∈ V, d ∈ dom(v). A partial assignment p is a set of
facts where each contained fact belongs to a different variable. We denote the set of variables used in p as vars(p). We
refer to an individual fact corresponding to a variable v in p
with p[v] = d if (v 7→ d) ∈ p. A state is a partial assignment
with a fact for each state variable. We say a partial assign1

In the original work it is simply called “width”. We call it
“novelty width” to emphasize the distinction between the different,
independent concept of width by Chen and Giménez (2007).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20692

