The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adversarial Robust Safeguard for Evading Deep Facial Manipulation
Jiazhi Guan1 , Yi Zhao2 * , Zhuoer Xu3 , Changhua Meng3 , Ke Xu1,4 , Youjian Zhao1,4 *
1

DCST, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Ant Group
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory
{guanjz20@mails., zhaoyoujian@}tsinghua.edu.cn, yizhao.tsinghua@gmail.com
Manipulation
Condition

Abstract
The non-consensual exploitation of facial manipulation has
emerged as a pressing societal concern. In tandem with the
identification of such fake content, recent research endeavors
have advocated countering manipulation techniques through
proactive interventions, specifically the incorporation of adversarial noise to impede the manipulation in advance. Nevertheless, with insufficient consideration of robustness, we
show that current methods falter in providing protection after simple perturbations, e.g., blur. In addition, traditional
optimization-based methods face limitations in scalability as
they struggle to accommodate the substantial expansion of
data volume, a consequence of the time-intensive iterative
pipeline. To solve these challenges, we propose a learningbased model, Adversarial Robust Safeguard (ARS), to generate desirable protection noise in a single forward process,
concurrently exhibiting a heightened resistance against prevalent perturbations. Specifically, our method involves a twoway protection design, characterized by a basic protection
component responsible for generating efficacious noise features, coupled with robust protection for further enhancement. In robust protection, we first fuse image features with
spatially duplicated noise embedding, thereby accounting for
inherent information redundancy. Subsequently, a combination comprising a differentiable perturbation module and an
adversarial network is devised to simulate potential information degradation during the training process. To evaluate it,
we conduct experiments on four manipulation methods and
compare recent works comprehensively. The results of our
method exhibit good visual effects with pronounced robustness against varied perturbations at different levels.

Protected Image
Protection
Method

Manip.
Model

Target Image
Protected Image

Manipulation

Protection Success

Perturbations
Resize, Blur, etc.

Protection Fail

Figure 1: Current protection methods can protect images
from malicious manipulations by adding adversarial noise,
as we see disrupted outcomes of the manipulation (manip.)
model. Nevertheless, the performance is largely compromised following simple perturbations, as the target is successfully manipulated with a desirable style in the last row.

Fake detection has been broadly studied in recent years
(Li et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021a; Xu et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2023). Identifying the existing fake content cannot erase
the possible negative impact that has already been done.
Therefore, an additional avenue of priors (Ruiz, Bargal, and
Sclaroff 2020; Huang et al. 2022) delves into a proactive solution, leveraging adversarial noise to pre-protect facial contents. Despite promising results reported that injected noise
is able to disrupt the manipulation process, there are still
some issues to be solved. 1) Optimization-based methods
(e.g., (Ruiz, Bargal, and Sclaroff 2020)) require from-scratch
optimization for each image independently, which costs considerable time and computational resources. 2) The manipulation methods are sensitive to subtle changes introduced
by the injected noise, while the injected noise itself is also
susceptible to minor alterations. There is still no comprehensive evaluation regarding the robustness of the injected
noise against manipulations when fronting commonly existing perturbations on the Internet. This problem is intuitively
demonstrated in Fig. 1. Our preliminary experiment finds the
vulnerability of current studies in this aspect.
With a spirit to tackle these challenges, in this paper,
we develop a learning-based protection framework named
Adversarial Robust Safeguard (ARS). ARS is designed
to achieve highly efficient and perturbation-resistant pre-

Introduction
Human-central entertainment is booming with rapid advancements in artificial intelligence applications. One of the
most important topics, facial manipulation, is now being
able to deliver photo-realistic outcomes given simply a target facial image. Although these techniques are proposed for
enriching people’s living world, they also induce malicious
usages such as non-consensual portrait violation, even producing nasty porn content. Concerns from society promote
many countermeasures in academic groups.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

118

