The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

End-to-End Real-Time Vanishing Point Detection with Transformer
Xin Tong * , Shi Peng, Yufei Guo, Xuhui Huang
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC
xin tong@pku.edu.cn, pengshi1828@163.com, yfguo@pku.edu.cn, starhxh@126.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel transformer-based endto-end real-time vanishing point detection method, which is
named Vanishing Point TRansformer (VPTR). The proposed
method can directly regress the locations of vanishing points
from given images. To achieve this goal, we pose vanishing
point detection as a point object detection task on the Gaussian hemisphere with region division. Considering low-level
features always provide more geometric information which
can contribute to accurate vanishing point prediction, we propose a clear architecture where vanishing point queries in the
decoder can directly gather multi-level features from CNN
backbone with deformable attention in VPTR. Our method
does not rely on line detection or Manhattan world assumption, which makes it more flexible to use. VPTR runs at an inferring speed of 140 FPS on one NVIDIA 3090 card. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our method can be used in both natural and structural scenes, and is superior to other state-of-the-art methods
on the balance of accuracy and efficiency.

Q

P

O

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: We pose vanishing point detection as an end-toend point object detection task on the Gaussian hemisphere.
(a) The hemisphere is divided into several overlapped sphere
caps which are centered by anchors sampled using Fibonacci
lattice (lvaro González 2010). In our model, each anchor will
finally predict a confidence score for containing a vanishing
point and a position of the possible vanishing point. (b) The
anchor Q with a small angle distance from a vanishing point
P should be responsible for detecting that vanishing point,
e.g., θ < θmax .

Introduction

to Hough histogram and then to the Gaussian hemisphere for
interpretable prediction. These methods often rely on selecting vanishing point proposals, which means that a predicted
vanishing point should be one of these candidates. Therefore, the trade-off of prediction accuracy and inferring speed
should be carefully considered. A dense point sampling on
the Gaussian sphere will always bring a high detection accuracy, but lead to a low inferring speed on the contrary. Kluger
et al. (Kluger et al. 2020) present to learning the sampling
probabilities of RANSAC for grouping lines corresponding
to the same vanishing point. Tong et al. (Tong et al. 2022)
propose to use a Transformer-based approach to group line
segments in the images with image context for vanishing
point detection. These methods provide convincing performance when lines can be detected in the images. However,
they often fail to detect vanishing points in scenes with insufficient lines.
We find that it is still hard to use a unified model to efficiently detect vanishing points in complex cases, e.g., when
lines are difficult to detect or the number of vanishing points
is unknown. Inspired by the success of end-to-end object detection approaches (Redmon et al. 2016; Carion et al. 2020),
we tackle the challenge by modeling vanishing point detec-

A vanishing point (VP) is the intersection of projections of a
set of parallel lines in the world. The coordinates of vanishing points determine the direction of 3D lines in the world
and bridge the information between the 2D image and 3D
space. Vanishing point detection is an important and classical problem in computer vision. It has been widely applied
in camera calibration, 3D reconstruction, SLAM, and autonomous driving.
Traditional vanishing point detection methods usually detect straight lines first, then cluster them into several groups
and locate the vanishing points based on the geometric
knowledge. Most previous learning-based methods learn the
geometric knowledge from annotated images. By explicitly importing the geometric priors into the Neural Network
(NN) models, recent learning-based methods achieve impressive success in improving predicting accuracy and data
efficiency. For instance, Zhou et al. (Zhou et al. 2019a) scan
the vanishing points on the Gaussian hemisphere with conic
convolution. Lin et al. (Lin et al. 2022) first map the features
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5243

