The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Bridging the Semantic Latent Space between Brain and Machine:
Similarity Is All You Need
Jiaxuan Chen1 , Yu Qi2, 3, 1∗ , Yueming Wang4 , Gang Pan3, 1, 2
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
4
Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{jiaxuan chen, qiyu, ymingwang, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
How our brain encodes complex concepts has been a longstanding mystery in neuroscience. The answer to this problem can lead to new understandings about how the brain retrieves information in large-scale data with high efficiency
and robustness. Neuroscience studies suggest the brain represents concepts in a locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) strategy,
i.e., similar concepts will be represented by similar responses.
This finding has inspired the design of similarity-based algorithms, especially in contrastive learning. Here, we hypothesize that the brain and large neural network models, both
using similarity-based learning rules, could contain a similar semantic embedding space. To verify that, this paper proposes a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) semantic learning network named BrainSem, aimed at seeking
a joint semantic latent space that bridges the brain and a Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) model. Given
that our perception is inherently cross-modal, we introduce a
fuzzy (one-to-many) matching loss function to encourage the
models to extract high-level semantic components from neural signals. Our results claimed that using only a small set of
fMRI recordings for semantic space alignment, we could obtain shared embedding valid for unseen categories out of the
training set, which provided potential evidence for the semantic representation similarity between the brain and large neural networks. In a zero-shot classification task, our BrainSem
achieves an 11.6% improvement over the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: Top: The fruit fly circuit assigns similar neural response patterns to similar odors. Middle: Schematic of two
cognitive spaces spanned by object properties. Bottom: The
main idea of the proposed BrainSem, which cast the neural
representation learning into a fuzzy visual-neural matching
paradigm in a self-supervised manner.

Introduction
Human visual system actively reorganizes incoming sensory
data to allow that people can recognize thousands of complex objects quickly and easily (Yamins and DiCarlo 2016).
Nevertheless, the fine-grained relationships between brain
activities and visual stimuli are poorly understood (Popham
et al. 2021). How our brain encodes properties of concepts is still a central quest of neuroscience. Over the past few
decades, decoding visual information from functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) signals has been investigated in different contexts, e.g., classification (Kamitani and
Tong 2005; Horikawa and Kamitani 2017; Du et al. 2023),
and reconstruction (Du et al. 2022; Gaziv et al. 2022; Chen

et al. 2023a,b; Fang, Zheng, and Pan 2023). However, due
to the brain’s internal cross-modal nature and the absence
of effective biological guidance, extracting semantic components from limited fMRI recordings remains challenging,
particularly in terms of generalizing to novel categories.
Neural code mechanisms suggest that the brain assigns similar neural activity patterns to similar concepts (Bellmund et al. 2018; Stevens 2015). For example, a study (Dasgupta, Stevens, and Navlakha 2017), which investigated the

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11302

