The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causal-Driven Skill Prerequisite Structure Discovery
Shenbao Yu1 , Yifeng Zeng2 * , Fan Yang1 * , Yinghui Pan3 *
1
Department of Automation, Xiamen University, China
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, UK
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, China
yushenbao@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yifeng.zeng@northumbria.ac.uk, yang@xmu.edu.cn, panyinghui@szu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
𝟏
𝟓

𝟑 − 𝟐 =?

Knowing a prerequisite structure among skills in a subject
domain effectively enables several educational applications,
including intelligent tutoring systems and curriculum planning. Traditionally, educators or domain experts use intuition
to determine the skills’ prerequisite relationships, which is
time-consuming and prone to fall into the trap of blind spots.
In this paper, we focus on inferring the prerequisite structure
given access to students’ performance on exercises in a subject. Nevertheless, it is challenging since students’ mastery of
skills can not be directly observed, but can only be estimated,
i.e., its latency in nature. To tackle this problem, we propose
a causal-driven skill prerequisite structure discovery (CSPS)
method in a two-stage learning framework. In the first stage,
we learn the skills’ correlation relationships presented in the
covariance matrix from the student performance data while,
through the predicted covariance matrix in the second stage,
we consider a heuristic method based on conditional independence tests and standardized partial variance to discover the
prerequisite structure. We demonstrate the performance of the
new approach with both simulated and real-world data. The
experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed
model for identifying the skills’ prerequisite structure.

𝟑−𝟐

𝟏
𝟓

𝟏
=𝟑−𝟐−
𝟓
𝟏
=𝟏−
𝟓
𝟓 𝟏
= −
𝟓 𝟓
𝟒
=
𝟓

S1: Separate a whole number from
a fraction
S2: Convert a whole number to a
fraction
S3: Subtract numerators

Figure 1: An example of the process to solve a fractionsubtraction exercise by applying three skills.

Introduction
With the burgeoning development of online learning platforms, a large amount of data on students’ learning performance are accumulated, which provides a good opportunity
for better education, e.g., educational data mining (EDM).
A crucial educational task in EDM is skill prerequisite
structure discovery, aiming to dig out the relations among
skills that have strict constraints on the order in which skills
should be mastered (Chen, González-Brenes, and Tian 2016;
Han, Yoon, and Yoo 2017). Obtaining the skills prerequisite
structure is pivotal for a variety of educational applications,
such as intelligent tutoring systems, student cognitive modeling, and curriculum planning. For example, it is superfluous
to provide students with activities to solve linear equation
exercises if they have not mastered fractions or other key
prerequisite skills (Brunskill 2011).
Usually, building a skill order in a given subject domain is
often hand-engineered by educators or experts (Liang et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20604

2017). But making the learning sequence choices is less than
straightforward, because the experts may be susceptible to
the “blind spot” (Nathan and Koedinger 2000), and some
relationships may be neglected due to their non-intuitive
structure (Chen, González-Brenes, and Tian 2016). Instead,
some data-driven methods are made to discover prerequisite
structures from student performance data, e.g., data likelihood (Brunskill 2011; Han, Yoon, and Yoo 2017), association
rule mining (Chen, Wuillemin, and Labat 2015), and structural maximization (Chen, González-Brenes, and Tian 2016).
However, such methods either focus on pairwise relationships
or are labor-intensive and rarely available in practice.
Intuitively, if skill A is a prerequisite to skill B, then A
can help students to learn B, thus A might be considered as
a cause of B. Considering the example in Fig. 1, learning
how to separate a whole number from a fraction (S1 ) can
deepen the understanding of fraction properties, which further
aids in mastering fraction operations, such as converting a
whole number to a fraction (S2 ). Hence, S1 can be respected
as one of the causes of S2 . Regardless of the interpretation,
prerequisite and causal relationships share similar conditional
independence in the data (Scheines, Silver, and Goldin 2014).
Therefore, we can adapt techniques used for causal structure
learning to discover prerequisite relationships
Unfortunately, toward this goal, there are still some challenges. A major obstacle is that the variables of interest are latent/unmeasured. Although the relationships can be estimated
by observing the student’s performance on exercises that refer
to these skills, most causal learning-based approaches either
are originally designed to estimate causal effects between the
observed variables or mainly focus on the pure measurement
model (Silva et al. 2006), while in our domain, exercises usu-

