The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ORES: Open-vocabulary Responsible Visual Synthesis
Minheng Ni1 * , Chenfei Wu1 * , Xiaodong Wang1 , Shengming Yin1 ,
Lijuan Wang2 , Zicheng Liu2 , Nan Duan1†
1

Microsoft Research Asia
2
Microsoft Azure AI
{t-mni, chewu, v-xiaodwang, v-sheyin, lijuanw, zliu, nanduan}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Administrator’s Forbidden Concept

Bill Gates

alcohol

...

Current Works

Avoiding synthesizing specific visual concepts is an essential
challenge in responsible visual synthesis. However, the visual
concept that needs to be avoided for responsible visual synthesis tends to be diverse, depending on the region, context,
and usage scenarios. In this work, we formalize a new task,
Open-vocabulary Responsible Visual Synthesis (
ORES),
where the synthesis model is able to avoid forbidden visual
concepts while allowing users to input any desired content.
To address this problem, we present a Two-stage Intervention
(TIN) framework. By introducing 1) rewriting with learnable
instruction through a large-scale language model (LLM) and
2) synthesizing with prompt intervention on a diffusion synthesis model, it can effectively synthesize images avoiding
any concepts but following the user’s query as much as possible. To evaluate on ORES, we provide a publicly available
dataset, baseline models, and benchmark. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in reducing
risks of image generation. Our work highlights the potential
of LLMs in responsible visual synthesis. Our code and dataset
is public available in https://github.com/kodenii/ORES.

User’s Query
Microsoft’s founder is
drinking wine in a bar

DDIM

Ours
User’s Query
Microsoft’s founder is
drinking wine in a bar

Satisfiable

Risky

Responsible

Responsible

Open-vocabulary Responsible Visual Synthesis (ORES)

Figure 1: Open-vocabulary responsible visual synthesis. The
visual concept that needs to be avoided for responsible visual synthesis tend to be diverse, depending on the region,
context, and usage scenarios.

approaches: refining inputs, refining outputs, and refining
models. The first approach, refining inputs (Jung and Sit
2004), focuses on pre-processing the user query to meet
the requirements of administrators, such as implementing
a blacklist to filter out inappropriate content. However, the
blacklist is hard to guarantee the complete elimination of all
unwanted elements in an open-vocabulary setting. The second approach, refining outputs, involves post-processing the
generated videos to comply with administrator guidelines,
for example, by detecting and filtering Not-Safe-For-Work
(NSFW) content to ensure the appropriateness of the output
(Rombach et al. 2022). However, this method relies on a filtering model pre-trained on specific concepts, which makes
it challenging to detect open-vocabulary visual concepts. Finally, the third approach, refining models (Gandikota et al.
2023; Kumari et al. 2023), aims at fine-tuning the whole or
the part of models to learn and satisfy the administrator’s requirements, thus enhancing the model’s ability to adhere to
the desired guidelines and produce content that aligns with
the established rules and policies. However, these methods
are often limited by the biases of tuning data, making it difficult to achieve open-vocabulary capabilities.
This leads us to the following question: How can openvocabulary responsible visual synthesis be achieved, allowing administrators to genuinely prohibit the generation
of arbitrary visual concepts? As an example in Figure 1,

Introduction
With the development of large-scale model training, visual
synthesis models are capable of generating increasingly realistic images (Ramesh et al. 2021; Rombach et al. 2022;
Saharia et al. 2022). Due to the growing risk of misuse
of synthesized images, responsible AI has become increasingly important (Arrieta et al. 2020; Wearn, Freeman, and
Jacoby 2019; Smith et al. 2022), especially to avoid some
visual features, such as, nudity, sexual discrimination, and
racism, during synthesis. However, responsible visual synthesis is a highly challenging task for two main reasons.
First, to meet the administrators’ requirements, the prohibited visual concepts and their referential expressions must
not appear in the synthesized images, e.g., “Bill Gates”
and “Microsoft’s founder”. Second, to satisfy the
users’ requirements, the non-prohibited parts of a user’s
query should be synthesized as accurately as possible.
To address the above issues, existing responsible visual
synthesis methods can be categorized into three primary
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21473

