The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

UNEX-RL: Reinforcing Long-Term Rewards in Multi-Stage Recommender
Systems with UNidirectional EXecution
Gengrui Zhang1 * , Yao Wang1 * , Xiaoshuang Chen1 * , Hongyi Qian2 , Kaiqiao Zhan1 , Ben Wang1†
1

Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
2
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zhanggengrui, wangyiyan, chenxiaoshuang, zhankaiqiao, wangben}@kuaishou.com, qianhongyi@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in utilizing reinforcement learning (RL) to optimize long-term
rewards in recommender systems. Since industrial recommender systems are typically designed as multi-stage systems, RL methods with a single agent face challenges when
optimizing multiple stages simultaneously. The reason is that
different stages have different observation spaces, and thus
cannot be modeled by a single agent. To address this issue,
we propose a novel UNidirectional-EXecution-based multiagent Reinforcement Learning (UNEX-RL) framework to reinforce the long-term rewards in multi-stage recommender
systems. We show that the unidirectional execution is a key
feature of multi-stage recommender systems, bringing new
challenges to the applications of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL), namely the observation dependency and
the cascading effect. To tackle these challenges, we provide a
cascading information chain (CIC) method to separate the independent observations from action-dependent observations
and use CIC to train UNEX-RL effectively. We also discuss
practical variance reduction techniques for UNEX-RL. Finally, we show the effectiveness of UNEX-RL on both public
datasets and an online recommender system with over 100
million users. Specifically, UNEX-RL reveals a 0.558% increase in users’ usage time compared with single-agent RL
algorithms in online A/B experiments, highlighting the effectiveness of UNEX-RL in industrial recommender systems.

1

Figure 1: Long-term rewards in recommender systems.
entire set of recommended items (Xue et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022), and it is difficult to relate the long-term reward
to a single recommended item. Figure 1 shows the long-term
reward of a recommender system.
Recently, a growing literature has focused on applying reinforcement learning (RL) to recommender systems due to
its ability to improve the long-term reward (Chen et al. 2019;
Gao et al. 2022a; Zou et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2023a). RLbased methods treat users as the environment and the recommender system as the agent, and then model the sequential interactions between users and the recommender system
as Markov Decision Processes (MDP). After such modeling,
several kinds of RL methods (Fan et al. 2020; Lillicrap et al.
2015; Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018) can be employed to
optimize users’ long-term rewards.
Despite the growing interest in RL-based recommendation, it is still challenging to apply RL to industrial-level
recommender systems. A significant challenge arises from
the fact that industrial recommender systems are typically
built upon a multi-stage structure, including matching, preranking, ranking, and re-ranking, to provide real-time recommendations from tens of millions of candidate items in
a low latency (Wang et al. 2020b). The upstream stages utilize lightweight models to provide a subset of the candidates
to the downstream stages for more precise estimation. Cooperation of the multiple stages is essential for optimizing
the long-term rewards (Zhang et al. 2023). However, it is
challenging to apply RL to the joint optimization of multi-

Introduction

Recent recommender systems have achieved great success
in optimizing immediate engagement, such as click-through
rates (Pi et al. 2020; Lian et al. 2018). However, in real-life
applications, it is also necessary to improve the long-term reward, including the total watch time, the session length, the
users’ retention, etc. The long-term reward is more desirable than immediate engagement because it directly affects
some important operational metrics, e.g., daily active users
(DAUs) and dwell time (Cai et al. 2023a). Different from
the immediate engagement, which has been extensively investigated (Wang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2018, 2019; Pi et al.
2020; Lian et al. 2018), it is more challenging to improve the
long-term reward in recommender systems, since the longterm reward is affected by users’ overall satisfaction of the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9305

