The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Handling Long and Richly Constrained Tasks through Constrained Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning
Yuxiao Lu1 , Arunesh Sinha2 , Pradeep Varakantham1
1

Singapore Management University
2
Rutgers University
yxlu.2021@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

areas (e.g., stairs) and retaining enough charge to move to
a charging dock. The following key challenge needs to be
addressed in the above mentioned problems of interest:
• Computing an execution policy that satisfies safety constraints (in expectation or in a confidence bounded way)
for temporally extended decision making problems in
the presence of uncertainty.
Existing research in temporally extended decision making
problem has focused on hierarchical RL methods (Nachum
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Kim, Seo, and Shin 2021;
Levy et al. 2017). These approaches successfully solve long
horizon tasks mainly in the widely applicable setting of goal
conditioned RL (Liu, Zhu, and Zhang 2022), but they are unable to deal with safety constraints. On the other hand, most
existing research in handling trajectory based safety constraints has focused on constrained RL approaches (Simão,
Jansen, and Spaan 2021; Gattami, Bai, and Aggarwal 2021),
where constraints are enforced on expected cost. A recent
method that has considered percentile/confidence based constraints is WCSAC (Yang et al. 2021). Unfortunately, these
constrained RL approaches are typically only able to solve
short horizon problems where the goal is not too far away.
We address the need to bring together these two threads
of research on hierarchical RL and constrained RL, which
have mostly progressed independently of each other (Roza,
Roscher, and Günnemann 2023). To that end, we propose
a new Constrained Search with Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning (CoSHRL) approach, where there is a hierarchy of
decision models: (a) The lower level employs goal conditioned distributional RL to learn reward and cost distributions to move between two local states that are near to each
other. (b) The upper level is a constrained search mechanism that builds on Informed RRT* (Gammell, Srinivasa,
and Barfoot 2014) to identify the best waypoints to get
from a given start state to a “far” away goal state. This is
achieved while ensuring overall expected or percentile cost
constraints (representative of robust safety measures) are enforced.

Safety in goal directed Reinforcement Learning (RL) settings
has typically been handled through constraints over trajectories and have demonstrated good performance in primarily
short horizon tasks. In this paper, we are specifically interested in the problem of solving temporally extended decision
making problems such as robots cleaning different areas in a
house while avoiding slippery and unsafe areas (e.g., stairs)
and retaining enough charge to move to a charging dock; in
the presence of complex safety constraints. Our key contribution is a (safety) Constrained Search with Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (CoSHRL) mechanism that combines
an upper level constrained search agent (which computes a
reward maximizing policy from a given start to a far away
goal state while satisfying cost constraints) with a low-level
goal conditioned RL agent (which estimates cost and reward
values to move between nearby states). A major advantage of
CoSHRL is that it can handle constraints on the cost value
distribution (e.g., on Conditional Value at Risk, CVaR) and
can adjust to flexible constraint thresholds without retraining. We perform extensive experiments with different types of
safety constraints to demonstrate the utility of our approach
over leading approaches in constrained and hierarchical RL.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a framework to solve decision learning problems in environments that have an underlying (Partially Observable) Markov Decision Problem,
(PO-)MDP. Deep Reinforcement Learning (François-Lavet
et al. 2018; Hernandez-Leal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019) approaches have been shown to solve large and complex decision making problems. For RL agents to be relevant in
the day-to-day activities of humans, they need to handle a
wide variety of temporally extended tasks while being safe.
A few examples of such multi-level tasks are: (a) planning
and searching for valuable targets by robots in challenging
terrains (e.g., disaster areas) while navigating safely and preserving battery to reach a safe spot; (b) for autonomous electric vehicles to travel long distances in minimum time, they
need to optimize the position of recharge locations along the
way to ensure the vehicle is not left stranded; (c) cleaning
robots to clean a house while avoiding slippery and unsafe

Contributions: Our key contributions are: (1) we provide a
scalable constrained search approach suited for long horizon tasks within a hierarchical RL set-up, (2) we are able to
handle rich percentile constraints on cost distribution, (3) the
design of enforcing the constraints at the upper-level search

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21368

