The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

End-to-End RGB-D Image Compression via Exploiting Channel-Modality
Redundancy
Huiming Zheng1, 2 , Wei Gao1, 2 *
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
hmzheng@stu.pku.edu.cn, gaowei262@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

efficient RGB-D image compression method is an important
and challenging work.
Deep learning-based image compression has been developing for several years. Numerous works (Minnen and Singh
2020; Gao et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2022;
Wu and Gao 2022; Zhu et al. 2022; Tao et al. 2023; Jiang
et al. 2023) have been put forth to improve rate-distortion
performance and optimize coding framework. In addition,
some open-source algorithm libraries (Bégaint et al. 2020;
Gao et al. 2023) also efficiently promote the prosperity of
the field. However, existing methods focus on single image
compression, ignoring the direct interactivity of RGB and
depth modalities. Modality redundancy is not adequately
considered, limiting rate-distortion performance improvement. Besides, knowledge-guided compression is one of
the most relevant topics. The coding framework can use
additional information from the data source itself or analyze additional information from its own modules to better eliminate redundancy. Stereo image compression framework (Deng et al. 2021) adopts homography transformation
to remove view redundancy. Light field image compression
framework (Zhao et al. 2018) leverages the inherent similarity of light field images to remove the redundancy of
different perspectives. 360° image compression framework
(Li et al. 2022) utilizes a latitude adaptive coding scheme
to allocate variant numbers of bits for different regions. Although these methods explore modality redundancy removal
to some extent, they can not achieve a higher compression
ratio in the RGB-D image compression owing to the significant difference in the distribution between RGB images and
depth images. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a compression framework dedicated to RGB-D images.
In this paper, we proposed an efficient learning-based
RGB-D image compression network by exploiting the redundant information between the modalities and channels.
Most learning-based methods usually sample and compress
images in RGB domain, while our method chooses to sample images in YUV domain in order to remove spatial redundancy in transform domain for depth images. In addition, we design Intra-Modality Attention (IMA) in feature
extraction module and Cross-Modality Attention (CMA) in
the main encoder module to eliminate channel redundancy
and modality redundancy separately. We adopt Context Prediction Module (CPM) and Context Fusion Module (CFM)

As a kind of 3D data, RGB-D images have been extensively
used in object tracking, 3D reconstruction, remote sensing
mapping, and other tasks. In the realm of computer vision,
the significance of RGB-D images is progressively growing. However, the existing learning-based image compression
methods usually process RGB images and depth images separately, which cannot entirely exploit the redundant information between the modalities, limiting the further improvement
of the Rate-Distortion performance. With the goal of overcoming the defect, in this paper, we propose a learning-based
dual-branch RGB-D image compression framework. Compared with traditional RGB domain compression scheme,
a YUV domain compression scheme is presented for spatial redundancy removal. In addition, Intra-Modality Attention (IMA) and Cross-Modality Attention (CMA) are introduced for modal redundancy removal. For the sake of benefiting from cross-modal prior information, Context Prediction Module (CPM) and Context Fusion Module (CFM) are
raised in the conditional entropy model which makes the context probability prediction more accurate. The experimental
results demonstrate our method outperforms existing image
compression methods in two RGB-D image datasets. Compared with BPG, our proposed framework can achieve up to
15% bit rate saving for RGB images.

Introduction
RGB-D images are an important 3D data format. It has been
widely used in 3D scene reconstruction (Zollhöfer et al.
2018), salient object detection (Liao et al. 2020; Gao et al.
2021), robotics and autonomous navigation, medical imaging and health monitoring, environmental monitoring, and
other fields. Unlike RGB images, depth images contain information about the distance to the surface of the scene
object from the viewpoint, which provides depth information among 3D scenes. Therefore, the RGB-D joint analysis methods are popular in computer vision tasks. However,
these methods (Bozic et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2020; Liu, Zhang,
and Han 2020; Shi et al. 2022; Tian et al. 2020; Xiang et al.
2021) use additional modality, which will bring supernumerary storage and transmission costs. Therefore, designing an
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7562

