The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Coreference Graph Guidance for Mind-Map Generation
Zhuowei Zhang, Mengting Hu* , Yinhao Bai, Zhen Zhang
College of Software, Nankai University
{zhuoweizhang, yinhao, zhangzhen}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, mthu@nankai.edu.cn

0. Three tips for keeping good relationships.
1. Show genuine empathy and actively listen to others' feelings and perspectives.
2. Encourage open and honest communication, and addressing conflicts calmly and
constructively.
3. Express your respect and support, acknowledging others' efforts and offering a
helping hand when needed.

Abstract
Mind-map generation aims to process a document into a hierarchical structure to show its central idea and branches. Such
a manner is more conducive to understanding the logic and
semantics of the document than plain text. Recently, a stateof-the-art method encodes the sentences of a document sequentially and converts them to a relation graph via sequenceto-graph. Though this method is efficient to generate mindmaps in parallel, its mechanism focuses more on sequential
features while hardly capturing structural information. Moreover, it’s difficult to model long-range semantic relations. In
this work, we propose a coreference-guided mind-map generation network (CMGN) to incorporate external structure
knowledge. Specifically, we construct a coreference graph
based on the coreference semantic relationship to introduce
the graph structure information. Then we employ a coreference graph encoder to mine the potential governing relations
between sentences. In order to exclude noise and better utilize
the information of the coreference graph, we adopt a graph
enhancement module in a contrastive learning manner. Experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms all
the existing methods. The case study further proves that our
model can more accurately and concisely reveal the structure
and semantics of a document. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/Cyno2232/CMGN.

(a) Original text
0. Three tips for keeping good relationships.
1. Show genuine
empathy and
actively listen to
others' feelings
and perspectives.

3. Express your
respect and support,
acknowledging
others’ efforts and
offering a helping
hand when needed.

2. Encourage open and honest
communication, and addressing
conflicts calmly and constructively.

0. Three tips, good relationships
1. genuine
empathy,
actively
listen

3. express your
respect and
support

2. open and honest communication

(c) Key-snippet-based mind-map (KSM)

(b) Salient-sentence-based mind-map (SSM)

Figure 1: A document (a) and two forms of mind-map
derived from the document, namely salient-sentence-based
mind-map (SSM) and key-snippet-based mind-map (KSM),
constructed by sentences (b) or keywords (c).

constructed using keywords (Dhindsa and Roger Anderson
2011).
Many softwares have been invented to assist manual
mind-map construction, such as FreeMind, MindMapper,
Visual Mind, etc (Kudelić, Konecki, and Maleković 2011).
Afterward, various approaches have been proposed to automatically generate mind-maps from input texts. Some aim to
identify the semantic relationship within one single sentence
by using pre-established rules (Brucks and Schommer 2008;
Rothenberger et al. 2008) or syntactic parser (Elhoseiny and
Elgammal 2012). Recent works (Wei et al. 2019; Hu et al.
2021) generate mind-maps by detecting the semantic relations between different sentences in a document.
Concretely, the generation process is divided into two
phases, as shown in Figure 2. Assume a document has N
sentences, the first phase aims to build a graph G for all pairs
of sentences. Each element in G indicates the governing relationship between two sentences. Then, since the graph is
redundant, the second phase prunes the extra edges to obtain
the mind-map. Yet the number of sentence pairs increases
exponentially with the length of the document, which raises

Introduction
A mind-map generally consists of a series of hierarchical
nodes, including central nodes and branches, which are conceptually connected and visually linked with lines (Kudelić,
Konecki, and Maleković 2011; Wei et al. 2019; Hu et al.
2021). Mind-map is designed to describe core concepts and
to guide the text through a cognitive structure, which makes
it easier to understand than reading the original text directly
(Dhindsa and Roger Anderson 2011). Figure 1 provides an
example of a mind-map. As depicted, a node represents the
idea of a single sentence, and an edge represents the governing relationships between sentences. There are generally two
kinds of mind-map, namely salient-sentence-based mindmap (SSM) and key-snippet-based mind-map (KSM). The
difference between them is that the nodes of SSM are constructed using whole sentences, while the nodes of KSM are
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19623

