The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Comprehensive Visual Grounding for Video Description
Wenhui Jiang1 , Yibo Cheng1 , Linxin Liu1 , Yuming Fang1 * , Yuxin Peng2 , Yang Liu3
1

Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, Nanchang, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Sany Heavy Industry CO., LTD,China
jiang1st@bupt.cn, cyb592891032@gmail.com, linxinliu2010@gmail.com, fa0001ng@e.ntu.edu.sg, pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn,
luy2655@sany.com.cn
Abstract
The grounding accuracy of existing video captioners is still
behind the expectation. The majority of existing methods
perform grounded video captioning on sparse entity annotations, whereas the captioning accuracy often suffers from
degenerated object appearances on the annotated area such
as motion blur and video defocus. Moreover, these methods seldom consider the complex interactions among entities.
In this paper, we propose a comprehensive visual grounding
network to improve video captioning, by explicitly linking
the entities and actions to the visual clues across the video
frames. Specifically, the network consists of spatial-temporal
entity grounding and action grounding. The proposed entity
grounding encourages the attention mechanism to focus on
informative spatial areas across video frames, even if the entity is annotated in only one frame of a video. The action
grounding dynamically associates the verbs to related subjects and the corresponding context, which keeps fine-grained
spatial and temporal details for action prediction. Both entity
grounding and action grounding are formulated as a unified
task guided by a soft grounding supervision, which brings architecture simplification and improves training efficiency as
well. We conduct extensive experiments on two challenging
datasets, and demonstrate significant performance improvements of +2.3 CIDEr on ActivityNet-Entities and +2.2 CIDEr
on MSR-VTT compared to state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: Examples of ActivityNet-Entities dataset. The
frames with grounding annotations are marked in red. Only
one bounding box per entity is labeled for each video.
in the training stage and designed diverse objective functions
to guide the attention module to ground on appropriate visual areas. These methods achieve desirable improvements
in still images. However, directly applying these grounding
modules for video captioning is highly challenging due to
the following reasons:
1. Relevant visual regions corresponding to the object entities can span several frames. However, carefully labeling
the bounding box of each entity frame by frame is laborconsuming. As is exemplified in Fig. 1, existing datasets
provide only sparse annotations (Zhou et al. 2019), i.e.,
annotating each entity with a bounding box in one frame
of the video. Recent grounded video captioning models then perform spatial-level grounding within the annotated frame (Zhou et al. 2019; Wan, Jiang, and Fang
2022), ignoring the temporal dynamics of the entities
across video frames.
2. Unlike image captioning that emphasizes the prediction
of nouns, video descriptions are featured for the complex actions and interactions of objects. However, due
to the lack of explicit visual annotations of verbs, action grounding remains challenging. Several methods (Ye
et al. 2022; Zheng, Wang, and Tao 2020) associate verbs
with global motion features, which may cause considerable spatial details missing.

Introduction
Video captioning aims to describe the visual content in the
video using natural language sentences. It remains a challenging task as it requires a deep understanding of the objects and their interactions.
Existing methods for video captioning usually employ attention mechanisms, which are expected to ground correct
visual regions for proper word generation. Although these
models have achieved remarkable performance, previous researches (Zhou et al. 2019, 2020; Fei 2022) have shown that
attention mechanisms are incapable of correctly associating generated words with meaningful visual regions, which
makes the model less interpretable.
To address this problem, recent works (Liu et al. 2017;
Jiang et al. 2022) have exploited region-phrase annotations
* Corresponding author: fa0001ng@e.ntu.edu.sg
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To fully explore the spatial and temporal correlations

2552

