The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Meta-Learning Probabilistic Inference Framework for Long Sequence
Prediction
Jianping Zhu1 , Xin Guo1 , Yang Chen2 * , Yao Yang3 , Wenbo Li3 , Bo Jin1 * , Fei Wu2
1

Dalian University of Technology
2
Zhejiang University
3
Zhejiang Lab
{zhujp, guoxinguo}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, jinbo@dlut.edu.cn, {ychen2014, wufei}@zju.edu.cn, {yangyao,
liwenbo}@zhejianglab.com
Abstract
Long sequence prediction has broad and significant application value in fields such as finance, wind power, and weather.
However, the complex long-term dependencies of long sequence data and the potential domain shift problems limit the
effectiveness of traditional models in practical scenarios. To
this end, we propose an Adaptive Meta-Learning Probabilistic
Inference Framework (AMPIF) based on sequence decomposition, which can effectively enhance the long sequence
prediction ability of various basic models. Specifically, first,
we decouple complex sequences into seasonal and trend components through a frequency domain decomposition module.
Then, we design an adaptive meta-learning task construction
strategy, which divides the seasonal and trend components
into different tasks through a clustering-matching approach.
Finally, we design a dual-stream amortized network (ST-DAN)
to capture shared information between seasonal-trend tasks
and use the support set to generate task-specific parameters
for rapid generalization learning on the query set. We conducted extensive experiments on six datasets, including wind
power and finance scenarios, and the results show that our
method significantly outperforms baseline methods in prediction accuracy, interpretability, and algorithm stability and
can effectively enhance the long sequence prediction capabilities of base models. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Zhu-JP/AMPIF.

Introduction
Long sequence prediction has significant and widespread demand in many fields. For example, in the field of finance,
long-sequence prediction can provide adequate decisionmaking references for investors and risk warning indicators
for regulatory authorities (Zhao and Chen 2022). In the field
of wind power prediction, long sequence prediction can give
adequate support for the operation and maintenance of wind
farms (Zhou et al. 2021). Therefore, accurate long-sequence
prediction has become a key prerequisite for the above applications. However, due to the highly nonlinear, non-stationary,
and uncertain characteristics often present in long sequence
prediction tasks, existing research is still limited to fields
with obvious periodic features and weak noise disturbances
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17159

such as climate, transportation, and wind power, and cannot
be effectively transferred to more complex long sequence
prediction scenarios. This poses a critical challenge to the
generalization ability of basic long-sequence prediction algorithms.
Firstly, the time dependence of long sequences exhibits
complex entangled patterns of trends and seasonality (Wu
et al. 2021). Currently, classic long sequence prediction algorithms include models based on Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017), such as Informer (Zhou et al. 2021), Reformer (Kitaev,
Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020), and Preformer (Du, Su, and
Wei 2022), methods based on seasonal and trend term representation learning, such as COST (Woo et al. 2022a) and
LaST (Wang et al. 2022), as well as methods that combine
sequence decomposition with the Transformer architecture,
such as Autoformer (Wu et al. 2021), FEDformer (Zhou
et al. 2022), and ETSformer (Woo et al. 2022b). These models have demonstrated powerful predictive capabilities on
datasets with strong seasonal regularities and weak noise
disturbances. However, existing research often focuses more
on seasonal-term modeling while neglecting the impact of
long-term trends, which is a limitation of this type of research.
Guided by the idea of sequence decomposition, we believe
that decoupling complex sequences and modeling seasonal
and trend terms separately can better improve the model’s
generalization ability in long sequence prediction tasks.
Secondly, long sequence prediction tasks in complex application scenarios are often accompanied by domain distribution shift problems (Jin et al. 2022). For the model to
adapt to changing environments, meta-learning algorithms
that capture shared knowledge between tasks to achieve rapid
and general learning have become a viable solution. Existing meta-learning strategies often assume that meta-learning
tasks have been completed—for example, MAML (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017), ATS (Yao et al. 2021), VC-BML
(Zhang et al. 2021), etc. However, in practical scenarios, most
datasets are difficult to complete a reasonable task division
based solely on prior knowledge, which also limits the transferability of these methods to other data scenarios. For example, in more complex financial scenarios, VML (Liu et al.
2022), DPML (Chen et al. 2023), and MASSER (Zhan et al.
2022) meta-learning-based stock prediction methods treat
each stock’s prediction as a meta-learning task. However,

