The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Axiomatic Aggregations of Abductive Explanations
Gagan Biradar1 ,Yacine Izza2 , Elita Lobo1 , Vignesh Viswanathan1 , Yair Zick1
1

University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA
CREATE, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{gbiradar,elobo,vviswanathan,yzick}@umass.edu, izza@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

underlying model’s structure to compute rigorous explanations. AXp’s are simple: they provide a minimal set of features that are sufficient to generate the outcome. In other
words, a set of features S forms an AXp for a particular
point of interest ~x if no matter how we modify the values of
the features outside S, the outcome will not change.
Despite being simple, concise, and theoretically sound,
AXp’s suffer from a major flaw — there may be several possible AXp’s for a given data point. Consider the following
example:

The recent criticisms of the robustness of post hoc model
approximation explanation methods (like LIME and SHAP)
have led to the rise of model-precise abductive explanations.
For each data point, abductive explanations provide a minimal subset of features that are sufficient to generate the outcome. While theoretically sound and rigorous, abductive explanations suffer from a major issue — there can be several
valid abductive explanations for the same data point. In such
cases, providing a single abductive explanation can be insufficient; on the other hand, providing all valid abductive
explanations can be incomprehensible due to their size. In
this work, we solve this issue by aggregating the many possible abductive explanations into feature importance scores.
We propose three aggregation methods: two based on power
indices from cooperative game theory and a third based on
a well-known measure of causal strength. We characterize
these three methods axiomatically, showing that each of them
uniquely satisfies a set of desirable properties. We also evaluate them on multiple datasets and show that these explanations are robust to the attacks that fool SHAP and LIME.

Example 1. Suppose that we train a simple rule-based
model f for algorithmic loan approval, using the features
‘Age’, ‘Purpose’, ‘Credit Score’, and ‘Bank Balance’. The
rule-based model has the following closed-form expression:
f (~x) =(Age > 20 ∧ Purpose = Education)
∨ (Credit > 700) ∨ (Bank > 50000)
In simple words, if the applicant has an age greater than 20
and is applying for education purposes, the loan is accepted;
otherwise, if the applicant has a credit score greater than 700
or a bank account balance greater than 50000, the loan is
accepted.
Consider a user with the following details ~x = (Age =
30, Purpose = Education, Credit = 750, Bank = 60000).
There are three explanations for this point: (Age = 30, Purpose = Education), (Credit = 750), and (Bank = 60000).

Introduction
The increasing use of complex machine learning (predictive) models in high-stake domains like finance (Ozbayoglu, Gudelek, and Sezer 2020) and healthcare (Pandey et al.
2022; Qayyum et al. 2021) necessitates the design of methods to accurately explain the decisions of these models.
Many such methods have been proposed by the AI community. Most of these methods (like SHAP (Lundberg and
Lee 2017) and LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016))
explain model decisions by sampling points and evaluating model behavior around a point of interest. While useful in many settings, this class of model approximationbased methods has faced criticisms for being unable to fully
capture model behavior (Rudin 2019; Huang and MarquesSilva 2023) and being easily manipulable (Slack et al. 2020).
The main issue with these methods stems from the fact that
model approximation-based explanation measures use the
model’s output on a small fraction of the possible input
points. This has led to the rise of model-precise abductive
explanations (AXp’s) (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019) which use the

In this example, if we provide the AXp (Age = 30, Purpose = Education) to the user, they can infer that their age
and purpose played a big role in their decision. However,
note that it would be incorrect to infer anything else. The
user cannot even tell if the features which are absent from the
explanation played any role in their acceptance. In fact, the
user still does not know whether the feature Age (present in
the explanation) was more important than the feature Credit
Score (absent in the explanation). Arguably, Credit Score
is more relevant than Age since it is present in a singleton
AXp. However, no user presented with only one AXp can
make this conclusion.
We propose to aggregate AXp’s into importance scores
for each feature. Feature importance scores are an extremely
well-studied class of explanations (Barocas, Selbst, and
Raghavan 2020). As seen with the widespread use of measures like SHAP and LIME, the simple structure of feature

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11096

