The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Efficient Algorithms for Non-gaussian Single Index Models
with Generative Priors
Junren Chen1 , Zhaoqiang Liu2 *
1

2

University of Hong Kong
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
chenjr58@connect.hku.hk, zqliu12@gmail.com

Abstract

sively studied for both conventional and high-dimensional
settings (Han 1987; Sherman 1993; Hristache, Juditsky, and
Spokoiny 2001; Plan and Vershynin 2016; Plan, Vershynin,
and Yudovina 2017). The data of the SIM can be of the following form:

yi = f aTi x∗ , wi , i = 1, 2, . . . , m,
(1)

In this work, we focus on high-dimensional single index models with non-Gaussian sensing vectors and generative priors. More specifically, our goal is to estimate the underlying
signal from i.i.d. realizations of the semi-parameterized single index model, where the underlying signal is contained in
(up to a constant scaling) the range of a Lipschitz continuous generative model with bounded low-dimensional inputs,
the sensing vector follows a non-Gaussian distribution, the
noise is a random variable that is independent of the sensing
vector, and the unknown non-linear link function is differentiable. Using the first- and second-order Stein’s identity, we
introduce efficient algorithms to obtain estimated vectors that
achieve the near-optimal statistical rate. Experimental results
on image datasets are provided to support our theory.

where {yi }m
i=1 are the observations, f is an unknown non∗
linear link function, {ai }m
i=1 are the sensing vectors, x ∈
n
m
R is the target signal, and {wi }i=1 are the noises.
The semi-parametric single index model (SIM) is a flexible nonlinear measurement model that can accommodate
various measurement models of interest, including those related to the first-order link functions defined after (4). However, to utilize the first-order Stein’s identity or to transform
the nonlinear model into an unconventional linear one, the
model must satisfy an important assumption like the one presented in equation (4). Unfortunately, this assumption is not
valid for the non-linear link functions associated with the
phase retrieval problem. To address this issue, we propose
to use second-order link functions (defined after (12)) based
on the second-order Stein’s identity.
Furthermore, most prior research on SIMs assumes that
the sensing vectors are Gaussian-distributed and that the underlying signal is limited to a low-complexity set that conforms to traditional modeling assumptions, such as sparsity
and low-rankness. In contrast, the present work focuses on
the scenario where the sensing vectors are non-Gaussian and
the signal falls within the range of a generative model. For
both first- and second-order link functions, we present efficient algorithms that can find estimated vectors achieving
the near-optimal statistical rate.

Introduction
There has been a significant amount of research into the
theoretical and computational aspects of high-dimensional
linear inverse problems. The standard compressed sensing
problem, which relies on the assumption of low-complexity
structure through sparsity to achieve the accurate recovery
of a high-dimensional signal using a small number of (noisy)
linear measurements, has been extensively investigated since
2006 and is now well-understood (Candès, Romberg, and
Tao 2006; Candes, Romberg, and Tao 2006; Donoho 2006;
Candès and Wakin 2008; Foucart et al. 2013).
Although the linear measurement model is widely used
in conventional compressed sensing and can be a useful
tool for demonstrating conceptual phenomena, it may not
be appropriate or even feasible in many real-world scenarios. For example, the phase retrieval problem is encountered in various fields of science and engineering, such as
acoustics, astronomy, microscopy, optics, quantum information, wireless communications, and X-ray crystallography,
where direct linear measurements are not possible, and only
the magnitudes or intensities of the measurements can be
recorded (Candes, Li, and Soltanolkotabi 2015). The limitations of the linear data model have led to the exploration of
general non-linear measurement models, such as the semiparametric single index model (SIM), which has been exten-

Related Work
In this subsection, we provide a brief overview of relevant
works on SIMs.
Low-dimensional SIMs: There is a substantial body of
research on the SIM in the conventional low-dimensional
setting where the number of measurements m is greater than
the data dimension n, see, e.g., (Han 1987; Li and Duan
1989; Sherman 1993; Hristache, Juditsky, and Spokoiny
2001). We do not aim to cover all of them since our attention
is focused on the high-dimensional scenario where m ≪ n.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11346

