The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Knowledge-Aware Neuron Interpretation for Scene Classification
Yong Guan1,2 , Freddy Lécué3∗ , Jiaoyan Chen4 , Ru Li2∗ , Jeff Z. Pan5 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
School of Computer & Information Technology, Shanxi University, China
3
Inria, France
4
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, UK
5
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, UK
gy2022@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, freddy.lecue@inria.fr, liru@sxu.edu.cn, j.z.pan@ed.ac.uk,
Abstract

2019), which, generally speaking, could be categorized
into two methods: functional analysis and decision analysis (Shahroudnejad 2021). Functional analysis methods
try to capture overall behavior by investigating the relations between the decision and the image, using saliency
map (Akhtar and Jalwana 2023), occlusion techniques (Kortylewski et al. 2021), and rationale (Jiang et al. 2021). Such
methods typically lack in-depth understanding of internal
modules of the model, often failing to provide comprehensive insights into the decision-making process. The decision
analysis methods explore explanation by analyzing the internal components’ behavior, such as decomposing the network classification decision into contributions of input elements (Montavon et al. 2017; Tian and Liu 2020). Furthermore, studying neuron-level explanation enables more accurate orientation and editing of the decision-making process
(Teotia, Lapedriza, and Ostadabbas 2022). However, they do
not offer the most intuitive explanations that are easily understandable to humans, and the link between the decision
and internal components is not obvious.

Although neural models have achieved remarkable performance, they still encounter doubts due to the intransparency.
To this end, model prediction explanation is attracting more
and more attentions. However, current methods rarely incorporate external knowledge and still suffer from three limitations: (1) Neglecting concept completeness. Merely selecting concepts may not sufficient for prediction. (2) Lacking concept fusion. Failure to merge semantically-equivalent
concepts. (3) Difficult in manipulating model behavior.
Lack of verification for explanation on original model. To
address these issues, we propose a novel knowledge-aware
neuron interpretation framework to explain model predictions for image scene classification. Specifically, for concept
completeness, we present core concepts of a scene based on
knowledge graph, ConceptNet, to gauge the completeness of
concepts. Our method, incorporating complete concepts, effectively provides better prediction explanations compared to
baselines. Furthermore, for concept fusion, we introduce a
knowledge graph-based method known as Concept Filtering,
which produces over 23% point gain on neuron behaviors for
neuron interpretation. At last, we propose Model Manipulation, which aims to study whether the core concepts based
on ConceptNet could be employed to manipulate model behavior. The results show that core concepts can effectively
improve the performance of original model by over 26%.

Some studies attempt to utilize concepts to enhance the
interpretation of model decisions, establishing relations between the decision and the input image through a selected
number of concepts, such as ACE (Ghorbani et al. 2019),
ConceptSHAP (Yeh et al. 2020), and VRX (Ge et al. 2021).
Although the decision is explained by presenting a set of
concepts found within image, these methods still exhibit
certain three key limitations. (1) Neglecting concept completeness. These methods select a set of concepts salient
to the corresponding scene, but they do not guarantee that
these concepts are sufficient to explain the prediction. As
shown in Figure 1(a), the model selects a set of salient concepts, including armchair, floor, wall, and more. However,
their prediction mislabels scene as utility room instead
of bedroom, due to an incomplete concept set (Zhu et al.
2015) that overlooks the bed concept. (2) Lacking concept
fusion. These methods merely group segments based on resemblance, but they do not merge semantically-equivalent
concepts. As depicted in Figure 1(b), concepts armchair and
chair can be fused (Wang et al. 2015), as they convey identical meanings. (3) Hard to manipulate model behavior.
These methods mainly focus on explanation, but they do not
provide guidance on how to rectify mistakes made by the
original model.

Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) architectures are designed to
be increasingly sophisticated, with scaled up the model size,
and have been achieving unprecedented advancements in
various areas of artificial intelligence (Thoppilan et al. 2022;
OpenAI 2023). Despite their strengths, DNNs are not fully
transparent and often perceived as “black-box” algorithms,
which can impair users’ trust and hence diminish usability of
such systems (Brik et al. 2023). As shown in Figure 1(a), the
model predicts the image as utility room, which is different from the ground truth (target label) bedroom. However, it is unclear why the model predicts this label, making
it hard to understand, debug and improve.
There has been a growing interest in exploring explanations of model predictions (Chen et al. 2018; Deng et al.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1950

