The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Relax Image-Specific Prompt Requirement in SAM: A Single Generic Prompt for
Segmenting Camouflaged Objects
Jian Hu* , Jiayi Lin* , Shaogang Gong, Weitong Cai
Queen Mary University of London
{jian.hu, jiayi.lin, s.gong, weitong.cai}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

et al. 2022). To alleviate this burden, weakly-supervised
COD (WSCOD) is introduced to relax the annotation requirements. That only requires a sparse annotation in either
the foreground or background. However, as annotations become sparser, they suffer from reduced accuracy. SAM introduces instance-level prompts to optimize segmentation,
promising performance can be achieved with only a few
points as prompts for each instance.
However, SAM has limited comprehension on its segmented object. Manual prompts can only provide location
information of desired segmentation objects, but lack in
semantic information, leading to potential ambiguity. In
Fig. 1(a), despite both prompts targeting the same object,
minor changes in the point prompt’s position can make SAM
misinterpret the desired object, greatly changing the results.
Moreover, compared to human perception, it also exhibits a
strong bias in interpreting prompts. In Fig. 1(b), even with
more information from scribble prompts than point prompts,
SAM still misunderstands the target, leading to limited performance. To eliminate ambiguity and bias, recent work
expands manual prompt input options to include reference
regions, videos and even audios (Zou et al. 2023). However, regardless of the prompting method, SAM still requires
instance-specific manual prompts, which may not always be
practical in real-world scenarios, and the question of eliminating this need remains unexplored.
In this work, we introduce a test-time adaptation mechanism called Generalizable SAM (GenSAM), a novel approach to alleviating the demand for accurate, instancespecific manual prompts in the SAM framework for the WSCOD task. Given a simple text description, detailed semantic information about the desired object is reasoned based
on both text and image information. Subsequently, this generates unambiguous visual prompt to guide the segmentation without human intervention. In order to provide semantic information of the target objects for SAM, we introduce Cross-modal Chains of Thought Prompting (CCTP)
which automatically reason pixel-level visual prompts from
various chains. BLIP2 (Zhu et al. 2023) and our devised
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) are employed for this propose.
BLIP2 generates various keywords related to the target and
their background using multiple chains of prompting (Wei
et al. 2022), ambiguously in the input text prompts is eliminated. The spatial CLIP component introduces a novel

Camouflaged object detection (COD) approaches heavily rely
on pixel-level annotated datasets. Weakly-supervised COD
(WSCOD) approaches use sparse annotations like scribbles
or points to reduce annotation efforts, but this can lead to
decreased accuracy. The Segment Anything Model (SAM)
shows remarkable segmentation ability with sparse prompts
like points. However, manual prompt is not always feasible, as it may not be accessible in real-world application.
Additionally, it only provides localization information instead of semantic one, which can intrinsically cause ambiguity in interpreting targets. In this work, we aim to eliminate the need for manual prompt. The key idea is to employ Cross-modal Chains of Thought Prompting (CCTP)
to reason visual prompts using the semantic information
given by a generic text prompt. To that end, we introduce
a test-time instance-wise adaptation mechanism called Generalizable SAM (GenSAM) to automatically generate and
optimize visual prompts from the generic task prompt for
WSCOD. In particular, CCTP maps a single generic text
prompt onto image-specific consensus foreground and background heatmaps using vision-language models, acquiring reliable visual prompts. Moreover, to test-time adapt the visual
prompts, we further propose Progressive Mask Generation
(PMG) to iteratively reweight the input image, guiding the
model to focus on the targeted region in a coarse-to-fine manner. Crucially, all network parameters are fixed, avoiding the
need for additional training. Experiments on 3 benchmarks
demonstrate that GenSAM outperforms point supervision approaches and achieves comparable results to scribble supervision ones, solely relying on general task descriptions. Our
codes is in https://github.com/jyLin8100/GenSAM.

Introduction
Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) aims to accurately
identify inconspicuous objects that have been carefully disguised, including those found in natural and artificial environments (Fan et al. 2017). The task’s complexity is amplified by the indistinct boundaries between objects and backgrounds, necessitating a significant number of precisely annotated image-mask pairs. This places a rigorous demand on
the annotation process (Pérez-de la Fuente et al. 2012; Pang
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12511

