The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Preparing Lessons for Progressive Training on Language Models
Yu Pan1 * , Ye Yuan3,4 * , Yichun Yin5 , Jiaxin Shi6 , Zenglin Xu1,2† ,
Ming Zhang3,4† , Lifeng Shang5 , Xin Jiang5 , Qun Liu5
1

Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Peking University-Anker Embodied AI Lab
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
6
Cloud BU, Huawei Technologies

Abstract

new-designed model structure, which affects the applicability of these studies as general strategies for training. On the
other hand, the studies of training from scratch (Gong et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2020) generally stack layers to train Transformer progressively. Nevertheless, these methods usually
cannot achieve significant acceleration in training, and are
thus slower than training from pretrained models. Against
this background, it is an emergency to design a universal
method to efficiently train the models with reduced time and
financial costs, while benefiting the ecological environment.
To achieve this goal, the progressive expansion of models in depth proves to be a crucial aspect in training from
scratch. One noteworthy example is StackBERT (Gong et al.
2019), where a stacking learning strategy contributes to improved training efficiency through two merits: (1) Fewer layers in the initial stages of training require fewer computational resources, leading to faster training; (2) Lower trained
weights provide a usable prior that benefits the training of
stacked higher weights. While StackBERT undeniably accelerates training from the second merit, there are still two
concerns that need to be addressed. Firstly, the suitability
of the stacking method is questionable. For instance, directly stacking the 1-st layer onto the 7-th layer of a 12layer Transformer is not intuitive due to the clear differences in semantic functionality between them (Rogers, Kovaleva, and Rumshisky 2020). Moreover, even though there
might be some similarities across the entire model, it has
been pointed out that most of the layers are different from
each other (Chen et al. 2022). Consequently, it raises doubts
about whether the normally trained weights are sufficiently
prepared well to be expanded effectively, given the lack of
knowledge in higher layers.
Motivated by this consideration, we introduce “Apollo” a novel approach to preparing lessons for low-layer weights
to learn the high-layer functionality in the training process.
This strategy proves beneficial in further extending the capabilities of the model. In essence, Apollo involves two
key components. Firstly, we employ a low-value-prioritized
sampling (LVPS) technique, which randomly selects a depth
for training at each step. This helps to ensure a diverse

The rapid progress of Transformers in artificial intelligence
has come at the cost of increased resource consumption
and greenhouse gas emissions due to growing model sizes.
Prior work suggests using pretrained small models to improve training efficiency, but this approach may not be suitable for new model structures. On the other hand, training
from scratch can be slow, and progressively stacking layers often fails to achieve significant acceleration. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel method called Apollo,
which prepares lessons for expanding operations by learning
high-layer functionality during training of low layers. Our
approach involves low-value-prioritized sampling (LVPS) to
train different depths and weight sharing to facilitate efficient expansion. We also introduce an interpolation method
for stable model depth extension. Experiments demonstrate
that Apollo achieves state-of-the-art acceleration ratios, even
rivaling methods using pretrained models, making it a universal and efficient solution for training deep models while
reducing time, financial, and environmental costs.

Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) have recently achieved a
significant impact on the field of artificial intelligence (Wang
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Cao et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2023a). Nevertheless, the training cost is
increasing in terms of the growing model size, which causes
an amount of resourcing consumption and greenhouse gases
emission (Schwartz et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2019). Addressing
this problem, recent work (Chen et al. 2022; Chen, Goodfellow, and Shlens 2016; Wang et al. 2023b; Pan et al. 2023)
suggests to improve training efficiency by reusing a pretrained small model as an initialization method that contains knowledge prior. However, the requirement of a pretrained model can cause fatal obstacles, especially for a
* These authors contributed equally. This work was done when

Yu Pan and Ye Yuan were interns at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18860

