The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Instrumental Variable Estimation for Causal Inference in Longitudinal Data with
Time-Dependent Latent Confounders
Debo Cheng* , Ziqi Xu* , Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, Jixue Liu, Wentao Gao, Thuc Duy Le
UniSA STEM, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, 5095, Australia
{debo.cheng,jiuyong.li,lin.liu,jixue.liu,thuc.le}@unisa.edu.au,{ziqi.xu,wentao.gao}@mymail.unisa.edu.au

Abstract

observational data in the static setting (Bowden and Turkington 1990; Hartford, Lewis et al. 2017; Wang, Yang et al.
2022). However, only a few IV-based methods are available for the longitudinal setting (Martinussen, Vansteelandt
et al. 2017). Estimating causal effects over time provides the
benefits of analysing changes, interventions, actions, and relationships within the same subjects across different timesteps in many fields, e.g., education, medicine and clinical
research. It also provides insights for making effective decisions over time (Bica, Alaa et al. 2019).
The primary challenge of estimating causal effects from
longitudinal studies is the time-dependent confounders
which influence both the time-dependent treatment and the
time-dependent outcome of interest, especially those latent
time-dependent confounders (Cui et al. 2023; Michael, Cui
et al. 2023). For example, consider a study that investigates
the effect of an ‘education intervention’ (the treatment), such
as personalised tutoring, on ‘academic performance’ (the
outcome) over time. In this scenario, certain factors like students’ pre-existing knowledge levels and study habits, which
change over time, might not be directly measured during the
study, and are latent time-dependent confounders.
When all time-dependent confounders are measured, adjusting for these confounders using methods like inverse
probability of treatment, can be utilised to obtain unbiased
estimation of the causal effect of the time-dependent treatment (Ali, Groenwold et al. 2016). In cases when there are
latent time-dependent confounders, an IV approach with a
valid time-dependent IV can be employed to recover the unbiased causal effect of time-dependent treatment from longitudinal data (Robins 2000). The treatment, outcome and
IV can be time-varying due to the dynamic and evolving
nature (Robins 1986). Following the example mentioned
above, the ’government funding in education’ can potentially serve as a time-dependent IV for estimating the causal
effect of time-dependent education intervention on timedependent academic performance. A valid time-dependent
IV is crucial for the soundness of the IV approach in longitudinal data, but finding a valid time-dependent IV poses a
major challenge in applications.
Data-driven methods for discovering time-dependent IV
directly from longitudinal data are needed. Many works using the IV approach in longitudinal studies need a given
valid time-dependent IV (Cui et al. 2023)). However, in

Causal inference from longitudinal observational data is a
challenging problem due to the difficulty in correctly identifying the time-dependent confounders, especially in the presence of latent time-dependent confounders. Instrumental variable (IV) is a powerful tool for addressing the latent confounders issue, but the traditional IV technique cannot deal
with latent time-dependent confounders in longitudinal studies. In this work, we propose a novel Time-dependent Instrumental Factor Model (TIFM) for time-varying causal effect estimation from data with latent time-dependent confounders. At each time-step, the proposed TIFM method employs the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architecture to
infer latent IV, and then uses the inferred latent IV factor for
addressing the confounding bias caused by the latent timedependent confounders. We provide a theoretical analysis for
the proposed TIFM method regarding causal effect estimation in longitudinal data. Extensive evaluation with synthetic
datasets demonstrates the effectiveness of TIFM in addressing causal effect estimation over time. We further apply TIFM
to a climate dataset to showcase the potential of the proposed
method in tackling real-world problems.

Introduction
Causal effect estimation based on observational data plays a
crucial role in understanding the underlying causal mechanism of a system in various areas, e.g., in epidemiology, econometrics, clinical decision-making, and climate research (Spirtes, Glymour et al. 2000; Imbens and Rubin
2015; Runge et al. 2019). The confounding bias, causal by
confounders that affect both the treatment variable and outcome variable, is a challenging problem for obtaining reliable causal effects using observational data, especially in the
presence of latent confounders (Hernán and Robins 2006).
Instrumental variable (IV) is a well-known tool for mitigating the spurious associations caused by latent confounders (Martens, Pestman et al. 2006). The IV approach
strongly relies on a predefined IV, which is required to be independent of all latent confounders and have a causal effect
on the outcome only through its direct effect on the treatment. Some IV-based methods have been developed to address latent confounding in causal effect estimation using
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11480

