The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Joint Demosaicing and Denoising for Spike Camera
Yanchen Dong1 , Ruiqin Xiong1 * , Jing Zhao2, 1 ,
Jian Zhang3 , Xiaopeng Fan4 , Shuyuan Zhu5 , Tiejun Huang1
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
5
School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
yanchendong@stu.pku.edu.cn, {rqxiong, jzhaopku, zhangjian.sz, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, fxp@hit.edu.cn, eezsy@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

manned aerial vehicle. By continuously accumulating photons and firing spike signals, spike camera is able to record
dynamic scenes with high-speed motion.
To recover the scenes from captured spike streams, there
have been some works (L. Zhu, S. Dong, T. Huang, and
Y. Tian 2019; Zhao, Xiong, and Huang 2020; Zhao et al.
2021b; Zheng et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022) about spike
camera reconstruction, which focus on the first-generation
spike camera that can only reproduce gray-scale image signals. Recently, spike camera with color filter array (CFA)
has been developed to record dynamic scenes with color information and meanwhile enjoy the benefits of spike imaging. In addition to noise in conventional digital cameras such
as thermal noise and readout noise, there is also quantization
noise in spike streams, as a result of the mechanism of spike
cameras. At present, there are some spike camera demosaicing methods (Dong et al. 2022) to reconstruct color images
from Bayer-pattern spike streams. However, the previous demosaicing methods pay less attention to the noise in spike
streams and the importance of exploring an efficient representation of Bayer-pattern spike streams. In summary, color
imaging of spike camera meets the following challenges:
(1) Severe noise in spike streams. Due to the imaging
mechanism, the noise of spike cameras is severe. The existing spike camera demosaicing methods focus more on inferring the missing pixels of each color channel, not paying
enough attention to the noise in spike streams.
(2) Representation of Bayer-pattern spike streams.
Previous spike camera demosaicing methods tend to employ
an intuitive way to represent spike camera data, without considering the motion and missing pixels of color channels.
(3) Lack of Bayer-pattern spike datasets. For better
speed and performance, the task can be handled by deep
learning-based methods. However, there are no released
datasets for the training or evaluation of deep models.
To address the issues, we propose a joint demosaicing and
denoising network (SJDD-Net) for spike cameras, based on
the observation model of spike camera JDD. Inspired by
optimization derivation, SJDD-Net is an iterative network,
which considers both the temporal and color correlation. To
learn the latent and motion-aligned representation, we first
design a color spike representation (CSR). In particular, we
utilize the motion offset of each color channel to jointly
align the temporal features, resulting in an offset-sharing de-

As a neuromorphic camera with high temporal resolution,
spike camera can capture dynamic scenes with high-speed
motion. Recently, spike camera with a color filter array (CFA)
has been developed for color imaging. There are some methods for spike camera demosaicing to reconstruct color images from Bayer-pattern spike streams. However, the demosaicing results are bothered by severe noise in spike streams,
to which previous works pay less attention. In this paper,
we propose an iterative joint demosaicing and denoising network (SJDD-Net) for spike cameras based on the observation model. Firstly, we design a color spike representation
(CSR) to learn latent representation from Bayer-pattern spike
streams. In CSR, we propose an offset-sharing deformable
convolution module to align temporal features of color channels. Then we develop a spike noise estimator (SNE) to obtain features of the noise distribution. Finally, a color correlation prior (CCP) module is proposed to utilize the color
correlation for better details. For training and evaluation, we
designed a spike camera simulator to generate Bayer-pattern
spike streams with synthesized noise. Besides, we captured
some Bayer-pattern spike streams, building the first realworld captured dataset to our knowledge. Experimental results show that our method can restore clean images from
Bayer-pattern spike streams. The source codes and dataset are
available at https://github.com/csycdong/SJDD-Net.

Introduction
Neuromorphic camera is a type of image sensor designed
to mimic the structure and functionality of the human visual system, which sends asynchronous signals with a high
temporal resolution. Besides the well-known event camera
(Litzenberger et al. 2006; Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck
2008; Posch, Matolin, and Wohlgenannt 2010) providing
light intensity changes to record motion, there is another
recently invented neuromorphic camera called spike camera (Dong, Huang, and Tian 2017; Dong et al. 2019; Huang
et al. 2023). Different from event camera which records the
relative change of light intensity, spike camera records the
absolute light intensity. Spike camera is designed for emerging vision applications, such as autonomous driving and un* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1582

