The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Disjoint Partial Enumeration without Blocking Clauses
Giuseppe Spallitta1 , Roberto Sebastiani1 , Armin Biere2
1

DISI, University of Trento
2
University of Freiburg
giuseppe.spallitta@unitn.it, roberto.sebastiani@unitn.it, biere@cs.uni-freiburg.de

a partial assignment with m variables covers 2n−m total assignments in one shot.
The literature distinguishes between enumeration with
repetitions (AllSAT) and enumeration without repetitions
(disjoint AllSAT). Whereas covering the same model may
not be problematic for certain applications (e.g. predicate
abstraction (Lahiri, Bryant, and Cook 2003)), it can result
in an incorrect final solution for other contexts, such as
Weighted Model Integration (Morettin, Passerini, and Sebastiani 2019) and #SMT (Chistikov, Dimitrova, and Majumdar 2015). In this paper, we will address disjoint AllSAT.
SAT-based propositional enumeration algorithms can be
grouped into two main categories: blocking solvers, and
non-blocking solvers.
Blocking AllSAT solvers (McMillan 2002; Jin, Han, and
Somenzi 2005; Yu et al. 2014) rely on Conflict Driven
Clause-Learning (CDCL) and non-chronological backtracking (NCB) to return the set of all satisfying assignments.
They work by repeatedly adding blocking clauses to the formula after each model is found, which rules out the previous set of satisfying assignments until all possible satisfying assignments have been found. These blocking clauses
ensure that the solver does not return the same satisfying
assignment multiple times and that the search space is efficiently scanned (Morgado and Marques-Silva 2005a). Although blocking solvers are straightforward to implement
and can be adapted to retrieve partial assignments, they
become inefficient when the input formula F has a high
number of models, as an exponential number of blocking
clauses might be added to make sure the entire search space
is visited. As the number of blocking clauses increases, unit
propagation becomes more difficult, resulting in degraded
performance.
Non-blocking AllSAT solvers (Grumberg, Schuster, and
Yadgar 2004; Li, Hsiao, and Sheng 2004) overcome this issue by not introducing blocking clauses and by implementing chronological backtracking (CB) (Nadel and Ryvchin
2018): after a conflict arises, they backtrack on the search
tree by updating the most recently instantiated variable.
Chronological backtracking guarantees not to cover the
same model of a formula multiple times without the typical CPU-time blow-up caused by blocking clauses. The major drawback of this class of AllSAT solvers is that they only
generate total assignments. Moreover, regions of the search

Abstract
A basic algorithm for enumerating disjoint propositional
models (disjoint AllSAT) is based on adding blocking clauses
incrementally, ruling out previously found models. On the
one hand, blocking clauses have the potential to reduce the
number of generated models exponentially, as they can handle partial models. On the other hand, the introduction of a
large number of blocking clauses affects memory consumption and drastically slows down unit propagation. We propose a new approach that allows for enumerating disjoint partial models with no need for blocking clauses by integrating: Conflict-Driven Clause-Learning (CDCL), Chronological Backtracking (CB), and methods for shrinking models
(Implicant Shrinking). Experiments clearly show the benefits
of our novel approach.

Introduction
All-Solution Satisfiability Problem (AllSAT) is an extension of SAT that requires finding all possible solutions of
a propositional formula. AllSAT has been heavily applied in
the field of hardware and software verification. For instance,
AllSAT can be used to generate test suites for programs
automatically (Khurshid et al. 2004) and for bounded and
unbounded model checking (Jin, Han, and Somenzi 2005).
Recently AllSAT has found applications in artificial intelligence. For example, (Spallitta et al. 2022) exploits AllSMT
(a variant of AllSAT dealing with first-order logic theories)
for probabilistic inference in hybrid domains. AllSAT has
also been applied to data mining to deal with the frequent
itemset mining problem (Dlala et al. 2016). Lastly, model
counting over first-order logic theories (#SMT) (Chistikov,
Dimitrova, and Majumdar 2015) relies on AllSAT too.
Exploring the complete search space efficiently is a major
concern in AllSAT. For a formula F with n variables, there
are 2n possible total assignments. Generating all of these assignments explicitly would require exponential space complexity. To mitigate the issue, we can use partial models to
obtain compact representations of a set of solutions. If a partial model does not explicitly assign the truth value of a variable, then it means that its truth value does not impact the
satisfiability of that assignment, thus two assignments are
represented by the partial one. In problems with n variables,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8126

