The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reinforcement Learning as a Parsimonious Alternative to Prediction Cascades:
A Case Study on Image Segmentation
Bharat Srikishan1 , Anika Tabassum2 , Srikanth Allu2 ,
Ramakrishnan Kannan2 , Nikhil Muralidhar1
1

Stevens Institute of Technology
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
bsrikish@stevens.edu, {tabassuma, allus, kannanr}@ornl.gov, nmurali1@stevens.edu
2

Abstract
Deep learning architectures have achieved state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance on computer vision tasks such as object
detection and image segmentation. This may be attributed to
the use of over-parameterized, monolithic deep learning architectures executed on large datasets. Although such large
architectures lead to increased accuracy, this is usually accompanied by a larger increase in computation and memory
requirements during inference. While this is a non-issue in
traditional machine learning (ML) pipelines, the recent confluence of machine learning and fields like the Internet of
Things (IoT) has rendered such large architectures infeasible for execution in low-resource settings. For some datasets,
large monolithic pipelines may be overkill for simpler inputs. To address this problem, previous efforts have proposed decision cascades where inputs are passed through
models of increasing complexity until desired performance is
achieved. However, we argue that cascaded prediction leads
to sub-optimal throughput and increased computational cost
due to wasteful intermediate computations. To address this,
we propose PaSeR (Parsimonious Segmentation with Reinforcement Learning) a non-cascading, cost-aware learning
pipeline as an efficient alternative to cascaded decision architectures. Through experimental evaluation on both real-world
and standard datasets, we demonstrate that PaSeR achieves
better accuracy while minimizing computational cost relative to cascaded models. Further, we introduce a new metric
IoU/GigaFlop to evaluate the balance between cost and performance. On the real-world task of battery material phase
segmentation, PaSeR yields a minimum performance improvement of 174% on the IoU/GigaFlop metric with respect to baselines. We also demonstrate PaSeR’s adaptability
to complementary models trained on a noisy MNIST dataset,
where it achieved a minimum performance improvement on
IoU/GigaFlop of 13.4% over SOTA models. Code and data
are available at github.com/scailab/paser.

Figure 1: Performance w.r.t IoU/GigaFlop metric (higher is
better) of SOTA models and our proposed PaSeR model on
the battery material phase segmentation task.

pabilities (edge) in conjunction with DL models that are deployed in less constrained environments (fog, cloud). These
edge-fog-cloud (EFC) systems are commonly used in areas
such as smart manufacturing (Chen et al. 2018a) and healthcare (Mutlag et al. 2021) where precision machines such as
electrocardiograms collect and preprocess high density data
while integrating with a local computer as well as cloud
based resources to accurately and efficiently provide critical
information. Although the fog and cloud environments enable the deployment of larger DL models, querying them is
costly (due to communication network and model latency).
Hence, such real-world contexts require a high-throughput
pipeline to balance task accuracy and computational cost.
A popular solution to deal with this problem is the I Don’t
Know (IDK) Cascade (Wang et al. 2017) in which models of
increasing complexity (starting with the least cost model)
are sequentially queried until a model yields a prediction
exceeding a preset confidence threshold. Multi-exit models
(Kouris et al. 2022) follow a similar cascading architecture
but require a potentially costly neural architecture search
during training. We argue that such pipelines, although wellmotivated, lead to high computational costs due to excess
computations incurred as a function of the sequential cascading constraint. In this paper, we argue that reinforcement
learning (RL) can be employed as an effective substitute to
circumvent the cascading restriction. We employ RL to directly select which of a set of models to query with a particular input such that the learned policy maximizes task performance while minimizing computational cost. To this end,
we propose the PaSeR framework and demonstrate its performance on the challenging task of battery material phase
segmentation.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning (DL) and the internetof-things (IoT) have led to the burgeoning application of
DL in manufacturing pipelines (Hussain et al. 2020; Meng
et al. 2020; Mohammadi et al. 2018; Tang et al. 2017).
In many such applications, ML / DL models are often deployed on devices with low memory and computational caCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15066

