The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

HDformer: A Higher-Dimensional Transformer for Detecting Diabetes Utilizing
Long-Range Vascular Signals
Ella Lan
The Harker School, California, USA
ella2happy@gmail.com

Abstract
Diabetes mellitus is a global concern, and early detection can
prevent serious complications. 50% of those with diabetes
live undiagnosed, disproportionately afflicting low-income
groups. Non-invasive methods have emerged for timely detection; however, their limited accuracy constrains clinical
usage. In this research, we present a novel Higher Dimensional Transformer (HDformer), the first Transformer-based
architecture which utilizes long-range photoplethysmography
(PPG) to detect diabetes. The long-range PPG maximizes signal contextual information when compared to the less-than
30 second signals commonly used in existing research. To
increase the computational efficiency of HDformer’s longrange processing, a new attention module, Time Square Attention (TSA), is invented to achieve linear computational
complexity with respect to the token volume while retaining the local/global dependencies. TSA converts the 1D inputs into 2D representations, grouping the adjacent points
into a single 2D token. It then generates dynamic patches
and feeds them into a gated mixture-of-experts (MoE) network, optimizing the learning on different attention areas.
HDformer achieves state-of-the-art results (sensitivity 98.4,
accuracy 97.3, specificity 92.8, AUC 0.929) on the standard MIMIC-III dataset, surpassing existing research. Furthermore, we develop an end-to-end solution where a lowcost wearable is prototyped to connect with the HDformer in
the Cloud via a mobile app. This scalable, convenient, and affordable approach provides instantaneous detection and continuous monitoring for individuals. It aids doctors in easily
screening for diabetes and safeguards underprivileged communities. The enhanced versatility of HDformer allows for
efficient processing and learning of long-range signals in general one-dimensional time-series sequences, particularly for
all biomedical waveforms.

Figure 1: HDformer Network Architecture.

people worldwide are diagnosed with diabetes, and these
statistics have a notably disproportionate impact on lowerincome communities.
Diabetes is a “silent killer”; it is often overlooked until its
progression into critical stages. The lack of obvious symptoms at onset prevents diabetic patients from being treated
until later stages when the patients’ blood sugar is uncontrollable and acutely above the standard. According to data
from the International Diabetes Federation, almost 50% of
people with diabetes are unaware of their diagnosis and its
risks to their health (Ogurtsova et al. 2022), hence leaving
the disease untreated.
Thus, early detection is critical to preventing long-term
complications and reducing mortality rates.
To diagnose diabetes, clinics use invasive or semi-invasive
methods. However, such treatments are expensive, timeconsuming, and inconvenient for patients. To overcome
these limitations, research on non-invasive methods has
emerged. A continuous, noninvasive, painless, easy, and
low-cost solution can improve patient adherence to routine
blood glucose monitoring, which may result in earlier diabetes detection.
Photoplethysmography (PPG) is an optically obtained
signal that can be used to detect blood volume changes in
the microvascular bed of tissues. PPG can extract various
pieces of cardiovascular-related information (Elgendi et al.
2019). Clinics have noted that diabetes is linked to vascular
changes. In particular, diabetic groups often exhibit signs of
reduced heart rate variability and an elevated resting heart

Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a clinical condition that results in a high
amount of glucose in the blood due to a lack of insulin in the
body— otherwise known as insulin resistance (Martin et al.
1992). Diabetes increases the risk of complications in nearly
every organ system, leading to conditions such as coronary
heart disease, kidney failure, blindness, and stroke. According to the World Health Organization, about 537 million
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13320

