The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation for Driving Scenes
Dongseob Kim* 1 , Seungho Lee* 1 , Junsuk Choe2 , Hyunjung Shim†3
1

Yonsei University, South Korea
Sogang University, South Korea
3
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology, South Korea
{kou.k, seungholee}@yonsei.ac.kr, jschoe@sogang.ac.kr, kateshim@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

et al. 2016), while PASCAL VOC required 239.7 seconds
per image (Bearman et al. 2016).
However, when applied to driving scene datasets like
Cityscapes, WSSS models exhibit significant performance
degradation. Akiva and Dana attributed this issue to the specific characteristics of the dataset, such as small object size,
a high number of objects in each image, and limited diversity in object appearance (Akiva and Dana 2023). However,
they only reported this tendency implicitly. In our study, we
explicitly compare the driving scene datasets to the existing
benchmark datasets (i.e., PASCAL VOC and MS COCO).
As a result, we find that the driving scenes datasets lack
negative samples and exhibit a remarkably high level of cooccurrence among classes. This poses a challenge in identifying individual objects through image classification, which
hinders the effectiveness of common WSSS baselines, such
as class activation mapping (CAM).
Recently, Contrastive Language Image Pre-training
(CLIP), a model trained on a massive set of 400 million
image-text pairs, has remarkably performed in open vocabulary classification. Using the open vocabulary classification
ability of CLIP, we can avoid the characteristic of the dataset
degrading the classifier’s performance. As a result, as opposed to CAM, the seed mask generated by CLIP better
distinguishes the object regions on the driving dataset like
Cityscapes. Despite the potential, it often fails to identify
small objects and produces noisy masks (Fig. 3 (a)).
In this paper, we present a novel WSSS framework for
driving scene datasets, to address the above two challenges
inherent in CLIP. Considering CLIP as a baseline mask generator, we propose (1) global-local view training to handle small-sized objects and (2) Consistency-Aware Region
Balancing (CARB) to mitigate the negative effects of noisy
pseudo-masks. Firstly, we found a unique property of CLIP:
it offers considerably different pseudo-masks across input
scales. Based on this observation, we use both a local view
(i.e., a small-sized patch) and a global view (i.e., an originalsized image) during model training for accurately detecting
small but critical objects in driving scenes (e.g., traffic light).
Next, we propose CARB, which suppresses the erroneous
region of pseudo-masks to train the segmentation model.
Specifically, we divide the noisy pseudo-mask into consistent and inconsistent regions according to prediction consistency between the segmentation model and CLIP. The incon-

State-of-the-art techniques in weakly-supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS) using image-level labels exhibit severe performance degradation on driving scene datasets such
as Cityscapes. To address this challenge, we develop a new
WSSS framework tailored to driving scene datasets. Based
on extensive analysis of dataset characteristics, we employ
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) as our baseline to obtain pseudo-masks. However, CLIP introduces two
key challenges: (1) pseudo-masks from CLIP lack in representing small object classes, and (2) these masks contain
notable noise. We propose solutions for each issue as follows. (1) We devise Global-Local View Training that seamlessly incorporates small-scale patches during model training, thereby enhancing the model’s capability to handle
small-sized yet critical objects in driving scenes (e.g., traffic light). (2) We introduce Consistency-Aware Region Balancing (CARB), a novel technique that discerns reliable and
noisy regions through evaluating the consistency between
CLIP masks and segmentation predictions. It prioritizes reliable pixels over noisy pixels via adaptive loss weighting.
Notably, the proposed method achieves 51.8% mIoU on the
Cityscapes test dataset, showcasing its potential as a strong
WSSS baseline on driving scene datasets. Experimental results on CamVid and WildDash2 demonstrate the effectiveness of our method across diverse datasets, even with smallscale datasets or visually challenging conditions. The code is
available at https://github.com/k0u-id/CARB.

Introduction
Recent advancements in weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) using image-level labels have demonstrated impressive results, achieving performance levels of
over 90% compared to full supervised models on the PASCAL VOC dataset (Lee, Kim, and Shim 2022; Yoon et al.
2022). Given this success, it is crucial to transfer the WSSS
framework to driving scenes, which are a significant scenario in semantic segmentation. Obtaining pixel-level labels
in driving scenes is prohibitively expensive, making labelefficient training methods imperative in this context. For
instance, Cityscapes required 1.5 hours per image (Cordts
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2741

