The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Feature Unlearning for Pre-trained GANs and VAEs
Saemi Moon1 , Seunghyuk Cho2 , Dongwoo Kim1,2
1

CSE, POSTECH
GSAI, POSTECH
{saemi, shhj1998, dongwookim}@postech.ac.kr
2

Bang

Abstract
We tackle the problem of feature unlearning from a pre-trained
image generative model: GANs and VAEs. Unlike a common
unlearning task where an unlearning target is a subset of the
training set, we aim to unlearn a specific feature, such as
hairstyle from facial images, from the pre-trained generative
models. As the target feature is only presented in a local region
of an image, unlearning the entire image from the pre-trained
model may result in losing other details in the remaining region of the image. To specify which features to unlearn, we
collect randomly generated images that contain the target features. We then identify a latent representation corresponding
to the target feature and then use the representation to finetune the pre-trained model. Through experiments on MNIST,
CelebA, and FFHQ datasets, we show that target features are
successfully removed while keeping the fidelity of the original
models. Further experiments with an adversarial attack show
that the unlearned model is more robust under the presence of
malicious parties.

Hat

Beard

Glasses

Original
Model

Unlearned
Model

Figure 1: Result of unlearning various features from pretrained StyleGAN model. We utilize the same latent vector
to generate images from both the original and the unlearned
models. Our method effectively unlearns the target feature
while maintaining high image quality.

Introduction
Recent advancements in deep generative models have led
to the generation of highly realistic images. However, this
progress has also raised concerns about the potential misuse
of such models. In some instances, generated images may
contain violent or explicit content and inadvertently leak
private information used to train the model. To address these
issues, a well-prepared dataset with appropriate cleansing
procedures can mitigate the potential for abuse of generative
models.
In addition to data preparation and cleansing, machine
unlearning serves as a complementary tool for preventing the
problem in the development and deployment of a generative
model. Machine unlearning aims to erase the target data
from a pre-trained machine-learning model, which can be
required to remove private information, harmful content, and
biased information (Cao and Yang 2015). However, most
of the machine unlearning methods have been focused on
supervised models so far (Gupta et al. 2021; Tarun et al.
2021; Baumhauer, Schöttle, and Zeppelzauer 2022; Ginart
et al. 2019; Yoon et al. 2022; Chundawat et al. 2022; Golatkar,
Achille, and Soatto 2020; Nguyen, Low, and Jaillet 2020).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21420

In this work, we tackle the problem of feature unlearning
from pre-trained image generative models where we aim to
fine-tune the model to exclude the production of samples that
exhibit target features. One of the challenges in feature unlearning is that the target feature can be subtle. For instance, a
specific hairstyle of a facial image could be the target feature
we want to remove from the model, as shown in Figure 1.
The subtlety in the target features makes it hard to adopt
traditional supervised model unlearning approaches.
In many unlearning scenarios with supervised models, the
target of unlearning is a subset of a training dataset, leading to
the oracle model that could have been obtained from training
without the target subset. Unlike supervised model unlearning, it is non-trivial to define the target data when unlearning
feature since the target feature is only presented in a local region of an image. If we naively remove the entire image that
contains the target feature, we could lose the other information in the remaining region of the image. Eventually, subset
removal results in a loss of high fidelity and diversity in the
generated samples. On the other hand, explicit pixel-level
supervision could be given to unlearn the target feature, but
it is often very expensive to obtain such supervision. Furthermore, the problem becomes more challenging if the training
dataset is inaccessible during unlearning for several reasons,
e.g., storage capacity, private content protection, etc.

