The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Label Disambiguation-Based Multimodal Massive Multiple Instance Learning
Approach for Immune Repertoire Classification
Fan Xu1* ,Yu Zhao2* † , Bingzhe Wu2 , Yueshan Huang3 , Qin Ren2 , Yang Xiao4 ,
Bing He2† , Jie Zheng1† , Jianhua Yao2†
1

ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen 518000, China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
4
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518071, China
yu.zhao@tum.de, hebinghb@gmail.com, zhengjie@shanghaitech.edu.cn, jianhua.yao@gmail.com
Abstract

situated on the surface of T-Cells, initially identify the antigen peptides from pathogens presented on the major histocompatibility complex (peptide-MHC complexes) and then
the adaptive immune system preserves and amplifies these
immune receptors to activate the immune response and protect human bodies from disease (Schumacher and Schreiber
2015; Mora and Walczak 2019). The pathogen recognition
mechanism of BCR is similar to that of TCR, and the main
difference is that BCRs directly bind to the antigen surface
without the presentation of the MHC.
As a collection of an individual’s TCRs and BCRs, the
AIRR records the past and ongoing adaptive immune responses and its status reflects the immune states and individual’s responses to infectious, autoimmune diseases, and
tumour-related pathogens (Song et al. 2021). Consequently,
the encoded information within the AIRRs is highly informative and valuable for repertoire-based diagnoses of infections, diseases, and cancers. This can be conceptualized
as an immune repertoire classification problem. It is desirable to develop an accurate and efficient method for the immune repertoire classification and associated receptor identification problems, for its potential to significantly accelerate the development of novel diagnostic tools, vaccines and
therapies. Recently, the advancement of high-throughput
sequencing-based immunosequencing techniques has facilitated the profiling of AIRRs, providing data on the counts
and receptor sequences of TCRs and BCRs within a repertoire (Minervina, Pogorelyy, and Mamedov 2019). This
progress has paved the way for developing data-driven approaches, such as deep neural networks, to advance the field
further. However, it remains a challenging problem for the
following factors (Dash et al. 2017; Glanville et al. 2017).
(1) High diversity: Adaptive immune receptors (AIRs) are
highly diverse to make the adaptive immune system capable of recognizing tremendous numbers of antigens. As estimated, there are at least 1016 distinct AIRs in nature (Wu
et al. 2021). (2) Large capacity: Each person has a large
number of distinct immune receptors (107 -108 ) that exhibit
minimal overlap among each other (Pavlović et al. 2021).
(3) Low witness rate (WR): The immune status of an individual with regard to a specific disease is often determined
by the presence of a tiny proportion of particular receptors

One individual human’s immune repertoire consists of a huge
set of adaptive immune receptors at a certain time point, representing the individual’s adaptive immune state. Immune
repertoire classification and associated receptor identification
have the potential to make a transformative contribution to
the development of novel vaccines and therapies. The vast
number of instances and exceedingly low witness rate pose a
great challenge to the immune repertoire classification, which
can be formulated as a Massive Multiple Instance Learning
(MMIL) problem. Traditional MIL methods, at both baglevel and instance-level, confront the issues of substantial
computational burden or supervision ambiguity when handling massive instances. To address these issues, we propose a novel label disambiguation-based multimodal massive multiple instance learning approach (LaDM³IL) for immune repertoire classification. LaDM³IL adapts the instancelevel MIL paradigm to deal with the issue of high computational cost and employs a specially-designed label disambiguation module for label correction, mitigating the impact
of misleading supervision. To achieve a more comprehensive
representation of each receptor, LaDM³IL leverages a multimodal fusion module with gating-based attention and tensorfusion to integrate the information from gene segments and
amino acid (AA) sequences of each immune receptor. Extensive experiments on the Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Cancer datasets demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed LaDM³IL for both immune repertoire classification and
associated receptor identification tasks. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/Josie-xufan/LaDM3IL.

Introduction
The adaptive immune receptor repertoires (AIRRs) consist
of T-cell receptors (TCRs) and B-cell receptors (BCRs) that
are responsible for recognizing disease-causing pathogens
such as bacteria, viruses as well as cancer cells and recording information on past and ongoing immune responses
(Pavlović et al. 2021). Fig. 1 shows a typical adaptive immune process, where the TCR is taken as an example. TCRs,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16138

