The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Patch-Aware Sample Selection for Efficient Masked Image Modeling
Zhengyang Zhuge1, 2 , Jiaxing Wang3 , Yong Li3 ,
Yongjun Bao3 , Peisong Wang1, 2, 4 , Jian Cheng1, 2, 4 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
JD.com
4
AiRiA
zhugezhengyang2020@ia.ac.cn, {wangjiaxing41, liyong5, baoyongjun}@jd.com
For Camera ready
{peisong.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Nowadays sample selection is drawing increasing attention.
By extracting and training only on the most informative subset, sample selection can effectively reduce the training cost.
Although sample selection is effective in conventional supervised learning, applying it to Masked Image Modeling (MIM)
still poses challenges due to the gap between sample-level
selection and patch-level pre-training. In this paper, we inspect the sample selection in MIM pre-training and find the
basic selection suffers from performance degradation. We attribute this degradation primarily to 2 factors: the random
mask strategy and the simple averaging function. We then
propose Patch-Aware Sample Selection (PASS), including
a low-cost Dynamic Trained Mask Predictor (DTMP) and
Weighted Selection Score (WSS). DTMP consistently masks
the informative patches in samples, ensuring a relatively accurate representation of selection score. WSS enhances the
selection score using patch-level disparity. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of PASS in selecting the most
informative subset and accelerating pretraining. PASS exhibits
superior performance across various datasets, MIM methods,
and downstream tasks. Particularly, PASS improves MAE by
0.7% on ImageNet-1K while utilizing only 37% data budget
and achieves ∼1.7× speedup.

…

Figure 1: Illustration of the Basic Sample Selection for
Masked Image Modeling. It is noteworthy that we divide
the original MIM pre-training into two stages: pre-training
stage and sample selection stage.

Introduction
Self-supervised pre-training has recently gained great attention due to its label-free nature and ability to learn informative representations. Among them, Masked Image Modeling
(MIM), motivated by the remarkable achievements of Masked
Language Modeling (MLM) (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al.
2020) in Natural Language Process (NLP) and the progress
of Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021), has emerged as a propitious
pre-training paradigm for computer vision (CV). However,
MIM suffers from large computational burden due to its extensive model size and substantial data demand. A natural
way of mitigating is to eliminate the redundant data and train
only on the most informative ones, namely, sample selection.
Pioneer works (Paul, Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021; Coleman et al. 2020; Feldman 2020; Mirzasoleiman, Bilmes, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17245

Leskovec 2020; Killamsetty et al. 2021) have explored efficient training with sample selection in Supervised Learning
(SL). However, there still lack successful practice in applying
sample selection to accelerate the MIM pre-training process.
We hypothesize this is due to the discrepancy between MIM
pre-training process and the supervised learning. In conventional supervised training, a sample image is fed into the
model as a whole, namely, supervised learning operates at
the sample level. While in MIM pre-training, samples are
first partitioned into patches and masked image modeling
operates at the patch level. Taking MAE (He et al. 2022)
for example, the image patches are randomly masked and
the model reconstructs the masked patches according to the
visible ones. This discrepancy raises a significant question:
How can we effectively evaluate the importance of a sample
given the image patches?
The most natural and straightforward way is to directly
aggregate the reconstruction loss of the randomly masked
patches. Samples with larger aggregated loss are considered
more informative and thus picked. We name this strategy
Basic Sample Selection (BSS) as denoted in Figure 1. Mearwhile, following (Killamsetty et al. 2021), we apply a dynamic selection scheme, where the sample selection is conducted periodically during the training process. However, we
find this BSS method incurs inevitable performance degradation. we suspect the performance degradation stemming
from two aspects: 1. the inconsistency and inaccuracy of
the selection score due to random masking strategy. and 2.

