The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Prototype Space Learning for Commonsense-Based Scene Graph
Generation
Lianggangxu Chen1 * , Youqi Song1 * , Yiqing Cai1 , Jiale Lu1 , Yang Li1 , Yuan Xie1 , Changbo Wang1† ,
Gaoqi He1, 2†
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Precision Optics, Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
{lgxchen, youqisong, yqcai, jllu}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, yli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, xieyuan8589@foxmail.com
{cbwang, gqhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

However, the long-tail distribution of predicate classes limits
the performance of existing visual contextual based methods
(Chen et al. 2019b; Tang et al. 2020). As Zareian et al. point
out (Zareian et al. 2020), head predicates, such as on, crowd
out rarer but more informative tail predicates, such as standing on. 2) Commonsense based methods extract commonsense from multiple external knowledge bases (Sharifzadeh
et al. 2022; Zareian 2020; Sharifzadeh, Baharlou, and Tresp
2021) to refine object and predicate features to improve recall for the tail predicate classes. Commonsense based methods typically represent the class center of each predicate as a
single prototype (Zareian 2020; Zheng et al. 2023a), where
the single prototype is embedded into a word vector trained
from external knowledge bases. The visual features of predicate instances are mapped into the prototype space, and then
each predicate instance is assigned a corresponding predicate class by searching the nearest prototype (Figure 1(a)).
Despite the progress made by existing commonsensebased scene graph generation (C-SGG) methods, the performance of diverse predicates is still not satisfied in the
single-prototype setting. In Figure 1(a), the predicate instance man-riding-board is closer to the prototype lying on
than to the prototype riding (d2 < d1 ) due to the visual similarity. As a result, the predicate instance man-riding-board
is misclassified as man-lying on-board. Specifically, predicates with large intra-class diversity, such as riding, standing on and lying on, are more likely to be misclassified.
Naturally, we investigated the underlying reasons behind
the misclassification of diverse predicates. The reason is that
the large intra-class variation is still not well addressed in
the single-prototype setting. For example, as illustrated in
Figure 1(a), there is a substantial diversity of visual appearance for bicycle riding, horseback riding, and wave
riding even if they respectively represents a single predicate category of riding. This intra-class variation results in
subclasses clearly identified within each predicate category.
Modern prototype category theory of cognitive science argues that categories do not have single, central prototype,
but rather a polycentric structure with multiple prototypes
(Spivak 2014). These prototypes are not fixed, but rather are
defined by a set of representative features induced by existing instances (Lakoff 2007). Modern prototype category
theory motivated us to rethink C-SGG from the polycen-

In the domain of scene graph generation, modeling commonsense as a single-prototype representation has been typically
employed to facilitate the recognition of infrequent predicates. However, a fundamental challenge lies in the large
intra-class variations of the visual appearance of predicates,
resulting in subclasses within a predicate class. Such a challenge typically leads to the problem of misclassifying diverse
predicates due to the rough predicate space clustering. In
this paper, inspired by cognitive science, we maintain multiprototype representations for each predicate class, which can
accurately find the multiple class centers of the predicate
space. Technically, we propose a novel multi-prototype learning framework consisting of three main steps: prototypepredicate matching, prototype updating, and prototype space
optimization. We first design a triple-level optimal transport
to match each predicate feature within the same class to a
specific prototype. In addition, the prototypes are updated using momentum updating to find the class centers according
to the matching results. Finally, we enhance the inter-class
separability of the prototype space through iterations of the
inter-class separability loss and intra-class compactness loss.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the Visual
Genome dataset.

Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) plays a vital role in visual
scene understanding, which aims to detect objects and represent their relationships using predicates in images (Sun et al.
2023). Consequently, SGG can provide valuable assistance
for subsequent computer vision tasks, including visual question answering (Lei et al. 2023) and image captioning (Yang,
Liu, and Wang 2022).
Existing SGG methods can be roughly categorized into
two groups by whether to use external knowledge: 1) Visual
contextual based methods successively pass visual features
through a given network, such as graph neural networks (Li
et al. 2018) and transformers (Dhingra, Ritter, and Kunz
2021), to update the feature representations of predicates.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Changbo Wang and Gaoqi He are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1129

