The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Poincaré Differential Privacy for Hierarchy-Aware Graph Embedding
Yuecen Wei1,2,3 , Haonan Yuan1 , Xingcheng Fu3 * , Qingyun Sun1 , Hao Peng1 ,
Xianxian Li3 , Chunming Hu1,2 *
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
{weiyc,yuanhn,sunqy,penghao,hucm}@buaa.edu.cn, {fuxc,lixx}@gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Hierarchy is an important and commonly observed topological property in real-world graphs that indicate the relationships between supervisors and subordinates or the organizational behavior of human groups. As hierarchy is introduced as a new inductive bias into the Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in various tasks, it implies latent topological
relations for attackers to improve their inference attack performance, leading to serious privacy leakage issues. In addition, existing privacy-preserving frameworks suffer from reduced protection ability in hierarchical propagation due to the
deficiency of adaptive upper-bound estimation of the hierarchical perturbation boundary. It is of great urgency to effectively leverage the hierarchical property of data while satisfying privacy guarantees. To solve the problem, we propose the
Poincaré Differential Privacy framework, named PoinDP, to
protect the hierarchy-aware graph embedding based on hyperbolic geometry. Specifically, PoinDP first learns the hierarchy weights for each entity based on the Poincaré model
in hyperbolic space. Then, the Personalized Hierarchy-aware
Sensitivity is designed to measure the sensitivity of the hierarchical structure and adaptively allocate the privacy protection strength. Besides, the Hyperbolic Gaussian Mechanism
(HGM) is proposed to extend the Gaussian mechanism in Euclidean space to hyperbolic space to realize random perturbations that satisfy differential privacy under the hyperbolic
space metric. Extensive experiment results on five real-world
datasets demonstrate the proposed PoinDP’s advantages of
effective privacy protection while maintaining good performance on the node classification task.

(b) Neighbour Classification.

(a) Latent Tree Structure.

(c) Hierarchical Classification.

Figure 1: Privacy leakage on the hierarchical structure.

However, dealing directly with hierarchy in the topological
space proves to be challenging in the Euclidean embedding
space. In contrast to the Euclidean space, the hyperbolic geometric space can be conceptualized as a continuous treelike structure, naturally capable of representing the topological hierarchy (Sun et al. 2022a, 2023b). The constant negative curvature of the hyperbolic geometric space imparts
it with a more potent ability for hierarchical representation
compared to the flat Euclidean space (Krioukov et al. 2010;
Sun et al. 2023a). Recent works in hyperbolic representation learning (Ganea, Bécigneul, and Hofmann 2018; Tifrea,
Bécigneul, and Ganea 2019) have achieved noteworthy success by harnessing the hierarchy, where the hierarchy is regarded as the prompt for balancing the aggregation weights.
These methods manifest how the hierarchy can be utilized to
enhance the effectiveness of graph representation learning.
However, while representation learning in the hyperbolic
geometric space offers benefits, it comes with the potential
drawback of increased susceptibility to the leakage of sensitive user information. Hierarchical structures are prevalent
in graph data, as depicted in Figure 1(a). Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces exhibit distinct perceptual capabilities for hierarchical structures. For instance, in Euclidean space, clustering based on node distances can reflect whether an individual is a patient, while node distances in hyperbolic space

Introduction
The inherent topological properties of graphs have been
widely leveraged in graph representation learning as inductive biases (Sun et al. 2022c; Li et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2024; Yuan et al. 2024). Real-world graph data typically
exhibit intricate topological structures with diverse properties (Sun et al. 2021b), and the hierarchy frequently assumes a pivotal role, which naturally mirrors human behavior within hierarchical organizations. This property assists in the learning of graph representation by capturing implicit data organization patterns (Papadopoulos et al. 2012).
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9160

