The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Improving Open Set Recognition via Visual Prompts
Distilled from Common-Sense Knowledge
Seongyeop Kim1 , Hyung-Il Kim2 , Yong Man Ro1 *
1

Integrated Vision Language Lab., KAIST, South Korea
2
ETRI, South Korea
seongyeop@kaist.ac.kr, hikim@etri.re.kr, ymro@kaist.ac.kr

Seen Class “Dog”

Abstract

have paws

Dogs.. are about two feet tall
are domesticated pets

Open Set Recognition (OSR) poses significant challenges
in distinguishing known from unknown classes. In OSR,
the overconfidence problem has become a persistent obstacle, where visual recognition models often misclassify unknown objects as known objects with high confidence. This
issue stems from the fact that visual recognition models often lack the integration of common-sense knowledge, a feature that is naturally present in language-based models but
lacking in visual recognition systems. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to enhance OSR performance by distilling common-sense knowledge into visual prompts. Utilizing text prompts that embody common-sense knowledge
about known classes, the proposed visual prompt is learned
by extracting semantic common-sense features and aligning
them with image features from visual recognition models.
The unique aspect of this work is the training of individual visual prompts for each class to encapsulate this common-sense
knowledge. Our methodology is model-agnostic, capable of
enhancing OSR across various visual recognition models, and
computationally light as it focuses solely on training the visual prompts. This research introduces a method for addressing OSR, aiming at a more systematic integration of visual
recognition systems with common-sense knowledge. The obtained results indicate an enhancement in recognition accuracy, suggesting the applicability of this approach in practical
settings.

Unseen Class “Fox”
Visual Recognition Visual Prompt
Lessens Overconfident
Model
Misclassifications
Visual Prompt
have paws
Dogs.. are about two feet tall
are domesticated pets
Distil the Common-Sense
Knowledge in Text Format into
Frame-shape Visual Prompt

Large Language
Model

Figure 1: Depiction of the proposed framework, where a
large language model distills common-sense knowledge into
a visual prompt. This process enables the visual recognition model to adapt and respond effectively when confronted with unfamiliar instances, thereby enhancing its performance in OSR tasks.

Clune 2015), (Hein, Andriushchenko, and Bitterwolf 2019),
(Padhy et al. 2020), (Wang et al. 2021) For instance, a visual recognition model trained to recognize various breeds
of dogs might confidently misclassify a fox, which it has
never seen before, as a type of dog. This reflects what is referred to as the overconfidence problem, stemming from the
fact that visual classifiers often lack common-sense knowledge (Zellers et al. 2019), (Park et al. 2020), (Shen et al.
2022). Such knowledge, like understanding that foxes and
dogs are distinct categories despite sharing similar features,
is typically found in language-based models but is missing in
visual recognition systems. In other words, while language
models can reason about these different contexts and relationships, visual recognition models might encounter limitations, particularly when encountering classes not seen during training.
Instead of merely learning a discriminative model for recognizing known objects, the proposed method enables vi-

Introduction
Open Set Recognition (OSR) is a critical domain in computer vision that focuses on the ability of a system to classify known objects while also recognizing and rejecting unknown ones. This OSR problem reflects real-world scenarios, where the models are expected to encounter objects not
belonging to the known classes in the training dataset. Despite the advances in deep learning techniques for closed-set
recognition, OSR remains a challenging problem, particularly due to an overconfidence issue in classifying unknown
objects (Zhou, Ye, and Zhan 2021).
In traditional OSR methods, visual recognition models often misclassify unknown objects with excessive certainty, so-called overconfidence. (Nguyen, Yosinski, and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2786

