The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GCNext: Towards the Unity of Graph Convolutions for Human Motion Prediction
Xinshun Wang1,2 , Qiongjie Cui3 , Chen Chen4 , Mengyuan Liu2 *
2

1
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
3
Xiaohongshu Inc.
4
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida

Abstract

graph convolution types unexplored by existing works. One
is naturally motivated to ask: What makes an ideal type of
graph convolution for human motion prediction?
To answer this question, we propose Universal Graph
Convolution (UniGC), a novel graph convolution concept
that pushes the boundaries of existing knowledge by reconceptualizing different graph convolutions, both existing
and unexplored, as its special cases. In the most general
case, UniGC uses 6D global adjacency to encode interrelationships within and across space, time, and channels,
which can be categorized into 7 types as shown in Fig. 1. The
entry at position [i, k, m, j, ℓ, n] of the 6D adjacency represents the relationship between channel-m of joint-k at time-i
and channel-n of joint-ℓ at time-j. Using two techniques—
adjacency masking and sub-adjacency tying, UniGC can be
specialized into various different special cases, which focus
on different subsets of all the 7 types of relationships. Existing graph convolutions are either the vanilla form or variations of these special cases, such as spatial (Cui, Sun, and
Yang 2020; Li et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2022), temporal (Ma
et al. 2022), spatial-temporal (Li et al. 2021), dense (Ma
et al. 2022), trajectory (Mao et al. 2019; Mao, Liu, and
Salzmann 2020; Dang et al. 2021), space-time-separable
(STS) (Sofianos et al. 2021), and unified (G3D) (Liu et al.
2020) graph convolutions. This gives rise to the second
question: What is the best way for UniGC to be leveraged
network-wise to address the task?
An intuitive answer based on common practices would be
to stack multiple layers of UniGC. However, its 6D global
adjacency would require too many parameters, making computation less efficient and optimization more challenging.
This paper gives a better answer by proposing GCNext,
which exploits the versatility and adaptability of UniGC on
network-level. In contrast to existing approaches which typically involve manually choosing one from all possible types
of graph convolutions, stacking it multiple layers, and evaluating the resulting network, GCNext is structured to make
the choice-making process learnable and sample-specific,
where each layer dynamically chooses the optimal graph
convolution type based on each different sample. Specifically, each layer in GCNext contains several graph convolutional blocks of different types in parallel and a lightweight selector block tasked with choosing the best-fitting
one for each sample. Other network designs include a rein-

The past few years has witnessed the dominance of Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) over human motion prediction. Various styles of graph convolutions have been proposed, with each one meticulously designed and incorporated into a carefully-crafted network architecture. This paper
breaks the limits of existing knowledge by proposing Universal Graph Convolution (UniGC), a novel graph convolution concept that re-conceptualizes different graph convolutions as its special cases. Leveraging UniGC on networklevel, we propose GCNext, a novel GCN-building paradigm
that dynamically determines the best-fitting graph convolutions both sample-wise and layer-wise. GCNext offers multiple use cases, including training a new GCN from scratch
or refining a preexisting GCN. Experiments on Human3.6M,
AMASS, and 3DPW datasets show that, by incorporating
unique module-to-network designs, GCNext yields up to 9×
lower computational cost than existing GCN methods, on top
of achieving state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/BradleyWang0416/GCNext.

Introduction
The idea of predictable human motion has attracted much research interest over the years across a wide range of applications such as human-robot interaction and autonomous driving. To generate plausible predictions, early successes were
achieved with RNNs (Fragkiadaki et al. 2015; Ghosh et al.
2017) and CNNs (Butepage et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018). At
present, human motion prediction is dominated almost exclusively by Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2016), due to the innate graph-like nature of
human body joints and bones. Human motion data are often
in the form of 3D skeleton sequences, where each dimension
corresponds to a different aspect—time, space, or channel,
as shown in Fig. 1. To extract features, various graph convolutions are proposed. They either focus on aggregating information in a single dimension (Li et al. 2020; Cui, Sun,
and Yang 2020), or combine aggregations in two dimensions
without considering the remaining one (Wang et al. 2024;
Ma et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021; Mao et al. 2019; Sofianos
et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2020). There are yet a number of other
* Corresponding author: nkliuyifang@gmail.com
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5642

