The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stable Matchings in Practice: A Constraint Programming Approach
Zhaohong Sun1, 2 , Naoyuki Yamada2 , Yoshihiro Takenami2 , Daisuke Moriwaki2 , Makoto Yokoo1
1

Kyushu University, Japan
CyberAgent Inc, Japan

2

Abstract
We study a practical two-sided matching problem of allocating children to daycare centers, which has significant social
implications. We are cooperating with several municipalities
in Japan and our goal is to devise a reliable and trustworthy
clearing algorithm to deal with the problem. In this paper, we
describe the design of our new algorithm that minimizes the
number of unmatched children while ensuring stability. We
evaluate our algorithm using real-life data sets, and experimental results demonstrate that our algorithm surpasses the
commercial software that currently dominates the market in
terms of both the number of matched children and the number
of blocking coalitions (measuring stability). Our findings have
been reported to local governments, and some are considering
adopting our proposed algorithm in the near future, instead
of the existing solution. Moreover, our model and algorithm
have broader applicability to other important matching markets, such as hospital-doctor matching with couples and school
choice with siblings.

Introduction
With the prevalence of dual-career households in recent years,
the demand for daycare facilities in Japan, especially in
metropolitan areas, has soared. Unfortunately, scarce space
and insufficient teachers lead to a long waiting list each year,
leaving numerous children unable to enroll in daycare centers. The waiting child problem becomes one of the critical
social challenges nowadays (see the press conference by
the Japanese Prime Minister on March 17, 2023, available
at https://japan.kantei.go.jp/101_kishida/statement/202303/
_00015.html).
The allocation of children to daycare centers in Japan is
not done on a first-come, first-served basis. Instead, the allocation process starts with families submitting applications
to their local government office, which contains basic information such as children’s age, guardians’ health conditions
and work schedule, as well as preferences over acceptable
daycare centers. Each municipality adopts a unique scoring
system that strictly prioritizes children. The scoring system is
designed in a way that children who may have greater needs
or face additional challenges have more chances of utilizing daycare services. Typically, children from low-income
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22377

or single-parent households, and those whose guardians are
suffering from diseases or disabilities take precedence over
others. Some local governments formulate lottery rules for
tie-breaking when children have identical priority scores. The
allocation is then computed by a centralized matching algorithm that allows for both families’ preferences over daycares
and daycares’ priorities over children.
The daycare matching process has faced criticism due to
long waiting lists and the Japanese government has made
considerable efforts to address this issue, including improving working conditions and increasing salaries for childcare
workers to engage more people in early childhood education,
and providing financial assistance for families in need to enlarge their options of affordable daycare centers. Although
the number of children on the waiting list significantly decreased recently, the shortage of daycare facilities continues.
This is because not all unmatched children are counted in
the waiting list, such as those who live near daycare centers
with vacant slots but are only willing to attend certain oversubscribed daycare centers and those whose parents have
to suspend their jobs or extend their childcare leave. Thus,
despite these measures, the waiting child problem remains a
major social challenge and long waiting lists have a profound
impact on young couples’ careers and lives.
The daycare matching problem bears similarities with conventional two-sided matching problems such as college admissions and job hunting, where one side of the market consists of families who submit applications on behalf of their
children and the other side consists of daycare centers with
limited resources (e.g., room space, teachers). However, the
daycare matching market possesses three features that set it
apart from classical matching models. These features include
i) transfers (i.e., some children who are already enrolled prefer to be transferred to other daycare centers), ii) siblings
(i.e., several children from the same family report joint preferences and only consent to an assignment if all of them are
matched), and iii) transferable quotas (i.e., a daycare center
may partition grades into grade groups and available spots
can be used by any child within the same grade group). It
is well-known that when couples exist, there may not exist any matching satisfying stability (Roth 1984) (i.e., one
of the most important solution concepts in matching theory
(Roth 2008)) and determining whether there exists a stable
matching is NP-complete (Ronn 1990). The presence of these

