The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Context-I2W: Mapping Images to Context-Dependent Words for Accurate
Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval
Yuanmin Tang1,2 , Jing Yu1,2 * , Keke Gai3 , Jiamin Zhuang1,2 , Gang Xiong1,2 , Yue Hu1,2 , Qi Wu4
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
4
Australia Institute of Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
{tangyuanmin, yujing02, zhuangjiamin, xionggang, huyue}@iie.ac.cn, gaikeke@bit.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
2

(a) Pre-training of context-free Image to word mapping (baseline)

Abstract

Image

Different from Composed Image Retrieval task that requires
expensive labels for training task-specific models, Zero-Shot
Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) involves diverse tasks
with a broad range of visual content manipulation intent that
could be related to domain, scene, object, and attribute. The
key challenge for ZS-CIR tasks is to learn a more accurate
image representation that has adaptive attention to the reference image for various manipulation descriptions. In this paper, we propose a novel context-dependent mapping network,
named Context-I2W, for adaptively converting descriptionrelevant Image information into a pseudo-word token composed of the description for accurate ZS-CIR. Specifically,
an Intent View Selector first dynamically learns a rotation
rule to map the identical image to a task-specific manipulation view. Then a Visual Target Extractor further captures
local information covering the main targets in ZS-CIR tasks
under the guidance of multiple learnable queries. The two
complementary modules work together to map an image to
a context-dependent pseudo-word token without extra supervision. Our model shows strong generalization ability on four
ZS-CIR tasks, including domain conversion, object composition, object manipulation, and attribute manipulation. It obtains consistent and significant performance boosts ranging
from 1.88% to 3.60% over the best methods and achieves
new state-of-the-art results on ZS-CIR. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Pter61/context-i2w.

Mapping Network

Pseudo Word

MLP

𝑺∗

(b) Pre-training of context-dependent Image to word mapping (ours)
Mapping Network

Image

Local content

View Selector Target Extractor

Pseudo Word

𝑺∗

learnable queries

Caption

A [REPLACE] passes the
ball with his teammate.

...

Guidance

(c) Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval
Image

Input

Description

Remove all but
one of the dog
and have it walk.

Retrieval Modal
Image Description

Retrieval Results
Baseline
Our

Mapping
Network

Has a gun with
larger text.

𝑆∗

The man is miss
and near a pool.

Composed
query

Image
Candidates

CLIP

Figure 1: An illustration of our motivation. (a) Global visual
mapping. (b) Our context-dependent visual mapping. (c) ZSCIR process with the results of different mapping strategies.

Introduction
Given a reference image and a text description, Composed
Image Retrieval (CIR) (Vo et al. 2019b) aims to retrieve an
image that is visually similar to a reference image while having visual modification according to the description. Unlike
traditional content-based image retrieval (Datta et al. 2008),
CIR is more flexible and accurate for users to express their
search intent by incorporating both visual and language content, which brings emerging attention to internet search and
e-commerce. Several CIR tasks have been proposed, including composing and manipulating objects for scene image
search, attribute changes for fashion image search, and converting the image style for creative image search. There exist two core challenges of CIR: (1) accurately grounding the

visual content in the reference image according to the description and (2) composing the relevant visual and textual
content from different modalities for image retrieval.
Several supervised approaches have been proposed to
solve CIR problems (Chen, Gong, and Bazzani 2020; Liu
et al. 2021; Goenka et al. 2022; Baldrati et al. 2022), which
require a large amount of annotated triplets consisting of a
reference image, a description, and a retrieved image. The
supervised approaches trained on a specific task are also
hard to generalize. To tackle these problems, the latest works
(Saito et al. 2023; Baldrati et al. 2023) introduce the ZeroShot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) task. ZS-CIR
aims to perform various CIR tasks without supervised training on task-specific triplet data. Current solutions treat the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5180

