The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identifiability of Direct Effects from Summary Causal Graphs
Simon Ferreira1,2 , Charles K. Assaad1
1

EasyVista
ENS de Lyon
simon.ferreira@ens-lyon.fr, cassaad@easyvista.com
2

Abstract

which qualitatively represents causal relations between different variables, the direct effect between two variables is always identifiable and there exists a complete graphical tool,
called the single-door criterion (Pearl 1998; Spirtes et al.
1998; Pearl 2000) that finds all possible adjustment sets
that allow to estimate the direct effect from data. These results are directly applicable in dynamic SCMs (Rubenstein
et al. 2018) given an acyclic full-time causal graph—which
qualitatively represents all causal relations between different
temporal instants of the dynamic SCM—and assuming consistency throughout time. However, in many dynamic systems, experts have difficulties in building a full-time causal
graph (Aı̈t-Bachir et al. 2023), while they can usually build
a summary causal graph (Assaad, Devijver, and Gaussier
2022) which is an abstraction of the full-time causal graph
where temporal information is omitted and cycles are allowed. So far, the problem of identifying direct effects has
solely been tackled for summary causal graphs with no cycles exceeding a size of 2 (Assaad, Ez-Zejjari, and Zan
2023). Specifically, it has been shown that in the absence
of cycles greater than 2, direct effects are always identifiable, and in these cases, an adjustment set has been proposed for estimating the direct effect from data. However,
in many applications, there exist cycles with a size greater
than 2 (Veilleux 1979; Staplin et al. 2016).
In this work, we focus on the identifiability of direct effects from summary causal graphs without restricting the
size of cycles. Our main contribution is twofold. First, we
give a complete identifiability result which characterizes all
cases for which a direct effect is graphically identifiable
from a summary causal graph. Then, we present two finite
adjustment sets that can be used to estimate the direct effect
from data whenever it is identifiable.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in the
next section, we give the definitions of direct effect and summary causal graph and recall all necessary graphical preliminaries. In the section that follows it, we present the complete identifiability result in addition to a weaker but interesting result that is implied by the complete identifiability
result. Then, in another section, we provide two finite adjustment sets that can be used to estimate the direct effect
from data whenever it is identifiable. Finally, in the last section, we conclude the paper while elaborating on promising
directions for further research.

Dynamic structural causal models (SCMs) are a powerful
framework for reasoning in dynamic systems about direct effects which measure how a change in one variable affects
another variable while holding all other variables constant.
The causal relations in a dynamic structural causal model can
be qualitatively represented with an acyclic full-time causal
graph. Assuming linearity and no hidden confounding and
given the full-time causal graph, the direct causal effect is
always identifiable. However, in many application such a
graph is not available for various reasons but nevertheless experts have access to the summary causal graph of the fulltime causal graph which represents causal relations between
time series while omitting temporal information and allowing cycles. This paper presents a complete identifiability result which characterizes all cases for which the direct effect
is graphically identifiable from a summary causal graph and
gives two sound finite adjustment sets that can be used to estimate the direct effect whenever it is identifiable.

Introduction
Structural causal models (SCMs) are a powerful framework
for representing and reasoning about causal relations between variables with a long history in many fields such
as genetics (Wright 1920, 1921), econometrics (Haavelmo
1943), social sciences (Duncan 1975; Goldberger 1972),
epidemiology (Hernan and Robins 2023), and artificial intelligence (Pearl 2000). In particular, SCMs are useful for reasoning about direct effects which measure how a change in
one variable affects another variable while holding all other
variables constant (Pearl 2012). The identification and estimation of direct effects are important in many application,
e.g., epidemiologists are interested in measuring how smoking affects lung cancer risk without being mediated by genetic susceptibility (Zhou et al. 2021); ecologists are usually
focus on understanding direct effects such as competition,
herbivory, and predation (Connell 1961); IT experts can localize root causes of system failures by comparing the direct
impact of different components on each other before and after the failure (Assaad, Ez-Zejjari, and Zan 2023).
In the framework of (non-dynamic) SCMs, assuming linearity and no hidden confounding and given a causal graph
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20387

