The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Xiezhi: An Ever-Updating Benchmark for Holistic Domain Knowledge Evaluation
Zhouhong Gu1 * , Xiaoxuan Zhu1 * , Haoning Ye1 , Lin Zhang1 , Jianchen Wang1 , Yixin Zhu1 ,
Sihang Jiang1 , Zhuozhi Xiong1 , Zihan Li1 , Weijie Wu1 , Qianyu He1 , Rui Xu1 , Wenhao Huang1 ,
Jingping Liu2 , Zili Wang3 , Shusen Wang3 , Weiguo Zheng4 , Hongwei Feng1† , Yanghua Xiao1,5 † ,
1
2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
School of Information Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology
3
Xiaohongshu Inc.
4
School of Data Science, Fudan University
5
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
{zhgu22, xxzhu22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {hwfeng, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
New Natural Langauge Process (NLP) benchmarks are urgently needed to align with the rapid development of large
language models (LLMs). We present Xiezhi, the most comprehensive evaluation suite designed to assess holistic domain knowledge. Xiezhi comprises multiple-choice questions
across 516 diverse disciplines ranging from 13 different subjects with 249,587 questions and accompanied by XiezhiSpecialty with 14,041 questions and Xiezhi-Interdiscipline
with 10,746 questions. We conduct evaluation of the 47
cutting-edge LLMs on Xiezhi. Results indicate that LLMs
exceed average performance of humans in science, engineering, agronomy, medicine, and art, but fall short in economics, jurisprudence, pedagogy, literature, history, and management. All the evaluation code and data are open sourced in
https://github.com/MikeGu721/XiezhiBenchmark

Introduction
Domain knowledge encompasses an in-depth comprehension of the world, necessitating the cultivation of various
cognitive skills, such as memorization, abstraction, logical
thinking, reasoning, and imagination. Human has exhibited
unparalleled proficiency in domain knowledge, far exceeding
any machine learning models in a long time. Nevertheless,
recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs),
including Bloom (Scao et al. 2022), Llama (Touvron et al.
2023), ChatGLM (Du et al. 2022), GPT4 (OpenAI 2023b;
Bubeck et al. 2023) and so many other models, have shown
remarkable capabilities in domain text understanding (Wei
et al. 2022). It is time to propose more comprehensive and
more prospective evaluations than before to explore whether
LLMs have actually acquired knowledge, or just acquired a
better imitation ability (Srivastava et al. 2022).
Constructing benchmarks is crucial for automatic evaluation as benchmarks facilitate efficient, systematic, and
scalable comparisons among models. However, as LLMs
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18099

continue to grow in size and complexity, they exhibit outstanding performance across a wide range of domain-specific
tasks. This makes even the newly released benchmarks like
MMLU (Hendrycks et al. 2021), BIG-bench (Srivastava et al.
2022) or HELM (Liang et al. 2022) all lag behind the capabilities of the LLMs quickily (Suzgun et al. 2022).
Considering LLMs’ performance, we conclude that the
benchmark used to evaluate LLMs should meet the following needs: (1) Needs to cover more tasks (Srivastava et al.
2022): Cutting-edge LLMs have integrated multiple capabilities into unified Text-to-Text transformer models (Raffel et al.
2020). Therefore, the evaluation of LLMs should focus on
abilities in multiple tasks. (2) Needs to manifest the disparities among LLMs (Huang et al. 2023): Considering the
emergent capacity of the models (Wei et al. 2022), it is likely
that the SoTA LLMs by learning knowledge in different domains, now have a certain level of performance in all domains.
To accurately evaluate the distinctions of LLMs with varying
capacities, the benchmark should consider breaking down
the evaluation dimensions into more detailed categories. This
will allow for a more precise assessment of each model’s
capabilities and provide valuable insights into their relative
strengths and weaknesses. (3) Needs to go ahead of the
training set (Bubeck et al. 2023): As LLMs are trained on
increasingly extensive corpora, newly released benchmarks
may become part of the LLMs’ training data much sooner
than before. A prerequisite for effective evaluation is to ensure that the benchmarks are fresher than the training data
used by LLMs.
In light of the aforementioned needs, we propose a comprehensive, multi-disciplinary, auto-updating benchmark for domain knowledge evaluation. We call this benchmark Xiezhi,
named after a mythical creature that symbolizes fairness and
judgement. Xiezhi consists of 249587 questions with 516
disciplines, ranging from 13 different categories: philosophy, economics, law, education, literature, history, natural
sciences, engineering, agriculture, medicine, military science,
management, and arts. These 516 disciplines are derived
from the Chinese Disciplinary Taxonomy, a comprehensive
hierarchical classification system of domain knowledge pro-

