The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Linear-Time Verification of Data-Aware Processes Modulo Theories
via Covers and Automata
Alessandro Gianola1 , Marco Montali2 , Sarah Winkler2
1

INESC-ID/Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
2
Faculty of Engineering, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
alessandro.gianola@tecnico.ulisboa.pt, {montali,winkler}@inf.unibz.it

Abstract

Vianu 2019; Deutsch et al. 2018) and lightweight ontologies
(Bagheri Hariri et al. 2013; Calvanese et al. 2023), and work
processes in business process management (BPM) (Reichert
2012; Calvanese et al. 2019a; Gianola 2023). In these settings, verification is important due to the data-process interplay, but highly challenging due to infinity of the state space.
When considering, within this large spectrum, those approaches that come with foundational results paired with effective algorithmic techniques and implementations, we observe that they either: (i) operate on arbitrary datatypes while
limiting verification to safety/reachability properties (Calvanese et al. 2020b; Ghilardi et al. 2023), (ii) handle general
linear-time properties but only for specific datatypes, such
as relational structures (Li, Deutsch, and Vianu 2017), or
numerical variables (Demri and D’Souza 2007; Felli, Montali, and Winkler 2022), (iii) restrict both the model and the
verification formalism (Masellis et al. 2017).
In this paper, we tackle such limitations and study lineartime verification for so-called data-aware processes modulo
theories (DMTs), from the foundational and practical point
of view. Our verification machinery is very general: DMTs
capture dynamic systems manipulating variables that can
store arbitrary types of data, ranging over infinite domains
and equipped with domain-specific predicates, only imposing very mild assumptions on their underlying theory. In this
respect, DMTs subsume several models studied in the literature for which very little is known regarding decidability of
linear-time verification. Among them, particularly relevant
and investigated are those where variables can store numeric
values subject to linear arithmetic operations, and/or objects
extracted from a read-only relational database or lightweight
ontology (Demri and D’Souza 2007; Damaggio, Deutsch,
and Vianu 2012; Bojańczyk, Segoufin, and Toruńczyk 2013;
Calvanese et al. 2020b; Felli, Montali, and Winkler 2022;
Calvanese et al. 2023). Notably, analysis is in this case reformulated as a parameterized verification problem, where
the property of interest needs to hold irrespectively of how
the read-only component is instantiated. Since process executions typically have a finite (yet unbounded) length, we
express properties using a data-aware extension of LTLf (De
Giacomo and Vardi 2013). However, data variables cause
undecidability already for reachability over very limited systems (Bojańczyk, Segoufin, and Toruńczyk 2013).
We show a simple example for our verification problem.

The need to model and analyse dynamic systems operating
over complex data is ubiquitous in AI and neighboring areas, in particular business process management. Analysing
such data-aware systems is a notoriously difficult problem, as
they are intrinsically infinite-state. Existing approaches work
for specific datatypes, and/or limit themselves to the verification of safety properties. In this paper, we lift both such
limitations, studying for the first time linear-time verification
for so-called data-aware processes modulo theories (DMTs),
from the foundational and practical point of view. The DMT
model is very general, as it supports processes operating over
variables that can store arbitrary types of data, ranging over
infinite domains and equipped with domain-specific predicates. Specifically, we provide four contributions. First, we
devise a semi-decision procedure for linear-time verification
of DMTs, which works for a very large class of datatypes
obeying to mild model-theoretic assumptions. The procedure relies on a unique combination of automata-theoretic
and cover computation techniques to respectively deal with
linear-time properties and datatypes. Second, we identify an
abstract, semantic property that guarantees the existence of
a faithful finite-state abstraction of the original system, and
show that our method becomes a decision procedure in this
case. Third, we identify concrete, checkable classes of systems that satisfy this property, generalising several results in
the literature. Finally, we present an implementation and an
experimental evaluation over a benchmark of real-world dataaware business processes.

Introduction
In many application domains of AI, the evolution of dynamic systems is inextricably intertwined with the progression of some form of data. This calls for representing the
states of the system with richer structures than propositional
assignments, making the system intrinsically infinite-state.
Notable examples of such data-aware processes are (Situation Calculus) action theories (Baral and De Giacomo 2015;
De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Patrizi 2016), lifted planning and planning over relational states/ontologies (Francès
and Geffner 2016; Calvanese et al. 2016; Borgwardt et al.
2022), dynamic systems operating over databases (Calvanese, De Giacomo, and Montali 2013; Deutsch, Li, and
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10525

