The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

S TERLING: Synergistic Representation Learning on Bipartite Graphs
Baoyu Jing1 , Yuchen Yan1 , Kaize Ding2 , Chanyoung Park3 ,
Yada Zhu4 , Huan Liu5 , Hanghang Tong1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Northwestern University
3
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology
4
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
5
Arizona State University
baoyuj2@illinois.edu, yucheny5@illinois.edu, kaize.ding@northwestern.edu, cy.park@kaist.ac.kr,
yzhu@us.ibm.com, huanliu@asu.edu, htong@illinois.edu
Abstract
A fundamental challenge of bipartite graph representation
learning is how to extract informative node embeddings. SelfSupervised Learning (SSL) is a promising paradigm to address this challenge. Most recent bipartite graph SSL methods
are based on contrastive learning which learns embeddings by
discriminating positive and negative node pairs. Contrastive
learning usually requires a large number of negative node
pairs, which could lead to computational burden and semantic
errors. In this paper, we introduce a novel synergistic representation learning model (S TERLING) to learn node embeddings without negative node pairs. S TERLING preserves the
unique local and global synergies in bipartite graphs. The local synergies are captured by maximizing the similarity of the
inter-type and intra-type positive node pairs, and the global
synergies are captured by maximizing the mutual information
of co-clusters. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that S TER LING could improve the connectivity between different node
types in the embedding space. Extensive empirical evaluation
on various benchmark datasets and tasks demonstrates the effectiveness of S TERLING for extracting node embeddings.

Figure 1: Example of a bipartite graph and its unique local
and global properties. Locally, the dashed curves are implicit
intra-type connections. Globally, the green line shows the
inter-connection between the co-clusters, i.e., bio-engineer
and electronic devices.
(You et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2022a; Zhou
et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023; Ding et al.
2023) and heterogeneous graphs (Park et al. 2020; Jing,
Park, and Tong 2021; Wang et al. 2021b; Fu et al. 2020; Yan
et al. 2022). These methods are usually sub-optimal to bipartite graphs (Gao et al. 2018), and therefore, several methods
have been specifically proposed for bipartite graphs. BiNE
(Gao et al. 2018) and BiANE (Huang et al. 2020) learn embeddings by maximizing the similarity of neighbors sampled by random walks; NeuMF (He et al. 2017) and NGCF
(Wang et al. 2019) train neural networks by reconstructing
the edges; BiGI (Cao et al. 2021), SimGCL (Yu et al. 2022)
and COIN (Jing et al. 2022b) further improve the quality of
embeddings via contrastive learning.
The aforementioned methods are mainly based on contrastive learning, which learns node embeddings by discriminating positive node pairs (e.g., local neighbors) and negative node pairs (e.g., unconnected nodes). The success of
contrastive learning heavily relies on the careful treatment
of large-scale negative node pairs (e.g., adaptive selection
of negative samples) (Grill et al. 2020). There still lacks
a principled mechanism to efficaciously construct desirable
negative node pairs, which may cause computational burden (Thakoor et al. 2021; Zheng, Zhu, and He 2023) and

Introduction
The bipartite graph is a powerful representation formalism
to model interactions between two types of nodes, which
has been used in various real-world applications. In recommender systems (Wang et al. 2021a; Wei and He 2022;
Zhou et al. 2021), users, items and their interactions (e.g.,
buy) naturally formulate a bipartite graph; in drug discovery (Pavlopoulos et al. 2018), chemical interactions between
drugs and proteins also formulate a bipartite graph; in information retrieval (He et al. 2016), clickthrough between
queries and web pages can be modeled by a bipartite graph.
A fundamental challenge for bipartite graphs is how to
extract informative node embeddings that can be easily used
for downstream tasks (e.g., link prediction). In recent years,
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has become a prevailing
paradigm to learn embeddings without human-annotated labels (Wu et al. 2021b; Zheng et al. 2022). Despite its great
performance on downstream tasks (e.g., node classification),
most of the methods are designed for homogeneous graphs
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12976

