The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MoDE: A Mixture-of-Experts Model with Mutual Distillation among the Experts
Zhitian Xie1 * , Yinger Zhang2 * † , Chenyi Zhuang1‡ , Qitao Shi1 , Zhining Liu1 , Jinjie Gu1 , Guannan
Zhang1
1
Ant Group
Zhejiang University
{xiezhitian.xzt, chenyi.zcy, qitao.sqt, eason.lzn, jinjie.gujj, zgn138592}@antgroup.com, zhangyinger@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The application of mixture-of-experts (MoE) is gaining popularity due to its ability to improve model’s performance. In
an MoE structure, the gate layer plays a significant role in
distinguishing and routing input features to different experts.
This enables each expert to specialize in processing their corresponding sub-tasks. However, the gate’s routing mechanism
also gives rise to narrow vision: the individual MoE’s expert
fails to use more samples in learning the allocated sub-task,
which in turn limits the MoE to further improve its generalization ability. To effectively address this, we propose a
method called Mixture-of-Distilled-Expert (MoDE), which
applies moderate mutual distillation among experts to enable
each expert to pick up more features learned by other experts
and gain more accurate perceptions on their original allocated
sub-tasks. We conduct plenty experiments including tabular,
NLP and CV datasets, which shows MoDE’s effectiveness,
universality and robustness. Furthermore, we develop a parallel study through innovatively constructing ”expert probing”,
to experimentally prove why MoDE works: moderate distilling knowledge can improve each individual expert’s test performances on their assigned tasks, leading to MoE’s overall
performance improvement.

E1 DS' Acc 0.9275
E2 DS' Acc 0.9669

(a)MoE

E1 DS' Acc 0.9525
E2 DS' Acc 0.9756

(b)MoDE

Figure 1: Narrow Vision. A and B represent two subsets
of the training samples, while E1/2 represent expert 1/2.
The normalized histogram schematically presents the ratio
of gradients on each expert in learning the same subset. The
narrow vision in MoE is indeed significant and MoDE alleviates it through distillation. As a result, it improves the
accuracy of individual experts on their dominating samplebased task domain (referred as DS in the following section).

Introduction

et al. 2017) have shown that in the MoE structure, each expert is specialized in processing a certain subset of samples.
The experts’ specialization comes from the fact that they
merely learn the limited sample features assigned by the gate
during the training process. Figure 1(a) shows that during
the training process of an MoE architecture (with totally two
experts), different subsets of the training samples partitioned
by the gate contribute their learning gradients in significantly
different levels: Sample A has a significant gradient to update expert 1’s parameters, but has negligible impact on expert 2. Therefore, certain samples contribute to each expert’s
specialization. However, is the mechanism of allocating limited samples to each expert the best way to construct MoE?
Assigning limited samples to each expert in an MoE can lead
to a ”narrow vision” issue, where experts are not exposed
to enough diverse data to develop a comprehensive understanding of their respective sub-tasks, potentially impairing
the model’s generalization performance.
Can we appropriately address narrow vision in MoE,
while still maintaining each expert’s specialization to improve the MoE’s overall generalization ability? To answer

Datasets can be naturally divided into different subsets (such
as those from different subdomains or with distinct subtasks) and attempting to learn these datasets with a single
model may meet difficulties in fitting and generalization
(Jacobs et al. 1991; Eigen, Ranzato, and Sutskever 2013;
Shazeer et al. 2017). To address this, the Mixture of Experts
(MoE) system has been proposed, which consists of several
different experts and a gating network as the router. MoE
have been applied in various domains, including multi-task
learning (Ma et al. 2018), NLP (Shazeer et al. 2017; Lepikhin et al. 2020), and CV (Svetlana et al. 2022; Pham et al.
2021; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Riquelme et al. 2021) and
proven as a promising architecture. Many studies (Jacobs
et al. 1991; Eigen, Ranzato, and Sutskever 2013; Shazeer
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This author conducted this work when she was serving as an
intern in Ant Group.
‡
This author is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16067

