The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RG-GAN: Dynamic Regenerative Pruning for Data-Efficient Generative
Adversarial Networks
Divya Saxena1, Jiannong Cao1, Jiahao Xu2, Tarun Kulshrestha3
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nevada, Reno, USA
3
University Research Facility of Big Data Analytics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
divsaxen@comp.polyu.edu.hk, csjcao@comp.polyu.edu.hk, jiahaoxxuu@gmail.com, tarun.kulshrestha@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Training Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) to generate high-quality images typically requires large datasets. Network pruning during training has recently emerged as a significant advancement for data-efficient GAN. However, simple and straightforward pruning can lead to the risk of losing
key information, resulting in suboptimal results due to
GAN’s competitive dynamics between generator (G) and discriminator (D). Addressing this, we present RG-GAN, a
novel approach that marks the first incorporation of dynamic
weight regeneration and pruning in GAN training to improve
the quality of the generated samples, even with limited data.
Specifically, RG-GAN initiates layer-wise dynamic pruning
by removing less important weights to the quality of the generated images. While pruning enhances efficiency, excessive
sparsity within layers can pose a risk of model collapse. To
mitigate this issue, RG-GAN applies a dynamic regeneration
method to reintroduce specific weights when they become
important, ensuring a balance between sparsity and image
quality. Though effective, the sparse network achieved
through this process might eliminate some weights important
to the combined G and D performance, a crucial aspect for
achieving stable and effective GAN training. RG-GAN addresses this loss of weights by integrating learned sparse network weights back into the dense network at the previous
stage during a follow-up regeneration step. Our results consistently demonstrate RG-GAN’s robust performance across
a variety of scenarios, including different GAN architectures,
datasets, and degrees of data scarcity, reinforcing its value as
a generic training methodology. Results also show that data
augmentation exhibits improved performance in conjunction
with RG-GAN. Furthermore, RG-GAN can achieve fewer
parameters without compromising, and even enhancing, the
quality of the generated samples. Code can be found at this
link: https://github.com/IntellicentAI-Lab/RG-GAN

Figure 1: Comparative results of StyleGAN2 and our
method (RG-StyleGAN2) on two datasets – Panda of
256×256 resolution (trained only on 100 images) and
FFHQ of 1024×1024 resolution (trained only on 1000 images). While StyleGAN2 shows artifacts with limited data,
our RG-StyleGAN2 leverages dynamic regeneration with
pruning to boost image quality, improve data-efficiency,
and reduce computational costs (best viewed in color).
have become essential in various visual tasks, such as domain adaptation (Hoffman et al. 2018; Hsu et al. 2020), image painting (Cheng et al. 2022), and image-to-image translation (Lee et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2017). However, the effectiveness of GAN heavily relies on having large and diverse
datasets but gathering such data can be time-intensive and
difficult (Kalibhat, Balaji, and Feizi 2021). Figure 1 shows
StyleGAN2 shows artifacts with limited data. To address the
challenges posed by limited data, numerous techniques
(Karras et al. 2018; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) have been
introduced. Dynamic data augmentation (Zhao et al. 2020;

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow,
Mirza, et al. 2014; Saxena et al. 2021) have achieved remarkable progress in generating high-quality images. They

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4704

