The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Detailed Text-to-Motion Synthesis via Basic-to-Advanced
Hierarchical Diffusion Model
Zhenyu Xie1 , Yang Wu2 , Xuehao Gao3 , Zhongqian Sun2 ,
Wei Yang2 , Xiaodan Liang1,4 *
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Xi’an Jiao Tong University, Xi’an, China
4
DarkMatter AI Research, Beijing, China
xiezhy6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, dylan.yangwu@qq.com, gaoxuehao.xjtu@gmail.com,
sallensun@tencent.com, willyang@tencent.com, xdliang328@gmail.com
Abstract

the cross-modal information in a shared embedding space.
On the other hand, motivated by fruitful attempts of diffusion
model (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Nichol and Dhariwal 2021) in the cross-modal image
synthesis (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Ramesh
et al. 2022), some pioneering works (Tevet et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2022; Dabral et al. 2023; Ma, Bai, and Zhou 2022; Chen
et al. 2023; Jin et al. 2023) exploit the diffusion model for textto-motion synthesis, demonstrating significant improvements
in fidelity and cross-modal consistency.

Text-guided motion synthesis aims to generate 3D human
motion that not only precisely reflects the textual description
but reveals the motion details as much as possible. Pioneering
methods explore the diffusion model for text-to-motion synthesis and obtain significant superiority. However, these methods
conduct diffusion processes either on the raw data distribution
or the low-dimensional latent space, which typically suffer
from the problem of modality inconsistency or detail-scarce.
To tackle this problem, we propose a novel Basic-to-Advanced
Hierarchical Diffusion Model, named B2A-HDM, to collaboratively exploit low-dimensional and high-dimensional diffusion models for high quality detailed motion synthesis. Specifically, the basic diffusion model in low-dimensional latent
space provides the intermediate denoising result that to be
consistent with the textual description, while the advanced
diffusion model in high-dimensional latent space focuses on
the following detail-enhancing denoising process. Besides, we
introduce a multi-denoiser framework for the advanced diffusion model to ease the learning of high-dimensional model and
fully explore the generative potential of the diffusion model.
Quantitative and qualitative experiment results on two text-tomotion benchmarks (HumanML3D and KIT-ML) demonstrate
that B2A-HDM can outperform existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of fidelity, modality consistency, and diversity.

In spite of the powerful generative ability, training a diffusion model for text-to-motion synthesis remains challenging,
which is mainly attributed to the complexity of the data distribution and the insufficiency of the text-annotated training
data. Without adequate data, it is difficult for the neural network to learn the denoising process that converts the Gaussian
distribution into the complex motion distribution. To address
this problem, MLD (Chen et al. 2023) applies VAE to project
the raw motion from the initial 3D pose space into the latent
code in the low-dimensional latent space, and then conducts
diffusion process on the latent space. Although simplifying
the target distribution can ease the learning of the denoising
process, the low-dimensional latent code is less expressive,
which hinders the diffusion model from generating detailed
motion. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2(a), reducing the dimension of the latent space in VAE results in reconstructed
motions with fewer captured details. Additionally, Fig. 2(b)
reveals that decreasing the dimension of the latent space leads
to an increase in the FID scores of the reconstructed motions,
indicating a degradation in their quality. However, simply
increasing the dimension of the latent space makes the target
distribution complex again, leading to more difficulties in
network learning, which will further result in a significant
drop in performance in terms of cross-modal consistency,
as demonstrated in Fig. 2(c). Nevertheless, the comparisons
in Fig. 2(c) provide an intuitive insight that while the lowdimensional diffusion model is ineffective for detail generation, it significantly benefits the modality transformation.
This insight further inspires us to integrate the complementary advantages of low-dimensional and high-dimensional
diffusion models to enhance cross-modal consistency and
facilitate detail-rich motion generation.

Introduction
Text-to-motion synthesis, which aims to generate human motion that conforms to the textual descriptions (with result examples of our proposed model shown in Figure 1), has made
significant progress in recent years. It has the potential to
revolutionize the traditional process of acquiring human motion, which typically requires expert knowledge from artists
or expensive motion capture equipment.
However, inferring human motion from textual description
is a no-trivial task due to the essential discrepancy between
the two data modalities. To address this challenge, some
existing works (Ahuja and Morency 2019; Ghosh et al. 2021;
Tevet et al. 2022; Petrovich, Black, and Varol 2022) resort to
the auto-encoder/VAE for motion synthesis and strive to align
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6252

