The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Harnessing Manycore Processors with Distributed Memory for Accelerated
Training of Sparse and Recurrent Models
Jan Finkbeiner1, 2 , Thomas Gmeinder3 , Mark Pupilli3 , Alexander Titterton3 , Emre Neftci1, 2
1

Research Center Juelich
RWTH Aachen University
3
Graphcore
j.finkbeiner@fz-juelich.de, thomasg@graphcore.ai, markp@graphcore.ai, alexandert@graphcore.ai, e.neftci@fz-juelich.de
2

promising alternative to achieve the efficiency of the human brain (Mead 1990; Chicca, Stefanini, and Indiveri 2013;
Benjamin et al. 2014; Friedmann et al. 2017; Davies et al.
2018; Frenkel and Indiveri 2022). Distributed local memory, where processing and memory are closely intertwined
is a key characteristic of brains, neuromorphic hardware and
physical computing in general. In the brain, synapses both
store information and perform computation, resulting in no
additional necessary data transfer as prevalent in today’s
von Neumann architectures. The other two core characteristics of the brain are recurrence and sparsity (Friston 2008).
Recurrence enables the reuse of locally stored information
and weights, thereby minimizing data transfer. Data transfer across processors is the most costly operation in modern technology (Horowitz 2014). Reducing transfer via sparsity can lead to significant energy efficiency and throughput
gains. Together, networks mimicking these brain-like characteristics can pave the way towards an energy-efficient and
sustainable future for large-scale model deployment. In this
article, we demonstrate an architecture emphasizing these
characteristics, namely local distributed memory and a novel
algorithm for training networks featuring sparsity and recurrence as in the brain that vastly outperforms their equivalent implementations in GPUs in throughput. GPUs (and
TPUs (Jouppi et al. 2017)), the prevalent hardware for deep
learning, are massively parallel single instruction multiple
data (SIMD) architectures, optimized for processing large
chunks of data and executing identical operations in parallel. However, networks featuring recurrence and sparsity and
thereby sequential computations, cannot fully utilize the parallel processing power of GPUs. Using a multiple instruction
mutliple data (MIMD) manycore processor with distributed
in-processor memory, we demonstrate speed-ups reaching
20× on training tasks for especially challenging network architectures featuring both recurrence and dynamic sparsity,
namely spiking neural networks (SNNs).

Abstract
Current AI training infrastructure is dominated by single instruction multiple data (SIMD) and systolic array architectures, such as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) and Tensor
Processing Units (TPUs), that excel at accelerating parallel
workloads and dense vector matrix multiplications. Potentially more efficient neural network models utilizing sparsity
and recurrence cannot leverage the full power of SIMD processor and are thus at a severe disadvantage compared to today’s prominent parallel architectures like Transformers and
CNNs, thereby hindering the path towards more sustainable
AI. To overcome this limitation, we explore sparse and recurrent model training on a massively parallel multiple instruction multiple data (MIMD) architecture with distributed local
memory. We implement a training routine based on backpropagation through time (BPTT) for the brain-inspired class of
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) that feature binary sparse
activations. We observe a massive advantage in using sparse
activation tensors with a MIMD processor, the Intelligence
Processing Unit (IPU) compared to GPUs. On training workloads, our results demonstrate 5-10× throughput gains compared to A100 GPUs and up to 38× gains for higher levels of
activation sparsity, without a significant slowdown in training
convergence or reduction in final model performance. Furthermore, our results show highly promising trends for both
single and multi IPU configurations as we scale up to larger
model sizes. Our work paves the way towards more efficient,
non-standard models via AI training hardware beyond GPUs,
and competitive large scale SNN models.

Introduction
The hardware lottery hypothesis (Hooker 2021) contends
that the current dominance of Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) in the AI hardware market constrains the innovation
of model architectures. As a result, contemporary research
in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML)
is predominantly driven by parallel, dense architectures that
fully leverage the processing power of GPUs. However, this
situation restricts the exploration of alternative approaches
with great potential, such as neuromorphic computing, due
to the inherent inefficiency of such architectures on GPUs.
In response to the limitations of traditional computing paradigms, neuromorphic computing has emerged as a

SNNs are a class of neuromorphic algorithms that emulate key computational principles of biological neurons. Unlike traditional Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), which
output continuous-valued activations and redundant computations, SNNs transmit information through discrete spike
events, potentially resulting in significant energy savings
(Zenke et al. 2021). Their sensor counterpart, i.e. eventbased cameras, departs from fixed-time interval sampling,

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11996

