The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Diverse Person: Customize Your Own Dataset for Text-Based Person Search
Zifan Song1 , Guosheng Hu2 , Cairong Zhao1 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
2
Oosto, Belfast, U.K., BT1 2BE
{sugger, zhaocairong}@tongji.edu.cn, huguosheng100@gmail.com

Text Query

Abstract

She has a long, black
ponytail and is wearing
a light blue shirt, faded
denim shorts, white
tennis
shoes
and
carrying a navy pack
with a white print.

Text-based person search is a challenging task aimed at locating specific target pedestrians through text descriptions. Recent advancements have been made in this field, but there remains a deficiency in datasets tailored for text-based person
search. The creation of new, real-world datasets is hindered
by concerns such as the risk of pedestrian privacy leakage
and the substantial costs of annotation. In this paper, we introduce a framework, named Diverse Person (DP), to achieve
efficient and high-quality text-based person search data generation without involving privacy concerns. Specifically, we
propose to leverage available images of clothing and accessories as reference attribute images to edit the original dataset
images through diffusion models. Additionally, we employ a
Large Language Model (LLM) to produce annotations that
are both high in quality and stylistically consistent with those
found in real-world datasets. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that the baseline models trained with our DP can
achieve new state-of-the-art results on three public datasets,
with performance improvements up to 4.82%, 2.15%, and
2.28% on CUHK-PEDES, ICFG-PEDES, and RSTPReid in
terms of Rank-1 accuracy, respectively.

Gallery Images

Retrieve

(a) Text-based Person Search
There is a female with
yellow hair, who
wears grey upperbody clothes, green
lower-body clothes,
dark shoes in a sunny
day, and with front
viewpoint this person
also wears no boots.

The girl has very
long black hair, is
wearing a sleeveless
blue
and
white
horizontal
striped
shirt, black skirt, and
work boots, and is
carrying a blue
canvas purse.

Virtual Data

Real-world Data

Target Person

The girl features blue hair
that cascades down, wears
a sleeveless blue and white
horizontal striped shirt and
a denim dress adorned
with white stripes, carries
a stylish black leather bag,
steps along in comfortable
sandals.

Diverse Person

(b) Comparison of Different Data Samples

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the text-based person search task.
The yellow and green bounding boxes denote the gallery
persons and the pedestrian correctly matched, respectively.
(b) Comparisons among the virtual data (left), real-world
data (middle), and the proposed Diverse Person (right). We
highlight the modified attributes in the text description.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to retrieve specific
pedestrians from a gallery set collected across cameras. Over
the past decade, Re-ID has achieved notable advancements
and expanded into various specialized subtasks. Based on
the type of query data, Re-ID can be roughly divided into
four subtasks: traditional Re-ID (Yang et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2022) based on cropped images, video Re-ID (Yan et al.
2018; Hou et al. 2021) based on video data, person search
(Xu et al. 2014; Song et al. 2023) based on scene images,
and text-based person search (Li et al. 2017; Shu et al. 2022;
Jiang and Ye 2023) based on textual descriptions. Among
these, text-based person search, distinguished by its use of
straightforward and widely accessible text descriptions to
locate target subjects, has seen a surge in interest due to its
practical applications.
Involving information processing from two heterogeneous modalities, text-based person search encounters sev-

eral challenges, including the potential for query text misinterpretation and diminished accuracy due to limited information. To track these challenges and enhance the quality
of search results, cross-modal alignment along with extensive text-image datasets, is necessary. By creating loss functions or network models, early techniques (Li et al. 2017;
Zhang and Lu 2018; Chen et al. 2021) align images and
texts within a unified embedding space. However, these approaches ignore local fine-grained alignment, focusing instead on global image-text correlations. As a result, recent
researches (Wang et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2021) shift towards modeling the nuanced, local correspondences between modalities. This typically involves segmenting images and texts into local components and then establishing correspondence between them. The effectiveness of
these methods is contingent upon the quality of the local
components. In order to further supplement clues available
for matching, some previous methods adopt external models to extract useful information (Niu et al. 2020; Zhu et al.
2021; Wu et al. 2021). Specially, Niu et al. (2020) introduce

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4943

