The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

PORTAL: Automatic Curricula Generation
for Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Jizhou Wu1 , Jianye Hao1* , Tianpei Yang2 * , Xiaotian Hao1 ,
Yan Zheng1 , Weixun Wang3 , Matthew E. Taylor2
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
University of Alberta and Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
3
Netease Fuxi AI Lab
{research5,jianye.hao,tpyang,xiaotianhao,yanzheng,wxwang}@tju.edu.cn
matthew.e.taylor@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract

that match the current capabilities of the agents, we can obtain more learning progress than direct learning on the (final)
target task. Based on this idea, we study how to generate the
task sequence to achieve maximum learning progress toward
the final task in this paper.
Current MARL CL works have many limitations. Some
works (Wang et al. 2020; Long et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021) address the challenges in large-scale MASs by starting from learning scenarios with few agents and progressively increasing the number of agents to learn the final task.
These approaches require the assumption that the learning
difficulty of a task increases as the number of agents increases; however, this assumption may be incorrect in complex domains. Moreover, the above works mainly focus on
how to maximize the learner’s learning speed on the curricula, which implicitly assumes that all tasks selected will contribute to the learning of the final task, which may be untrue
in practice. Some works consider the learning relevance of a
task to the final task, but they also have limitations. The approach in (Fang et al. 2021) can only work with the assumption that the tasks have the same state and action space, and
thus could not be applied in complex MASs. The approaches
in (da Silva and Costa 2018; Zhao and Pajarinen 2022) need
to work with task contexts, like object type and number, goal
position, etc. In this setting, searching for a suitable task as
curriculum is relatively easy, since they measure the similarity of tasks by contextual variables which relies on human
prior knowledge. The above reasons limit the ability of these
approaches to generalize to complex domains. Please refer
to the appendix for more information on related work.1
In this paper, we propose a novel ACL framework PrOgRessive mulTiagent Automatic curricuLum
(PORTAL) to facilitate MARL algorithms. We study 1) how
to measure the learning progress of learners for better curriculum selection and 2) how to design efficient transfer
mechanisms for better curriculum transfer, two critical issues in multiagent ACL. The main contributions are:

Despite many breakthroughs in recent years, it is still hard for
MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) algorithms to
directly solve complex tasks in MultiAgent Systems (MASs)
from scratch. In this work, we study how to use Automatic
Curriculum Learning (ACL) to reduce the number of environmental interactions required to learn a good policy. In order to solve a difficult task, ACL methods automatically select a sequence of tasks (i.e., curricula). The idea is to obtain
maximum learning progress towards the final task by continuously learning on tasks that match the current capabilities
of the learners. The key question is how to measure the learning progress of the learner for better curriculum selection. We
propose a novel ACL framework, PrOgRessive mulTiagent
Automatic curricuLum (PORTAL), for MASs. PORTAL selects curricula according to two criteria: 1) How difficult is a
task, relative to the learners’ current abilities? 2) How similar
is a task, relative to the final task? By learning a shared feature space between tasks, PORTAL can characterize different
tasks based on the distribution of features and select those that
are similar to the final task. Also, the shared feature space can
effectively facilitate policy transfer between curricula. Experimental results show that PORTAL can train agents to master
extremely hard cooperative tasks, which can not be achieved
with previous state-of-the-art MARL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Although reinforcement learning (RL) agents can learn sophisticated behaviors by continuously interacting with the
environment, they suffer from the notorious sample inefficiency problem (Taylor and Stone 2009; Yang et al. 2020).
In MultiAgent Systems (MASs), this problem is more severe since the agents need to learn under partially observable and non-stationary environments, which makes it difficult for agents to achieve cooperation and even leads to algorithmic failures (Hao et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2021; Claus
and Boutilier 1998; Yang et al. 2023). One potential way
to address difficult MARL problems is to use curriculum
learning (CL) (Narvekar et al. 2020) to generate a sequence
of tasks from easy to hard to improve the agents’ learning
process. The key idea is that by continuously learning tasks

1. We propose a novel MARL curriculum selection criterion that considers both the difficulty of tasks for learners
and the relevance of tasks to the final task.

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Code
and
appendix:
https://github.com/TJU-DRLLAB/transfer-and-multi-task-reinforcement-learning

15934

