The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Say Anything with Any Style
Shuai Tan1 , Bin Ji1 , Yu Ding2 , Ye Pan1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Virtual Human Group, Netease Fuxi AI Lab
{tanshuai0219, bin.ji, whitneypanye}@sjtu.edu.cn, dingyu01@corp.netease.com
2

Generating stylized talking head with diverse head motions is
crucial for achieving natural-looking videos but still remains
challenging. Previous works either adopt a regressive method
to capture the speaking style, resulting in a coarse style that is
averaged across all training data, or employ a universal network to synthesize videos with different styles which causes
suboptimal performance. To address these, we propose a
novel dynamic-weight method, namely Say Anything with
Any Style (SAAS), which queries the discrete style representation via a generative model with a learned style codebook. Specifically, we develop a multi-task VQ-VAE that incorporates three closely related tasks to learn a style codebook as a prior for style extraction. This discrete prior, along
with the generative model, enhances the precision and robustness when extracting the speaking styles of the given style
clips. By utilizing the extracted style, a residual architecture
comprising a canonical branch and style-specific branch is
employed to predict the mouth shapes conditioned on any
driving audio while transferring the speaking style from the
source to any desired one. To adapt to different speaking
styles, we steer clear of employing a universal network by exploring an elaborate HyperStyle to produce the style-specific
weights offset for the style branch. Furthermore, we construct
a pose generator and a pose codebook to store the quantized
pose representation, allowing us to sample diverse head motions aligned with the audio and the extracted style. Experiments demonstrate that our approach surpasses state-of-theart methods in terms of both lip-synchronization and stylized
expression. Besides, we extend our SAAS to video-driven
style editing field and achieve satisfactory performance.

Style Clip 1

Audio-Driven

Abstract

0

Stylized Outputs

Style Clip 2

Video-Driven

Switch

Figure 1: Example animations generated by our SAAS.
Given a source image and a style reference clip, SAAS generates stylized talking faces driven by audio. The lip motions
are synchronized with the audio, while the speaking styles
are controlled by the style clips. We also support videodriven style editing by inputting a source video.
Generally speaking, individuals exhibit diverse speaking styles accompanied by corresponding variations in head
poses when uttering the same sentence. As depicted in Figure 1, Leo speaks with happy and sad styles, where the
happier style often involves more lively head movements,
whereas the sadder style tends to display a contrasting pattern. Previous methods (Ji et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023) commonly treat the style extraction as a regression task, inadvertently encouraging averaged representations and limiting the
diversity of stylized expressions. Also, these methods use a
static network to stylize motion for different styles which
leads to suboptimal results. Moreover, they rarely consider
the stylized head poses and instead rely on users to provide
a pose reference.
In this paper, we introduce a novel model called Say
Anything with Any Style (SAAS). Our objective is to generate talking face videos with stylized expressions and head
poses that resemble the provided style clip, while ensuring
synchronization of lip motions with the audio. Additionally,
we extend our method to video-driven style editing field,
enabling the transfer of style from input videos to match a
specified style clip. We leverage the 3DMM (3D Morphable
Models) (Blanz and Vetter 1999) coefficients as the intermediate representation. Unlike previous regressive approach (Ji
et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023), we formulate style extraction as
a query task using a learned style codebook, which expands

Introduction
Talking face generation has gained significant popularity
due to its wide range of applications in virtual reality, film
production, and games (Pataranutaporn et al. 2021). While
significant efforts have been dedicated to generating synchronized lip motions (Vougioukas, Petridis, and Pantic
2020; Tian, Yuan, and Liu 2019) and rhythmic head movements (Chen et al. 2020a; Zhang et al. 2021a), the stylized
expression, which plays a crucial role in conveying communicative information (Ekman and Rosenberg 2005), is often
overlooked in most existing approaches.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5088

