The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Theoretical Aspects of Generating Instances with Unique Solutions:
Pre-assignment Models for Unique Vertex Cover
Takashi Horiyama1 , Yasuaki Kobayashi1 , Hirotaka Ono2 , Kazuhisa Seto1 , Ryu Suzuki3
1

Faculty of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University, Japan
2
Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Japan
3
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University, Japan
horiyama@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, koba@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, ono@nagoya-u.jp, seto@ist.hokudai.ac.jp,
suzuki-r1991@eis.hokudai.ac.jp
Abstract

therefore suitable as a benchmark. On the other hand, it is
not easy to generate sufficient instances because each one
is hand-made, and there are confidentiality issues. Random
generation is often used to compensate for this problem and
has also been studied for a long time, especially how to generate good instances from several points of view, such “difficulty” control and variety.
In this paper, we consider generating problem instances
with unique solutions. It is pointed out that the “unique
solution” is related to the nature of intractability in SAT.
Indeed, PPSZ, currently the fastest SAT algorithm in theory (Scheder 2022), is based on the unique k-SAT solver.
Furthermore, a type of problem that determines whether or
not it has a unique solution (e.g., U NIQUE SAT) belongs to
a class above NP and coNP (Blass and Gurevich 1982), but
the status of that class is still not well understood, where
an exception is TSP; U NIQUE TSP is known to be ∆p2 complete (Papadimitriou 1984). Thus, it is desirable to have
a sufficient number of instances with unique solutions in
many cases, such as when problem instances with unique
solutions are used as benchmarks or when we evaluate the
performance of a solver for the uniqueness check version
of combinatorial optimization problems. In other words, instances with unique solutions have an important role in experimental studies of computational complexity theory.
In this paper, we focus on V ERTEX C OVER problem
as a representative of combinatorial optimization problems
(also referred Drosophila in the field of parameterized algorithms (Downey and Fellows 2013)), propose a “preassignment” model as an instance generation model for this
problem, and consider the computational complexity of instance generation based on this model. One of the crucial
points in generating problem instances with unique solutions
is that it is difficult for unweighted combinatorial optimization problems to apply approaches used in conventional generation methods. A simple and conventional way of generating instances is a random generation, but the probability that
a randomly generated problem instance has a unique solution is low. Furthermore, although some combinatorial problems have randomized algorithms modifying an instance
into an instance with a unique solution, they strongly depend
on the structure of the problems, and it is non-trivial to apply
them to other problems, including V ERTEX C OVER (Valiant
and Vazirani 1986; Mulmuley, Vazirani, and Vazirani 1987).

The uniqueness of an optimal solution to a combinatorial optimization problem attracts many fields of researchers’ attention because it has a wide range of applications, it is related
to important classes in computational complexity, and an instance with only one solution is often critical for algorithm
designs in theory. However, as the authors know, there is no
major benchmark set consisting of only instances with unique
solutions, and no algorithm generating instances with unique
solutions is known; a systematic approach to getting a problem instance guaranteed having a unique solution would be
helpful. A possible approach is as follows: Given a problem
instance, we specify a small part of a solution in advance so
that only one optimal solution meets the specification. This
paper formulates such a “pre-assignment” approach for the
vertex cover problem as a typical combinatorial optimization
problem and discusses its computational complexity. First,
we show that the problem is ΣP
2 -complete in general, while
the problem becomes NP-complete when an input graph is
bipartite. We then present an O(2.1996n )-time algorithm for
general graphs and an O(1.9181n )-time algorithm for bipartite graphs, where n is the number of vertices. The latter is
based on an FPT algorithm with O∗ (3.6791τ ) time for vertex cover number τ . Furthermore, we show that the problem
for trees can be solved in O(1.4143n ) time.

Introduction
Preparing a good benchmark set is indispensable for evaluating the actual performance of problem solvers, such as
SAT solvers, combinatorial optimization solvers, and learning algorithms. This is the reason that instance generation is
a classical topic in the fields of AI and OR, including optimization and learning. Indeed, there are well-known benchmark sets, such as the TSPLIB benchmark set for the traveling salesperson problem (Reinelt 1991), the UCI Machine
Learning Repository dataset for machine learning (Asuncion
and Newman 2007), SATLIB for SAT (Hoos and Stützle
2000), and other benchmark sets for various graph optimization problems in the DIMACS benchmarks (DIMACS
2022). In these benchmarks, instances are generated from
actual data or artificially generated. Instances generated
from actual data are closely related to the application, so
it is a very instance that should be solved in practice and is
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20726

