The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Multi-Prompts Learning with Cross-Modal Alignment for Attribute-Based Person
Re-identification
Yajing Zhai1,2 * , Yawen Zeng1 * , Zhiyong Huang3 , Zheng Qin1† , Xin Jin2† , Da Cao1
1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
National University of Singapore, NUS Research Institute in Chongqing
{yajingzhai9,yawenzeng11}@gmail.com, huangzy@comp.nus.edu.sg,
zqin@hnu.edu.cn, jinxin@eitech.edu.cn, caoda0721@gmail.com
Attribute Prompt

Abstract

[P]yellow, shirt, black, backpack,
dark, shorts, …

The fine-grained attribute descriptions can significantly supplement the valuable semantic information for person image,
which is vital to the success of person re-identification (ReID)
task. However, current ReID algorithms typically failed to effectively leverage the rich contextual information available,
primarily due to their reliance on simplistic and coarse utilization of image attributes. Recent advances in artificial intelligence generated content have made it possible to automatically generate plentiful fine-grained attribute descriptions and make full use of them. Thereby, this paper explores
the potential of using the generated multiple person attributes
as prompts in ReID tasks with off-the-shelf (large) models
for more accurate retrieval results. To this end, we present
a new framework called Multi-Prompts ReID (MP-ReID),
based on prompt learning and language models, to fully dip
fine attributes to assist ReID task. Specifically, MP-ReID
first learns to hallucinate diverse, informative, and promptable sentences for describing the query images. This procedure includes (i) explicit prompts of which attributes a person
has and furthermore (ii) implicit learnable prompts for adjusting/conditioning the criteria used towards this person identity
matching. Explicit prompts are obtained by ensembling generation models, such as ChatGPT and VQA models. Moreover, an alignment module is designed to fuse multi-prompts
(i.e., explicit and implicit ones) progressively and mitigate
the cross-modal gap. Extensive experiments on the existing
attribute-involved ReID datasets, namely, Market1501 and
DukeMTMC-reID, demonstrate the effectiveness and rationality of the proposed MP-ReID solution.

Retrieval

(a) Retrieval results with limited coarse-grained attributes
Learnable Prompt
[P]A photo of a [X] [X] [X] [X] person.

Retrieval

(b) Retrieval results with only implicit attribute prompts
ChatGPT Prompt
[P0]The man with a black backpack is
wearing a short yellow top and dark
shorts.
VQA Prompt

Retrieval

[P1]The man is wearing glasses.
[P2]The man has no beard.
[P3]The man is wearing plaid clothes.
[PN]...

(c) Retrieval results with multiple fine-grained attribute prompts

Figure 1: Comparison of various usages of attributes for person ReID, where red boxes represent negative images, green
boxes indicate positive results and key attribute words have
been marked in red. We can see that using multiple fine human attributes as prompts in ReID brought advancements.

these variations and are often exploited as efficient supplements with local descriptions that aid in the learning of more
discriminative feature representations (Jia et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022a). In particular, the common attributes include
clothing color, shoes, hairstyle, gender, age, and other specific characteristics. They serve as additional information
that complements and aligns images, reducing the impact
of the above factors, thereby improving the overall performance of ReID (Yu et al. 2022).
Recently, some researchers (Jia, Chen, and Huang 2021;
Niu et al. 2022; Specker, Cormier, and Beyerer 2023; Zheng
et al. 2022) begin to investigate the importance of attributes
w.r.t ReID task, which demonstrate that attributes are in-

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is a challenging task due to
the dramatic visual appearance changes from pose, viewpoints, illumination, occlusion, low resolution, background
clutter, etc. (Jin et al. 2020a; Ye et al. 2021; Zhang, Zhang,
and Liu 2021). Fine-grained person attributes are robust to
* These authors contributed equally. This work was done when
Yajing Zhai was an intern at Eastern Institute of Technology,
Ningbo, China.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6979

