The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

COMMA: Co-articulated Multi-Modal Learning
Lianyu Hu1 , Liqing Gao1 , Zekang Liu1 , Chi-Man Pun2 , Wei Feng1 *
1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, China
{hly2021,lqgao,lzk100953}@tju.edu.cn,cmpun@umac.mo,wfeng@ieee.org

Abstract

tasks and could reason about open-vocabulary visual concepts (Gao et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2021).
During inference, a set of hand-crafted prompts such as ’a
photo of [category]’ is used as a query for the text encoder.
The output text embeddings are matched with the visual embeddings generated by the image encoder to predict the output class.
Despite the impressive generalizability of CLIP over
novel scenarios, its massive model scale and requirements
of training data make it infeasible to fine-tune the full model
in the downstream tasks. Fine-tuning the whole model also
easily forgets the beneficial knowledge acquired in the training stage and overfits the downstream data. To handle the
above limitations, a series of works (Radford et al. 2021;
Jin et al. 2021) are dedicated to designing better handcrafted prompts to fit downstream tasks. However, handcrafted prompts require careful selections with intensive
labors, which may also be suboptimal in depicting the characteristics of novel scenarios. Recently, many methods (Shu
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022a,b) propose to treat the prompts
as textual embeddings and update them in the fine-tuning
process to better coordinate with the VLMs. In this procedure, only the learnable prompts are updated and the original parameters of VLMs are fixed, which greatly reduces the
requirements of computations.
We argue that these approaches still own two major drawbacks. First, the prompts of the vision and language branches
in these methods are usually separated or uni-directionally
correlated (the vision branch is uni-directionally influenced
by the text branch only). As the goal of VLMs is to better match the embeddings of vision and language branches,
disjointed vision and language prompts may hinder modelling the correlation of output embeddings in two branches.
Second, it has been observed that most previous methods
usually achieve superior performance on seen classes but
demonstrate worse generalizability on unseen classes compared to CLIP. This is because the essential generic knowledge acquired in the pretraining process is partly forgotten
in the fine-tuning procedure.
To handle the above limitations, we propose CoArticulated Multi-Modal Learning (COMMA) in this paper. Especially, to enhance the correlations of prompts in
both branches, we generate prompts of the next layer based
on preceding prompts in both branches. In this case, the

Pretrained large-scale vision-language models such as CLIP
have demonstrated excellent generalizability over a series of
downstream tasks. However, they are sensitive to the variation of input text prompts and need a selection of prompt
templates to achieve satisfactory performance. Recently, various methods have been proposed to dynamically learn the
prompts as the textual inputs to avoid the requirements of
laboring hand-crafted prompt engineering in the fine-tuning
process. We notice that these methods are suboptimal in
two aspects. First, the prompts of the vision and language
branches in these methods are usually separated or unidirectionally correlated. Thus, the prompts of both branches
are not fully correlated and may not provide enough guidance to align the representations of both branches. Second,
it’s observed that most previous methods usually achieve better performance on seen classes but cause performance degeneration on unseen classes compared to CLIP. This is because the essential generic knowledge learned in the pretraining stage is partly forgotten in the fine-tuning process. In
this paper, we propose Co-Articulated Multi-Modal Learning (COMMA) to handle the above limitations. Especially,
our method considers prompts from both branches to generate
the prompts to enhance the representation alignment of both
branches. Besides, to alleviate forgetting about the essential
knowledge, we minimize the feature discrepancy between the
learned prompts and the embeddings of hand-crafted prompts
in the pre-trained CLIP in the late transformer layers. We
evaluate our method across three representative tasks of generalization to novel classes, new target datasets and unseen
domain shifts. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method by exhibiting a favorable performance
boost upon all tasks with high efficiency. Code is available at
https://github.com/hulianyuyy/COMMA

Introduction
The increase of web data with aligned large-scale textimage pairs has greatly facilitated the development of foundation vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021). Thanks to the supervision provided by
the natural language, these models have demonstrated excellent generalization performance over a series of downstream
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2238

