The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DTL: Disentangled Transfer Learning for Visual Recognition
Minghao Fu, Ke Zhu, Jianxin Wu*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
fumh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhuk@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@gmail.com

Abstract
Accuracy (%)

When pre-trained models become rapidly larger, the cost
of fine-tuning on downstream tasks steadily increases, too.
To economically fine-tune these models, parameter-efficient
transfer learning (PETL) is proposed, which only tunes a
tiny subset of trainable parameters to efficiently learn quality representations. However, current PETL methods are facing the dilemma that during training the GPU memory footprint is not effectively reduced as trainable parameters. PETL
will likely fail, too, if the full fine-tuning encounters the outof-GPU-memory issue. This phenomenon happens because
trainable parameters from these methods are generally entangled with the backbone, such that a lot of intermediate states
have to be stored in GPU memory for gradient propagation.
To alleviate this problem, we introduce Disentangled Transfer Learning (DTL), which disentangles the trainable parameters from the backbone using a lightweight Compact Side
Network (CSN). By progressively extracting task-specific information with a few low-rank linear mappings and appropriately adding the information back to the backbone, CSN effectively realizes knowledge transfer in various downstream
tasks. We conducted extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of our method. The proposed method not only reduces a large amount of GPU memory usage and trainable
parameters, but also outperforms existing PETL methods by
a significant margin in accuracy, achieving new state-of-theart on several standard benchmarks.

78
76
74
72
70
68
66

78
76
74
72
70
68
66

−1
0
1
2
2
3
4
5
10 10 10 10
# trainable params (M) GPU memory (GB)

Full
BitFit
VPT
LST
AdaptFormer
LoRA
NOAH
FacT
SSF
DTL
DTL+

Figure 1: Top-1 accuracy on VTAB-1K (Zhai et al. 2019) vs.
different numbers of trainable parameters and GPU memory
footprint. Our DTL achieves the highest accuracy with the
least trainable parameters and GPU memory usage.

Nevertheless, a huge decrease on trainable parameters
does not necessarily mean an equivalent reduction in GPU
memory usage: the percentage of saved GPU memory is still
small (around 25%, cf. Fig. 1). Even the PETL pipeline may
still fail if a large model cannot be fine-tuned due to GPU
memory shortage. This drawback is critical and fundamental. Hence, it is critical to devise a new method that effectively reduces GPU memory usage and fully explores the
utility of large-scale pre-trained models.
One common characteristic of PETL methods (Hu et al.
2022; Houlsby et al. 2019; Jia et al. 2022) is that they closely
entangle the small trainable modules with the huge frozen
backbone. As indicated by Sung, Cho, and Bansal (2022),
for a specific network parameter to be correctly updated, the
model has to cache related intermediate gradients from activation values. This entangled design makes the cache a considerable part of GPU memory footprint, and thus hinders
large pre-trained models from being applied in various tasks.
To address this fundamental drawback, we propose Disentangled Transfer Learning (DTL), which disentangles the
weights update from the backbone network by proposing a
lightweight Compact Side Network (CSN). DTL not only
greatly reduces GPU memory footage, but also achieves
high accuracy in knowledge transfer (cf. Fig. 1).
As shown in Fig. 2, CSN composes of several low-rank
linear mapping matrices to extract task-specific information,
which is completely disentangled from the backbone. By in-

Introduction
The pipeline of large-scale pre-training plus fine-tuning has
been popularized in various domains (Devlin et al. 2018;
Lewis et al. 2019; He et al. 2022; Caron et al. 2021). But
traditional fine-tuning can be intractable due to GPU memory or time budget (He et al. 2022), since parameters of the
entire large model have to be updated. Recently, parameterefficient transfer learning (PETL) is proposed to update only
a tiny subset of trainable parameters (Houlsby et al. 2019).
Because of its efficacy and the ability to prevent over-fitting,
numerous variants (Jia et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2022; Zhang,
Zhou, and Liu 2022; Lian et al. 2022; Jie and Deng 2023) of
PETL successively emerged.
* J. Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12082

