The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SQLdepth: Generalizable Self-Supervised Fine-Structured Monocular Depth
Estimation
Youhong Wang1, 2 , Yunji Liang1 * , Hao Xu2 , Shaohui Jiao2 , Hongkai Yu3
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Bytedance Inc
3
Cleveland State University

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised monocular depth estimation has
gained popularity with numerous applications in autonomous
driving and robotics. However, existing solutions primarily
seek to estimate depth from immediate visual features, and
struggle to recover fine-grained scene details. In this paper, we introduce SQLdepth, a novel approach that can effectively learn fine-grained scene structure priors from egomotion. In SQLdepth, we propose a novel Self Query Layer
(SQL) to build a self-cost volume and infer depth from it,
rather than inferring depth from feature maps. We show that,
the self-cost volume is an effective inductive bias for geometry learning, which implicitly models the single-frame
scene geometry, with each slice of it indicating a relative distance map between points and objects in a latent space. Experimental results on KITTI and Cityscapes show that our
method attains remarkable state-of-the-art performance, and
showcases computational efficiency, reduced training complexity, and the ability to recover fine-grained scene details. Moreover, the self-matching-oriented relative distance
querying in SQL improves the robustness and zero-shot
generalization capability of SQLdepth. Code is available at
https://github.com/hisfog/SfMNeXt-Impl.

1

RGB

Monodepth2

Ours

EPCDepth

RGB

Monodepth2

Ours

EPCDepth

RGB

Monodepth2

Ours

EPCDepth

Figure 1: Visualized comparison on images from KITTI
dataset (Geiger et al. 2013). Existing self-supervised solutions such as Monodepth2 (Godard et al. 2019) and
EPCDepth (Peng et al. 2021) show degraded performance
under the conditions of illumination change, or occlusion,
and fail to estimate the depth of thin or small objects.

Introduction

As one of the fundamental research topics in computer vision, monocular depth estimation (MDE) aims to predict the
corresponding depth of each pixel within a single image,
and is widely used in numerous applications, such as autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction, augmented reality and
robotics. For the supervised solutions, depth sensors, such as
LiDAR and Kinect camera are used to collect the depth measurements as ground truth. However, it is time-consuming
and expensive to collect large-scale depth measurements
from physical world. In addition, supervised depth estimation cannot be well-optimized under the sparse supervision
and has limited generalization to unseen scenarios.
Lately, self-supervised solutions have gained popularity.
Existing efforts have concentrated on training with selfdistillation (Peng et al. 2021), leveraging depth hints (Watson et al. 2019), and inferring with multi-frames (Watson
et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2022). However, they often fail to re-

cover fine-grained scene details, as shown in Figure 1. How
to learn the fine-grained scene structure priors effectively
and efficiently in self-supervised setting is still challenging.
We observe that the depth of a pixel is strongly correlated with the depth of its adjacent pixels and related objects within the image. This suggests that a pixel’s depth
can be inferred from related contexts, which provide relative distance information. Therefore, in this paper, we aim
to explore whether relative distance information can serve
as an effective inductive bias, thereby improving the selfsupervised learning of monocular depth estimation.
To achieve this, we propose to build a novel self-cost volume using a Self Query Layer (SQL), with the aim of accurately modeling the underlying geometry of the monocular scene. Specifically, we first model points and objects

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5713

