The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Small Language Model Can Self-Correct
Haixia Han1 , Jiaqing Liang2 , Jie Shi3 , Qianyu He3 , Yanghua Xiao1,3 *
1

Shanghai Institute of AI for Education and School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
haixiahan03@gmail.com, {liangjiaqing, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn, {jshi22, qyhe21}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative Language Models (LMs) such as ChatGPT have
exhibited remarkable performance across various downstream tasks. Nevertheless, one of their most prominent drawbacks is generating inaccurate or false information with a
confident tone. Previous studies have devised sophisticated
pipelines and prompts to induce large LMs to exhibit the capability for self-correction. However, large LMs are explicitly
prompted to verify and modify their answers separately rather
than completing all steps spontaneously like humans. Moreover, these complex prompts are extremely challenging for
small LMs to follow. In this paper, we introduce the Intrinsic
Self-Correction (ISC) in generative language models, aiming to correct the initial output of LMs in a self-triggered
manner, even for those small LMs with 6 billion parameters. Specifically, we devise a pipeline for constructing selfcorrection data and propose Partial Answer Masking (PAM),
aiming to endow the model with the capability for intrinsic
self-correction through fine-tuning. We conduct experiments
using LMs with parameters sizes ranging from 6 billion to 13
billion in two tasks, including commonsense reasoning and
factual knowledge reasoning. Our experiments demonstrate
that the outputs generated using ISC outperform those generated without self-correction. We believe that the output quality of even small LMs can be further improved by empowering them with the ability to intrinsic self-correct.

Figure 1: Two self-correction methods are demonstrated in
language models in response to a query. The gray line on
the left illustrates the process of self-correction employing prompt engineering in large language models like ChatGPT. The red line shows the overall steps of our proposed
Intrinsic Self-Correction, where self-verification and selfmodification occur spontaneously.

Introduction
Generative Language Models (LMs) have gained considerable attention due to their remarkable capabilities (Guo et al.
2023; Suzgun et al. 2023). Despite the convincing and realistic nature of text generated by these LMs, a concern with
LMs lies in their tendency to produce fabricated facts and
generate false information (Lin, Hilton, and Evans 2022).
Moreover, these models deliver inaccurate information employing unequivocal expressions, which poses substantial
risks as it can lead to the spread of misleading and harmful content.
One of the contributing factors to the hallucination lies
in inadequate acquisition of knowledge (Manakul, Liusie,
and Gales 2023; Huang et al. 2023). For example, consider
the question Which animal is China’s nation treasure?, LMs

may provide a different animal name like tiger instead of
panda due to a lack of relevant knowledge. Considerable efforts have been made to alleviate such hallucination induced
by lacking of knowledge in LMs. One approach involves
supervised fine-tuning LMs with standard ground-truth answers to enhance their comprehension of relevant knowledge (Wei et al. 2022a; Ouyang et al. 2022). This method
has shown promising efficacy. However, it demands a significant amount of high-quality annotated data for training.
Additionally, other methods have relied on external verifier
or critic model to evaluate the accuracy of a statement (Yang
et al. 2022; Paul et al. 2023). Training a verifier necessitates
a large number of high-quality evaluation annotations and
further fine-tuning of the model, which restricts its broad
applicability to other tasks and domains.
Another reason for an LM to provide incorrect response
is intrinsically linked to the design architecture of genera-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18162

