The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Fair Policies for Multi-Stage Selection Problems from Observational
Data
Zhuangzhuang Jia1 , Grani A. Hanasusanto1 , Phebe Vayanos2 , Weijun Xie3
1

Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society, University of Southern California
3
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
zj12@illinois.edu, gah@illinois.edu, phebe.vayanos@usc.edu, wxie@gatech.edu
Abstract

for each résumé they send out (Bertrand and Mullainathan
2004). Also, in the Canadian labor market, there exists notable discrimination towards applicants with foreign experience or those with Indian, Pakistani, Chinese, and Greek
names compared with English names (Oreopoulos 2011).
In college admission, a recent study reveals that typical
Asian American applicants would see their average admit
rate rise by 19% if treated as white applicants (Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom 2022). Additionally, recent research finds that Black-owned businesses received loans that
were approximately 50% lower than observationally similar White-owned businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program during Covid-19 (Atkins, Cook, and Seamans
2022).
With the growing availability of data and the empirical
success of machine learning, data-driven decision-making
is increasingly being used in many selection problems (Li
et al. 2021; Ahmad et al. 2022; Marques-Silva and Ignatiev
2022). As a result, much recent research focuses on promoting fairness and mitigating discrimination toward candidates
from certain groups (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2017;
Green and Chen 2019; Aghaei, Azizi, and Vayanos 2019).
One prevalent approach to addressing fairness concerns during the training process is either by integrating fairness constraints into the training process (Zafar et al. 2017, 2019;
Wang, Nguyen, and Hanasusanto 2021; Jo et al. 2022), or
penalizing discrimination using the fairness-driven regularization terms (Kamishima et al. 2012; Berk et al. 2017; Ye
and Xie 2020).
Often, the models are trained and evaluated on historical
datasets containing fully observed outcomes and covariates.
However, this raises questions about the possible harm of
the deployed models as the training data may reflect implicit
biases by humans who may unconsciously be in favor of certain groups of people (Greenwald and Banaji 1995; Barocas
and Selbst 2016). For example, in the hiring setup, the available dataset only contains full covariates of people who got
hired, and the outcome measure is whether they are “qualified” or “not qualified”; on the other hand, we do not have
access to the outcomes of candidates who were not hired.
One may use a trained model based on the candidates with
full covariates and outcomes to select candidates. However,
when deployed to assess the qualification of future candidates, the model may exhibit significant unfairness, even if

We consider the problem of learning fair policies for multistage selection problems from observational data. This problem arises in several high-stakes domains such as company
hiring, loan approval, or bail decisions where outcomes (e.g.,
career success, loan repayment, recidivism) are only observed
for those selected. We propose a multi-stage framework that
can be augmented with various fairness constraints, such as
demographic parity or equal opportunity. This problem is
a highly intractable infinite chance-constrained program involving the unknown joint distribution of covariates and outcomes. Motivated by the potential impact of selection decisions on people’s lives and livelihoods, we propose to focus on interpretable linear selection rules. Leveraging tools
from causal inference and sample average approximation, we
obtain an asymptotically consistent solution to this selection
problem by solving a mixed binary conic optimization problem, which can be solved using standard off-the-shelf solvers.
We conduct extensive computational experiments on a variety of datasets adapted from the UCI repository on which we
show that our proposed approaches can achieve an 11.6% improvement in precision and a 38% reduction in the measure
of unfairness compared to the existing selection policy.

Introduction
Selection problems are very common decision-making problems in many high-stakes domains, such as company hiring,
college admission, and loan audit. Given a set of candidates,
a decision-maker aims to select a fixed fraction of them with
objectives such as hiring the most talented candidates, admitting the most qualified students, or selecting the applicants who are most likely to repay the loan. Often, selection
problems are under a multi-stage setup. In hiring, for example, candidates are initially chosen for interviews based on
their résumés and the final selection is subsequently made
from those who have been interviewed.
Substantial evidence points to the existence of discrimination in many selection problems that involve prejudiced
outcomes for individuals or groups based on sensitive attributes like gender, race, ethnicity, nationality, disability
status, or religion. For example, job applicants with AfricanAmerican names are found to receive far fewer callbacks
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21188

