The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Depth-Guided Robust and Fast Point Cloud Fusion NeRF for Sparse Input Views
Shuai Guo1 , Qiuwen Wang1 , Yijie Gao1 , Rong Xie1 , Li Song1,2*
1

Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{shuaiguo, wangqiuwen, gaoyijie, xierong, song li}@sjtu.edu.cn

…

Abstract
Novel-view synthesis with sparse input views is important for
real-world applications like AR/VR and autonomous driving. Recent methods have integrated depth information into
NeRFs for sparse input synthesis, leveraging depth prior for
geometric and spatial understanding. However, most existing
works tend to overlook inaccuracies within depth maps and
have low time efficiency. To address these issues, we propose
a depth-guided robust and fast point cloud fusion NeRF for
sparse inputs. We perceive radiance fields as an explicit voxel
grid of features. A point cloud is constructed for each input
view, characterized within the voxel grid using matrices and
vectors. We accumulate the point cloud of each input view
to construct the fused point cloud of the entire scene. Each
voxel determines its density and appearance by referring to
the point cloud of the entire scene. Through point cloud fusion and voxel grid fine-tuning, inaccuracies in depth values
are refined or substituted by those from other views. Moreover, our method can achieve faster reconstruction and greater
compactness through effective vector-matrix decomposition.
Experimental results underline the superior performance and
time efficiency of our approach compared to state-of-the-art
baselines.

…

Inaccurate

…

…
Sparse Input RGB Views

Sparse Input Depth Views

Accurate

Synthesis Result

Figure 1: Depth-guided sparse input NeRF should overcome
the effects of inaccurate depth values. This example illustrates a synthesis result of our method on the LLFF dataset.

Introduction

Han 2022; Yang, Pavone, and Wang 2023). Among these solutions, depth prior has garnered substantial interest due to
its ease of access, its capacity to offer object positions, and
its aid in handling occlusions and geometry understanding.
Numerous methods have been proposed to integrate depth
information into NeRFs for sparse input views.
Nevertheless, most existing depth-aware NeRFs for
sparse input views disregard the holes, artifacts, and inaccurate values of depth maps. For example, DSNeRF (Deng
et al. 2022) introduced depth supervision to leverage depth
information, but it failed to account for inaccurate depth
values. Certain practices might introduce additional unreliability. DDP-NeRF (Roessle et al. 2022), for instance,
used a depth completion network to transform sparse depth
into dense depth maps and uncertainty estimates, potentially
leading to more inaccurate depth values. The issues inherent
to the network itself could subsequently impact sparse view
synthesis effects. SparseNeRF (Guangcong et al. 2023) employed the rough point cloud geometry provided by sparse
RGB-D inputs to render more images and depict the approx-

Novel-view synthesis (NVS) serves as a fundamental objective within the realm of computer vision. The recent surge in
NVS popularity is largely attributable to the success of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)(Mildenhall et al. 2021). However, NeRFs generally demand numerous images taken from
a variety of views for efficient training. In real-world applications such as AR/VR and autonomous driving, where input views are typically sparse (Niemeyer et al. 2022), NeRF
risks overfitting. This may lead to inconsistencies in reconstructions or failure in generating any useful solution.
Various strategies have significantly enhanced the performance of NeRF for sparse inputs by 1) optimizing training
data utilization (Yu et al. 2021; Niemeyer et al. 2022; Truong
et al. 2023), 2) incorporating prior information like depth
and flow (Deng et al. 2022; Roessle et al. 2022), or 3) exploring new constraints and regularizations (Kim, Seo, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1976

