The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NeSyFOLD: A Framework for Interpretable Image Classification
Parth Padalkar, Huaduo Wang, Gopal Gupta
The University of Texas at Dallas
{parth.padalkar, huaduo.wang, gupta}@utdallas.edu

Abstract

CNN is inherently a blackbox model though attempts have
been made to make it more interpretable (Zhang et al. 2017,
2018).
While these deep models achieve remarkable accuracy,
their interpretability becomes compromised. It remains unclear what the model has truly learnt and whether its predictions are rooted in human-understandable, semantically
meaningful patterns or mere coincidental correlations within
the dataset. Motivated by the need for interpretability, in this
paper we introduce a framework called NeSyFOLD, which
a) gives a global explanation for the predictions made by
a CNN in the form of an ordered rule-set and b) generates
an interpretable NeSy model that can be used to make predictions instead of the CNN. This resultant rule-set can be
readily scrutinized by domain experts, enabling the discernment of potential biases towards specific classes or learning
of non-intuitive class representations by the trained model.
The NeSyFOLD framework uses a Rule Based Machine
Learning (RBML) algorithm called FOLD-SE-M (Wang
and Gupta 2024) for generating a rule-set by using binarized
outputs of the last layer kernels of a trained CNN. The ruleset is a (stratified) answer set program. The most influential
kernels, called significant kernels, appear as predicates in the
rule body. The binarized kernel’s output determines the truth
value of its corresponding predicate in the rule-set. Aditionally, Zhou et al. (Zhou et al. 2014) showed that training
a CNN on scene classification datasets results in last-layer
kernels emerging as object detectors. Motivated by their discovery, we developed an algorithm for labeling the corresponding predicates of the significant kernels with the semantic concept(s) that they represent. We call this procedure
the semantic labeling of the kernels. For example, the predicate 52(X) corresponding to kernel 52 will be replaced by
bathtub(X) in the rule-set, if kernel 52 has learnt to look
for “bathtubs” in the image. Fig. 1 shows an outline of our
NeSyFOLD framework. The semantic labeling can be done
manually as demonstrated by Townsend et al. (Townsend,
Kasioumis, and Inakoshi 2021), however, it entails substantial time and labour investments. We automate this process
using our semantic labeling algorithm.
Next, we create a model that uses the generated rule-set
in conjunction with the CNN for inference. We call this the
NeSy model. We use the in-built FOLD-SE-M rule interpreter (Wang and Gupta 2024) to execute the rules against

Deep learning models such as CNNs have surpassed human
performance in computer vision tasks such as image classification. However, despite their sophistication, these models
lack interpretability which can lead to biased outcomes reflecting existing prejudices in the data. We aim to make predictions made by a CNN interpretable. Hence, we present a
novel framework called NeSyFOLD to create a neurosymbolic (NeSy) model for image classification tasks. The model
is a CNN with all layers following the last convolutional layer
replaced by a stratified answer set program (ASP) derived
from the last layer kernels. The answer set program can be
viewed as a rule-set, wherein the truth value of each predicate depends on the activation of the corresponding kernel
in the CNN. The rule-set serves as a global explanation for
the model and is interpretable. We also use our NeSyFOLD
framework with a CNN that is trained using a sparse kernel
learning technique called Elite BackProp (EBP). This leads to
a significant reduction in rule-set size without compromising
accuracy or fidelity thus improving scalability of the NeSy
model and interpretability of its rule-set. Evaluation is done
on datasets with varied complexity and sizes. We also propose a novel algorithm for labeling the predicates in the ruleset with meaningful semantic concept(s) learnt by the CNN.
We evaluate the performance of our “semantic labeling algorithm” to quantify the efficacy of the semantic labeling for
both the NeSy model and the NeSy-EBP model.

Introduction
Interpretability in AI is an important issue that has resurfaced in recent years as deep learning models have become
larger and are applied to an increasing number of tasks.
Some applications such as autonomous vehicles (Kanagaraj
et al. 2021), disease diagnosis (Sun, Zheng, and Qian 2016),
and natural disaster prevention (Ko and Kwak 2012) are very
sensitive areas where a wrong prediction could be the difference between life and death. The above tasks rely heavily
on good image classification models such as Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). A CNN is a deep learning model
used for a wide range of image classification and object detection tasks, first introduced by Y. Lecun et al. (LeCun et al.
1989). Current CNNs are extremely powerful and capable
of outperforming humans in image classification tasks. A
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4378

