The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Causal Adversarial Perturbations for Individual Fairness and Robustness in
Heterogeneous Data Spaces
Ahmad-Reza Ehyaei 1 , Kiarash Mohammadi 2 3 , Amir-Hossein Karimi 1 , Samira Samadi 1 ,
Golnoosh Farnadi 2 3 4
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
2
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
3
Mila - Québec AI Institute, Montréal, Canada
4
McGill University, Montréal, Canada
ahmadreza.ehyaei@uni-tuebingen.de, kiarash.mohammadi@mila.quebec, amir@tue.mpg.de, ssamadi@tuebingen.mpg.de,
farnadig@mila.quebec
Abstract

formulations presume existence of a metric on the individuals that capture their (qualification) similarity. Such a similarity metric, by definition, is assumed to capture relevant
features in the individuals that are important for the classification outcome, and to ignore features that should be irrelevant. For instance, in a hiring scenario, the similarity metric
between the individuals could consider work experience and
academic degree but should not take into account sensitive
attributes. Due to this inherent fairness property in the definition of similarity metric, such metric is often referred to as a
fair metric. Various similarity functions have been proposed
as fair metrics, including weighted ℓp norms, Mahalanobis
distance, and feature embedding (Benussi et al. 2022).
In the domain of responsible AI, the study of causality is paramount, as the problems addressed often manipulate systems where inter-variable relations are governed by
cause-and-effect mechanisms. In fact, many such sensitive
attributes such as socio-economic status broadly affect the
opportunities presented to individuals, which fair AI aims
to rectify. Despite the introduction of causality as a critical
lens in fairness literature (Kusner et al. 2017), the aforementioned definitions of fair metrics, and the studied domains
therein, have struggled to fully encompass the notion of robustness. While causal reasoning offers a foundation for addressing fairness, the inherent challenges of adversarial perturbations and their potential influence on fairness have remained largely unexplored.
In response to this gap, the initial step in our study is
to propose a framework that defines a fair metric based on
the functional structure of the underlying structural causal
model. We propose a mathematical approach for protecting
sensitive attributes by employing the concept of a pseudometric. Our proposed methodology enables the development
of a fair metric that effectively mitigates bias across different levels of sensitive features in heterogeneous data spaces.
Using our proposed fair metric we establish a causal adversarial perturbation (CAP) set to identify similar individuals.
Subsequently, we analyze the characteristics of the CAP and
its relationship with counterfactual fairness and adversarial
robustness. Finally, we define a novel causal individual fairness notion based on the fair metric, which we refer to as
CAPI fairness.
After formulating CAPI fairness, the next step is to train
a classifier that guarantees this notion. This objective can be
accomplished by applying bias mitigation methods during
the in-processing stage. We ground our theoretical contri-

As responsible AI gains importance in machine learning algorithms, properties such as fairness, adversarial robustness,
and causality have received considerable attention in recent
years. However, despite their individual significance, there
remains a critical gap in simultaneously exploring and integrating these properties. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach that examines the relationship between individual
fairness, adversarial robustness, and structural causal models
in heterogeneous data spaces, particularly when dealing with
discrete sensitive attributes. We use causal structural models
and sensitive attributes to create a fair metric and apply it to
measure semantic similarity among individuals. By introducing a novel causal adversarial perturbation and applying adversarial training, we create a new regularizer that combines
individual fairness, causality, and robustness in the classifier.
Our method is evaluated on both real-world and synthetic
datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in achieving an accurate classifier that simultaneously exhibits fairness, adversarial robustness, and causal awareness.

1

Introduction

In the ever-evolving landscape of machine learning, responsible AI has emerged as a pivotal focal point. Attributes such
as fairness, adversarial robustness, and causality have taken
center stage, each carrying its own weight in shaping ethical and socially reliable AI systems. Yet, the prevailing discourse often falls short of comprehensively addressing these
dimensions in a unified manner, leaving a gap in our understanding of how they intersect and influence each other.
Notably, within the realm of fairness, the scientific community has proposed various notions of fairness, broadly
categorized as group fairness, examining model’s performance across different demographic groups, and individual
fairness, assessing model’s performance on different individuals (Pessach and Shmueli 2022; Mehrabi et al. 2021).
While group fairness can guarantee similar classification
performance on different demographic groups, it does not
always guarantee individual fairness, i.e., that similarly qualified individuals, receive similar outcomes (Binns 2020).
Various formulations of individual fairness have been proposed in the literature, including Lipschitz (Dwork et al.
2012) and ϵ-δ (John, Vijaykeerthy, and Saha 2020). These
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11847

