The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Embedded Feature Selection on Graph-Based Multi-View Clustering
Wenhui Zhao1 , Guangfei Li1 , Haizhou Yang1 , Quanxue Gao1 * , Qianqian Wang1
1

School of Telecommunication Engineering, Xidian University, Shaanxi 710071, China
whzhao@stu.xidian.edu.cn, liguangfei dream@hotmail.com, leoyhz@qq.com, qxgao@xidian.edu.cn, qqwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

also leads to the clustering performance being limited by
K-means. To this end, SFMC (Li et al. 2020) manipulates
the joint graph by a connectivity constraint, so that the connected components can indicate clusters directly. MSC-BG
(Yang et al. 2022) proposed imposing constraints on the rank
of the Laplacian matrix to obtain an affinity graph matrix
with K connected components. Nevertheless, imposing constraints on connected components may result in a smaller
number of connected components than K, leading to a significant decrease in clustering performance.
Moreover, most anchor graph-based clustering algorithms
take advantage of all the data points, but the anchor points
corresponding to noise and redundant data in data points are
useless. Therefore, LAPIN (Nie et al. 2023) method obtains
a better coefficient matrix by applying sparse constraints to
the data matrix, thus to alleviate the impact of noise to some
extent. However, the distribution of noise is difficult to estimate, and the sparse representation of the noise term is
hard to guarantee. Furthermore, the quality differences between different data views can also significantly affect clustering performance. Accordingly, AMGL (Nie, Li, and Li
2016) automatically learns optimal weights for each view
by minimizing the squared-root trace. Although these methods have achieved good results, they cannot fully utilize the
complementary information in the adjacency matrix of different views.
To address these issues, we propose an Embedded Feature
Selection on Graph-Based Multi-View Clustering (EFSGMC) method, which can obtain the final cluster label in
one step. Specifically, we adapt non-negative matrix factorization directly to the anchor graph to get the final cluster
indicator matrix in one step, thus avoiding post-processing.
Besides, we draw inspiration from feature selection for raw
data points and apply feature selection to the anchor graph.
Specifically, we minimize the ℓ2,p -norm to make the learned
anchor map representation more sparse to filter out the
anchor points corresponding to noise and redundant data,
which significantly reduces the effect of noise. In addition,
we refer to the weighted tensor Schatten p-norm minimization (WTSNM) (Xia et al. 2022) and propose to employ the
tensor Schatten p-norm minimization to explore the lowrank structure embedded in inter-view graphs. The main
contributions of our method are as follows:

Recently, anchor graph-based multi-view clustering has been
proven to be highly efficient for large-scale data processing.
However, most existing anchor graph-based clustering methods necessitate post-processing to obtain clustering labels and
are unable to effectively utilize the information within anchor
graphs. To solve these problems, we propose an Embedded
Feature Selection on Graph-Based Multi-View Clustering
(EFSGMC) approach to improve the clustering performance.
Our method decomposes anchor graphs, taking advantage of
memory efficiency, to obtain clustering labels in a single step
without the need for post-processing. Furthermore, we introduce the ℓ2,p -norm for graph-based feature selection, which
selects the most relevant data for efficient graph factorization. Lastly, we employ the tensor Schatten p-norm as a tensor rank approximation function to capture the complementary information between different views, ensuring similarity between cluster assignment matrices. Experimental results
on five real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Over the past few decades, there has been immense interest
in developing numerous exceptional clustering algorithms,
including subspace-based clustering (Luo et al. 2018; Xie
et al. 2020), non-negative matrix factorization clustering
(Gao et al. 2013; Salah, Ailem, and Nadif 2018), and graphbased clustering (Hu et al. 2020; Nie, Li, and Li 2017). Notably, graph-based clustering methods have been widely developed due to their excellent performance in capturing the
spatial structure of nonlinear data.
The key step in graph-based clustering methods is to construct an N × N affinity graph matrix to represent the similarity between different N data points. However, this operation can be time-consuming and memory-intensive. To address this issue, anchor graph-based methods (Li et al. 2020)
have been proposed to construct an N × M (M << N ) anchor graph, where anchor graphs are used to measure the
relationship between N data points and M anchors. However, post-processing (e.g., K-means) is required in most
anchor graph-based methods to obtain final clustering labels, which not only increases the computational time but
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Our method performs non-negative matrix decomposi-

17016

