The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Reconciling Predictive and Statistical Parity:
A Causal Approach
Drago Plečko and Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
dp3144@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

which are mutually incompatible (Corbett-Davies and Goel
2018). The incompatibility of these measures can create
a serious obstacle for practitioners since choosing among
them, even for the system designer, is usually non-trivial.
In the real world, issues of discrimination and unfairness
are analyzed through two major legal doctrines. The first one
is disparate treatment, which enforces the equality of treatment of different groups and prohibits the use of the protected attribute (e.g., race) during the decision process. One
of the legal formulations for showing disparate treatment is
that “a similarly situated person who is not a member of
the protected class would not have suffered the same fate”
(Barocas and Selbst 2016). Disparate treatment is commonly
associated with the notion of direct effects in the causal literature. The second doctrine is known as disparate impact
and focuses on outcome fairness, namely, the equality of
outcomes among protected groups. Discrimination through
disparate impact occurs if a facially neutral practice has an
adverse impact on members of the protected group, including cases where discrimination is unintended or implicit. In
practice, the law may not necessarily prohibit the usage of all
characteristics correlated with the protected attribute due to
their relevance to the business itself, which is legally known
as “business necessity” (labeled BN from now on) or “jobrelatedness”. Therefore, some of the variables may be used
to distinguish between individuals, even if they are associated with the protected attribute (Kilbertus et al. 2017). From
a causal perspective, disparate impact is realized through indirect forms of discrimination, and taking into account BN
considerations is the essence of this doctrine (Barocas and
Selbst 2016).

Since the rise of fair machine learning as a critical field of inquiry, many different notions on how to quantify and measure
discrimination have been proposed in the literature. Some of
these notions, however, were shown to be mutually incompatible. Such findings make it appear that numerous different
kinds of fairness exist, thereby making a consensus on the appropriate measure of fairness harder to reach, hindering the
applications of these tools in practice. In this paper, we investigate one of these key impossibility results that relates
the notions of statistical and predictive parity. Specifically,
we derive a new causal decomposition formula for the fairness measures associated with predictive parity, and obtain
a novel insight into how this criterion is related to statistical parity through the legal doctrines of disparate treatment,
disparate impact, and the notion of business necessity. Our
results show that through a more careful causal analysis, the
notions of statistical and predictive parity are not really mutually exclusive, but complementary and spanning a spectrum
of fairness notions through the concept of business necessity.
Finally, we demonstrate the importance of our findings on a
real-world example.

1

Introduction

As society increasingly relies on AI-based tools, an ever
larger number of decisions that were once made by humans
are now delegated to automated systems, and this trend is
likely to only accelerate in the coming years. Such automated systems may exhibit discrimination based on gender,
race, religion, or other sensitive attributes, as witnessed by
various examples in criminal justice (Angwin et al. 2016),
facial recognition (Harwell 2019; Buolamwini and Gebru
2018), targeted advertising (Detrixhe and Merrill 2019), and
medical treatment allocation (Rajkomar et al. 2018), to name
a few.
In light of these challenges, a large amount of effort has
been invested in attempts to detect and quantify undesired
discrimination based on society’s current ethical standards,
and then design learning methods capable of removing possible unfairness from future predictions and decisions. During this process, many different notions on how to quantify
discrimination have been proposed. In fact, the current literature is abundant with different fairness metrics, some of

1.1

Relationship to Previous Literature

Consider now a set of causal pathways between the attribute
X and the predictor Yb , labeled C1 , . . . , Ck . For example,
these pathways could represent the direct, indirect, and spurious effects of X on Yb , or more generally any set of pathspecific effects. Previous works on path-specific counterfactual fairness (Nabi and Shpitser 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Chiappa 2019) constrain the effects along paths Ci that are considered discriminatory (i.e., not in the BN set), by requiring
them to be equal to 0, written Ci (X, Yb ) = 0. Other works
demonstrate how such causal variations can be disentangled

This paper is part of the Proceedings of the 38th AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2024).

14625

