The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Get an A in Math: Progressive Rectification Prompting
Zhenyu Wu1 , Meng Jiang2 , Chao Shen1
1

2

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
zhenyuwu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, mjiang2@nd.edu, chaoshen@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

First, to distinguish correct and incorrect answers, existing methods repeatedly solve a problem and use a majority vote strategy to determine the most consistent answer as
the correct answer. This is known as self-consistency (Wang
et al. 2023b). However, since it solves the same problem
multiple times, this repeated independent process leads to
same mistakes, making the frequent answer still incorrect.
Second, existing methods such as progressive-hint prompting (Zheng et al. 2023) modify reasoning paths by adding
“(Hint: The answer is near [H])” after the given problem,
where [H] is the slot of previous answers. It is evident that
when previous answers are incorrect, LLMs may still generate an incorrect answer in response to the hint. Third, existing CoT prompting methods exhibit high sensitivity to mistakes in intermediate reasoning steps (Kojima et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023a; Shi et al. 2023). Even
a tiny mistake in the reasoning process could alter the entire
problem-solving process, resulting in an incorrect answer. It
is nontrivial to achieve multi-step precise reasoning.

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting methods have enabled
large language models (LLMs) to generate reasoning paths
and solve math word problems (MWPs). However, they are
sensitive to mistakes in the paths, as any mistake can result in
an incorrect answer. We propose a novel method named Progressive Rectification Prompting (PRP) to improve average
accuracy on eight MWP datasets from 77.3 to 90.5. Given
an initial answer from CoT, PRP iterates a verify-then-rectify
process to progressively identify incorrect answers and rectify the reasoning paths. With the most likely correct answer,
the LLM predicts a masked numerical value in the question;
if the prediction does not match the masked value, the answer is likely incorrect. Then the LLM is prompted to regenerate the reasoning path hinted with a set of incorrect
answers to prevent itself from repeating previous mistakes.
PRP achieves the best performance compared against the CoT
methods. Our implementation is made publicly available at
https://wzy6642.github.io/prp.github.io/.

To address the three drawbacks of existing methods, our
research is inspired by a guide on math study skills and exam
success written by Gall et al. in 1990. First, substitute verification has been commonly used in math exams to verify the
correctness of an answer. Let us look at a specific example.
Given an equation 2+3 = y, after solving it, we find that the
answer y equals 5. Next, we introduce a masked condition
to formulate the masked equation X + 3 = y and substitute
the answer 5 into this equation. Solving the masked equation, if X equals 2, it indicates that the answer 5 align with
the original equation. So the answer was more likely to be
correct. Otherwise, the answer could probably be incorrect.
Compared to repeatedly checking, such as solving the same
question multiple times, the substitute verification can effectively prevent the repetition of mistakes and improve the
accuracy of answer verification. Second, relying on existing progressive hints such as “the answer is near [H]” would
limit the exploration of other potential answers when the hint
answer was incorrect. Suppose that [H] has been found less
likely correct by substitute verification. A negation hint on
it, like “the answer is likely not [H]”, will help LLMs eliminate or less consider such answers, so the LLMs will actively rectify their reasoning paths to avoid mistakes. Third,
the dual process theory in psychology (Evans 2003) tells us
that humans have two cognitive systems to progressively re-

Introduction
Math word problems (MWPs) require language comprehension, mathematical reasoning, and problem-solving skills.
Studying these problems helps AI researchers develop algorithms and models that can mimic human-like reasoning
and problem-solving abilities (Chen et al. 2022). Chain-ofthought (CoT) prompting methods help large language models (LLMs) break down complex problems into manageable
parts, allowing them to focus on each part individually (Kojima et al. 2022). The LLMs become decent zero-shot reasoners by simply adding “Let’s think step by step” to generate reasoning paths and predict answers to the MWPs (Shi
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a,b; Zheng et al. 2023).
When analyzing the performance of existing methods, we
found that the average accuracy on eight standard datasets
(e.g., MultiArith, GSM8K) was 77.3, far below A-level
grades. Because they have three drawbacks: (1) lack of verification that checks if the answer is correct, (2) lack of rectification that finds the correct answer being aware of mistakes, and (3) lack of an effective method that progressively
refines reasoning path, which are essential “exam skills.”
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19288

