The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Sample Efficient Reinforcement Learning with Partial Dynamics Knowledge
Meshal Alharbi, Mardavij Roozbehani, Munther Dahleh
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{meshal, mardavij, dahleh}@mit.edu

Abstract

Practical methods that aim to address the previous question
should carefully balance the sample complexity (number of
interactions with the system) and computations (time and
memory) spent in planning or improving policies. Our primary objective is to incorporate prior structural information
without extensive offline computation or access to strong
computational oracles.

The problem of sample complexity of online reinforcement
learning is often studied in the literature without taking into
account any partial knowledge about the system dynamics
that could potentially accelerate the learning process. In this
paper, we study the sample complexity of online Q-learning
methods when some prior knowledge about the dynamics is
available or can be learned efficiently. We focus on systems
that evolve according to an additive disturbance model of the
form Sh+1 = f (Sh , Ah ) + Wh , where f represents the
underlying system dynamics, and Wh are unknown disturbances independent of states and actions. In the setting of
finite episodic Markov decision processes with S states, A
actions, and episode length H, we present an√optimistic Qlearning algorithm that achieves Õ(P OLY(H) T ) regret under perfect knowledge of f , where T is the total number of
interactions with√the system. This is in contrast to the typical Õ(P OLY(H) SAT ) regret for existing Q-learning methods. Further, if only a noisy estimate fˆ of f is available, our
method can learn an approximately optimal policy in a number of samples that is independent of the cardinalities of state
and action spaces. The sub-optimality gap depends on the approximation error fˆ − f , as well as the Lipschitz constant of
the corresponding optimal value function. Our approach does
not require modeling of the transition probabilities and enjoys
the same memory complexity as model-free methods.

Systems of Interest. Learning complexity in RL is multifaceted, and is influenced by uncertainty in both rewards
and dynamics (see, e.g., Lu et al. (2023) for an introductory treatment on the subject). In the interest of tractability,
herein, we focus our attention on a specific class of RL problems with uncertainty in the dynamics only. We consider a
class M of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) where the
state transition is governed by:
Sh+1 = f (Sh , Ah ) + Wh

(1)

where f , which may be partially or approximately known,
represents the dynamics or fixed structure of the system, and
Wh are unknown disturbances independent of states and actions. Further, we assume the reward r function is known;
and thus, all the uncertainty is in the state transitions. Partial dynamics knowledge is modeled via the availability of
an approximation fˆ of f that satisfies ∥fˆ − f ∥∞ ≤ ζ/2.
Note that this is different than sim-to-real literature, where
it is often assumed that one has a detailed probabilistic description of an approximate model (Jiang 2018; Feng, Yin,
and Yang 2019) or an approximate generative model where
we can sample an arbitrary amount of trajectories without
cost (Chen et al. 2022). See the next section for a detailed
comparison. Furthermore, even if f is fully known, one cannot apply dynamic programming here as the disturbances
Wh are not known even in distribution (in fact, this can be
the main challenge in many practical problems). Finally, we
shall see that restricting to linear disturbance models is beneficial for devising computationally efficient algorithms.
Many applications fit the setting described above. In operational tasks, like inventory control and demand response
problems (Vázquez-Canteli and Nagy 2019), the structural
function f is often known and the challenge lies in optimizing for the unknown non-stationary demand signals. In control tasks, where the dynamics rise from parametric physical
models, one might only know f approximately due to parametric uncertainty (Bhattacharyya 2017; Taylor et al. 2021).

Introduction
Motivations. Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have achieved tremendous success in various domains, and
the literature has seen an influx of methods with provable non-asymptotic guarantees. Many of these results are
problem-agnostic and the theoretical guarantees are limited
by the worst-case scenarios. At the same time, one would
hope that the sample efficiency of RL could be tied to the inherent measures of complexity of the problem’s dynamics,
with ways to accelerate learning if some prior knowledge
about the problem is available. Indeed, the following question in its full generality is still open:
How can we improve the sample efficiency of RL methods
when some structure about the underlying dynamics is
known or can be learned efficiently?
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10804

