The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Detecting and Preventing Hallucinations in
Large Vision Language Models
Anisha Gunjal* , Jihan Yin* , Erhan Bas†
Scale AI
anishagunjal@utexas.edu, jihan yin@berkeley.edu, erhan.bas@gehealthcare.com

Abstract

models have seen adoption around grafting visual backbones
onto pre-trained large language models, resulting in LVLMs
(Liu et al. 2023b; Dai et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023). While
this has led to strides in overall VQA performance, it brings
along the same challenges that plague these LLMs - a significant one being the propensity to generate hallucinations.
In language models, hallucinations occur when the model
produces inaccurate or misleading factual information that
cannot be supported by existing knowledge stores (Ji et al.
2023; Bang et al. 2023). In the context of VQA for LVLMs,
hallucinations can manifest as responses containing references or descriptions of the input image that are incorrect (Li
et al. 2023). It is essential to address and mitigate these hallucinations to enhance the reliability and accuracy of multimodal models in real-life usecases. However, these multimodal hallucinations are hard to programatically detect and
often requires human supervision, which can be costly.
To facilitate automatic hallucination detection, we build a
diverse human-labeled dataset using VQA responses from
InstructBLIP, as seen in Figure 1. We train multiple reward models of various densities (sentence and sub-sentence
level) on this dataset for hallucination detection. An effective
way to use these reward models to reduce hallucinations is
to use them to generate rewards in a reinforcement learning
setup (Ziegler et al. 2019; Stiennon et al. 2020; Nakano et al.
2021), although the resulting final model can only be as effective as the original reward model used (Bai et al. 2022).
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on measuring the quality
of these reward models, exploring classification metrics, and
using best-of-n rejection sampling as an approximation of
the system’s performance. Similar to (Rafailov et al. 2023),
we also directly optimize InstructBLIP with fine-grained Direct Preference Optimization (FDPO), a novel variation of
DPO in which we leverage fine-grained annotation information from individual examples, rather than collecting relative preference signals from pairs of texts. Both methods
show significant success in reducing hallucination rates from
InstructBLIP, and furthermore, rejection sampling with our
reward models reduces hallucination rates in other multimodal models as well - LLaVA (Liu et al. 2023b) and
mPLUG-OWL (Ye et al. 2023).
Our main contributions are as follows:

Instruction tuned Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs)
have significantly advanced in generalizing across a diverse
set of multi-modal tasks, especially for Visual Question Answering (VQA). However, generating detailed responses that
are visually grounded is still a challenging task for these models. We find that even the current state-of-the-art LVLMs (InstructBLIP) still contain a staggering 30 percent of the hallucinatory text in the form of non-existent objects, unfaithful descriptions, and inaccurate relationships. To address this,
we introduce M-HalDetect, a Multimodal Hallucination Detection Dataset that can be used to train and benchmark models for hallucination detection and prevention. M-HalDetect
consists of 16k fine-grained annotations on VQA examples,
making it the first comprehensive multi-modal hallucination detection dataset for detailed image descriptions. Unlike previous work that only consider object hallucination,
we additionally annotate both entity descriptions and relationships that are unfaithful. To demonstrate the potential
of this dataset for hallucination prevention, we optimize InstructBLIP through our novel Fine-grained Direct Preference Optimization (FDPO). We also train fine-grained multimodal reward models from InstructBLIP and evaluate their
effectiveness with best-of-n rejection sampling (RS). We perform human evaluation on both FDPO and rejection sampling, and find that they reduce hallucination rates in InstructBLIP by 41% and 55% respectively. We also find that our
reward model generalizes to other multi-modal models, reducing hallucinations in LLaVA and mPLUG-OWL by 15%
and 57% respectively, and has strong correlation with human evaluated accuracy scores. The dataset is available at
https://github.com/hendryx-scale/mhal-detect.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have transformed the AI
landscape in recent years, scaling their training data to trillions of tokens and their parameter count to hundreds of
billions (Brown et al. 2020; Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron
et al. 2023). This has unlocked powerful emergent behaviors, and seen widespread adoption through the use of chat
agents such as ChatGPT. Recently, advances in multi-modal
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done at ScaleAI
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We create and release M-HalDetect, a new hallucination
detection dataset focused on fine-grained annotations at

18135

