The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Contrastive Continual Learning with Importance Sampling and
Prototype-Instance Relation Distillation
Jiyong Li1, 2 , Dilshod Azizov3 , Yang Li4, 5 , Shangsong Liang1, 2, 3, *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
3
Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
4
AI Thrust, Information Hub, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
5
Department of CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
lijy373@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, dilshod.azizov@mbzuai.ac.ae, yli803@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
liangshangsong@gmail.com
Abstract

and used alongside current tasks in contrastive continual
models. This introduces a bias between contrastive representations trained in on-line and off-line settings, significantly
contributing to Catastrophic Forgetting. Second, while the
importance of hard negative samples (i.e., data points that
are difficult to distinguish from anchors of different classes)
for contrastive representation is recognized (Robinson et al.
2020), there has been limited investigation into the optimal
selection and preservation of these samples in the context of
contrastive continual learning, as observed in previous research (Cha, Lee, and Shin 2021). In this paper, we address
two questions: (1) How can we more effectively recapture
the data distributions of earlier tasks using buffered samples? and (2) How can we improve the selection and retention of important samples?
Consequently, we propose CCLIS, a contrastive continual
learning algorithm that can alleviate Catastrophic Forgetting
and select hard negative samples. We set out to make theoretical and empirical contributions as follows:
1. Based on a prototype-based supervised contrastive continual learning framework, we estimate previous task
distributions via importance sampling with a weighted
buffer during training, which can eliminate the bias between contrastive representations trained online and offline to overcome Catastrophic Forgetting.
2. Based on (1), we introduce a methodology to compute
importance weights within a contrastive continual learning framework accompanied by robust theoretical justifications. In addition, we examine the interplay between
importance sampling and hard negative selection. In particular, we observe that samples with higher scores, as
determined by our method, are more likely to be retained
as hard negative samples.
3. We propose the PRD loss to preserve the learned relationship between prototype and instance, which helps to
use the importance sampling method to recover the distributions of tasks and maintain knowledge of previous
tasks.
4. Finally, experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms most of the state-of-the-art non-stationary task distributions from three benchmark datasets. Empirically,
our algorithms can recover the data distributions of pre-

Recently, because of the high-quality representations of contrastive learning methods, rehearsal-based contrastive continual learning has been proposed to explore how to continually learn transferable representation embeddings to avoid
the catastrophic forgetting issue in traditional continual settings. Based on this framework, we propose Contrastive
Continual Learning via Importance Sampling (CCLIS) to
preserve knowledge by recovering previous data distributions with a new strategy for Replay Buffer Selection
(RBS), which minimize estimated variance to save hard negative samples for representation learning with high quality. Furthermore, we present the Prototype-instance Relation
Distillation (PRD) loss, a technique designed to maintain
the relationship between prototypes and sample representations using a self-distillation process. Experiments on standard continual learning benchmarks reveal that our method
notably outperforms existing baselines in terms of knowledge preservation and thereby effectively counteracts catastrophic forgetting in online contexts. The code is available at
https://github.com/lijy373/CCLIS.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are widely recognized to commonly
face challenges in preserving performance in learned tasks
after being trained on a new one, which is called Catastrophic Forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). Continual
learning has been proposed to overcome Catastrophic Forgetting and transfer knowledge forward and backward during training for a stream of data, with only a small portion
of the samples available at once. Recent research has integrated this scheme into continual learning due to the capability of contrastive learning to secure high-quality representations (Chen et al. 2020). A prime example of this integration is contrastive continual learning (Cha, Lee, and Shin
2021), which leverages the advantages of contrastive representations. Furthermore, we have identified two primary areas that remain underexplored in contrastive continual learning. First, the settings of continual learning inherently mean
that only limited samples from previous tasks are retained
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13554

