The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Towards Human-like Learning from Relational Structured Data
Quanming Yao
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Haidian District, Beijing, China
qyaoaa@tsinghua.edu.cn

Research Goal

consistently perform well due to the complex patterns exhibited by relations in KGs. AutoBLM proposes to search
scoring functions among bilinear models for KG learning
with evolutionary algorithm.
• Sample-efficient side: PAR (Wang et al. 2021) addresses
few-shot molecular property prediction in drug discovery
with meta learning based on a property-aware embedding
function, adaptive relation graph learning, and refining
embeddings based on the target property.
• Interpretable side: QL-GNN (Qiu et al. 2023) shows that
GNN can capture logical rules from graded model logic,
providing a new theoretical tool for interpreting the expressiveness of GNN for KG reasoning. It also concludes
that state-of-the-art methods are mainly based on labeling
trick due to its simplicity in capturing logical rules.
• Scientific application side: EmerGNN (Zhang et al. 2023)
predicts interactions between emerging drugs and existing drugs with GNN that considers connections between
biomedical entities and relations. It extracts paths between
drugs using a flow-based GNN, propagates information
from emerging drugs to existing drugs, providing interpretable evidence using attention weights on the edges.

Relational structured data is a way of representing knowledge using nodes and edges, while also capturing the meaning of that knowledge in a structured form that can be
used for machine learning. (Peter W. Battaglia 2018). Compared with vision and natural language data, relational structured data represents and manipulates structured knowledge,
which can be beneficial for tasks that involve reasoning or
inference. On the other hand, vision and NLP deal more
with unstructured data (like images and text), and they often require different types of models and algorithms to extract useful information or features from the data. Humanlike Learning develops methods that can harness relational
structures and learning-to-learn to rapidly acquire and generalize knowledge to new tasks and situations (Lake and Baroni 2023). With Human-like Learning, the learning algorithm is efficient and is able to adapt to new or unseen situations, which is crucial in real-world applications where environments may change unpredictably. Moreover, the models
are easier for humans to understand and interpret, which is
important for transparency and trust in AI systems.

Roadmap

References

The key to achieve the above goal is to develop knowledge
and data dual-driven learning methods, which should have
the following three properties:

Lake, B. M.; and Baroni, M. 2023. Human-like systematic
generalization through a meta-learning neural network. Nature.
Peter W. Battaglia, e. a. 2018. Relational inductive biases,
deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint.
Qiu, H.; Zhang, Y.; Li, Y.; and Yao, Q. 2023. Logical
Expressiveness of Graph Neural Network for Knowledge
Graph Reasoning. arXiv preprint.
Wang, Y.; Abuduweili, A.; Yao, Q.; and Dou, D. 2021.
Property-aware relation networks for few-shot molecular
property prediction. NeurIPS.
Zhang, Y.; Yao, Q.; and Kwok, J. T. 2022. Bilinear scoring
function search for knowledge graph learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.
Zhang, Y.; Yao, Q.; Yue, L.; Wu, X.; Zhang, Z.; Lin, Z.; and
Zheng, Y. 2023. Emerging drug interaction prediction enabled by a flow-based graph neural network with biomedical
network. Nature Computational Science.

• Data-Specific: design the tailored model on different types
of data guided by relational knowledge.
• Sample-efficient: extract meaningful meta-knowledge
from limited data, allowing it to generalize effectively to
new, unseen examples.
• Interpretable: understand and explain how a model makes
predictions with structural evidence.

Works to be Covered
Following recent works from our group will be high-lighted
• Data-Specific side: AutoBLM (Zhang, Yao, and Kwok
2022) automatically designs scoring function for KG
learning. Human-designed scoring functions struggle to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22684

