The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Linear-Time Algorithms for Front-Door Adjustment in Causal Graphs
Marcel Wienöbst, Benito van der Zander, Maciej Liśkiewicz
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, University of Lübeck, Germany
{m.wienoebst,b.vanderzander,maciej.liskiewicz}@uni-luebeck.de

Abstract
Causal effect estimation from observational data is a fundamental task in empirical sciences. It becomes particularly
challenging when unobserved confounders are involved in
a system. This paper focuses on front-door adjustment – a
classic technique which, using observed mediators allows to
identify causal effects even in the presence of unobserved
confounding. While the statistical properties of the front-door
estimation are quite well understood, its algorithmic aspects
remained unexplored for a long time. In 2022, Jeong, Tian,
and Bareinboim presented the first polynomial-time algorithm
for finding sets satisfying the front-door criterion in a given
directed acyclic graph (DAG), with an O(n3 (n + m)) run
time, where n denotes the number of variables and m the
number of edges of the causal graph. In our work, we give
the first linear-time, i.e., O(n + m), algorithm for this task,
which thus reaches the asymptotically optimal time complexity. This result implies an O(n(n + m)) delay enumeration
algorithm of all front-door adjustment sets, again improving
previous work by a factor of n3 . Moreover, we provide the
first linear-time algorithm for finding a minimal front-door
adjustment set. We offer implementations of our algorithms in
multiple programming languages to facilitate practical usage
and empirically validate their feasibility, even for large graphs.

1

Introduction

Discovering and understanding causal relationships and distinguishing them from purely statistical associations is a fundamental objective of empirical sciences. For example, recognizing the causes of diseases and other health problems
is a central task in medical research enabling novel disease
prevention and treatment strategies. One possible approach
for establishing causal relationships and analyzing causal effects is through Randomized Controlled Trials (Fisher 1936),
which are considered the gold standard of experimentation. In
practice, however, experimentation is not always possible due
to costs, technical feasibility, or ethical constraints – e.g., participants of medical studies should not be assigned to smoke
over extended periods of time to ascertain its harmfulness.
The goal of causal inference is to determine cause-effect
relationships by combining observed and interventional data
with existing knowledge. In this paper, we focus on the problem of deciding when causal effects can be identified from
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20577

a graphical model and observed data and, if possible, how
to estimate the strength of the effect. The model is typically
represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), whose edges
encode direct causal influences between the random variables
of interest. To analyze the causal effects in such models, Pearl
(1995, 2009) introduced the do-operator which performs a
hypothetical intervention forcing exposure (treatment) variables X to take some values x. This allows to regard the
(total) causal effect of X on outcome variables Y, denoted
as P (y|do(x)), as the probability distribution of variables
Y after the intervention.1 The fundamental task in causal
inference is to decide whether P (y|do(x)) can be expressed
using only standard (i.e., do-operator free) probabilities and
it becomes challenging when unobserved confounders (variables affecting both the treatment and outcome) are involved
in a system. A variable is considered unobserved if it cannot
be measured by the researcher. Fig. 1 shows DAGs of some
models with unobserved confounders.
It is well known that the IDC algorithm by Shpitser and
Pearl (2006a), based on the prominent do-calculus (Pearl
1995), allows solving the identifiability problem in a sound
and complete way (Huang and Valtorta 2006; Shpitser and
Pearl 2006b). As such, researchers could potentially apply
IDC to decide identifiability. However, two drawbacks affect
the widespread use of the algorithm: Firstly it runs in polynomial time of high degree which precludes computations for
graphs involving a reasonable amount of variables. Secondly,
the IDC algorithm computes complex expressions, even in
case of small DAGs for which a simple formula exists (for
details, see, e.g., (van der Zander, Liśkiewicz, and Textor
2019)). Hence, in practice, total causal effects are estimated
using other methods.
One of the most popular approaches isP
to utilize covariate
adjustment of the form P (y|do(x)) = z P (y|x, z)P (z),
which is valid if Z satisfies the famous back-door (BD) criterion (Pearl 1995). Apart from convenient statistical properties, the BD based methods rely on efficient, sound, and
complete algorithms for covariate adjustments in DAGs. In
particular, utilizing the generalized BD criterion by Shpitser,
VanderWeele, and Robins (2010), the algorithmic framework
1
Following convention, for a random variable X, we use P (x)
as a shorthand for P (X = x). By bold capital letters X, Y, etc.,
we denote sets of variables, and the corresponding sets of values are
denoted by bold lowercase letters x, y, etc.

