The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Gramformer: Learning Crowd Counting via Graph-Modulated Transformer
Hui Lin1 , Zhiheng Ma2 , Xiaopeng Hong3,4 * , Qinnan Shangguan3 , Deyu Meng1
1

2

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
linhuixjtu@gmail.com; zh.ma@siat.ac.cn; hongxiaopeng@ieee.org;
sg12qt@gmail.com; dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer has been popular in recent crowd counting work
since it breaks the limited receptive field of traditional CNNs.
However, since crowd images always contain a large number of similar patches, the self-attention mechanism in Transformer tends to find a homogenized solution where the attention maps of almost all patches are identical. In this paper, we address this problem by proposing Gramformer: a
graph-modulated transformer to enhance the network by adjusting the attention and input node features respectively on
the basis of two different types of graphs. Firstly, an attention graph is proposed to diverse attention maps to attend
to complementary information. The graph is building upon
the dissimilarities between patches, modulating the attention
in an anti-similarity fashion. Secondly, a feature-based centrality encoding is proposed to discover the centrality positions or importance of nodes. We encode them with a proposed centrality indices scheme to modulate the node features and similarity relationships. Extensive experiments on
four challenging crowd counting datasets have validated the
competitiveness of the proposed method. Code is available at
https://github.com/LoraLinH/Gramformer.

Vanilla Attention

Graph-guided Attention

Figure 1: Visualization comparison of attention maps in different patches between vanilla attention and the proposed
graph-guided attention. Each white cross mark indicates the
location of a patch which the attention map is corresponding
to. The vanilla attention finds a homogenized solution where
the attention maps of most patches are similar (to the final density map), regardless of whether they are background
(the first column) or foreground (the last two columns).

Introduction
et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022b,a) have leveraged on the selfattention mechanisms to further boost the accuracy. The
transformer treats the image as a sequence of patches and
each patch receives information from all other ones. With a
dot-product operation, the intensity of information received
is based on the feature similarity of different nodes.
While the transformer architecture is effective at computing crowd density in an image, it may produce homogenized
attention maps as there are numerous regions that appear
similar in a crowdy image. In our experiments, we are surprised to find that the attention maps of most patches produced by the vanilla transformer are almost identical1 , irrespective of whether they are foreground or background.
As depicted in Figure 1, these attention maps are predominantly focused on head positions and similar to the crowd
density map (homogenized attention). It can be also seen

Crowd counting, which aims to estimate the number of people in crowded scenes, is a core and challenging task in
computer vision. It has a wide range of real-world applications, including congestion estimation, traffic monitoring,
and other crowd management scenarios, especially after the
outbreak of COVID-19. The increasing demand drives the
prosperous development of counting methods.
Over the last few decades, Convolution Neural Network (CNN) has been utilized as the mainstream structure to regress the density map and predict the total crowd
count (Zhang et al. 2016; Li, Zhang, and Chen 2018; Ma
et al. 2019). However, the accuracy of these methods will
sometimes be constrained by the fixed-size convolution kernel, where each patch only receives information from its spatial neighbours. This makes traditional CNNs to be difficult
to deal with different variations in crowd images. Recently,
with the blossom of transformers, some approaches (Liang

1
The recent study (Wang, Mei, and Yuille 2023) also reveals
that the transformer in CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) tends to produce highly similar attention maps across various source points in
natural images.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3395

