The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Manipulation-Robust Selection of Citizens’ Assemblies
Bailey Flanigan1 , Jennifer Liang2 , Ariel D. Procaccia2 , Sven Wang3
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Harvard University
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract

In a citizens’ assembly, a panel of randomly-chosen constituents convenes to make a policy recommendation on a
political issue. Although citizens’ assembly participants are
not career politicians, their recommendations are informed
by an extensive process of learning from experts and deliberating with one another. As such, citizens’ assemblies
are appealing because they combine the goals of engaging everyday citizens in democratic decision-making, while
also facilitating informed decisions. Citizens’ Assemblies
are now being used to make increasingly high-profile decisions around the world (Participedia 2023); for example,
France recently ran a national-level assembly on the topic of
assisted dying, and its outcome is slated to affect policy on
palliative care (Bürgerrat 2023).
Because the participants of a citizens’ assembly represent
their entire underlying constituency, the process by which
they are selected is crucial to whether the policy recommendation they produce is perceived as trustworthy. The
importance of this selection process has motivated a growing body of research on selection algorithms (Ebadian and
Micha 2023; Ebadian et al. 2022; Flanigan et al. 2020, 2021;

Flanigan, Kehne, and Procaccia 2021), which solve the following task: from among a pool of volunteers, randomly
sample a panel that is (at least approximately) descriptively
representative of the underlying population. This means that
if the population is 48% women, the panel should be approximately 48% women. Because exact representation of all
identities cannot be achieved with a finite-size panel, practitioners’ main goal is to achieve representation with respect
to a handful of key features, such as gender, age, geographic
location, education level, and opinion on the issue at hand.
The main algorithmic challenge in selecting descriptively
representative participants is self-selection bias: different
demographic groups agree to participate at vastly different
rates, so the pool of volunteers from which the panel is sampled is demographically skewed compared to the underlying population. Consequently, simple sampling techniques
do not produce the desired descriptive representation.
Existing work has circumvented the challenge of achieving representation to a large degree. The first selection algorithms, developed by practitioners, were heuristics that
searched for representative panels, injecting randomness
wherever possible. More recent work has contributed algorithms that not only find representative panels, but do so in
a way that achieves other desiderata simultaneously. For example, Flanigan et al. (2021) presents a framework of algorithms that are maximally fair to individual pool members:
that is, they make pool members’ probabilities of being selected as equal as possible, subject to representation constraints. One algorithm within this framework, called Leximin (Flanigan et al. 2021), is now widely used in practice.
Beyond the desiderata of representation and maximal fairness, follow-up work has contributed methods for additionally achieving transparency (Flanigan, Kehne, and Procaccia 2021). However, at the current frontier of research on
selection algorithms, a key desideratum remains yet untouched: their manipulability.
In this paper, we initiate the study of selection algorithms’
vulnerability to perhaps the most salient type of potential
manipulation: volunteers misreporting their features. With
Theorem 1.1, we now illustrate in detail why the selection
process, as it commonly works in practice, can permit — and
strongly incentivize — such manipulation.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Example 1.1. We want to select a panel of 10 people to
convene on climate policy. We care about descriptive repre-

Among the recent work on designing algorithms for selecting citizens’ assembly participants, one key property of
these algorithms has not yet been studied: their manipulability. Strategic manipulation is a concern because these algorithms must satisfy representation constraints according to
volunteers’ self-reported features; misreporting these features
could thereby increase a volunteer’s chance of being selected,
decrease someone else’s chance, and/or increase the expected
number of seats given to their group. Strikingly, we show that
Leximin — an algorithm that is widely used for its fairness —
is highly manipulable in this way. We then introduce a new
class of selection algorithms that use `p norms as objective
functions. We show that the manipulability of the `p -based
algorithm decreases in O(1/n1−1/p ) as the number of volunteers n grows, approaching the optimal rate of O(1/n) as
p → ∞. These theoretical results are confirmed via experiments in eight real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

9696

