The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

KPA-Tracker: Towards Robust and Real-Time Category-Level Articulated Object
6D Pose Tracking
Liu Liu1 * , Anran Huang1 * , Qi Wu2 , Dan Guo1† , Xun Yang3 , Meng Wang1
1

Hefei University of Technology
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
University of Science and Technology of China
{liuliu, guodan, wangmeng}@hfut.edu.cn, 2459259637@qq.com, robotics qi@sjtu.edu.cn, xyang21@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2022b,a, 2023), articulation pose tracking begins to attract
attention from computer vision researchers in recent years.
Given a sequence of point clouds for articulated object motion as well as the initialized per-part poses from the first
frame, the pose tracker aims to update those for the rest
frames (Weng et al. 2021).
Under this problem setting, some works attempt to transfer the static articulation pose estimation methods such as
NOCS (Wang et al. 2019a) and A-NCSH (Li et al. 2020)
into pose tracking task (Weng et al. 2021) but suffer from the
following issues: (1) they rely on learning the object features
from the visible points, which results in incomplete shape
and kinematics modeling under the camera views with selfocclusion. (2) they require per-pixel representation learning
that hinders the performance of tracking speed on the video.
Thus, these limitations prevent the category-level articulated
object trackers from achieving robust and real-time tracking
performance.
In this paper, targeting at building a robust and realtime articulated object tracking approach, we propose KPATracker, a novel 3D KeyPoint based Articulated object
pose Tracking framework. Given an initial articulated object pose at the first frame, our KPA-Tracker is to continuously track the 6D pose for each individual rigid part of an
articulated object with learned 3D keypoints from the adjacent frames. The main motivation of our KPA-tacker is to
track the per-part poses by registering a list of ordered 3D
keypoints, which are learned to model the amodal shape explicitly from the point cloud observation. Exploiting these
ordered 3D keypoints, KPA-Tracker might alleviate the effect of invisible parts and achieve more robust tracking performance. In addition, the pose tracker can more effectively
compute the pose increment between two frames due to the
sparsity of the keypoints.
In our KPA-Tracker, to relieve the difficulty of predicting the pose for the observed point cloud in camera space,
we first canonicalize the input space at the current frame by
transforming the point cloud using the inverse poses from
the previous frame. This strategy formulates the articulated
object tracking as an inter-frame pose increment estimation
task. Next, we propose KPA-Gen, an unsupervised manner
to automatically generate and train a sequence of ordered
sparse 3D keypoints as articulation modeling for per-part
representation, which can be used as supervision for KPA-

Our life is populated with articulated objects. Current
category-level articulation estimation works largely focus on
predicting part-level 6D poses on static point cloud observations. In this paper, we tackle the problem of categorylevel online robust and real-time 6D pose tracking of articulated objects, where we propose KPA-Tracker, a novel 3D
KeyPoint based Articulated object pose Tracker. Given an
RGB-D image or a partial point cloud at the current frame
as well as the estimated per-part 6D poses from the last
frame, our KPA-Tracker can effectively update the poses with
learned 3D keypoints between the adjacent frames. Specifically, we first canonicalize the input point cloud and formulate the pose tracking as an inter-frame pose increment estimation task. To learn consistent and separate 3D keypoints
for every rigid part, we build KPA-Gen that outputs the highquality ordered 3D keypoints in an unsupervised manner.
During pose tracking on the whole video, we further propose
a keypoint-based articulation tracking algorithm that mines
keyframes as reference for accurate pose updating. We provide extensive experiments on validating our KPA-Tracker
on various datasets ranging from synthetic point cloud observation to real-world scenarios, which demonstrates the
superior performance and robustness of the KPA-Tracker.
We believe that our work has the potential to be applied in
many fields including robotics, embodied intelligence and
augmented reality. All the datasets and codes are available
at https://github.com/hhhhhar/KPA-Tracker.

Introduction
Articulated objects are very common in daily life. Accurately estimating and tracking 6D pose is crucial for a variety
of computer vision and robotics applications, such as robot
manipulation (Xiong et al. 2023; Geng et al. 2023), visual
understanding (Li, Guo, and Wang 2021; Guo, Wang, and
Wang 2021), human object interaction (Yang et al. 2022b,a;
Li et al. 2023), embodied intelligence (Romero, Tzionas,
and Black 2017; Fu et al. 2022) and VR/AR applications
(Clark, Newman, and Dutta 2022). Unlike category-level articulated object pose estimation that predicts 6D poses from
static point cloud or RGB-D image observations (Liu et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3684

