The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Rethinking Multi-Scale Representations in Deep Deraining Transformer
Hongming Chen1 , Xiang Chen2∗ , Jiyang Lu1 , Yufeng Li1 *
1

2

College of Electronic Information Engineering, Shenyang Aerospace University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{chenhongming,lujiyang1}@stu.sau.edu.cn, chenxiang@njust.edu.cn, liyufeng@sau.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Transformer-based image deraining methods depend
mostly on fixed single-input single-output U-Net architecture.
In fact, this not only neglects the potentially explicit information from multiple image scales, but also lacks the capability
of exploring the complementary implicit information across
different scales. In this work, we rethink the multi-scale representations and design an effective multi-input multi-output
framework that constructs intra- and inter-scale hierarchical
modulation to better facilitate rain removal and help image
restoration. We observe that rain levels reduce dramatically
in coarser image scales, thus proposing to restore rain-free results from the coarsest scale to the finest scale in image pyramid inputs, which also alleviates the difficulty of model learning. Specifically, we integrate a sparsity-compensated Transformer block and a frequency-enhanced convolutional block
into a coupled representation module, in order to jointly learn
the intra-scale content-aware features. To facilitate representations learned at different scales to communicate with each
other, we leverage a gated fusion module to adaptively aggregate the inter-scale spatial-aware features, which are rich in
correlated information of rain appearances, leading to highquality results. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
model achieves consistent gains on five benchmarks.

Uformer
Restormer
IDT
DRSformer
Input 1

Output 1

Our method

Input 2

Input 3

Output 3

Output 2

Figure 1: The architectures of deep deraining Transformers.
Compared to existing models, our method first introduces a
coarse-to-fine scheme to better capture multi-scale representations (intra-scale and inter-scale hierarchical modulation).

the field of image rain removal (Yang et al. 2020). CNNbased methods (Jiang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022) excel in
their ability to learn intricate mappings between rainy and
clean images, allowing them to effectively handle various
shapes, sizes, and densities of rain streaks. More recently,
Transformer-based methods (Chen et al. 2023a; Wang et al.
2022; Xiao et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023b) have demonstrated remarkable performance in image deraining, primarily due to their ability to model non-local information, which
is crucial for achieving high-quality image reconstruction.
Despite achieving impressive performance, we note that
existing deep image deraining Transformers depend mostly
on single-input single-output architecture. Figure 1 provides
a pipeline for network architecture. By this way, it not only
neglects the potentially explicit information from multiple
image scales, but also lacks the capability of exploring the
complementary implicit information across different scales.
In general, multi-scale visual information flow, encompassing feature representations at both small (global contextual)
and large (local connectivity) scales, was frequently used in
computer vision, particularly the solution of creating feature
pyramids from image pyramid inputs (Chen, Zhu, and Gong
2017; Jiang et al. 2020; Mao et al. 2023). Thus, it is of great

Introduction
Adverse visual conditions have become a major obstacle to
the application of artificial intelligence, especially computer
vision. As one of the harsh environments, rainy days have
sparked a wave of research on low-level vision communities
in recent years. The objective of single image deraining is to
remove or reduce the undesired degradation caused by rain
from input images, enhancing its visual quality and improving the accuracy of perception system (Chen et al. 2022).
Over the years, numerous techniques have been proposed
to address the image deraining problem. Early prior-based
methods (Kang, Lin, and Fu 2011; Chen and Hsu 2013; Luo,
Xu, and Ji 2015; Li et al. 2016) utilize prior information
about clean images or specific characteristics of rain streaks
to guide the restoration process. Afterwards, the emergence
of deep learning has attracted significant advancements in
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1046

