The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Robust Distributed Gradient Aggregation
Using Projections onto Gradient Manifolds
Kwang In Kim
POSTECH
kimkin@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the distributed gradient aggregation problem where
individual clients contribute to learning a central model by
sharing parameter gradients constructed from local losses.
However, errors in some gradients, caused by low-quality data
or adversaries, can degrade the learning process when naively
combined. Existing robust gradient aggregation approaches
assume that local data represent the global data-generating
distribution, which may not always apply to heterogeneous
(non-i.i.d.) client data. We propose a new algorithm that can
robustly aggregate gradients from potentially heterogeneous
clients. Our approach leverages the manifold structure inherent in heterogeneous client gradients and evaluates gradient
anomaly degrees by projecting them onto this manifold. This
algorithm is implemented as a simple and efficient method that
accumulates random projections within the subspace defined
by the nearest neighbors within a gradient cloud. Our experiments demonstrate consistent performance improvements over
state-of-the-art robust aggregation algorithms.

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of deep learning depends on diverse and
rich data that accurately represent diverse facets of real-world
applications. However, collecting and maintaining such large
datasets centrally can be prohibitively expensive. To address
this, in distributed collaborative learning, such as federated
learning, local clients (devices or sites that participate in
the learning process) individually manage data. Often, such
client datasets are kept undisclosed. For instance, medical or
healthcare organizations would want to contribute to building
a neural network model while ensuring the privacy of patients
and experimental participants.
Training a model in such privacy-preserving environments
is coordinated by a centralized server that stores only the
model parameters. During each training step, the server distributes the parameters to participating clients who then use
their respective local data to calculate their updates, i.e., the
loss gradients with respect to the parameters. These local
updates are then sent back to the server to be combined and
update the global model.
Existing collaborative learning approaches typically assume that all clients possess clean and high-quality data.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13151

However, in real-world applications, data quality can vary
significantly. For example, some clients have highly noisy labels due to the limited availability of experienced annotators,
while other clients may be compromised by adversaries. Additionally, some clients might attempt to free-ride, i.e., they
wish to use the trained model without contributing adequate
data (Fang and Ye 2022). Such affected clients can transfer arbitrarily erroneous or nonsensical gradients, which can
severely degrade the final model’s performance if combined
straightforwardly.
Robustness against noisy examples and adversarial attacks
has been extensively studied in traditional centralized learning environments. However, existing techniques typically require access to the training data, e.g., to build a noise model or
design noise-robust losses; therefore, they are not directly applicable to privacy-preserving distributed learning (see Sec. 2
for examples). For collaborative learning, (Turan et al. 2022)
presented a robust gradient aggregation scheme assuming a
known number of affected clients, while (Fang and Ye 2022)
proposed to store a separate dataset in the server to identify
outliers. Recently, (Kim 2022) formulated the gradient aggregation problem into an iteratively reweighted averaging
process. The resulting algorithm does not require separate
datasets or information on affected clients but is limited to
cases where client data are roughly homogeneous (Sec. 3.2).
In this paper, we present a novel gradient aggregation algorithm that can handle situations where there is no known
information on the client data or the types of noise or attacks,
and it can be applied to both heterogeneous and homogeneous clients. Our algorithm leverages the manifold structure
of client gradients and assesses the degrees of anomaly of
the gradients by projecting them onto this manifold. This is
achieved through an intuitive and computationally efficient
algorithm that accumulates random projections onto the nearest neighbors in the point cloud of sample gradients. In the
experiments with six benchmarks, our algorithm consistently
outperformed both the existing robust gradient aggregation algorithm and a baseline uniform gradient averaging approach.

2

Related Work

Robust (Centralized) Learning. State-of-the-art approaches include the use of robust losses (Xu et al. 2019; van
Rooyen, Menon, and Williamson 2015; Brooks 2011), regularizers (Liu et al. 2020), filtering out noisy examples (Huang

