The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Learning Spatially Collaged Fourier Bases for Implicit Neural Representation
Jason Chun Lok Li* , Chang Liu* , Binxiao Huang, Ngai Wong
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
{jasonlcl, lcon7, huangbx7}@connect.hku.hk, nwong@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Existing approaches to Implicit Neural Representation (INR)
can be interpreted as a global scene representation via a linear
combination of Fourier bases of different frequencies. However, such universal basis functions can limit the representation capability in local regions where a specific component is
unnecessary, resulting in unpleasant artifacts. To this end, we
introduce a learnable spatial mask that effectively dispatches
distinct Fourier bases into respective regions. This translates
into collaging Fourier patches, thus enabling an accurate representation of complex signals. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate the superior reconstruction quality of the proposed approach over existing baselines across various INR
tasks, including image fitting, video representation, and 3D
shape representation. Our method outperforms all other baselines, improving the image fitting PSNR by over 3dB and 3D
reconstruction to 98.81 IoU and 0.0011 Chamfer Distance.

Figure 1: (Left) traditional INR such as SIREN can be
viewed as a linear combination of Fourier features of different frequencies, where the globally added Fourier features
are universally applied to the whole frame even for some regions where these frequencies are unnecessary. (Right) The
proposed SCONE utilizes spatial masks for each Fourier
feature and collages the frequency patches to form a more
precise reconstruction.

Introduction
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) has attracted increased attention lately as an effective framework for encoding complex signals in diverse fields, encompassing image fitting, 3D shape representation, and novel view synthesis (Sitzmann et al. 2020; Saragadam et al. 2023; Mildenhall et al. 2021). Using INR, discontinuous signals such as
images, videos, and 3D point clouds can be represented by
a lightweight neural network, which outputs corresponding
data values given the query coordinates. Hence, the neural
network transforms the original discontinuous data into a
continuous latent mapping function, which sheds new light
on several downstream tasks, for example, data compression, 3D shape reconstruction, and super-resolution (Sitzmann et al. 2020; Saragadam et al. 2023).
Albeit the success of INR, conventional methods usually
model the target signal through a linear combination of universal basis functions spanning various frequencies (Sitzmann et al. 2020; Tancik et al. 2020; Fathony et al. 2020),
which are usually waveform Fourier features. Consequently,
these methods inevitably introduce the same strength of each
basis feature to the whole space, even when the component

is not necessary for certain regions. Even though such unnecessary components can be counteracted by combining a
large number of different frequency bases, this strains the
network and limits its representability. As also pointed out
by (Dou et al. 2023), the global combination manner results
in larger model sizes and/or sub-optimal performance, especially for local regions where existing methods can introduce
undesirable artifacts and fuzzy details.
In view of such limitation, this paper presents a simple yet effective architecture, dubbed Spatially Collaged
cOordinate NEtworks (SCONE). In contrast to existing approaches employing a combination of global Fourier features, SCONE incorporates learnable spatial masks to allocate specific Fourier bases to their corresponding regions.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, SCONE learns a spatial mask
for each Fourier feature to avoid adding the wave component in regions where it is unnecessary. Consequently,
SCONE distinguishes between the distinct tasks of learning
geometry-dependent masks and Fourier features, permitting
the Fourier features to be spatially and adaptively decoupled.
By adopting a different paradigm of spatial collaging instead of global overlaying, the proposed technique facilitates
a more precise and granular representation of intricate signals through the efficient assembly of mask-cropped Fourier

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13492

