The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

SoftCLIP: Softer Cross-Modal Alignment Makes CLIP Stronger
Yuting Gao1 * , Jinfeng Liu1,2 * , Zihan Xu1 * ,
Tong Wu1 , Enwei Zhang1 , Ke Li1 , Jie Yang2 , Wei Liu2† , Xing Sun1†
1

Tencent Youtu Lab
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yutinggao@tencent.com, ljf19991226@sjtu.edu.cn, ianxxu@tencent.com
2

Abstract

Caption1: Soccer
winger and football
player vie for the ball
during semi.

(i)

During the preceding biennium, vision-language pre-training
has achieved noteworthy success on several downstream
tasks. Nevertheless, acquiring high-quality image-text pairs,
where the pairs are entirely exclusive of each other, remains
a challenging task, and noise exists in the commonly used
datasets. To address this issue, we propose SoftCLIP, a novel
approach that relaxes the strict one-to-one constraint and
achieves a soft cross-modal alignment by introducing a softened target, which is generated from the fine-grained intramodal self-similarity. The intra-modal guidance is indicative
to enable two pairs have some local similarities and model
many-to-many relationships between the two modalities. Besides, since the positive still dominates in the softened target distribution, we disentangle the negatives in the distribution to further boost the relation alignment with the negatives
in the cross-modal learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of SoftCLIP. In particular, on ImageNet zero-shot classification task, using CC3M/CC12M as
pre-training dataset, SoftCLIP brings a top-1 accuracy improvement of 6.8%/7.2% over the CLIP baseline.

(ii)

Caption2: Football
player vies with football
player for the ball during
sports association.

(iii)

Caption3: Football player
celebrates after scoring
the opening goal with
football player during
football league.

Images

Captions

(a)

Cap1

1

0

0

Cap2

0

1

0

Cap3

0

0

1

Hard Label

Cap1 0.55 0.30 0.15
Cap2 0.33 0.48 0.19
Cap3 0.29 0.31 0.60

Soft Label

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Three image-text pairs randomly sampled
from CC3M dataset have some local similarities, suggesting
the ubiquitous many-to-many relationships. (b) Using finegrained intra-modal self-similarity as the softened target can
allow for the existence of some similarities among unpaired
image and text.

Introduction
Since OpenAI proposed Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021), large-scale visionlanguage pre-training (VLP) has achieved rapid development. Many approaches (Li et al. 2021b; Yao et al. 2021;
Gao et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021a) have been proposed and
achieved remarkable success on several downstream tasks.
Among these methods, the alignment of the visual and linguistic modalities is a critical component, often requiring the
use of image-text contrastive learning. This learning process
aims to bring paired image and text samples closer while
simultaneously pushing unpaired samples away, necessitating the complete mutual exclusivity between any two unpaired samples. However, acquiring high-quality image-text
pairs is a challenging task, owing to the fact that the majority of image-text pairs are obtained through web crawling over the Internet, which frequently results in significant
noise. As evidenced in Figure 1(a), there are some local similarities between the three pairs, the caption of (i) can also be

used to describe the image (ii) and (iii), indicating many-tomany relationships instead of perfect one-to-one correspondences, which is also pointed out in CLIP-PSD (Andonian,
Chen, and Hamid 2022). Therefore, it is too harsh and unreasonable to completely push away the image (i) and the
text (ii)/(iii). Recent work PyramidCLIP (Gao et al. 2022)
also noticed this problem and proposed to use label smoothing (Szegedy et al. 2016) to mitigate this problem. However, assigning equal weight to all the negative samples is
improper and ignores the information pertaining to their relationships. The neglect of the potential distinctions among
negative samples results in the underutilization of valuable
information and an incomplete understanding of the underlying data structure.
In this paper, we propose SoftCLIP, a novel approach that
relaxes the strict one-to-one contrastive constraint and leverages the intra-modal discriminative information to guide the
interaction between visual and linguistic modalities. Specifically, we employ fine-grained intra-modal self-similarities
as the softened targets for soft cross-modal alignments. Fig-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1860

