The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Explicitly Perceiving and Preserving the Local Geometric Structures
for 3D Point Cloud Attack
Daizong Liu and Wei Hu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, forhuwei@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Chamfer Distance

Deep learning models for point clouds have shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which have received increasing attention in various safety-critical applications such as
autonomous driving, robotics, and surveillance. Existing 3D
attack methods generally employ global distance losses to implicitly constrain the point-wise perturbations for optimization. However, these simple losses are quite difficult to accurately measure and restrict the proper 3D geometry as point
clouds are highly structured. Although few recent works try
to exploit additional shape-aware surface knowledge to globally constrain the point position, they still fail to preserve the
detailed point-to-point geometric dependency in different local regions. To this end, in this paper, we propose a novel
Multi-grained Geometry-aware Attack (MGA), which explicitly captures the local topology characteristics in different 3D
regions for adversarial constraint. Specifically, we first develop multi-scale local spectral filter banks adapting to different 3D object shapes to explore potential geometric structures
in different local regions. Considering that objects may contain complex geometries, we then extend each filter bank into
multi-layer ones to gradually capture different-granularity
topology contexts of the same region in a coarse-to-fine manner. Hence, the focused local geometries will be highlighted
in the coefficients calculated by the filtering process. At last,
by restricting these coefficients between benign and adversarial samples, our MGA is able to properly measure and preserve the detailed geometry contexts in the whole 3D object
with trivial perturbations. Experiments demonstrate that our
attack can achieve superior performance on various 3D classification models, with satisfying adversarial imperceptibility
and strong resistance to different defense methods.

Global
Constraint

Hausdorff Distance

GT

GT
Curvature
Matching
Adv

Surface
Constraint

Keeping
Smooth

Adv

(a) Implicit global-distance constraint

(b) Global-surface constraint

blading

GT

airfoil

engines

(c) Complex and diverse local geometric structures of 3D object

GT

global spectrum

low-frequency

tail

nose

engine

filtering

...
Local spectral filter banks

(d) We utilize local filters to capture the detailed geometries

Figure 1: Existing 3D attackers simply utilize (a) global distance losses or (b) surface constraints to restrict the perturbations. Since 3D objects generally contain (c) diverse geometric characteristics in different local regions, they fail to
comprehend and preserve corresponding detailed contexts.
In this paper, we propose to exploit (d) local spectral filters
to perceive the complex geometric structures in different regions for generating imperceptible adversarial samples.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014;
Szegedy et al. 2013), which add visually indistinguishable
perturbations to network inputs but lead to incorrect prediction results. Significant progress has been made in adversarial attacks on 2D images, where many methods (Dong et al.
2018; Madry et al. 2017; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Tu et al. 2019) learn to add imperceptible pixelwise noise. Nevertheless, adversarial attacks on 3D depth or

point cloud data are still relatively underexplored. Different
from images, point clouds are discrete representations of 3D
objects or scenes (Huang, Liu, and Hu 2023; Hu, Liu, and
Hu 2023), receiving increasing attention in various 3D applications such as autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2017b)
and medical data analysis (Singh et al. 2020). Similarly to

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3576

