The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Label Attentive Distillation for GNN-Based Graph Classification
Xiaobin Hong1 , Wenzhong Li1 * , Chaoqun Wang2 , Mingkai Lin1 , Sanglu Lu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
{xiaobinhong, mingkai}@smail.nju.edu.cn, chaoqunwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {lwz, sanglu}@nju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful
tool for modeling graph-structured data, exhibiting remarkable potential in applications such as social networks, recommendation systems, and molecular structures. However,
the conventional GNNs perform node-level feature aggregation from neighbors without considering graph-label information, which leads to the misaligned embedding problem that may cause a detrimental effect on graph-level tasks
such as graph classification. In this paper, we propose a
novel label-attentive distillation method called LAD-GNN
for graph representation learning to solve this problem. It alternatively trains a teacher model and a student GNN with
a distillation-based approach. In the teacher model, a labelattentive encoder is proposed to encode the label information fusing with the node features to generate ideal embedding. In the student model, the ideal embedding is used as
intermediate supervision to urge the student GNN to learn
class-friendly node embedding to facilitate graph-level tasks.
Generally, LAD-GNN is an enhanced GNN training approach
that can be incorporated with arbitrary GNN backbone to improve performance without significant increase of computational cost. Extensive experiments with 7 GNN backbones
based on 10 benchmark datasets show that LAD-GNN improves the SOTA GNNs in graph classification accuracy. The
source codes of LAD-GNN are publicly available on https:
//github.com/XiaobinHong/LAD-GNN.

Graph
Pooling

Readout

GNN Backbone

Input Graph

Classifier

Predict

(a)
Node embedding
Label embedding

0.4
0.3

Positive correlation
Negative correlation

0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2

GCN

(b)

GAT

GIN

SAGE OURS

(c)

Figure 1: (a) The pipeline of conventional GNN-based graph
classification. (b) Illustration of misaligned node embeddings and label embeddings for GraphSAGE on the MUTAG dataset, where different colors denote different graph
classes. (c) The violin plots of correlation statistics of
node/label embeddings on the MUTAG dataset. It shows that
our method has fewer negative correlations and much higher
positive correlation scores compared to the other GNNs.

The conventional pipeline of GNN-based graph classification is shown in Fig. 1 (a), which consists of the following processes: (1) The input graph is fed into a GNN backbone to generate node embedding by aggregating neighbors’
information via message passing; (2) A graph-level representation is formed by applying a readout function (e.g.,
graph pooling (Duvenaud et al. 2015)) on the node embedding; (3) The graph representation is fed to a classifier, which is trained with supervised labels and then applied for graph classification. However, a major issue of
the conventional GNN-based pipeline for graph classification lies in that it conducts node embeddings without
considering graph-level information. As a result, the readout function pools the diverse local node embeddings to
form a global graph representation, which exists the embedding misalignment problem that can jeopardize the accuracy of graph-level task. For example, Fig. 1 (b) shows
the label embeddings and node embeddings with the popular

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016,
2017) are adept at converting unstructured data into lowdimensional representations by effectively capturing both
node features and topological dependencies. The GNN
learning tasks broadly focused on node classification, link
prediction, and graph classification (You et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2021), which have demonstrated their effectiveness in various fields such as protein-to-protein interaction (Nouranizadeh et al. 2021), molecular medicine (Li
et al. 2022b) information retrieval (Chen et al. 2022), etc.
This paper focuses on graph classification, a graph-level task
that aims to learn a graph representation with GNNs to predict the graph labels.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8499

