The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FedLF: Layer-Wise Fair Federated Learning
Zibin Pan1,2 , Chi Li1,4 , Fangchen Yu1 , Shuyi Wang1,2 , Haijin Wang1 ,
Xiaoying Tang∗1,2,3 , Junhua Zhao* 1,2
1

The School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
The Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
zibinpan@link.cuhk.edu.cn, chili@link.cuhk.edu.cn, fangchenyu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, shuyiwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
haijinwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, tangxiaoying@cuhk.edu.cn, zhaojunhua@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract
Fairness has become an important concern in Federated
Learning (FL). An unfair model that performs well for some
clients while performing poorly for others can reduce the
willingness of clients to participate. In this work, we identify
a direct cause of unfairness in FL - the use of an unfair direction to update the global model, which favors some clients
while conflicting with other clients’ gradients at the model
and layer levels. To address these issues, we propose a layerwise fair Federated Learning algorithm (FedLF). Firstly, we
formulate a multi-objective optimization problem with an effective fair-driven objective for FL. A layer-wise fair direction is then calculated to mitigate the model and layer-level
gradient conflicts and reduce the improvement bias. We further provide the theoretical analysis on how FedLF can improve fairness and guarantee convergence. Extensive experiments on different learning tasks and models demonstrate
that FedLF outperforms the SOTA FL algorithms in terms
of accuracy and fairness. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zibinpan/FedLF.

1

Figure 1: A demo of two clients. (a) shows gradients and
directions. Obtained by previous algorithms, direction d¯t
conflicts with client 2. dt and d˜t are directions obtained by
FedLF with/without the fair-driven objective. (b) describes
several objective vectors of the models updated by different
directions. F (ω t ) depicts clients’ objectives at round t.

(Pan et al. 2023) developed this approach and proposed FedMDFG to calculate a fair-descent direction for the model update that doesn’t conflict with clients’ gradient in the model
level, which made progress in enhancing FL fairness.
In this work, we extend this proactive way to improve fairness in FL. We observe that in addition to the model-level
gradient conflict, there are also layer-level gradient conflicts
that should be mitigated when determining a fair direction
for the model update. In conclusion, we summarize that
there exist three primary challenges when computing a fair
direction: model-level gradient conflicts, improvement bias,
and layer-level gradient conflicts.
Challenge 1: Model-level gradient conflict. Due to the
data heterogeneity of clients, clients’ gradients easily conflict with each other (Wang et al. 2021), i.e., at round t,
there exist clients i, j whose gradients git and gjt satisfy
git · gjt < 0. When updating the model, a simple-aggregated
direction d¯t will easily conflict with some clients’ gradients,
i.e., d¯t · git > 0, thus it will reduce the model’s performance
on those clients and harm fairness (see Fig. 1).
Challenge 2: Improvement bias. It is not enough to
enhance fairness only by addressing the above challenge.
Because despite a direction that doesn’t conflict with each
client’s gradient can improve the model performance on

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a popular machine learning
paradigm that allows clients to collaboratively train a global
model without sharing data. It is a promising methodology
to address data island and privacy issues (Yu et al. 2022),
where clients are able to obtain a more generalized model
than local learning. However, due to many factors such as
data heterogeneity, intermittent client participation, client
dropout, etc., the global FL model is prone to be unfair since
it favors part of clients and may perform poorly on some
others (Li et al. 2020b; Kairouz et al. 2021), which would
reduce their willingness to participate in FL.
Improving fairness in FL has drawn increased attention
recently (Shi, Yu, and Leung 2021; Zhou et al. 2021; Pan
et al. 2023). (Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh 2019) proposed AFL,
aiming to prevent the overfitting of certain clients at the
expense of others. Recent studies have explored proactive
ways to enhance fairness by mitigating model-level gradient
conflicts among clients (Wang et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2022).
* Xiaoying Tang and Junhua Zhao are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14527

