The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Complete Neural Networks for Complete Euclidean Graphs
Snir Hordan1 , Tal Amir1 , Steven J. Gortler2 , Nadav Dym1, 3
1
Faculty of Mathematics, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
3
Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{snirhordan, talamir}@campus.technion.ac.il, sjg@cs.harvard.edu, nadavdym@technion.ac.il
2

Abstract

tecture is universal, but the construction in their proof requires arbitrarily high-order representations of the rotation
group. Similarly, universality can be obtained using highorder representations of the permutation group (Lim et al.
2022). However, before this work, it was not known whether
the same theoretical guarantees can be achieved by realistic point-cloud architectures that use low-dimensional representations, and whose complexity has a mild polynomial
dependency on the data dimension. In the words of (Pozdnyakov and Ceriotti 2022): ”...provably universal equivariant frameworks are such in the limit in which they generate high-order correlations. . . It is an interesting, and open,
question whether a given order suffices to guarantee complete resolving power.” (p. 6). We note that it is known that
separation of point clouds in polynomial time in n is possible, assuming that d is fixed (e.g., d = 3) (Arvind and Rattan
2014; Dym and Kovalsky 2019; Kurlin 2022). What still remains to be established is whether separation is achievable
for common invariant machine learning models, and more
generally, whether separation can be achieved by computing a continuous invariant feature that is piecewise differentiable.
In this paper, we give what seems to be the first positive answer to this question. We focus on analyzing a popular method for the construction of invariant point-cloud networks via Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). This is done in
two steps: first, point clouds are represented as a Euclidean
graph- which we define to be a complete weighted graph
whose edge features are simple, rotation-invariant features:
the inner products between pairs of (centralized) points. We
then apply permutation-invariant Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) to the Euclidean graphs to obtain a rotation- and
permutation-invariant global point-cloud feature. This leads
to a rich family of invariant point-cloud architectures, which
is determined by the type of GNN chosen.
The most straightforward implementation of this idea
would be to apply the popular message passing GNNs to the
Euclidean graphs. One could also consider applying more
expressive GNNs. For combinatorial graphs, it is known that
message-passing GNNs are only as expressive as the 1-WL
graph isomorphism test. There exists a hierarchy of k-WL
graph isomorphism tests, where larger values of k correspond to more expressive, and more expensive, graph isomorphism tests. There are also corresponding GNNs that

Neural networks for point clouds, which respect their natural invariance to permutation and rigid motion, have enjoyed recent success in modeling geometric phenomena, from
molecular dynamics to recommender systems. Yet, to date,
no model with polynomial complexity is known to be complete, that is, able to distinguish between any pair of nonisomorphic point clouds. We fill this theoretical gap by showing that point clouds can be completely determined, up to permutation and rigid motion, by applying the 3-WL graph isomorphism test to the point cloud’s centralized Gram matrix.
Moreover, we formulate an Euclidean variant of the 2-WL
test and show that it is also sufficient to achieve completeness. We then show how our complete Euclidean WL tests
can be simulated by an Euclidean graph neural network of
moderate size and demonstrate their separation capability on
highly symmetrical point clouds.

Introduction
A point cloud is a collection of n points in Rd , where typically in applications d = 3. Machine learning on point
clouds is an important task with applications in chemistry
(Gilmer et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2022), physical systems
(Finzi, Welling, and Wilson 2021), and image processing
(Ma et al. 2023). Many successful architectures for point
clouds are invariant by construction to the natural symmetries of point clouds: permutations and rigid motions.
The rapidly increasing literature on point-cloud networks
with permutation and rigid-motion symmetries has motivated research aimed at theoretically understanding the expressive power of the various architectures. This analysis
typically focuses on two closely related concepts: Separation and Universality. We say an invariant architecture is
separating, or complete, if it can assign distinct values to
any pair of point clouds that are not related by symmetry.
An invariant architecture is universal if it can approximate
all continuous invariant functions on compact sets. Generally speaking, these two concepts are essentially equivalent,
as discussed in (Villar et al. 2021; Joshi et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2019), and in our context, in Appendix A.
Dym and Maron (2021) proved that the well-known Tensor Field Network (Thomas et al. 2018) invariant archiCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12482

