The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stochastic Bayesian Optimization with Unknown Continuous Context Distribution
via Kernel Density Estimation
Xiaobin Huang, Lei Song, Ke Xue, Chao Qian*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{huangxb, songl, xuek, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

bid-ask spread and borrowing cost in portfolio optimization (Boyd et al. 2017; Cakmak et al. 2020), and temperature in crop size optimization (Tay et al. 2022). There has
been some BO literature taking context variable into account with different objectives. Robust optimization aims
to find solutions that perform well in the worst-case scenario (Marzat, Walter, and Piet-Lahanier 2013; Bogunovic
et al. 2018), while stochastic optimization (SO) focuses on
finding solutions that perform well in expectation (Williams
2000; Xie et al. 2012; Beland and Nair 2019; Kirschner
and Krause 2019; Toscano-Palmerin and Frazier 2022).
Risk optimization considers risk measures such as meanvariance (Iwazaki, Inatsu, and Takeuchi 2021), value at risk
(VaR) (Cakmak et al. 2020; Nguyen et al. 2021) or conditional VaR (Cakmak et al. 2020). However, robust optimization ignores the distribution information of the context, and
most existing works on SO and risk optimization assume
that the distribution of context is known.
Distributionally robust BO (DRBO) (Kirschner et al.
2020; Nguyen et al. 2020; Inatsu et al. 2022; Tay et al. 2022)
is proposed to address problems with unknown context distribution by optimizing the worst expectation over a set of
distributions. Existing DRBO works focus on finite context.
When the context variable is in a continuous space, which
is common (e.g., temperature in crop size optimization, and
energy output in wind power prediction (Tay et al. 2022))
in practice, they usually discretize the space. However, the
computational complexity of the inner convex optimization
in DRBO is at least cubed to the size |C| of context space
C (Tay et al. 2022). Smaller |C| leads to poor approximation to the expectation over the continuous space, thus poor
performance, while larger |C| leads to unacceptable computational complexity. While Tay et al. (2022) have developed a method based on fast worst case sensitivity to efficiently approximate and accelerate the inner optimization
problem, it suffers from linear regret due to approximation
errors. Nguyen et al. (2020) used Lagrange multipliers to
accelerate the optimization, but it is limited to the simulator
setting, where the decision makers can select the context.
In this paper, we consider the problem of maximizing the
SO objective maxx Ec∼p(c) [f (x, c)] over the decision variable x ∈ X , where f is a black-box function, and the distribution p of context variable c ∈ C is continuous and unknown. The context is observable after making decisions.

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a sample-efficient method and
has been widely used for optimizing expensive black-box
functions. Recently, there has been a considerable interest in
BO literature in optimizing functions that are affected by context variable in the environment, which is uncontrollable by
decision makers. In this paper, we focus on the optimization
of functions’ expectations over continuous context variable,
subject to an unknown distribution. To address this problem,
we propose two algorithms that employ kernel density estimation to learn the probability density function (PDF) of continuous context variable online. The first algorithm is simpler,
which directly optimizes the expectation under the estimated
PDF. Considering that the estimated PDF may have high estimation error when the true distribution is complicated, we
further propose the second algorithm that optimizes the distributionally robust objective. Theoretical results demonstrate
that both algorithms have sub-linear Bayesian cumulative regret on the expectation objective. Furthermore, we conduct
numerical experiments to empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2015; Frazier
2018) is a popular and sample-efficient method for optimizing expensive black-box functions. BO has shown excellent performance in various fields, such as chemical molecular design (Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018; Griffiths and
Hernández-Lobato 2020), neural architecture search (Klein
et al. 2017; Kandasamy et al. 2018b; Song et al. 2022), and
hyper-parameter tuning (Chen et al. 2018; Qian, Xiong, and
Xue 2020). The typical process of BO involves approximating the objective function by a Gaussian process (GP) surrogate model (Rasmussen and Williams 2006), and then selecting the most valuable point for evaluation by optimizing
an acquisition function based on the posterior of the surrogate model.
In some practical scenarios, uncontrollable context variable from the environment can impact the objective function,
such as customer demand in inventory management (Dai,
Chen, and Birge 2000; Hannah, Powell, and Blei 2010),
* Chao Qian is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12635

