The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Memory-Efficient Prompt Tuning for Incremental Histopathology Classification
Yu Zhu1,3 * , Kang Li1 * † , Lequan Yu2 , Pheng-Ann Heng1 ,
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
{yzhu, kli, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, lqyu@hku.hk

Abstract

have achieved remarkable progress on this task, contemporary studies are not content with the achievements made so
far but strive to upgrade and update model functionality toward perfection by incremental learning (Derakhshani et al.
2022; Li, Yu, and Heng 2022).
One practical yet challenging direction for model upgrading is to incrementally boost its generalization potential over
heterogeneous histopathology data. Depending on the technician skills and digital scanner brands in different medical
centers, the histology data sampled from multiple sites (i.e.,
domain) often exhibit heterogenous appearances after hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, varying from dark blueish
purple to light pinkish purple (Lin et al. 2019). Then, domain
incremental learning (DIL), i.e., a model updating paradigm
that enables the model to progressively adapt to more and
more heterogenous domains as time goes by, would be substantial for robust histopathology classification.
For any updated model, the basic requirement is to keep
the existing capability unaffected, i.e., not catastrophically
forgetting the previously-acquired domains. Moreover, we
expect to enhance its generalization ability, i.e., not only
well adapted to the currently delivered domains but also
the unseen domains that might be encountered in the future. Particularly in the medical field, for each update, the
model would have no access to the early-delivered domains
due to data privacy concerns (Li et al. 2020) and storage
burden (Lin et al. 2019). In addition, the domain identity,
i.e., the label indicating which domain one particular sample
comes from, is erased as part of patient privacy during data
anonymization and would be unavailable to use for model
training and testing during the entire learning lifespan (Gonzalez, Sakas, and Mukhopadhyay 2020).
The straightforward approach is to finetune the previous
model with each sequentially incoming domain one by one.
However, with the absence of past domains and data heterogeneity throughout time, it inevitably overrides and disrupts the parameters learned for past domains, leading to
catastrophic forgetting of them (Li and Hoiem 2017). A
promising way for this issue is to address it from the modelcentric perspective, i.e., isolating the early-acquired parameters (e.g., the whole model) into separate storage and allocating new parameters to acquire the newly-arrived domain (Gonzalez, Sakas, and Mukhopadhyay 2020; Miao
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2019). Despite their effectiveness, most

Recent studies have made remarkable progress in histopathology classification. Based on current successes, contemporary
works proposed to further upgrade the model towards a more
generalizable and robust direction through incrementally
learning from the sequentially delivered domains. Unlike previous parameter isolation based approaches that usually demand massive computation resources during model updating,
we present a memory-efficient prompt tuning framework to
cultivate model generalization potential in economical memory cost. For each incoming domain, we reuse the existing parameters of the initial classification model and attach
lightweight trainable prompts into it for customized tuning.
Considering the domain heterogeneity, we perform decoupled
prompt tuning, where we adopt a domain-specific prompt for
each domain to independently investigate its distinctive characteristics, and one domain-invariant prompt shared across
all domains to continually explore the common content embedding throughout time. All domain-specific prompts will
be appended to the prompt bank and isolated from further
changes to prevent forgetting the distinctive features of earlyseen domains. While the domain-invariant prompt will be
passed on and iteratively evolve by style-augmented prompt
refining to improve model generalization capability over
time. In specific, we construct a graph with existing prompts
and build a style-augmented graph attention network to guide
the domain-invariant prompt exploring the overlapped latent
embedding among all delivered domains for more domaingeneric representations. We have extensively evaluated our
framework with two histopathology tasks, i.e., breast cancer
metastasis classification and epithelium-stroma tissue classification, where our approach yielded superior performance
and memory efficiency over the competing methods.

Introduction
Histopathology classification is a fundamental task in cancer
diagnosis. It aims to specify the malignancy and benignity
of suspected tissues by microscopic examination. The resulting analysis is normally considered the gold standard in
determining the presence and spread of certain cancers (Bejnordi et al. 2017). Although recent deep-learning models
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7802

