The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Positive-Unlabeled Metric Learning Framework for
Document-Level Relation Extraction with Incomplete Labeling
Ye Wang1 , Huazheng Pan1 , Tao Zhang2 , Wen Wu1 , Wenxin Hu1 *
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{yewang, hzpan}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, tao-zhan20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
wwu@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, wxhu@cc.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

2022) noticed that the popular document-level RE dataset
DocRED (Yao et al. 2019) annotated using the recommendrevise scheme contains a large number of unlabeled positive
relations, i.e. false negatives. (Tan et al. 2022b) obtained
a high-quality Re-DocRED dataset by supplementing the
large number of missing relations in DocRED. (Wang et al.
2022) was the first to use positive-unlabeled (PU) learning,
a method of learning risk estimators from positive and unlabeled data, to solve the document-level RE task with incomplete labeling and provided a powerful baseline. Despite
this, they still suffer greatly from distribution bias caused by
incomplete annotation of positive samples, and lack of generalization in the model.
Inspired by these studies, we propose a positiveaugmentation and positive-mixup positive-unlabeled metric
learning framework (P3 M). Firstly, for metric learning in
document-level RE, we initialize an embedding for each relation and an embedding for the none-class relation. During
training, we pull the entity pair embedding closer to the corresponding relation embedding and push it away from the
none-class relation embedding. We adapt this goal to the
positive-unlabeled learning paradigm. Then, due to the fact
that the labeled positive samples are a subset of the overall positive samples, the distribution of the labeled positive
samples cannot approximate the true positive sample distribution, especially in extreme cases of incomplete labeling.
To alleviate this problem, inspired by (Gao, Yao, and Chen
2021), we use the dropout noise (Srivastava et al. 2014)
inherent in the model to augment the positive samples and
experimentally verify the effectiveness of this augmentation.
Finally, to further enhance the model’s generalization, we
use mixup to interpolate between the embeddings of positive
and negative samples. Under the positive-unlabeled setting,
it is not possible to obtain true negative samples, i.e. unlabeled entity pairs may still have some relations. Directly interpolating between the two would introduce noise. Thanks
to the metric learning framework, which puts the embeddings of none-class relation and none-class entity pairs in
the same feature space, we can use the embedding of noneclass relation as pseudo-negative entity pair embedding.
We conduct experiments on the DocRED (Yao et al.
2019) dataset under incomplete labeling and extreme incomplete labeling settings, as well as the ChemDisGene (Zhang
et al. 2022) dataset in the biomedical domain. We improve

The goal of document-level relation extraction (RE) is to
identify relations between entities that span multiple sentences. Recently, incomplete labeling in document-level RE
has received increasing attention, and some studies have used
methods such as positive-unlabeled learning to tackle this issue, but there is still a lot of room for improvement. Motivated
by this, we propose a positive-augmentation and positivemixup positive-unlabeled metric learning framework (P3 M).
Specifically, we formulate document-level RE as a metric
learning problem. We aim to pull the distance closer between entity pair embedding and their corresponding relation embedding, while pushing it farther away from the noneclass relation embedding. Additionally, we adapt the positiveunlabeled learning to this loss objective. In order to improve
the generalizability of the model, we use dropout to augment
positive samples and propose a positive-none-class mixup
method. Extensive experiments show that P3 M improves the
F1 score by approximately 4-10 points in document-level RE
with incomplete labeling, and achieves state-of-the-art results
in fully labeled scenarios. Furthermore, P3 M has also demonstrated robustness to prior estimation bias in incomplete labeled scenarios.

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) involves identifying the relations
between two entities in a given text, which is a fundamental task in information extraction. In the past, most RE research focused on extracting relations within a single sentence (Miwa and Bansal 2016; Zhang, Qi, and Manning
2018). However, more recent work has begun to examine
document-level RE, which involves identifying relations between entities across multiple sentences in a document (Yao
et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Yu, Yang, and
Tian 2022; Zhou and Lee 2022).
Previously, document-level RE focused on fully supervised scenarios. However, due to the fact that the number of
entity pairs is related to the number of entities in a quadratic
way, it is very difficult to fully annotate all the relations in
a document. This has made the problem of incomplete labeling a common problem in document-level RE and has attracted increasing attention from researchers. (Huang et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19197

