The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

RGMComm: Return Gap Minimization via Discrete Communications in
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Jingdi Chen1 , Tian Lan1 , Carlee Joe-Wong2
1

The George Washington University
2
Carnegie Mellon University
jingdic@gwu.edu, tlan@gwu.edu, cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

However, continuous communication messages refer to numerical vectors originating from a continuous space. These
vectors are generated by encoding local information/features
using Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) or attention networks.
This is largely a black-box approach with high communication overhead and offers little explainability of the messages (Chen et al. 2023). Efforts on generating discrete communication messages enable agents to broadcast one-hot vectors apt for solving particular tasks. However, discretizing
messages through the imposition of one-hot vectors, as outlined in (Lowe et al. 2017; Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus
2016; Freed et al. 2020; Lazaridou and Baroni 2020; Li et al.
2022), inherently precludes agents from learning some desirable properties of the messages. This is because the onehot vectors do not establish relationships between messages,
since each one-hot vector remains orthogonal to and equally
distant from all other one-hot vectors. Some recent works try
to address the limitations of one-hot communication by endowing agents with learnable messages (Tucker et al. 2021)
or discretized bottleneck layer outputs of autoencoders and
using them as communication vectors (Tucker et al. 2022),
but none of these methods provides average return guarantees
for a Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (Dec-POMDP) with communication, and the communication module in (Tucker et al. 2022) still requires a
large vocabulary size.

Communication is crucial for solving cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning tasks in partially observable Markov
Decision Processes. Existing works often rely on black-box
methods to encode local information/features into messages
shared with other agents, leading to the generation of continuous messages with high communication overhead and
poor interpretability. Prior attempts at discrete communication
methods generate one-hot vectors trained as part of agents’
actions and use the Gumbel softmax operation for calculating
message gradients, which are all heuristic designs that do not
provide any quantitative guarantees on the expected return.
This paper establishes an upper bound on the return gap between an ideal policy with full observability and an optimal
partially observable policy with discrete communication. This
result enables us to recast multi-agent communication into a
novel online clustering problem over the local observations
at each agent, with messages as cluster labels and the upper
bound on the return gap as clustering loss. To minimize the
return gap, we propose the Return-Gap-Minimization Communication (RGMComm) algorithm, which is a surprisingly
simple design of discrete message generation functions and
is integrated with reinforcement learning through the utilization of a novel Regularized Information Maximization loss
function, which incorporates cosine-distance as the clustering
metric. Evaluations show that RGMComm significantly outperforms state-of-the-art multi-agent communication baselines
and can achieve nearly optimal returns with few-bit messages
that are naturally interpretable.

Introduction
In multi-agent tasks, communication is necessary to successfully complete tasks when agents have partial observability of the environment. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently seen success in scenarios that require communication (Cao et al. 2013). Existing approaches
to multi-agent communications have considered continuous
communication (Foerster et al. 2016; Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and
Fergus 2016; Lowe et al. 2017; Jiang and Lu 2018; Wang
et al. 2019; Rangwala and Williams 2020) and discrete communication (Mordatch and Abbeel 2017; Freed et al. 2020;
Lazaridou and Baroni 2020; Li et al. 2022; Tucker et al. 2022).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17327

In this paper, we propose a discrete MARL communication framework, Return-Gap-Minimization Communication
(RGMComm), that is proven to achieve a closed-form guarantee on optimal expected average return for Dec-POMDPs.
It analyzes what information in an agent’s local observations
is relevant for other agents’ decision-making (for minimizing the resulting return gap) and supports sharing messages
between MARL agents using any finite-size discrete alphabet. More precisely, consider a Dec-POMDP problem with
n agents. Each agent j computes a message mj sent to each
other agent i based on its local observation oj in each step
t. Let m−i = {mj , ∀j ̸= i} be the collection of all messages received by agent i. For any discrete communication
strategy, we quantify the gap between the optimal expected
average return of an ideal policy with full observability, i.e.,
π ∗ = [πi∗ (ai |o1 , . . . , on ), ∀i] and the optimal expected average return of a communication-enabled, partially-observable
policy, i.e., π = [πi (ai |oi , m−i ), ∀i]. This return gap is

