The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

StockMixer: A Simple Yet Strong MLP-Based Architecture for Stock Price
Forecasting
Jinyong Fan, Yanyan Shen*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{weizhili, shenyy}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

• Indicator correlations. Typically, there are several financial indicators serving as raw features for each stock per
trading day, e.g., the basic open, high, low, and closing
prices. It is desirable to model correlations and dependencies among raw indicators and extract high-level latent features that are informative for future stock trends.

Stock price forecasting is a fundamental yet challenging task
in quantitative investment. Various researchers have developed a combination of neural network models (e.g., RNNs,
GNNs, Transformers) for capturing complex indicator, temporal and stock correlations of the stock data. While complex
architectures are highly expressive, they are often difficult to
optimize and the performances are often compromised by the
limited stock data. In this paper, we propose a simple MLPbased architecture named StockMixer which is easy to optimize and enjoys strong predictive performance. StockMixer
performs indicator mixing, followed by time mixing, and
finally stock mixing. Unlike the standard MLP-based mixing, we devise the time mixing to exchange multi-scale time
patch information and realize the stock mixing by exploiting stock-to-market and market-to-stock influences explicitly. Extensive experiments on real stock benchmarks demonstrate our proposed StockMixer outperforms various state-ofthe-art forecasting methods with a notable margin while reducing memory usage and runtime cost. Code is available at
https://github.com/SJTU-Quant/StockMixer.

• Temporal correlations. Stock price movements are fundamentally caused by the continuous demand-and-supply
balancing. The temporal trends in surrounding trading
days are noticeably correlated, e.g., moving in the same
or reverse directions. The existence of temporal correlations makes the future trends predictable.
• Stock correlations. As staying in the same market, stocks
are correlated. For instance, stocks in the same industry
may all have an upstream movement in one trading day
due to a bullish event for the industry. Being aware of the
stock correlations is thus beneficial for the forecasting.
Existing deep learning methods (Zou et al. 2022) take
parts or all of the correlations into account. A typical model
architecture consists of a specialized neural module for modeling each individual correlation, followed by a fusion module that combines information from preceding modules for
the final prediction. Specifically, Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) (Qin et al. 2017; Nelson, Pereira, and De Oliveira
2017; Feng et al. 2018) are used for modeling temporal correlations; Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Feng et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2021; Sawhney et al. 2021) are good at exchanging stock-wise information; Transformer-based models (Yoo
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a) use the attention mechanism to emphasize crucial patterns from correlated subjects. Nevertheless, a hybrid neural architecture
increases the model complexity and may further hurt the
model’s generalization ability. The reasons are three-fold.
First, stock price data is of a limited size, i.e., about 250 trading days per year and each day delivers only one multivariate
time series for training, introducing overfitting risks into the
model. Second, a hybrid model involving diverse information exchanging scopes (e.g., local or global) and behaviors
(e.g., using gating or attention) is not easy to optimize which
may compromise the final performance. Third, some components may learn inaccurate inductive bias that misleads
the model training. For instance, GNNs assume smoothness
between related stocks but their underlying patterns can be

Introduction
Stock price forecasting is a fundamental task in the field of
quantitative investment. Due to the fact that the movements
of different stock prices in a market are not independent with
each other, stock price forecasting is practically formulated
as a multivariate time series forecasting problem. As the
stock market is highly volatile and chaotic, achieving high
forecasting accuracy remains an open question.
Numerous efforts have been devoted to improving forecasting performance for profitable stock investment. Early
attempts apply basic machine learning methods to uncover
complex patterns in stock data, including decision trees (Nugroho, Adji, and Fauziati 2014; Kamble 2017), support vector machines (SVM) (Xie et al. 2013), and k-nearest neighbors (KNN) (Alkhatib et al. 2013). With the advent of deep
learning, recent literature focuses on developing neural architectures that are expressive and flexible to exploit various
inductive biases based on the intuitive (probably insightful)
understandings about the stock market. Generally, there are
three kinds of correlations that have been investigated.
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8389

