The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identification of Causal Structure in the Presence of Missing Data with Additive
Noise Model
1

1,3

1

Jie Qiao , Zhengming Chen , Jianhua Yu , Ruichu Cai

1,2 *

, Zhifeng Hao

4

1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China
3
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou 515063, China
{qiaojie.chn, chenzhengming1103, philoso521, cairuichu}@gmail.com, haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn
Abstract
Missing data are an unavoidable complication frequently encountered in many causal discovery tasks. When a missing
process depends on the missing values themselves (known
as self-masking missingness), the recovery of the joint distribution becomes unattainable, and detecting the presence
of such self-masking missingness remains a perplexing challenge. Consequently, due to the inability to reconstruct the
original distribution and to discern the underlying missingness
mechanism, simply applying existing causal discovery methods would lead to wrong conclusions. In this work, we found
that the recent advances additive noise model has the potential for learning causal structure under the existence of the
self-masking missingness. With this observation, we aim to investigate the identification problem of learning causal structure
from missing data under an additive noise model with different
missingness mechanisms, where the ‘no self-masking missingness’ assumption can be eliminated appropriately. Specifically,
we first elegantly extend the scope of identifiability of causal
skeleton to the case with weak self-masking missingness (i.e.,
no other variable could be the cause of self-masking indicators
except itself). We further provide the sufficient and necessary
identification conditions of the causal direction under additive noise model and show that the causal structure can be
identified up to an IN-equivalent pattern. We finally propose
a practical algorithm based on the above theoretical results
on learning the causal skeleton and causal direction. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real data demonstrate the
efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed algorithms.

Introduction
Missing data are ubiquitous in many fields and causal discovery from missing observational data is challenging due to
possible complex missingness mechanisms—causal structure
among the causal variables and its missingness indicators. ‘indicator’ is variables that specify whether a value was missing
for an observation. With different structures of the missingness mechanisms, following Rubin (1976), the missingness
types can be categorized as Missing Completely At Random
(MCAR), Missing At Random (MAR), and Missing Not At
Random (MNAR).
*

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20516

When data are MCAR, the causal variables, and their missingness indicators are independent such that the missingness mechanism is ignorable, and one can perform the listwise deletion that simply drops the samples with missing
value (Strobl, Visweswaran, and Spirtes 2018). However, for
MNAR, the missingness mechanism is not ignorable, and
the simple deletion would introduce bias resulting in incorrect inference (Rubin 2004; Mohan, Pearl, and Tian 2013;
Tu et al. 2019). Much effort has been made in studying the
recoverability of the MNAR data to correct the spurious correlations from deleted-wised distribution using reweighting by
incorporating prior information of the causal graph and missingness mechanisms (Bhattacharya et al. 2020; Mohan and
Pearl 2021; Nabi, Bhattacharya, and Shpitser 2020). However, when a missing process depends on the missing values
themselves (known as self-masking belonging to MNAR),
it suffers from a serious identifiability issue such that the
origin distribution is not recoverable (Nabi, Bhattacharya,
and Shpitser 2020).
Existing works, therefore, mainly focus on causal discovery with no self-masking missingness mechanisms. On one
hand, (Gao et al. 2022) addresses the M(C)AR cases using
the identifiable additive noise models (ANMs) (Hoyer et al.
2008; Shimizu et al. 2006; Peters and Bühlmann 2014) with
a general EM-based framework to perform causal discovery
in the presence of missing data. On the other hand, to learn
causal structure in MNAR, some constraints of the missingness mechanisms must be made. With the no self-masking
assumption, Gain and Shpitser (2018) proposes to extend
the constraint-based PC algorithm (Spirtes et al. 2000) by
correcting the bias of each conditional independence (CI) test
bought by the missing value. While, instead of correcting CI
test, Tu et al. (2019) proposes a more efficient post-correction
strategy to correct the spurious edges produced by the original PC algorithm.
However, due to the limited recoverability, it is still unclear
how to identify causal structure in the presence of the selfmasking missingness mechanism, which is believed to be the
most commonly encountered in practice (Osborne 2013), e.g.,
smokers do not answer any questions about their smoking
behavior in insurance applications, and people with very high
or low income do not disclose their income (Mohan 2018).
In this work, we found that the recent advances additive
noise model has the potential for learning causal structure

