The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Submodel Enumeration for CTL Is Hard
Nicolas Fröhlich, Arne Meier
Leibniz Universität Hannover, Institut für Theoretische Informatik, Appelstrasse 9a, 30167 Hannover, Germany
nicolas.froehlich@thi.uni-hannover.de, meier@thi.uni-hannover.de

w1

Abstract
Expressing system specifications using Computation Tree
Logic (CTL) formulas, formalising programs using Kripke
structures, and then model checking the system is an established workflow in program verification and has wide applications in AI. In this paper, we consider the task of model
enumeration, which asks for a uniform stream of output systems that satisfy the given specification. We show that, given
a CTL formula and a system (potentially falsified by the formula), enumerating satisfying submodels is always hard for
CTL—regardless of which subset of CTL operators is considered. As a silver lining on the horizon, we present fragments
via restrictions on the allowed Boolean functions that still allow for fast enumeration.

w2

w5

Start
Error

Close

Close w4
Heat

Start
Close
Error

Start w6
Close

Start
Close
Heat

w3

w7

Figure 1: Kripke model of the microwave oven example.
While the structure containing the dashed edge (w5 , w6 )
does not satisfy the constraint φ = AG(Error → ¬Heat AU
¬Start), the submodel without the edge does.

Introduction
Kripke structures, which model the software system of interest, are essentially labelled directed graphs that have a total transition relation (Kripke 1963). A submodel of a Kripke
structure is defined with respect to all possible subsets for
the state set and transition relation. Note that the subset for
the transition relation must still be total, otherwise it is not
a valid submodel. More formally, the problem we are interested in is defined as follows. For a Kripke structure M and
a CTL formula φ, list of all submodels M′ of M such that
M′ satisfies φ. Let us illustrate the idea with an example.
Example 1. Consider the Kripke model M shown in Figure 1, which models the behavior of a microwave oven, a
well-known example from (Clarke et al. 2018). Next, consider the constraint φ = AG(Error → ¬Heat AU ¬Start),
which says that any path starting in a world labeled with
the Error proposition must first reach a world where ¬Start
holds, before Heat becomes true. With the dashed edge from
w5 to w6 this constraint obviously does not hold in M. In
contrast, the submodel M′ of M without the dashed edge
satisfies φ. Thus, as an automated repair or a suggestion in
debugging one might want to consider the submodels of M.
Also other areas of research benefit from this kind of
approach as follows. For bounded model checking (Biere
et al. 2003), the size of the state space can easily become
very large for complex systems. For such systems, Biere
et al. suggest combining model checking with SAT solvers,
which allow faster exploration of the state space. Similarly,
Gupta et al. 2000 showed that similar things have been ob-

In artificial intelligence, temporal logic is used as a formal language to describe and reason about the temporal behaviour of systems and processes (Barringer et al. 2000;
Bérard et al. 2001). One of the key applications of temporal
logic in artificial intelligence is the formal specification and
verification of temporal properties of software systems, such
as real-time systems (Bellini, Mattonlini, and Nesi 2000;
Konur 2013; Blom 1996), reactive systems (Finger, Fisher,
and Owens 1993), and hybrid systems (da Silva, Kurtz, and
Lin 2021). Temporal logic can be used to specify the desired
behaviour of these systems and to check that systems of that
kind satisfy the specified properties. This task is known as
model checking (MC) and is one of the most important reasoning tasks (Schnoebelen 2002). In this context, the search
for satisfying submodels is a useful approach to debugging
faulty systems.
One of the central temporal logics for which the model
checking problem is efficiently solvable (more precisely, the
problem is complete for polynomial time) is the Computation Tree Logic CTL (Clarke et al. 2018). The logic is
often used in the context of program verification and, accordingly, is well suited to our study. CTL formulas enrich
classical propositional logic with a variety of modal operators (next, until, global, future, release) that combine with
so-called path quantifiers (existential and universal) to form
CTL operators.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10517

