The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Better than Random: Reliable NLG Human Evaluation with
Constrained Active Sampling
Jie Ruan, Xiao Pu, Mingqi Gao, Xiaojun Wan, Yuesheng Zhu
Peking University
{ruanjie,puxiao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {gaomingqi,wanxiaojun,zhuys}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Human evaluation is viewed as a reliable evaluation method
for NLG which is expensive and time-consuming. To save labor and costs, researchers usually perform human evaluation
on a small subset of data sampled from the whole dataset in
practice. However, different selection subsets will lead to different rankings of the systems. To give a more correct intersystem ranking and make the gold standard human evaluation
more reliable, we propose a Constrained Active Sampling
Framework (CASF) for reliable human judgment. CASF operates through a Learner, a Systematic Sampler and a Constrained Controller to select representative samples for getting a more correct inter-system ranking. Experiment results
on 137 real NLG evaluation setups with 44 human evaluation metrics across 16 datasets and 5 NLG tasks demonstrate
CASF receives 93.18% top-ranked system recognition accuracy and ranks first or ranks second on 90.91% of the human
metrics with 0.83 overall inter-system ranking Kendall correlation. Code and data are publicly available online.

Introduction
Evaluation of NLG systems remains challenging. The reason is that similar content in text can often be expressed
in various ways, and the same output of the NLG system
may need to satisfy multiple goals in different aspects (2020;
2022). Hence, reliable automatic metrics are complex to design (2017; 2009). Human evaluation is generally considered to be a more reliable evaluation way in natural language
generation tasks (2020; 2018; 2015). However, human judgment is viewed as expensive, time-consuming, and lacks
standardized evaluation procedures (2020; 2020; 2022).
To save labor and costs, human evaluation is usually performed on a small subset sampled from the dataset in practice. Researchers compare the average scores of the systems
on this subset to obtain a ranking between the systems. However, different sample subsets will lead to different rankings
of the systems. We re-evaluated 137 real NLG evaluation
setups on 44 human metrics across 16 datasets and 5 NLG
tasks. Results show that 87.5% of datasets have different
inter-system rankings across 5 times of random sampling.
Since research is driven by evaluation, focusing on the final

Figure 1: Conducting human evaluations on different sample
subsets (Sub) can obtain different inter-system rankings. The
lower part shows the same sampling method obtains different subsets at different sampling times. The upper part shows
the ranking obtained from the corresponding subsets. “Sys”
represents system and “GT” represents Ground Truth.

ranking of systems, it is vital to design a more reliable evaluation method to obtain the correct inter-system ranking.
We randomly select 1404 papers from ACL, EMNLP and
COLING in the past 2 years and find that 270 papers select a
subset of the dataset for manual evaluation to save labor and
cost (details are in the Survey section of the Appendix). The
survey results show that random sampling is the most vital
sampling method, accounting for 60.7%, and the rest 39.3%
of the papers do not mention the sampling method they used.
Random sampling is widely used in human evaluation sampling for its simplicity. However, random sampling can be
risky (2022). On the one hand, random sampling can lead
to clustered selection, a phenomenon in which randomly se-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18915

