The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Spatial-Temporal Interplay in Human Mobility: A Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning Approach with Hypergraph Representation
Zhaofan Zhang1 * , Yanan Xiao2,5 * , Lu Jiang3 , Dingqi Yang1,4 , Minghao Yin2,5 , Pengyang Wang1,4†
1

The State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau, China
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
3
Department of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, China
4
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, China
5
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, China
{mc25684, dingqiyang, pywang}@um.edu.mo, {xiaoyn117, ymh}@nenu.edu.cn, jiangl761@dlmu.edu.cn
2

Temporal Factor: time-saving
Spatial Factor: zone-oriented

Abstract
In the realm of human mobility, the decision-making process for selecting the next-visit location is intricately influenced by a trade-off between spatial and temporal constraints, which are reflective of individual needs and preferences. This trade-off, however, varies across individuals,
making the modeling of these spatial-temporal dynamics a
formidable challenge. To address the problem, in this work,
we introduce the “Spatial-temporal Induced Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning” (STI-HRL) framework, for capturing
the interplay between spatial and temporal factors in human
mobility decision-making. Specifically, STI-HRL employs a
two-tiered decision-making process: the low-level focuses on
disentangling spatial and temporal preferences using dedicated agents, while the high-level integrates these considerations to finalize the decision. To complement the hierarchical
decision setting, we construct a hypergraph to organize historical data, encapsulating the multi-aspect semantics of human
mobility. We propose a cross-channel hypergraph embedding
module to learn the representations as the states to facilitate
the decision-making cycle. Our extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets validate the superiority of STI-HRL over
state-of-the-art methods in predicting users’ next visits across
various performance metrics.

User1

Deciding

Deciding

Thinking

...

Spatial
focused
User2

Temporal
focused

Deciding

Deciding

Thinking

...

Spatial
focused

...

Spatial
focused

Spatial
focused

...

Temporal
focused

Figure 1: The two users with inconsistent spatial-temporal
dynamics and the factors they prioritize when making decisions in various scenarios.

Introduction
Human mobility refers to the patterns and behaviors associated with how and where individuals move or travel within
physical spaces. Comprehending and accurately modeling
human mobility offers valuable insights with applications
spanning transportation (Wang et al. 2020c), urban planning (Wang et al. 2018, 2020a), public health (Qureshi and
Xiong 2021), business (Antoniou et al. 2012), etc. Specifically, individual preferences regarding spatial and temporal factors are pivotal in modeling human mobility. From a
decision-making standpoint, the selection of the next-visit
site by humans is deeply influenced by the interplay between spatial and temporal constraints, which echo individual needs and preferences. This spatial-temporal dynamic is

subject to change over time and can differ among individuals. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, User 1 prioritizes temporal factors, opting for a quick dinner post-school.
However, post-dinner, his preference shifts towards a superior shopping experience, emphasizing spatial considerations over time. In contrast, when comparing the mobility
decisions of User 1 and User 2, their spatial-temporal dynamics differ significantly.
Existing works on studying on spatial-temporal factors
in human mobility fall into two categories: (1) Temporaloriented approaches primarily emphasize the time dimension, modeling preferences that evolve over time, while
incorporating spatial context as a secondary element. For
instance, RNN-based methods (Wang et al. 2020d; Zhao
et al. 2020) employ transition matrices or gates to merge
spatial context with temporal factors within RNNs’ recurrent hidden states. Some models (Lian et al. 2020; Luo,

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9396

