The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Augmented Commonsense Knowledge for Remote Object Grounding
Bahram Mohammadi1 , Yicong Hong2 , Yuankai Qi3 , Qi Wu1 , Shirui Pan4 , Javen Qinfeng Shi1
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning (AIML), University of Adelaide
2
Australian National University
3
Macquarie University
4
Griffith University
{bahram.mohammadi, qi.wu01, javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au,
yicong.hong@anu.edu.au, yuankai.qi@mq.edu.au, s.pan@griffith.edu.au
Instruction

Abstract

Go clean the counter to the right of the fridge in the kitchen

Observation

The vision-and-language navigation (VLN) task necessitates
an agent to perceive the surroundings, follow natural language instructions, and act in photo-realistic unseen environments. Most of the existing methods employ the entire
image or object features to represent navigable viewpoints.
However, these representations are insufficient for proper action prediction, especially for the REVERIE task, which uses
concise high-level instructions, such as ”Bring me the blue
cushion in the master bedroom”. To address enhancing representation, we propose an augmented commonsense knowledge model (ACK) to leverage commonsense information
as a spatio-temporal knowledge graph for improving agent
navigation. Specifically, the proposed approach involves constructing a knowledge base by retrieving commonsense information from ConceptNet, followed by a refinement module to
remove noisy and irrelevant knowledge. We further present
ACK which consists of knowledge graph-aware cross-modal
and concept aggregation modules to enhance visual representation and visual-textual data alignment by integrating visible objects, commonsense knowledge, and concept history,
which includes object and knowledge temporal information.
Moreover, we add a new pipeline for the commonsensebased decision-making process which leads to more accurate local action prediction. Experimental results demonstrate
our proposed model noticeably outperforms the baseline and
archives the state-of-the-art on the REVERIE benchmark.
The source code is available at https://github.com/BahramMohammadi/ACK.

Action

Baseline

…….
Scene Graph:
Refrigerator
Table …

Knowledge Graph:
Kitchen
Counter …

Query <start node, relationship, end node>

Action

ACK

Knowledge Base

<refrigerator, synonym, fridge>
<table, is a, counter>
<counter, used for, kitchen> <fridge, at location, kitchen>
<table, at location, kitchen>
<table, related to, chair>

Figure 1: Action prediction by the baseline and our method.
Utilizing visible objects alongside commonsense knowledge
as a spatio-temporal knowledge graph improves visual representation and action prediction. Best viewed in color.
starting point by following fine-grained instructions. However, To be more practical, REVERIE introduces a goaloriented task in which the agent needs to explore the environment and localize the target object according to concise
instructions, e.g., ”Go to the living room and clean the table
next to the couch”. Therefore, the agent cannot complete the
task successfully just by strictly following instructions and
requires more information about the environment to predict
the correct action at each step.
Many of the proposed methods exploit scene-level features to represent visual perception (Qiao et al. 2022; Guhur
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021). To provide the agent with
richer visual clues, a wide range of previous works (Hong
et al. 2020; Qi et al. 2020a, 2021) use object-level features.
It is very common to use an object as a landmark in the instructions which means they can also be utilized as visual
landmarks. Hence, object localization along with their orientation encoding regarding the heading and elevation angles
of the agent is very beneficial to align the detected objects in
the scene with the object labels in the instruction. For example, Given the instruction ”With the fireplace on your right
walk down the walkway and stop at the end before you enter

Introduction
Navigating an embodied agent through complex and unseen
environments by following natural language instructions is
a challenging problem in artificial intelligence research. In
this regard, vision-and-language navigation (VLN) (Anderson et al. 2018) has drawn the attention of many researchers
in recent years (Fried et al. 2018; Tan, Yu, and Bansal 2019;
Hao et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023) and a variety of VLN tasks have been introduced
in different levels, such as room-to-room (R2R) (Anderson
et al. 2018) and remote embodied visual referring expression
in real indoor environments (REVERIE) (Qi et al. 2020b). In
R2R, the agent aims to reach a pre-specified location from a
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4269

