The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

MaskDiff: Modeling Mask Distribution with Diffusion Probabilistic Model
for Few-Shot Instance Segmentation
Minh-Quan Le1, 2, 3 , Tam V. Nguyen4 , Trung-Nghia Le1, 2 ,
Thanh-Toan Do5 , Minh N. Do6 , Minh-Triet Tran1, 2 *
1

University of Science, VNU-HCM, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
2
Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
3
Stony Brook University, United States
4
University of Dayton, United States
5
Monash University, Australia
6
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States
lmquan@selab.hcmus.edu.vn, tamnguyen@udayton.edu, ltnghia@fit.hcmus.edu.vn,
toan.do@monash.edu, minhdo@illinois.edu, tmtriet@fit.hcmus.edu.vn
Abstract
Few-shot instance segmentation extends the few-shot learning paradigm to the instance segmentation task, which tries
to segment instance objects from a query image with a few
annotated examples of novel categories. Conventional approaches have attempted to address the task via prototype
learning, known as point estimation. However, this mechanism depends on prototypes (e.g. mean of K−shot) for
prediction, leading to performance instability. To overcome
the disadvantage of the point estimation mechanism, we
propose a novel approach, dubbed MaskDiff, which models the underlying conditional distribution of a binary mask,
which is conditioned on an object region and K−shot information. Inspired by augmentation approaches that perturb data with Gaussian noise for populating low data density regions, we model the mask distribution with a diffusion probabilistic model. We also propose to utilize classifierfree guided mask sampling to integrate category information into the binary mask generation process. Without bells
and whistles, our proposed method consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on both base and novel classes of
the COCO dataset while simultaneously being more stable than existing methods. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/minhquanlecs/MaskDiff.

⋮

⋮

a) Point Estimation

Support Set

⋯

Query Set
b) Our Method

Figure 1: (a) Prior work estimates a specific point as representative of each class (Fan et al. 2020). (b) Our MaskDiff
method models the conditional distribution of masks given
object regions and K−shot samples.

Conventional few-shot instance segmentation (FSIS)
methods tried to address learning on a few examples via prototype learning (Fan et al. 2020; Ganea et al. 2021). This
matching mechanism searches the nearest prototype and its
corresponding support class from support images as guidance for segmenting the query image (Fig.1a). Unlike existing FSIS methods, we introduce a novel probabilistic model
to estimate the distribution of a binary mask given a detected
object region and K samples (Fig.1b). Concretely, object
region, object category, and K−shot are treated as conditional information for generating the binary mask representation of each object. Mathematically, we model the conditional distribution of a binary mask of an object instance
conditioned on an object region and K−shot
of a specific

i
i-th class pθ ymask |xregion , K−shot . To the best of our
knowledge, our work is the first method to model mask distribution for FSIS.

Introduction
To achieve outstanding performances, instance segmentation models (He et al. 2017; Le et al. 2022) require to be
trained on substantial pixel-level annotated images, which is
labor-intensive and costly. Moreover, their ability to generalize from a few examples is still far from acceptable compared to the human visual system, which constrains their
feasibility in practical applications. Inspired by the miraculous ability of the human visual system to recognize novel
objects with limited data, few-shot learning (FSL) aims to
learn new concepts on a handful of training data (K examples) by generalizing models trained on base classes to adapt
novel classes.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2874

