The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Truth Forest: Toward Multi-Scale Truthfulness in Large Language Models
through Intervention without Tuning
Zhongzhi Chen1,2 * , Xingwu Sun2,3 * , Xianfeng Jiao2 , Fengzong Lian2
Zhanhui Kang2 , Di Wang2 , Cheng-Zhong Xu3
1

Beihang University
2
Tencent Inc.
3
University of Macau
jongjyh@buaa.edu.cn, {sammsun,xfengjiao,faxonlian,kegokang,diwang}@tencent.com, czxu@um.edu.mo
Abstract

tasks supports the G-D Gap’s impact on LLM performance
(McKenna et al. 2023; Agrawal, Mackey, and Kalai 2023).
These studies suggest that hallucinations may partly stem
from knowledge deficiency and misalignment between the
model’s output and the desired truthful response, resulting
from the model’s inability to properly access or utilize internal knowledge. Although generating factual statements
aligns with human preferences, this characteristic is not inherently present in LLMs pre-trained on extensive, noisy
data. Reinforcement learning (RLHF) (Ziegler et al. 2020),
a method for introducing alignments, cannot fully address
the problem, as reward models may erroneously reward unverifiable answers or prioritize versatility over truthfulness,
potentially exacerbating the G-D Gap and hallucination issues.
A more promising approach might involve focusing on
the concept of ’truth’ within LLMs, as recent studies have
shown that LLMs can internally model truthfulness (Azaria
and Mitchell 2023). By systematically analyzing the internal
states of LLMs and evaluating their propensity to generate
accurate or inaccurate statements, insights have been gained
from interventions designed to guide the model toward producing more truthful outputs.
Inspired by existing work, we propose Truth Forest
(TrFr), a method for exploring multi-dimensional truth features within LLMs. TrFr models complex truth features by
employing multiple orthogonal probes, effectively capturing the intricate internal activities within LLMs. Truth Forest introduces a simple iterative algorithm with orthogonal
constraints to generate a series of orthogonal probes, which
are merely direction vectors pointing towards some truth.
These direction vectors are weighted during the intervention
to impose a preference for truthfulness. To mitigate the G-D
Gap, we incorporate Random Peek, a diversified sampling
method that captures truth-related features from various positions within the sequence, enhancing the model’s ability to
access and utilize its internal knowledge.
We conducted a systematic study of TrFr’s components.
For orthogonal directions, we explored various intervention
intensities and data amounts, confirming the advantages of
employing multiple directions. A study on samples unveiled
the underlying logic of our approach. Through random peek,
we analyzed differences in intervention locations between
our method and ITI. Our study reveals the first proof of the

Despite the great success of large language models (LLMs)
in various tasks, they suffer from generating hallucinations.
We introduce Truth Forest, a method that enhances truthfulness in LLMs by uncovering hidden truth representations using multi-dimensional orthogonal probes. Specifically, it creates multiple orthogonal bases for modeling truth by incorporating orthogonal constraints into the probes. Moreover,
we introduce Random Peek, a systematic technique considering an extended range of positions within the sequence, reducing the gap between discerning and generating truth features in LLMs. By employing this approach, we improved the
truthfulness of Llama-2-7B from 40.8% to 74.5% on TruthfulQA. Likewise, significant improvements are observed in
fine-tuned models. We conducted a thorough analysis of truth
features using probes. Our visualization results show that
orthogonal probes capture complementary truth-related features, forming well-defined clusters that reveal the inherent
structure of the dataset.

1

Introduction

Large language models are known to generate complex and
unverifiable answers, often referred to as hallucinations.
Studies show that advanced LLMs, like GPT-4, produce confusing statements without verification (Li et al. 2023a).
Incorporating external knowledge can partially address
hallucination issues (Li et al. 2023a), but methods like
prompting or self-checking without additional knowledge
also yield improvements (Manakul, Liusie, and Gales 2023;
Saunders et al. 2022). Research on extracting knowledge
networks from LLMs (Wang, Liu, and Song 2020) reveals
that these models possess more knowledge than initially assumed.
LLMs sometimes generate incorrect answers due to
misalignment between internal states and outputs, a phenomenon known as the Generating and Discerning Gap (GD Gap) (Saunders et al. 2022). Studies indicate that supervising internal states, rather than generating answers, enhances recognition accuracy in classification tasks (Azaria
and Mitchell 2023). Additional research on downstream
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding authors.

20967

