The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Strong Baselines for Parameter-Efficient Few-Shot Fine-Tuning
Samyadeep Basu1 , Shell Hu3 , Daniela Massiceti2 , Soheil Feizi1
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge
3
Samsung Research, Cambridge
sbasu12@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

Recent works (Hu et al. 2022; Li, Liu, and Bilen 2021; Xu
et al. 2022) have shown that fine-tuning a large pre-trained
Vision Transformer (ViT) on the support set of new test
tasks achieves state-of-the-art performance on large-scale
few-shot classification benchmarks such as META - DATASET
(MD). Because of their high number of parameters, however,
fine-tuning ViTs is extremely expensive in terms of storage,
compute, and time. This limits the ability to learn new downstream tasks in real-world applications where resources are
constrained (e.g., personalization on edge or mobile devices)
since (i) storing the task’s fine-tuned parameters on the edge
may be unfeasible, especially for a large number of downstream tasks and (ii) fine-tuning on each new task takes long.
As a result, much recent progress has been made in designing light-weight, fast and parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods (Xu et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2022). These reduce the computational requirements to adapt a ViT to a new
test task by fine-tuning only a fraction of the ViT’s total parameters. However, inconsistencies in experimental setups
make it difficult to disentangle the benefit of PEFT methods from other experimental factors, including pre-training
initialization, feature extractor architecture, fine-tuning algorithm, downstream dataset and other hyperparameters.
Prompt-tuning (Jia et al. 2022), for example, is the stateof-the-art PEFT method on the transfer learning benchmark
VTAB (Zhai et al. 2019), while eTT (Xu et al. 2022) performs strongly on few-shot classification in MD. Both, however, use distinct feature extractors, pre-training initializations, fine-tuning algorithms, and hyperparameters, thus limiting our understanding of the generalizability of these PEFT
methods across different setups.
To address this, we perform a large-scale empirical analysis of top-performing PEFT methods on two large-scale fewshot image classification benchmarks, META - DATASET (Triantafillou et al. 2019) and ORBIT (Massiceti et al. 2021). Our
experimentation involves ∼ 1.8k fine-tuning experiments
which quantify the performance of PEFT methods under experimentally controlled settings including ViT architectures,
pre-training objectives, and fine-tuning algorithms. This enables us to compare PEFT methods in a fair and consistent
way and also draw out novel insights on the interaction between these different components in the fine-tuning pipeline.
Our main finding is that the embarrassingly simple approach of fine-tuning just a ViT’s LayerNorm parameters

Few-shot classification (FSC) entails learning novel classes
given only a few examples per class after a pre-training
(or meta-training) phase on a set of base classes. Recent
works have shown that simply fine-tuning a pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT) on new test classes is a strong approach for FSC. Fine-tuning ViTs, however, is expensive in
time, compute and storage. This has motivated the design of
parameter efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods which finetune only a fraction of the Transformer’s parameters. While
these methods have shown promise, inconsistencies in experimental conditions make it difficult to disentangle their advantage from other experimental factors including the feature extractor architecture, pre-trained initialization and fine-tuning
algorithm, amongst others. In our paper, we conduct a largescale, experimentally consistent, empirical analysis to study
PEFTs for few-shot image classification. Through a battery
of over 1.8k controlled experiments on large-scale few-shot
benchmarks including META - DATASET (MD) and ORBIT, we
uncover novel insights on PEFTs that cast light on their efficacy in fine-tuning ViTs for few-shot classification. Through
our controlled empirical study, we have two main findings:
(i) Fine-tuning just the LayerNorm parameters (which we call
LN-T UNE) during few-shot adaptation is an extremely strong
baseline across ViTs pre-trained with both self-supervised
and supervised objectives, (ii) For self-supervised ViTs, we
find that simply learning a set of scaling parameters for each
attention matrix (which we call ATTN S CALE) along with a
domain-residual adapter (DRA) module leads to state-of-theart performance (while being ∼9× more parameter-efficient)
on MD. Our empirical findings set strong baselines and call
for rethinking the current design of PEFT methods for FSC.

1

Introduction

Few-shot classification (FSC) involves learning a new classification task given only a few labelled training examples
from each of the novel classes. It has a large number of mainstream applications such as drug-discovery (Stanley et al.
2021), robotics (Ren et al. 2020) and personalized object
recognition (Massiceti et al. 2021) among others. Usually, a
given few-shot classification task consists of a few-labelled
examples from the new classes (support set) and a testing set
of unlabeled held-out examples of those classes (query set).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11024

