The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Enhancing Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation via Effective Target Labeling
Jiujun He1 , Bin Liu1 * , Guosheng Yin2
1

Center of Statistical Research, School of Statistics, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
tk9ng @smail.swufe.edu.cn, liubin@swufe.edu.cn, gyin@hku.hk

Abstract

Domain adaptation (DA) aims to ease the cross-domain
discrepancies, whereby transferring the knowledge learned
from a label-rich source domain to a label-scarce but related
target domain (Pan et al. 2010). Over the past decade, extensive research has been carried out in the unsupervised
DA where the target domain is completely unlabeled (Long
et al. 2013; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015). Despite advancements in these methods, the costless annotation scenarios
yet making limited performance improvements on the target
domain arise as a dilemma. In practice, it may be feasible
to obtain a small amount of labeled target samples that can

greatly facilitate the learning process. Hence, another branch
of DA research falls into the semi-supervised learning setting and, more importantly, the semi-supervised DA (SSDA)
approaches exhibit compelling performance improvements
on the target domain when a small amount of labeled target data are provided in comparison with the unsupervised
counterparts (Saito et al. 2019).
Existing works on SSDA (Saito et al. 2019; Yang et al.
2021a; Singh 2021; Li et al. 2021b) typically assume that
the labeled target data are given, and each class has an equal
number of labeled samples (e.g., 3 samples per class). However, this assumption is non-trivial in practice since labeling an equal number of target samples for each class, particularly for classification tasks with a large number of categories, requires a considerable amount of manual effort for
domain experts, which is inconsistent with the idea of low
annotation cost in DA. Moreover, the quality of the labeled
target samples should also be guaranteed in order to maximize the utilization of the limited annotation expense. In
practice, labeling target samples may produce worse performance (e.g., labeling outliers) or gain a very limited performance improvement (e.g., labeling “easy samples”). Unfortunately, these common but bad scenarios cannot be circumvented by human annotators. Therefore, it would be more
reasonable that we design a learning framework that can automatically select a pre-defined number of target samples
which, once labeled, can greatly facilitate the DA process.
Motivated by the above observations, we propose EFfective Target Labeling (EFTL), a DA framework that uses active learning and pseudo-labeling strategies to select some
informative target samples for labeling. First, since only 1–3
samples per class are allowed for labeling in the SSDA setting, we aim to select intra-class representative and interclass diverse target samples. To this end, we introduce a
novel active strategy, called non-maximal degree node suppression (NDNS), to model sample’s representativeness and
diversity with graphs. Specifically, we first construct a directed graph by defining accepted neighbors (ADN) and
acceptive neighbors (AEN) for each unlabeled target sample. Benefiting from the definitions of ADN and AEN, those
nodes with the locally maximal out-degree1 can well repre-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The out-degree of a node indicates how many nodes are oriented by that node.

Existing semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) models
have exhibited impressive performance on the target domain
by effectively utilizing few labeled target samples per class
(e.g., 3 samples per class). To guarantee an equal number of
labeled target samples for each class, however, they require
domain experts to manually recognize a considerable amount
of the unlabeled target data. Moreover, as the target samples
are not equally informative for shaping the decision boundaries of the learning models, it is crucial to select the most
informative target samples for labeling, which is, however,
impossible for human selectors. As a remedy, we propose an
EFfective Target Labeling (EFTL) framework that harnesses
active learning and pseudo-labeling strategies to automatically select some informative target samples to annotate. Concretely, we introduce a novel sample query strategy, called
non-maximal degree node suppression (NDNS), that iteratively performs maximal degree node query and non-maximal
degree node removal to select representative and diverse target samples for labeling. To learn target-specific characteristics, we propose a novel pseudo-labeling strategy that attempts to label low-confidence target samples accurately via
clustering consistency (CC), and then inject information of
the model uncertainty into our query process. CC enhances
the utilization of the annotation budget and increases the
number of “labeled” target samples while requiring no additional manual effort. Our proposed EFTL framework can
be easily coupled with existing SSDA models, showing significant improvements on three benchmarks.

Introduction

12385

