The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FlightBERT++: A Non-autoregressive Multi-Horizon Flight
Trajectory Prediction Framework
Dongyue Guo, Zheng Zhang, Zhen Yan, Jianwei Zhang, Yi Lin*
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610000, China
{dongyueguo, zhaeng}@stu.scu.edu.cn, tankzhen@163.com, {zhangjianwei, yilin}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

tories based on real-time observations. According to modeling approaches, the FTP methods can be classified into
three distinct categories: physical models, filter-based models, and data-driven models. Physical models typically establish a set of mathematical equations based on kinematics
and aerodynamics assumptions to estimate the future flight
status (Tang et al. 2015; Benavides et al. 2014; FAA 2010),
while the filter-based models estimate the flight trajectory iteratively via a predefined system model by considering realtime measurements (Kalman 1960; Yan et al. 2013; Thipphavong et al. 2013). However, limited by the fixed inference rules, these approaches easily suffer from error accumulation problems and not be suitable for multi-horizon
FTP tasks. In contrast, data-driven models aim to learn flight
transition patterns from historical data, which have emerged
as the predominant approach in modern ATC applications
due to remarkable performance (Wang, Liang, and Delahaye
2017; Zeng et al. 2020).
Among the data-driven models, the FlightBERT is a pioneering effort that proposes binary encoding (BE) representation to encode the attributes of the trajectory points
into a set of binary vectors, further formulating the FTP
task as multiple binary classification (MBC) problem (Guo
et al. 2023). Benefiting from the innovative idea of BE representation, the FlightBERT framework not only enhances
the semantic representation of the trajectory points, but also
avoids the vulnerability impacted by the normalization algorithms. However, two primary limitations should be further
addressed to enhance the performance of the FTP task.
• A limitation of the BE representation is that the highbit prediction errors will lead to outliers in the predictions. For instance, given the BE representation "0110
0100" (decimal 100), the absolute error is 128 (decimal) if the misclassification occurs in the 8th bit ("1110
0100") while that is 1 (decimal) if the prediction error
occurs in 1st bit ("0110 0101").
• The FlightBERT performs multi-horizon prediction recursively, i.e., predicts the flight status of the next time
step based on observation and iteratively applies the
predicted values as pseudo-observation to obtain multihorizon predictions. It is easy to suffer from larger accumulative errors since the prediction errors in the pseudoobservation will be accumulated during the recursive
inference process. Additionally, the computational effi-

Flight Trajectory Prediction (FTP) is an essential task in
Air Traffic Control (ATC), which can assist air traffic controllers in managing airspace more safely and efficiently. Existing approaches generally perform multi-horizon FTP tasks
in an autoregressive manner, thereby suffering from error
accumulation and low-efficiency problems. In this paper, a
novel framework, called FlightBERT++, is proposed to i)
forecast multi-horizon flight trajectories directly in a nonautoregressive way, and ii) improve the limitation of the binary encoding (BE) representation in the FlightBERT. Specifically, the FlightBERT++ is implemented by a generalized
encoder-decoder architecture, in which the encoder learns
the temporal-spatial patterns from historical observations and
the decoder predicts the flight status for the future horizons. Compared with conventional architecture, an innovative
horizon-aware contexts generator is dedicatedly designed to
consider the prior horizon information, which further enables
non-autoregressive multi-horizon prediction. Moreover, a differential prompted decoder is proposed to enhance the capability of the differential predictions by leveraging the stationarity of the differential sequence. The experimental results
on a real-world dataset demonstrated that the FlightBERT++
outperformed the competitive baselines in both FTP performance and computational efficiency.

Introduction
Flight Trajectory Prediction (FTP) is essential for Air Traffic
Management (ATM), enabling many critical applications to
help Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) manage airspace more
safely and efficiently, such as traffic flow prediction (Lin,
wei Zhang, and Liu 2019; Yan et al. 2023), conflict detection (Liu and Hwang 2011; Chen, Guo, and Lin 2020; Li
et al. 2019), and arrival time estimation (Wang, Liang, and
Delahaye 2018; Ma et al. 2023). In this context, the FTP
technique has gathered more attention from researchers and
achieved significant progress in the past decade.
In general, FTP in the Air Traffic Control (ATC) domain
aims to forecast the flight status in future time steps according to the observed historical flight trajectories. Currently,
the short FTP tasks are commonly formulated as a time series forecasting problem, which predicts future flight trajec* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

127

