The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

How to Trade Off the Quantity and Capacity of Teacher Ensemble: Learning
Categorical Distribution to Stochastically Employ A Teacher for Distillation
Zixiang Ding* 1 , Guoqing Jiang1 , Shuai Zhang1 , Lin Guo1 , Wei Lin2
1

Meituan
Independent Researcher
{dingzixiang, jiangguoqing03, zhangshuai51}@meituan.com, lguo7@jhu.edu, lwsaviola@163.com
2

Abstract

Distillation (KD) (Pan et al. 2021). In this paper, we focus
on the KD-based compression approaches.
From the point of view of learning procedure, KD is used
in both pre-training (Turc et al. 2019; Sanh et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2020; Jiao et al. 2020) and fine-tuning phases (Jiao
et al. 2020; Wu, Wu, and Huang 2021; Ding et al. 2023).
From the point of view of distillation objective, KD is employed for the outputs of hidden layer (Sun et al. 2020), final
layer (Wu, Wu, and Huang 2021), embedding (Sanh et al.
2019) and self-attention (Wang et al. 2020). Wu, Wu, and
Huang (2021) employ multiple teachers to achieve better
performance than single-teacher KD based approaches on
several downstream tasks of GLUE benchmark. Nevertheless, the ensemble of multiple teachers is not always more
effective than the single teacher for student distillation (see
Table 3), where same observations are also existed in SKDBERT (Ding et al. 2023). There are two possible reasons
as mentioned in SKDBERT: 1) diversity losing (Tran et al.
2020) and 2) underutilization of powerful teacher (Mirzadeh
et al. 2020). To solve this issue, Ding et al. (2023) propose a
distillation strategy named SKD where a teacher is stochastically sampled from a teacher ensemble according to a handcrafted distribution. However, it is very time-consuming to
design appropriate sampling distribution.
Inspired by SKDBERT, as shown in Figure 1, we propose DynaKD which stochastically employs a teacher from
a multi-level teacher ensemble following a learned adaptive categorical distribution with regard to different downstream tasks in each step. The proposed approach can not
only solve the above mentioned issues, but also automate
the designing process of sampling distribution (dubbed as
categorical distribution in this paper). Furthermore, we also
propose a differentiable algorithm to dynamically determine
the adaptive categorical distribution which plays an important role in DynaKD. We implement extensive experiments
on GLUE benchmark to verify the effectiveness of DynaKD.
Moreover, to show the generalization capacity, we have also
distilled deep convolutional neural network by DynaKD for
computer vision on CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, Hinton et al.
2009). Our contributions are summarized as follows:

We observe two phenomenons with respect to quantity and
capacity: 1) more teacher is not always better for multiteacher knowledge distillation, and 2) stronger teacher is not
always better for single-teacher knowledge distillation. To
trade off the quantity and capacity of teacher ensemble, in
this paper, we propose a new distillation paradigm named Dynamic Knowledge Distillation (DynaKD) that learn an adaptive categorical distribution to stochastically employ a teacher
from a teacher ensemble in each step, to transfer knowledge
from teacher ensemble into student. DynaKD has three advantages: 1) it can preserve diversity of each teacher via oneto-one distillation manner instead of several-for-one, 2) it can
make the best of powerful teacher via those multi-level assistant teachers in ensemble, and 3) it can also dynamically
determine the importance of each teacher for various tasks.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we conduct extensive experiments for BERT compression on GLUE
benchmark. Experimental results show that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art score compared to previous
compression approaches on five out of seven downstream
tasks, including pushing MRPC F1 and accuracy to 92.2 (1.4
point absolute improvement), RTE accuracy to 76.2 (2.8 point
absolute improvement). Moreover, we conduct also extensive
experiments for image classification on CIFAR-100. Similarly, DynaKD achieves also state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) has brought about a sea change
for natural language processing. Following BERT, numerous subsequent works focus on various perspectives to further improve its performance, e.g., hyper-parameter (Liu
et al. 2019b), learnable embedding paradigm (Raffel et al.
2020), architecture (Gao et al. 2022), etc. However, there
are massive redundancies in the above BERT-style models w.r.t. attention heads (Dong, Cordonnier, and Loukas
2021), weights (Gordon, Duh, and Andrews 2020), and layers (Fan, Grave, and Joulin 2020). Consequently, many compact BERT-style language models are proposed via pruning (Fan, Grave, and Joulin 2020), quantization (Shen et al.
2020), parameter sharing (Lan et al. 2020) and Knowledge

• We propose DynaKD which preserves the diversity of
each teacher in local view (i.e., each step) and make the
best use of strong teachers in global view (i.e., entire process) under an adaptive categorical distribution.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17915

