The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stability in Online Coalition Formation
Martin Bullinger1 * , René Romen2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
martin.bullinger@cs.ox.ac.uk, rene.romen@tum.de

Abstract

existing coalitions. For instance, in a company, most workers are assigned to a department or team, and new hires join
existing teams.
Based on such considerations, Flammini et al. (2021b)
have introduced an online variant of hedonic games that
adds the arrival of agents over time. Their goal is to achieve
high social welfare, and they find that a greedy algorithm
performs best in a competitive analysis. However, this algorithm has an unbounded competitive ratio even if the number
of agents or the utility range is unbounded. In subsequent
work, Bullinger and Romen (2023a) show that it is possible to get rid of utility dependencies of the competitive ratio
under certain model assumptions, e.g., a uniformly random
arrival of agents. They achieve a competitive ratio of Θ (n),
which is essentially the best approximation guarantee that
we can hope for by efficient algorithms because, for every
ϵ > 0, it is NP-complete to approximate social welfare by
a factor of n1−ϵ (Flammini, Kodric, and Varricchio 2022,
Theorem 17).1
By contrast, the scarce existing literature on online coalition formation omits other common objectives in coalition
formation. Stability probably is the most studied solution
concept for hedonic games in general and additively separable hedonic games in particular (see, e.g., Bogomolnaia and
Jackson 2002; Sung and Dimitrov 2010; Aziz, Brandt, and
Seedig 2013; Woeginger 2013; Gairing and Savani 2019;
Brandt, Bullinger, and Tappe 2022; Brandt, Bullinger, and
Wilczynski 2023; Bullinger 2022). In our work, we close
this research gap and consider the question of whether notions of stability can be achieved in an online manner.
We focus on stability concepts based on deviations by single agents, namely Nash stability, individual stability, contractual Nash stability, and contractual individual stability.
In addition, we study Pareto optimality, which is particularly interesting because it is a natural weakening of the demanding objective of maximizing social welfare while it can
still be interpreted as a notion of stability (Morrill 2010).
We present a comprehensive picture of the capabilities and
impossibilities of online algorithms aiming to compute stable partitions. For this, we consider natural utility restrictions, such as symmetry or the distinction of friends and en-

Coalition formation is concerned with the question of how to
partition a set of agents into disjoint coalitions according to
their preferences. Deviating from most of the previous work,
we consider an online variant of the problem, where agents
arrive in sequence and whenever an agent arrives, they have
to be assigned to a coalition immediately and irrevocably. The
scarce existing literature on online coalition formation has focused on the objective of maximizing social welfare, a demanding requirement, even in the offline setting. Instead, we
seek to achieve stable coalition structures in an online setting,
and focus on stability concepts based on deviations by single
agents. We present a comprehensive picture in additively separable hedonic games, leading to dichotomies, where positive
results are obtained by deterministic algorithms and negative
results even hold for randomized algorithms.

Introduction
The formation of stable coalition structures is an important concern in multi-agent systems. The key question is
how to partition a set of agents into reasonable coalitions.
A standard framework for this is the consideration of hedonic games (Drèze and Greenberg 1980). In these games,
a set of agents expresses their preferences over subsets of
agents containing themselves, i.e., their potential coalitions.
The output is then a coalition structure, where all agents are
assigned to a unique coalition. In our work, we consider additively separable hedonic games, one of the most prominent
classes of hedonic games, where cardinal utilities for single
agents encode the preferences, and a sum-based aggregation
obtains the utility for a coalition.
Hedonic games have been used to model various aspects
of group interaction, such as the formation of research teams
(Alcalde and Revilla 2004) or the detection of communities (Aziz et al. 2019). A commonality of most research is
that the focus is on a single game, which is fully specified
and for which a desirable outcome is searched. However,
this misses an important feature of many real-life scenarios:
Agents might arrive over time and have to be assigned to
* Most of this research was done when Martin Bullinger was a
PhD student at the Technical University of Munich.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
This result even holds for the class of aversion-to-enemies
games that we will introduce and investigate later.

9537

