The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

GOODAT: Towards Test-Time Graph Out-of-Distribution Detection
Luzhi Wang1 , Dongxiao He1 , He Zhang2 , Yixin Liu2 ,
Wenjie Wang3 , Shirui Pan4 * , Di Jin1 , Tat-Seng Chua3
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
4
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{wangluzhi, jindi, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn, {he.zhang1, yixin.liu}@monash.edu,
wenjiewang96@gmail.com, s.pan@griffith.edu.au, dcscts@nus.edu.sg
Abstract

(a) GNN-based detector trained from scratch

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have found widespread application in modeling graph data across diverse domains. While
GNNs excel in scenarios where the testing data shares the
distribution of their training counterparts (in distribution, ID),
they often exhibit incorrect predictions when confronted with
samples from an unfamiliar distribution (out-of-distribution,
OOD). To identify and reject OOD samples with GNNs, recent studies have explored graph OOD detection, often focusing on training a specific model or modifying the data
on top of a well-trained GNN. Despite their effectiveness,
these methods come with heavy training resources and costs,
as they need to optimize the GNN-based models on training data. Moreover, their reliance on modifying the original
GNNs and accessing training data further restricts their universality. To this end, this paper introduces a method to detect
Graph Out-of-Distribution At Test-time (namely GOODAT),
a data-centric, unsupervised, and plug-and-play solution that
operates independently of training data and modifications of
GNN architecture. With a lightweight graph masker, GOODAT can learn informative subgraphs from test samples, enabling the capture of distinct graph patterns between OOD
and ID samples. To optimize the graph masker, we meticulously design three unsupervised objective functions based
on the graph information bottleneck principle, motivating the
masker to capture compact yet informative subgraphs for
OOD detection. Comprehensive evaluations confirm that our
GOODAT method outperforms state-of-the-art benchmarks
across a variety of real-world datasets.

Training Dataset

GNN-based
OOD Detection
Model

!

OOD
Prediction

(b) Data-centric OOD detector

Training Dataset

MLP for
Graph
Modification

!

Well-trained
GNN

❄

OOD
Prediction

(c) Test-time OOD detector
Graph
Masker
Testing Dataset

!

Well-trained
GNN

❄

OOD
Prediction

Figure 1: Comparisons between GOODAT and other methods. To detect OOD samples, (a) most GNN-based methods need to learn a detector from the training data (Liu
et al. 2023a); (b) other data-centric methods learn an MLP
to modify the training data while keeping the well-trained
GNN fixed (Guo et al. 2023). (c) In contrast, our test-time
OOD detector directly works on the test data without 1
needing to consult the training data and change the parameters of
the well-trained GNN.

graph “Out-of-Distribution (OOD)” data (Liu et al. 2023a).
On the OOD data, well-trained GNNs may not be effective,
as the features and distribution patterns of these OOD graphs
are not exposed during GNN training (Bai et al. 2023). This
situation can lead to prediction errors when dealing with
these unknown distribution samples, thereby reducing the
reliability of GNNs. In this scenario, an ideal GNN model
should possess the capability to identify and reject OOD
samples, rather than misclassifying them as belonging to the
in-distribution (ID) classes.
To effectively identify OOD graph samples, various graph
OOD detection approaches have emerged (Huang, Wang,
and Fang 2022; Hoffmann, Galke, and Scherp 2023). A subset of research (Liu et al. 2023a) centers around crafting
GNN-based OOD detection models that are meticulously
tailored for graph OOD detection tasks. While demonstrating effectiveness, they need to train additional GNNs from
scratch, resulting in a heavy resource expenditure. Another

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are potent representation
learning methods that focus on processing graph data (Wang
et al. 2019a,b), and have been widely used in financial networks (Zheng et al. 2021), binary code analysis (Wang et al.
2023a), sarcasm detection (Wang et al. 2023b; Yu et al.
2023), etc. Generally, GNNs provide strong support for accurate prediction of downstream tasks by capturing the distribution of training data (Kipf and Welling 2017; Zhang
et al. 2021). However, when these well-trained GNN models are deployed in open-world scenarios, they inevitably encounter graph samples from unknown classes, the so-called
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15537

