The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Decoupling Degradations with Recurrent Network for Video Restoration in
Under-Display Camera
Chengxu Liu1,2 , Xuan Wang3 , Yuanting Fan1 , Shuai Li3 , Xueming Qian1,2
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd
3
MEGVII Technology
liuchx97@gmail.com, retofan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {wangxuan02,lishuai}@megvii.com, qianxm@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Under-display camera (UDC) systems are the foundation of
full-screen display devices in which the lens mounts under
the display. The pixel array of light-emitting diodes used for
display diffracts and attenuates incident light, causing various degradations as the light intensity changes. Unlike general video restoration which recovers video by treating different degradation factors equally, video restoration for UDC
systems is more challenging that concerns removing diverse
degradation over time while preserving temporal consistency.
In this paper, we introduce a novel video restoration network, called D2 RNet, specifically designed for UDC systems.
It employs a set of Decoupling Attention Modules (DAM)
that effectively separate the various video degradation factors. More specifically, a soft mask generation function is proposed to formulate each frame into flare and haze based on
the diffraction arising from incident light of different intensities, followed by the proposed flare and haze removal components that leverage long- and short-term feature learning to
handle the respective degradations. Such a design offers an
targeted and effective solution to eliminating various types of
degradation in UDC systems. We further extend our design
into multi-scale to overcome the scale-changing of degradation that often occur in long-range videos. To demonstrate
the superiority of D2 RNet, we propose a large-scale UDC
video benchmark by gathering HDR videos and generating
realistically degraded videos using the point spread function
measured by a commercial UDC system. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the superiority of
D2 RNet compared to other state-of-the-art video restoration
and UDC image restoration methods.

…

Flare Map
Decoupling
Degradations
Haze Map

Input UDC Video
Short-Term Haze Removal

Restoration

Long-Term Flare Removal

Abstract

Restored UDC Video

Figure 1: Method illustration. In UDC systems, the degree
of degradation is positively correlated with the intensity of
incident light. Our method decouples the degradation into
brighter flare and darker haze, which are handled using information from long and short distances, respectively.

In contrast to conventional cameras, during UDC imaging, the incident light will cross the densely arranged organic
light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) used for display before arriving at the lens. It implies that incident light is diffracted
when propagating the aperture between the OLEDs, especially when the wavelength of the light is similar to the
gaps between the obstacles (Zhou et al. 2021) (illustrated by
Fig. 2(a)). Besides, the degree of degradation arising from
diffraction is positively correlated with the intensity of incident light (Kwon et al. 2021). As depicted in Fig. 1, in
brighter regions close to the light source, diffraction causes
flare that saturates one or more channels of the image, resulting in content loss. In contrast, in other darker regions,
diffraction causes haze that makes the content fuzzy.
To solve these challenges, many efforts have been devoted to handle image restoration for UDC through deep
learning-based models. These works can be categorized into
two paradigms. Some attempts to leverage the prior knowledge of the diffraction blur kernel, i.e., point spread function
(PSF) illustrated in Fig. 2(b), to guide the removal of diffraction (Feng et al. 2021; Kwon et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022c).
Another part directly learns diffraction removal through
complex network design (Feng et al. 2023; Koh, Lee, and
Yoon 2022; Liu et al. 2023a). Unfortunately, unlike UDC
images, diffraction will change dynamically with motion in

Introduction
The rising popularity of full-screen mobile devices has
driven the development of under-display camera (UDC) systems. While research on UDC primarily focuses on single
image restoration (Feng et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2020), few
works are available on video restoration, which impedes the
popularity of devices with UDC systems. UDC system is an
imaging system where the lens is mounted under the display.
It can eliminate the screen notch of the traditional front camera in mobile devices, providing a bezel-less display without
disrupting the screen’s integrity (Qin et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3558

