The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive Feature Imputation with Latent Graph for Deep Incomplete Multi-View
Clustering
Jingyu Pu1 , Chenhang Cui1 , Xinyue Chen1 , Yazhou Ren1, 2 * , Xiaorong Pu1, 2 , Zhifeng Hao3 ,
Philip S. Yu4 , Lifang He5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
5
Department Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA
pujingyu0105@163.com, {chenhangcui, martinachen2580}@gmail.com,
{yazhou.ren, puxiaor}@uestc.edu.cn, haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn, psyu@uic.edu, lih319@lehigh.edu
Abstract

analysis, and bioinformatics (Nie, Cai, and Li 2017; Zhan
et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020; Huang, Kang, and Xu 2020;
Xu et al. 2021). Most existing multi-view clustering methods
heavily rely on the assumption of fully available data. However, it is a commonly encountered scenario that only partial
data can be collected and transmitted owing to factors such
as unstable sensors and damaged storage media. Therefore,
an increasing attention is paid to partial multi-view clustering or incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) problems
(Peng et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2021, 2022).
To handle the incompleteness issue, traditional incomplete multi-view clustering methods with satisfactory performance have been proposed. Typical strategies are mainly
based on matrix decomposition (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014;
Zhao, Liu, and Fu 2016; Hu and Chen 2019b), incomplete
multiple kernel learning (Liu et al. 2020; Guo and Ye 2019)
and graph-based methods (Xu et al. 2018; Wen et al. 2019,
2021). Improving the performance of incomplete multi-view
clustering relies on the ability to learn more discriminative
consensus representations despite the presence of incomplete view information. Most methods naturally focus on
addressing the challenge of missing data by imputing, recovering, or inferring values for the missing samples.
However, the above traditional IMVC methods all exploit
the shallow learning based methods, which are not effective enough to excavate the in-depth knowledge hidden in
the data (Zhao et al. 2018). In recent years, deep incomplete
multi-view clustering (DIMVC) have demonstrated remarkable progress by integrating clustering with the representation learning capabilities of deep models (Wen et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2022). Most existing DIMVC
methods utilize the generalization capability of deep models to achieve the imputation for missing data (Yang et al.
2022).
Although existing DIMVC methods have achieved significant progress through imputation, they have at least two issues. On the one hand, the effectiveness of these methods
is limited as they cannot exploit the topological information
of samples. On the other hand, imputing missing data accurately based on observed data poses a significant challenge,

In recent years, incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC),
which studies the challenging multi-view clustering problem of missing views, has received growing research interests. Previous IMVC methods suffer from the following issues: (1) the inaccurate imputation for missing data, which
leads to suboptimal clustering performance, and (2) most existing IMVC models merely consider the explicit presence of
graph structure in data, ignoring the fact that latent graphs
of different views also provide valuable information for the
clustering task. To overcome these challenges, we present a
novel method, termed adaptive feature imputation with latent graph for incomplete multi-view clustering (AGDIMC).
Specifically, it captures the embedded features of each view
by incorporating the view-specific deep encoders. Then, we
construct partial latent graphs on complete data, which can
consolidate the intrinsic relationships within each view while
preserving the topological information. With the aim of estimating the missing sample based on the available information, we utilize an adaptive imputation layer to impute the
embedded feature of missing data by using cross-view soft
cluster assignments and global cluster centroids. As the imputation progresses, the portion of complete data increases,
contributing to enhancing the discriminative information contained in global pseudo-labels. Meanwhile, to alleviate the
negative impact caused by inferior impute samples and the
discrepancy of cluster structures, we further design an adaptive imputation strategy based on the global pseudo-label and
the local cluster assignment. Experimental results on multiple real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method over existing approaches.

Introduction
The proliferation of multi-view data has created a compelling demand for researchers to analyze this intricate information. As an important unsupervised learning approach,
multi-view clustering has been widely applied in real-world
applications, such as recommendation systems, multimedia
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14633

