The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Composite Sketch+Text Queries for Retrieving Objects with
Elusive Names and Complex Interactions
Prajwal Gatti1 , Kshitij Parikh1 , Dhriti Prasanna Paul1 , Manish Gupta2 , Anand Mishra1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
2
Microsoft
{pgatti, parikh.2, paul.4, mishra}@iitj.ac.in, gmanish@microsoft.com

Search Query

Abstract

Retrieved Images

“Small mammal
with striped
back and long
snout digging
in the ground.”

CSTBIR

SBIR

TBIR

Non-native speakers with limited vocabulary often struggle
to name specific objects despite being able to visualize them,
e.g., people outside Australia searching for ‘numbats.’ Further, users may want to search for such elusive objects with
difficult-to-sketch interactions, e.g., “numbat digging in the
ground.” In such common but complex situations, users desire
a search interface that accepts composite multimodal queries
comprising hand-drawn sketches of “difficult-to-name but
easy-to-draw” objects and text describing “difficult-to-sketch
but easy-to-verbalize” object’s attributes or interaction with
the scene. This novel problem statement distinctly differs
from the previously well-researched TBIR (text-based image retrieval) and SBIR (sketch-based image retrieval) problems. To study this under-explored task, we curate a dataset,
CSTBIR (Composite Sketch+Text Based Image Retrieval),
consisting of ∼2M queries and 108K natural scene images. Further, as a solution to this problem, we propose a
pretrained multimodal transformer-based baseline, STN ET
(Sketch+Text Network), that uses a hand-drawn sketch to localize relevant objects in the natural scene image, and encodes the text and image to perform image retrieval. In addition to contrastive learning, we propose multiple training
objectives that improve the performance of our model. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method outperforms
several state-of-the-art retrieval methods for text-only, sketchonly, and composite query modalities. We make the dataset
and code available at: https://vl2g.github.io/projects/cstbir.

+

“Digging in the
ground”

Figure 1: CSTBIR: Composite Sketch+Text Based Image
Retrieval: A user wants to search “Numbat digging in the
ground” but does not know the word “numbat”, and the interaction “digging in the ground” is not easy to sketch.

Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) systems (Yu et al.
2016; Dey et al. 2019; Song et al. 2017b; Collomosse, Bui,
and Jin 2019; Sain et al. 2022) seem to provide an illusory relief in such situations. Although a user can sketch
“difficult-to-name but easy-to-draw” objects, (1) users may
not have enough time, skills, or tools to draw all the details,
leading to ambiguity in sketches; (2) users may be looking for “difficult-to-sketch but easy-to-verbalize” object’s attributes or interaction with the scene. For example, for the
query, “numbat digging in the ground”, it is difficult to draw
a sketch to represent “digging in the ground”, and even if
drawn, the sketch could lead to false positives about “numbat eating an insect” or “numbat searching for termites”.
Such common but complex search situations require novel
multimodal search interfaces, allowing seamless text and
sketch mix-ups in queries. Such a flexible and natural interface should help the user to draw sketches for “difficult-toname” objects effortlessly and then complement their creations with text descriptions to define layout, color, pose,
and other object characteristics, along with complex interactions with other objects in scenes. We refer to such a novel
proposed system as CSTBIR or Composite Sketch+Text
Based Image Retrieval system.

Introduction
Traditional text-based image retrieval (TBIR) systems (Li
et al. 2020a; Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Zhang et al. 2020;
Lee et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020b) are intuitive for users with
strong linguistic abilities. However, non-native speakers or
users unfamiliar with particular objects struggle in using
such systems to find objects with “elusive” names, e.g., users
outside Australia searching for numbats, as shown in Figure 1. Elaborate text descriptions in lieu of the precise object
name could provide limited help, even with all the details.
For example, “Small mammal with striped back and long
snout digging in the ground” as a replacement for “numbats”
leads to images of chipmunk, badger, weasel, mongoose, or
skunk.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1869

