The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identifying and Addressing Disparities in Public Libraries
with Bayesian Latent Variable Modeling
Zhi Liu1, 2 , Sarah Rankin2 , Nikhil Garg1
1

Cornell Tech
The New York Public Library
zl724@cornell.edu, sarahrankin@nypl.org, ngarg@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

These branches are both locally and centrally operated –
e.g., branch librarians may curate their collections, but resources and books are also shared across branches.
An important component of library usage is the holds system: an online portal allowing patrons to request a book
available at any branch in the system, which is then transferred to their local branch to be picked up. Such hold systems increase effective branch collection quality and thus efficiency: books desired in one branch are not sitting unused
in another; however, as we show, such systems can also be a
source for inequity, if usage of the holds system is disparate.
We ask: are urban library systems providing equitable service to all residents, in terms of the books they have access to
and check out? If not, what causes disparities: heterogeneous
branch collection quality, availability, resident behavior and
access, and/or operational policies? Existing research on library equity largely focuses on high-level questions, such as
large-scale disparities in funding (Sin 2011) or accessibility (Cheng et al. 2021; Guo, Chan, and Yip 2017) across an
entire country or region, or comparison between rural and
urban libraries (Real, Bertot, and Jaeger 2014).
While essential, such analyses are insufficient to inform
operational decisions, such as how much to invest to improve collection quality in each branch, and how to fill hold
requests across branches. In particular, coarse analyses confound many potential reasons that there may be fewer checkouts by patrons of one branch than another:
(a) Collection desirability. Does a branch collection contain books that potential patrons desire to read?
(b) Latent demand. What is the overall latent demand
for the branch, due to factors such as population size, geographic distance to the branch, and outside options for books
(such as personal purchases)?
(c) Book availability. Are desired books actually available
for checkout by branch patrons? If not, where is the book?
(d) Differential mode usage. Books can be checked-out
via different means. Patrons using the hold system have access to books from any branch in the system and can request books online. Other patrons physically visit their local
branch and browse books on the shelves. Differential mode
usage (due to, e.g., mode familiarity or access to home internet) can induce disparities, due to de facto access to different
collection sizes and qualities, as well as how such holds lead
to transfers between branches.

Public libraries are an essential public good. We ask: are urban library systems providing equitable service to all residents, in terms of the books they have access to and check
out? If not, what causes disparities: heterogeneous book collections, resident behavior and access, and/or operational
policies? Existing methods leverage only system-level outcome data (such as overall checkouts per branch), and so cannot distinguish between these factors. As a result, it is difficult to use their results to guide interventions to increase equitable access. We propose a Bayesian framework to characterize book checkout behavior across multiple branches of a
library system, learning heterogeneous book popularity, overall branch demand, and usage of the online hold system, while
controlling for book availability.
In collaboration with the New York Public Library, we apply
our framework to granular data consisting of over 400,000
checkouts during 2022. We first show that our model significantly out-performs baseline methods in predicting checkouts
at the book-branch level. Next, we study spatial and socioeconomic disparities. We show that disparities are largely driven
by disparate use of the online holds system, which allows library patrons to receive books from any other branch through
an online portal. This system thus leads to a large outflow of
popular books from branches in lower income neighborhoods
to those in high income ones. Finally, we illustrate the use of
our model and insights to quantify the impact of potential interventions, such as changing how books are internally routed
between branches to fulfill hold requests.

1

Introduction

Libraries play a key role in how humans preserve, share, and
access knowledge. Public libraries in particular are an important social space and resource. Urban library systems are
not monoliths, but rather spatially distributed throughout the
city, with each branch primarily serving its neighborhood
population. As a prominent example, the New York Public
Library (NYPL), has 92 branches in the boroughs of Manhattan, the Bronx, and Staten Island,1 serving roughly 867
thousand active patrons (users)(NYC Mayor’s Office of Operations 2023); similarly, the Chicago Public Library has 81
branches, and the Seattle Public Library has 27 branches.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The boroughs of Queens and Brooklyn have separate systems.

22258

