The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Context Transformation Learning for Progressive Correspondence Pruning
Junwen Guo1,2 , Guobao Xiao1∗ , Shiping Wang2 , Jun Yu3
1

School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University
2
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University
jwg9967@163.com, x-gb@163.com, shipingwangphd@163.com, yujun@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most of existing correspondence pruning methods only concentrate on gathering the context information as much as possible while neglecting effective ways to utilize such information. In order to tackle this dilemma, in this paper we propose Graph Context Transformation Network (GCT-Net) enhancing context information to conduct consensus guidance
for progressive correspondence pruning. Specifically, we design the Graph Context Enhance Transformer which first generates the graph network and then transforms it into multibranch graph contexts. Moreover, it employs self-attention
and cross-attention to magnify characteristics of each graph
context for emphasizing the unique as well as shared essential information. To further apply the recalibrated graph contexts to the global domain, we propose the Graph Context
Guidance Transformer. This module adopts a confident-based
sampling strategy to temporarily screen high-confidence vertices for guiding accurate classification by searching global consensus between screened vertices and remaining ones.
The extensive experimental results on outlier removal and relative pose estimation clearly demonstrate the superior performance of GCT-Net compared to state-of-the-art methods
across outdoor and indoor datasets.

(a) Original Image

(b) Initial Correspondence Set

(c) Graph Context Enhancement (d) Global Consensus Guidance

Figure 1: Visualization results of the procedure for correspondence pruning using GCT-Net, with the red and green
lines representing incorrect and accurate correspondences,
respectively.

in Fig. 1b) due to the limitations of local descriptor representation and the presence of low-quality images. Therefore,
the third step, identifying and eliminating outliers, is indispensable. As illustrated in Fig. 1c and Fig. 1d, outliers are
removed and most of inliers are preserved, enhancing the
available insights for post-processing endeavors.
Correspondence pruning methods are mainly evolved into two distinct factions, i.e., tradition methods and learningbased methods. RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981) and
its modifications (Barath, Matas, and Noskova 2019; Chum
and Matas 2005; Chum, Werner, and Matas 2005; Torr and
Zisserman 2000) are representative of traditional methods.
These methods adopt a sampling-verification loop to retain
most of correspondences adhering to a specific geometric
model. However, in scenarios with a high proportion of outliers, the runtime of these methods will rapidly increase and
simultaneously, the quality of the results will significantly
deteriorate. In our task, it is common for the initial correspondence set to have an outlier proportion exceeding 80%,
rendering these methods inapplicable.
The most of learning-based advancements approach the
correspondence pruning as a binary classification problem
and achieve remarkable potential. But this treatment also
poses formidable challenges: (1) unordered data should be
handled appropriately to ensure its permutation invariance.
(2) local context and global context should be adequately

Introduction
Two-view correspondence pruning methods strive to form
robust correspondences between two sets of interest points
to lay the foundation for many computer vision tasks, such
as, Structure from Motion (SfM) (Sarlin et al. 2023), Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) (Johari, Carta, and Fleuret 2023) and Image Fusion (Tang et al. 2023).
Correspondence pruning involves three steps: keypoints and
relating descriptors extraction, the initial correspondence
set establishment and outlier (i.e. false correspondence) removal. More specifically, we employ established methods,
such as SuperPoint (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich
2018) and SIFT (Lowe 2004), to generate keypoints and
computer their descriptors at first. Subsequently, the initial correspondence set is generated by applying the nearest
matching algorithm to the descriptors. However, the initial
correspondence set often contains numerous outliers (shown
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1968

