The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Audio Generation with Multiple Conditional Diffusion Model
Zhifang Guo1,2 , Jianguo Mao1,2
Rui Tao , Long Yan , Kazushige Ouchi3 , Hong Liu1 , Xiangdong Wang1 *
2,3

3

1
Bejing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Toshiba China R&D Center, Beijing, China
guozhifang21s@ict.ac.cn, mao@maojianguo.cn
{taorui, yanlong}@toshiba.com.cn, kazushige.ouchi@toshiba.co.jp, {hliu, xdwang}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Text-based audio generation models have limitations as they
cannot encompass all the information in audio, leading to
restricted controllability when relying solely on text. To address this issue, we propose a novel model that enhances the
controllability of existing pre-trained text-to-audio models by
incorporating additional conditions including content (timestamp) and style (pitch contour and energy contour) as supplements to the text. This approach achieves fine-grained control
over the temporal order, pitch, and energy of generated audio.
To preserve the diversity of generation, we employ a trainable control condition encoder that is enhanced by a large
language model and a trainable Fusion-Net to encode and
fuse the additional conditions while keeping the weights of
the pre-trained text-to-audio model frozen. Due to the lack of
suitable datasets and evaluation metrics, we consolidate existing datasets into a new dataset comprising the audio and
corresponding conditions and use a series of evaluation metrics to evaluate the controllability performance. Experimental
results demonstrate that our model successfully achieves finegrained control to accomplish controllable audio generation.

Figure 1: Our model supports fine-grained control by enabling the existing TTA models to accept control conditions.
We show temporal order control in Subfigure (a), pitch control in Subfigure (b), and energy control in Subfigure (c).

Liu et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Ghosal et al. 2023). However, in other domains, many generation models have been
proposed to explore the use of other conditions (referred to
as control condition), such as layout (Li et al. 2021a) and
keypoint (He, Wandt, and Rhodin 2023), to control the generation process, even employing multiple conditions simultaneously (Li et al. 2023b). These control conditions serve
as a guidance for the generation process to approximate specific distributions. However, within the audio domain, there
is little research on audio generation with multiple conditions that are necessary for enriching the expression of the
text condition. For instance, when generating audio for video
or virtual reality, it is important to specify the temporal locations of sound events and precisely control the pitch and
energy to enhance users’ immersion in the scene. Obviously,
it is difficult to precisely convey the intended fine-grained
control over the audio through language alone. Therefore, it
is reasonable to use other control conditions as a supplement
to the text condition to overcome the limitations of language
expression and facilitate the understanding of users’ intention by the model. As shown in Figure 1, our focus is on
three crucial control conditions: timestamp, pitch contour,
and energy contour. These conditions are used to control the
temporal order of sound events, as well as their pitch and

Introduction
In recent years, significant progress has been made in generation models, with enhanced naturalness observed across
diverse domains such as image (Ramesh et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2020; Nichol et al. 2022) and text (Radford et al. 2020;
Schick et al. 2023; Kong et al. 2020). This is due to the more
stable learning objectives of the models and the availability of extensive paired data. In addition to these fields, audio generation has also attracted significant attention, with
strong potential for applications in video creation, virtual reality, and interactive systems.
Audio generation begins with label-to-audio (Pascual
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2021b), but the diversity of generated
audio is limited by the classes of labels. Considering that
text is a more natural way to express the need of audio, recent research on audio generation primarily focuses on using
captions (referred to as text condition) to generate semantically coherent audio (Yang et al. 2022; Kreuk et al. 2022;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18153

