The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Carbon Footprint Reduction for Sustainable Data Centers in Real-Time
Soumyendu Sarkar*†, Avisek Naug†, Ricardo Luna†, Antonio Guillen†, Vineet Gundecha†, Sahand
Ghorbanpour, Sajad Mousavi, Dejan Markovikj, Ashwin Ramesh Babu
Hewelett Packard Labs @ Hewlett Packard Enterprise
820 N McCarthy Blvd, Milpitas, CA 95035, USA
soumyendu.sarkar, avisek.naug, rluna, antonio.guillen, vineet.gundecha, sahand.ghorbanpour, sajad.mousavi,
dejan.markovikj, ashwin.ramesh-babu@hpe.com
Abstract

Static, isolated approaches for carbon footprint reduction,
such as energy optimization, load shifting to less carbonintensive hours, and battery usage for charging during low
power grid carbon intensity (CI) hours to supplement load
demand during high CI hours, are frequently used. However, achieving significant footprint savings with analytic
pipeline-based planning has proven challenging due to the
complexity of these individual problems and the reliance
on long forecast horizons (24h) for static approaches. Furthermore, the dependencies between these approaches and
the necessity of information exchange across separate problems have prevented the development of a cohesive strategy
that can simultaneously reduce the carbon footprint using all
three methods in real time.
In this paper, we introduce DC Carbon Footprint Reduction (DC-CFR), a novel framework that uses Multi-Agent
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) to optimize DC energy consumption, flexible load shifting, and battery operation decisions simultaneously in real time. The optimization is based on short-term weather and grid CI information.
Grid CI refers to the amount of CO2 emissions produced
per unit of electricity consumed, which varies based on the
source of the electricity (e.g., fossil fuels, renewable energy)
at a given time. The lower the CI, the more renewable the
energy source. Our approach effectively mitigates the drawbacks of existing, isolated methods. It does so by efficiently
managing the complex interdependencies and information
exchange among individual optimization strategies, a process that is illustrated in Figure 2 at a system level and in
Figure 3 to show the dependencies.
The proposed contributions of the framework are as follows:
• A carbon emission-aware framework for controlling data
centers by redistribution of server workloads, efficient
cooling, and battery storage for auxiliary energy supply.
• Real-time control for the individual approaches under the
framework, while coordinating between themselves using shared reward and state variables. The collaborative
performance indicators help the agents self-adjust their
operations.
• Implementation of the framework as a multi-agent reinforcement learning problem using industry-standard
simulators for Load Shifting and Battery Supply from

As machine learning workloads significantly increase energy
consumption, sustainable data centers with low carbon emissions are becoming a top priority for governments and corporations worldwide. This requires a paradigm shift in optimizing power consumption in cooling and IT loads, shifting flexible loads based on the availability of renewable energy in the power grid, and leveraging battery storage from
the uninterrupted power supply in data centers, using collaborative agents. The complex association between these optimization strategies and their dependencies on variable external factors like weather and the power grid carbon intensity makes this a hard problem. Currently, a real-time controller to optimize all these goals simultaneously in a dynamic real-world setting is lacking. We propose a Data Center Carbon Footprint Reduction (DC-CFR) multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) framework that optimizes data
centers for the multiple objectives of carbon footprint reduction, energy consumption, and energy cost. The results
show that the DC-CFR MARL agents effectively resolved
the complex interdependencies in optimizing cooling, load
shifting, and energy storage in real-time for various locations
under real-world dynamic weather and grid carbon intensity
conditions. DC-CFR significantly outperformed the industrystandard ASHRAE controller with a considerable reduction
in carbon emissions (14.5%), energy usage (14.4%), and energy cost (13.7%) when evaluated over one year across multiple geographical regions.

Introduction
In recent years, sustainability and carbon footprint reduction
have emerged as critical factors driving the need for innovative optimization techniques in data center (DC) operations.
While energy and cost optimization have been primary concerns in smart-grid problems, the increasing sustainability
commitments of companies with large DCs have made carbon footprint reduction an essential target for the industry.
Achieving significant carbon footprint savings requires reducing energy consumption and replacing carbon-intensive
energy sources with those with a lower carbon footprint.
*Corresponding author.

†These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22322

