The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Graph Learning in 4D: A Quaternion-Valued Laplacian to Enhance Spectral GCNs
Stefano Fiorini1 , Stefano Coniglio2 , Michele Ciavotta3 , Enza Messina3
1

Italian Institute of Technology, Genoa, Italy
2
University of Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy
3
University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
stefano.fiorini@iit.it, stefano.coniglio@unibg.it, michele.ciavotta@unimib.it, enza.messina@unimib.it

Abstract
We introduce QuaterGCN, a spectral Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) with quaternion-valued weights at whose core
lies the Quaternionic Laplacian, a quaternion-valued Laplacian matrix by whose proposal we generalize two widely-used
Laplacian matrices: the classical Laplacian (defined for undirected graphs) and the complex-valued Sign-Magnetic Laplacian (proposed to handle digraphs with weights of arbitrary
sign). In addition to its generality, our Quaternionic Laplacian
is the only Laplacian to completely preserve the topology of a
digraph, as it can handle graphs and digraphs containing antiparallel pairs of edges (digons) of different weights without
reducing them to a single (directed or undirected) edge as done
with other Laplacians. Experimental results show the superior
performance of QuaterGCN compared to other state-of-the-art
GCNs, particularly in scenarios where the information the
digons carry is crucial to successfully address the task at hand.

Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) has recently achieved a striking success, contributing to the advancement of several research
areas such as natural language processing (Vaswani et al.
2017), business intelligence (Khan et al. 2020), and cybersecurity (Dixit and Silakari 2021), only to name a few. While
many of the most popular DL architectures are designed to
process data arranged in grid-like structures (such as RGB
pixels in 2D images and video streams), many real-world phenomena are ruled by more general relationships that are better
represented by a graph (Bronstein et al. 2017). For example,
e-commerce relies on graphs to model the user-product interaction to make recommendations, drug discovery models
molecule bioactivity via interaction graphs, and information
discovery uses multi-relational knowledge graphs to extract
information between the entities (Ye et al. 2022).
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) model the interaction between the entities of a complex system via a graphbased convolution operator. They are the primary tool for
machine learning tasks on data that enjoy a graph-like structure. In spatial GCNs, the convolution operator is defined
as a localized aggregation operator (Xu et al. 2018). There
are various implementations and extensions of this operator.
E.g., in attention-based GCNs the convolutional operator
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12006

is used to dynamically learn attention scores on the graph
edges (Veličković et al. 2018), while, in recurrence-based
GCNs, the operator leverages gated recurrent units to capture
edge-specific information and temporal dependencies during
message passing (Li et al. 2016).
While spatial GCNs rely on different heuristics for the
definition of their convolution operator, spectral GCNs are
solidly grounded in signal and algebraic graph theory. They
rely on a convolution operator based on a Fourier transform
applied to the eigenspace of the Laplacian matrix of the
graph (Kipf and Welling 2017; He et al. 2022c; Wu et al.
2022) to capture the global structure of the graph. Spectral
GCNs have been shown to achieve superior performance to
their spatial-based counterpart in a number of papers, see,
e.g., (Zhang et al. 2021b; Fiorini et al. 2023). Our focus in
the paper will be on extending the applicability of spectral
GCNs. Spatial GCNs will be considered only for comparison
purposes within computational experiments.
Despite the growing interest in academia and industry alike
for neural-network methods suitable for progressively more
general classes of graphs, the literature on spectral GCNs
has only recently begun to include extensions beyond the
basic case of unweighted, undirected graphs. As a result, the
adoption of spectral CGNs in learning tasks involving graphs
such as those featuring directed edges, digons, and edges
with negative weights (He et al. 2022c; Wu et al. 2022) is still
limited. To (partially) address such limitations, alternative notions of the Laplacian matrix have been put forward, among
which the Magnetic Laplacian (Lieb and Loss 1993), which
was originally proposed in physics and first used within a
spectral GCN in (Zhang et al. 2021b), albeit with the limitation of only handling digraphs non-negative edge weights.
Spectral-based GCNs suitable for digraphs with weights of
unrestricted sign have been proposed only recently. Three
such networks are SigMaNet (Fiorini et al. 2023) (based
on the therein proposed Sign-Magnetic Laplacian), MSGNN (He et al. 2022a) (based on an extension of the Magnetic
Laplacian), and the network proposed in (Ko 2022).
Graphs with digons (pairs of antiparallel directed edges)
occur in many important applications including, e.g., traffic
and networking and, so far, have eluded every spectral-based
GCN proposed in the literature. Indeed, to the best of our
knowledge none of the known spectral-based GCNs can
handle graphs with digons with arbitrary weights and signs

