The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Variational Hybrid-Attention Framework for Multi-Label Few-Shot Aspect
Category Detection
Cheng Peng, Ke Chen * , Lidan Shou, Gang Chen ∗
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310000, China
{chengchng, chenk, should, cg}@zju.edu.cn

Support Set

Abstract

(1) This hotel is terrible with even worse service.
hotel

Multi-label few-shot aspect category detection (FS-ACD) is
a challenging sentiment analysis task, which aims to learn
a multi-label learning paradigm with limited training data.
The difficulty of this task is how to use limited data to generalize effective discriminative representations for different
categories. Nowadays, all advanced FS-ACD works utilize
the prototypical network to learn label prototypes to represent different aspects. However, such point-based estimation
methods are inherently noise-susceptible and bias-vulnerable.
To this end, this paper proposes a novel Variational HybridAttention Framework (VHAF) for the FS-ACD task. Specifically, to alleviate the data noise, we adopt a hybrid-attention
mechanism to generate more discriminative aspect-specific
embeddings. Then, based on these embeddings, we introduce
the variational distribution inference to obtain the aspectspecific distribution as a more robust aspect representation,
which can eliminate the scarce data bias for better inference.
Moreover, we further leverage an adaptive threshold estimation to help VHAF better identify multiple relevant aspects.
Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our VHAF over other state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/chengzju/VHAF.

service

food

(2) The hotel is clean and will suffice , but there are much better
options for the money.
(1) We got better service at the casino valet at the mgm which is
unacceptable considering the cost of our stay .
(2) Vegas hotels are very good at providing this sort of excellent
customer service .
(1) It is the staff and food quality that really needs fixing.
(2) The views are amazing from any location, staff is friendly and
the food was great too!

Query Set
hotel
hotel and food
service and food

(1) It 's not the best hotel , but for the money , it 's my 1st choice .
(2) The food is better than average for a hotel but not great for a
resort.
(3) Good service and food , but it used to be head and shoulders
above typical resort fare.

Figure 1: A 3-way 2-shot meta-task example. The words
in the gray background represent target aspects, while the
words with underscores represent irrelevant aspects.

the first to address ACD in the few-shot scenario, which formulates a few-shot aspect category detection problem (FSACD). Afterward, many advanced FS-ACD works (Zhao
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022) have been proposed. FS-ACD
follows the meta-learning paradigm (Vinyals et al. 2016) by
constructing a set of N -way K-shot meta-tasks. A meta-task
aims to infer a query set with a small labeled support set, and
an example case is shown in Figure 1. In this way, FS-ACD
methods can achieve good generalization ability by leveraging a large number of different meta-tasks.
Despite the promise, the recent FS-ACD research still encounters several thorny challenges. The issues come from
two folds. Firstly, since an ACD sentence may contain multiple aspects, the noise from irrelevant aspects will inevitably
disturb the learning of the target aspect. As shown in Figure 1, as ”food” is the target aspect, ”staff” will be treated
as a noise aspect for the sentence ”It is the staff and food
quality that really needs fixing.” Although previous works
(Hu et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022) exploit
the aspect information to guide an attention mechanism to
alleviate this issue, it is hard to ensure that novel aspects
can establish accurate attention associations with sentence
features during inference. Secondly, existing FS-ACD methods consistently follow the prototypical network (Snell et al.

Introduction
Aspect category detection (ACD) (Pontiki et al. 2016) is an
important task in sentiment analysis, which aims to discern
the aspect categories discussed in a given sentence from a
predefined set of aspect categories (e.g., price, food). Given
that sentences frequently encompass multiple aspects, ACD
inherently embodies a multi-label classification challenge.
The efficacy of prevalent ACD methodologies (Hu et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020) is contingent upon substantial amounts
of supervised data. However, in real scenarios, ACD usually
suffers from a lack of training data due to the labor-intensive
collection and annotation efforts.
Nowadays, the success of Few-Shot Learning (FSL) provides an effective solution to address the above challenges.
FSL is a human-like learning paradigm that can quickly generalize novel classes with a few training data by exploiting
prior knowledge. The pioneering work (Hu et al. 2021) is
* Ke Chen and Gang Chen are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14590

