The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

ODTrack: Online Dense Temporal Token Learning for Visual Tracking
Yaozong Zheng1,2 , Bineng Zhong1,2 * , Qihua Liang1,2 , Zhiyi Mo3 , Shengping Zhang4 , Xianxian Li1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University
2
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-Source Information Mining and Security, Guangxi Normal University
3
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Machine Vision and Intelligent Control, Wuzhou University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology
yaozongzheng@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn
zhiyim@gxuwz.edu.cn, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, lixx@gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Backbone
Reference frame

Online contextual reasoning and association across consecutive video frames are critical to perceive instances in visual tracking. However, most current top-performing trackers persistently lean on sparse temporal relationships between reference and search frames via an offline mode. Consequently, they can only interact independently within each
image-pair and establish limited temporal correlations. To
alleviate the above problem, we propose a simple, flexible
and effective video-level tracking pipeline, named ODTrack,
which densely associates the contextual relationships of video
frames in an online token propagation manner. ODTrack receives video frames of arbitrary length to capture the spatiotemporal trajectory relationships of an instance, and compresses the discrimination features (localization information)
of a target into a token sequence to achieve frame-to-frame
association. This new solution brings the following benefits: 1) the purified token sequences can serve as prompts
for the inference in the next video frame, whereby past information is leveraged to guide future inference; 2) the complex online update strategies are effectively avoided by the
iterative propagation of token sequences, and thus we can
achieve more efficient model representation and computation.
ODTrack achieves a new SOTA performance on seven benchmarks, while running at real-time speed. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/ODTrack.

Matching/Fu
sion Module

Head

Backbone
Search frame

Tracking result

(a) The offline image-level method
Reference video-clip

Token

Encoder

Token

...

hv
arc
Se

Encoder

Token
Tracking results

p
cli

oide

Encoder

(b) Our online video-level method

Figure 1: Comparison of tracking methods. (a) The offline
image level tracking methods(Li et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2021) based on sparse sampling and image-pair matching.
(b) Our online video-level tracking method based on video
sequence sampling and temporal token propagation.

Yan et al. 2021a; Ye et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2022) typically
follow a three-phase process: (i) extracting features by sampling two video frames (i.e., reference and search frames);
(ii) propagating the initial target information from the reference to the search frame through a matching/fusion module;
and (iii) utilizing a bounding box prediction head to output
the localization results. Most trackers have performed well
under this paradigm, but still exhibit the following drawbacks: (1) The sampling frames are sparse (i.e., using only
one reference frame and one search frame). Although visual tracking inherently contains rich temporal data, this
simple sampling strategy falls short in accurately representing the motion state of an object, posing a significant challenge for trackers to comprehend dynamic video content,
and (2) The target information is matched offline and limited to image-pair level, preventing the association of the
targets across video frames. Traditional feature matching/fusion methods(Chen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Guo
et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2022) focus on the appearance similar-

Introduction
Visual tracking aims to uniquely identify and track an object
within a video sequence by using arbitrary target queries. In
the visual world, objects rarely exist in isolation but rather
within a larger and dynamic context. Therefore, visual perception is a complex process that involves interpreting and
understanding the surrounding environment of an object. In
such a situation, equipping a model with the ability to perform online contextual reasoning and establish associations
presents a challenge in the field of visual tracking.
Despite this challenge, a significant number of current
tracking methods overlook this problem and instead rely
on the offline image-pair matching to localize instances in
the current frame. As shown in Fig.1(a), these offline methods(Bertinetto et al. 2016; Li et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7588

