The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Unsupervised Extractive Summarization with Learnable Length Control Strategies
Renlong Jie1, 2 * , Xiaojun Meng1† , Xin Jiang1 , Qun Liu1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
jierenlong@nwpu.edu.cn, {xiaojun.meng, Jiang.Xin, qun.liu}@huawei.com
2

Abstract
Unsupervised extractive summarization is an important technique in information extraction and retrieval. Compared with
supervised method, it does not require high-quality humanlabelled summaries for training and thus can be easily applied
for documents with different types, domains or languages.
Most of existing unsupervised methods including TextRank
and PACSUM rely on graph-based ranking on sentence centrality. However, this scorer can not be directly applied in
end-to-end training, and the positional-related prior assumption is often needed for achieving good summaries. In addition,
less attention is paid to length-controllable extractor, where
users can decide to summarize texts under particular length
constraint. This paper introduces an unsupervised extractive
summarization model based on a siamese network, for which
we develop a trainable bidirectional prediction objective between the selected summary and the original document. Different from the centrality-based ranking methods, our extractive
scorer can be trained in an end-to-end manner, with no other requirement of positional assumption. In addition, we introduce
a differentiable length control module by approximating 0-1
knapsack solver for end-to-end length-controllable extracting.
Experiments show that our unsupervised method largely outperforms the centrality-based baseline using a same sentence
encoder. In terms of length control ability, via our trainable
knapsack module, the performance consistently outperforms
the strong baseline without utilizing end-to-end training. Human evaluation further evidences that our method performs the
best among baselines in terms of relevance and consistency.

Introduction
Text summarization aims at producing a short and clear text
that expresses the major ideas and important information of
an original article. There are two types of summarization
methods: 1) abstractive summarization directly generates
summary texts as a sequence, while 2) extractive summarization extracts the most important sentences from the original
article to form a summary. As known to all, recent abstractive
models like GPT-style large language models have shown
an incredible ability in text generation (Zhang et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Work is done as a postdoctoral research fellow of Noah’s Ark
Lab, Huawei.
†
Corresponding authors.

18372

These LLMs can be used to summarize everything with designing certain prompts. However, it is noticed that compared
with abstractive summarization with LLMs, extractive models are in much smaller size and thus have the advantages of
faster inference and less demand on computing costs. In additional, factually consistent summaries can not be guaranteed
by LLMs (Tam et al. 2023). Oppositely, extractive models
can ensure factual consistency to the original article and the
extracted text content is more controllable for the safe use of
real products.
Extractive summarization includes traditional unsupervised methods like TextRank (Mihalcea 2004; Erkan and
Radev 2004), and supervised methods like BertSum (Liu
and Lapata 2019). Although being capable of building highquality summaries, supervised methods rely on high-quality
human-labelled datasets. However, it is not realistic to label
these datasets across all kinds of domains, document types
and user requirements. The mainstream existing unsupervised summarization methods are centrality-based methods,
including Textrank and PACSUM (Mihalcea and Tarau 2004;
Zheng and Lapata 2019). They are no-differentiable methods and thus can not be trained with end-to-end manner. In
addition, some of them like PACSUM and FAR (Zheng and
Lapata 2019; Liang et al. 2021) rely on the positional-related
prior assumption to achieve good performance.
Building upon existing summarization work, lengthcontrollable summarization (LCS) (Yu et al. 2021) has been
studied to control the length of output summaries. The LCS
approach enables users to control summary length, thus to
serve various real industrial scenarios when users read different types of articles, or use different size of screens, on
different occasions. However, very few work (Mehdad et al.
2016) targets at the LCS problem of extractive methods, and
it is hard to annotate summaries under strict length control.
In fact, the nature of extracting summary texts under length
constraint is more like a combinatorial optimization problem
such as Knapsack Problem (Martello and Toth 1990), where
we extract the most valuable sentences within the length constraint. This is traditional solved by dynamic programming
(DP), but this solver can not be applied as a differentiable
module in end-to-end deep learning architectures.
In this paper, we aim at developing a novel unsupervised
extractive summarization method with strong length control
ability. We propose an unsupervised summarization archi-

