The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Arbitrariness and Social Prediction:
The Confounding Role of Variance in Fair Classification
A. Feder Cooper1,2 * , Katherine Lee1,2 , Madiha Zahrah Choksi2 , Solon Barocas2, 3 ,
Christopher De Sa2 , James Grimmelmann1,2 , Jon Kleinberg2 , Siddhartha Sen3 , Baobao Zhang4
The Center for Generative AI, Law, and Policy Research
2
Cornell University
3
Microsoft Research
4
Syracuse University
# of Model predictions

1

100

Abstract
Variance in predictions across different trained models is
a significant, under-explored source of error in fair binary
classification. In practice, the variance on some data examples
is so large that decisions can be effectively arbitrary. To
investigate this problem, we take an experimental approach
and make four overarching contributions. We: 1) Define a
metric called self-consistency, derived from variance, which
we use as a proxy for measuring and reducing arbitrariness;
2) Develop an ensembling algorithm that abstains from
classification when a prediction would be arbitrary; 3)
Conduct the largest-to-date empirical study of the role of
variance (vis-a-vis self-consistency and arbitrariness) in fair
binary classification; and, 4) Release a toolkit that makes
the US Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) datasets
easily usable for future research. Altogether, our experiments
reveal shocking insights about the reliability of conclusions
on benchmark datasets. Most fair binary classification benchmarks are close-to-fair when taking into account the amount
of arbitrariness present in predictions — before we even try
to apply any fairness interventions. This finding calls into
question the practical utility of common algorithmic fairness
methods, and in turn suggests that we should reconsider how
we choose to measure fairness in binary classification.

1

y=1
y=0

75
50
25
0

Ind. 1

Ind. 2

Two individuals from COMPAS

Figure 1: 100 bootstrapped logistic regression models show
models can be very consistent in predictions ŷ for some
individuals (Ind. 1) and arbitrary for others (Ind. 2).

Introduction

A goal of algorithmic fairness is to develop techniques that
measure and mitigate discrimination in automated decisionmaking. In fair binary classification, this often involves
training a model to satisfy a chosen fairness metric, which
typically defines fairness as parity between model error rates
for different demographic groups in the dataset (Barocas
et al. 2019). However, even if a model’s classifications satisfy
a particular fairness metric, it is not necessarily the case that
the model is equally confident in each classification.
To provide an intuition for what we mean by confidence,
consider the following experiment: We fit 100 logistic regression models using the same learning process, which draws
different subsamples of the training set from the COMPAS
prison recidivism dataset (Larson et al. 2016; Friedler et al.
2019), and we compare the resulting classifications for two
* Full, authoritative paper at https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11562.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22004

individuals in the test set. Figure 1 shows a difference in
the consistency of predictions for both individuals: the 100
models agree completely to classify Individual 1 as “will
recidivate” and disagree completely on whether to classify
Individual 2 as “will” or “will not recidivate.”
If we were to pick one model at random to use in practice,
there would be no effect on how Individual 1 is classified;
yet, for Individual 2, the prediction is effectively random.
We can interpret this disagreement to mean that the learning
process that produced these predictions is not sufficiently
confident to justify assigning Individual 2 either decision
outcome. In practice, instances like Individual 2 exhibit
so little confidence that their classification is effectively
arbitrary (Cooper et al. 2022a,b; Creel and Hellman 2022).
Further, this arbitrariness can also bring about discrimination
if classification decisions are systematically more arbitrary
for individuals in certain demographic groups.
A key aspect of this example is that we use only one model
to make predictions. This is the typical setup in fair binary
classification: Popular metrics are commonly applied to evaluate the fairness of a single model (Hardt et al. 2016; Pleiss
et al. 2017; Kleinberg et al. 2017). However, as is clear from
the example learning process in Fig. 1, using only a single
model can mask the arbitrariness of predictions. Instead, to
reveal arbitrariness, we must examine distributions over possible models for a given learning process. With this shift in
frame, we ask: What is the empirical role of arbitrariness in
fair binary classification tasks?
To study this question, we make four contributions:

