The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Variational Incomplete Multi-View Clustering: Exploring Shared Clustering
Structures
Gehui Xu1 , Jie Wen1 * , Chengliang Liu1 , Bing Hu1 , Yicheng Liu1 , Lunke Fei2 , Wei Wang1
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
tkkxgh@foxmail.com, jiewen pr@126.com, liucl1996@163.com, {200111412,190110406}@stu.hit.edu.cn,
flksxm@126.com, wangwei2019@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

assumption may not always hold in practical applications
where some samples may only contain partial views due
to unstable sensors or different acquisition costs. To this
end, many incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) methods have been proposed and can be roughly categorized into
two groups: imputation-based methods and imputation-free
methods.
To address the incomplete learning issue, most IMVC
methods typically impute missing views before exploring
clustering information, i.e., imputation-based IMVC methods (Wen et al. 2019; Liu 2021; Yin and Sun 2021; Wen
et al. 2021c; Liu et al. 2020). For traditional IMVC methods, such imputation strategies are generally built on matrix
factorization, multiple kernel learning, and graph learning
(Wen et al. 2022). For example, Wen et al. proposed a unified embedding alignment framework based on matrix factorization to jointly reconstruct the missing views and learn
the consensus representation (Wen et al. 2019). Although
imputation-based traditional IMVC methods are known for
their interpretability and physical significance, their effectiveness is constrained by the limited representation extraction capacity of shallow models. Furthermore, these methods commonly involve high computational complexity and
struggle with mixed data types like text, audio, and video. In
recent years, with the advancements of deep learning, many
deep incomplete multi-view clustering (DIMVC) methods
have also been developed. By leveraging the superior representation extraction and generalization capability of deep
neural networks, many imputation-based DIMVC methods
have shown significant performance improvements over traditional ones (Tang and Liu 2022; Liu et al. 2023; Lin et al.
2021; Xu et al. 2022a, 2023). Intuitively, the effectiveness
of imputation-based IMVC methods largely hinges on the
quality of the imputed missing views. While some works
visualize recovered missing views to demonstrate their effectiveness in missing view recovery, regrettably, none can
rigorously prove their ability to accurately restore missing
views from a theoretical perspective. Accurately estimating
missing data is challenging without ground-truth, especially
when the proportion of missing views is large. Therefore,
the imputation process carries a high risk of degrading clustering performance.
Different from the aforementioned imputation-based
IMVC methods, imputation-free IMVC methods directly

Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) aims to reveal
shared clustering structures within multi-view data, where
only partial views of the samples are available. Existing IMVC methods primarily suffer from two issues: 1)
Imputation-based methods inevitably introduce inaccurate
imputations, which in turn degrade clustering performance;
2) Imputation-free methods are susceptible to unbalanced information among views and fail to fully exploit shared information. To address these issues, we propose a novel method
based on variational autoencoders. Specifically, we adopt
multiple view-specific encoders to extract information from
each view and utilize the Product-of-Experts approach to efficiently aggregate information to obtain the common representation. To enhance the shared information in the common
representation, we introduce a coherence objective to mitigate
the influence of information imbalance. By incorporating the
Mixture-of-Gaussians prior information into the latent representation, our proposed method is able to learn the common
representation with clustering-friendly structures. Extensive
experiments on four datasets show that our method achieves
competitive clustering performance compared with state-ofthe-art methods.

Introduction
Multi-view data widely exist in real-world application scenarios, where data are often collected from different sources
or by different sensors (Jiang et al. 2022b; Yan et al. 2021).
For instance, a 3D object can be described from different angles; an image can be characterized by heterogeneous feature descriptions, e.g., HOG, SIFT, and LBP. Multi-view
learning focuses on developing methods to effectively utilize multi-view data for a range of tasks (Jiang et al. 2022a,
2023). A fundamental challenge within this domain is multiview clustering, which aims to partition multi-view data into
distinct groups in an unsupervised manner by exploiting
the consistent and complementary characteristics inherent
across different views.
Existing multi-view clustering methods heavily rely on
the assumption that samples have all views (Li and He 2020;
Wang et al. 2021b; Xu et al. 2022b). However, such an
* Corresponding author: Jie Wen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16147

