The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Kernelized Normalizing Constant Estimation:
Bridging Bayesian Quadrature and Bayesian Optimization
Xu Cai1 , Jonathan Scarlett1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
Department of Mathematics, Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
caix@u.nus.edu, scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of estimating the
normalizing constant through queries to the black-box
function f, which is the integration of the exponential function
of f scaled by a problem parameter lambda. We assume
f belongs to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
and show that to estimate the normalizing constant within
a small relative error, the level of difficulty depends on
the value of lambda: When lambda approaches zero, the
problem is similar to Bayesian quadrature (BQ), while
when lambda approaches infinity, the problem is similar to
Bayesian optimization (BO). More generally, the problem
varies between BQ and BO. We find that this pattern holds
true even when the function evaluations are noisy, bringing
new aspects to this topic. Our findings are supported by both
algorithm-independent lower bounds and algorithmic upper
bounds, as well as simulation studies conducted on a variety
of benchmark functions.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of estimating the normalizing
constant under small (0.1) and large (10) .
which Gaussian process (GP) techniques can be used to
quantify uncertainty. The NC estimation problem brings
new challenges compared to BO (which seeks to find
arg
R maxx2D f (x)) and BQ (which seeks to approximate
f (x)dx), and in fact turns out to share features of both.
D
In this paper, we study the asymptotic limits of NC
estimation for functions in RKHS with bounded norm,
adopting Bayesian numerical analysis techniques. As is
commonly done, we consider an additional parameter
estimation problem, i.e., we consider Z =
R in the
f (x)
e
dx. The interpretation of
differs across
D
different subjects; for instance, it can represent the
reciprocal of the thermodynamic temperature of a system,
or it can be used to “temper” or “amplify” terms in Bayesian
statistics. Additionally, we consider the scenario where
observations may be corrupted by additive Gaussian noise
and
may vary with the time
with variance 2 , and
horizon T as T ! 1.
For d-dimensional Matérn-⌫ RKHS functions, our
findings reveal that, to estimate Z within a multiplicative
factor of 1±✏ with constant probability (e.g., 0.99), the level
of difficulty generally exhibits the following behaviour (also
partially listed in Table 1):
• When ! 0, the error bound of ✏ is similar to BQ. Our
lower bound is similar to the BQ lower bounds stated
in (Plaskota 1996; Cai, Lam, and Scarlett 2023), who
showed that the order-optimal average mean absolute
⌫
1
error of ✏ is ⇥(T d 1 + T 2 ).
• When ! 1, the problem becomes more similar to BO,
and the error bounds again reflect this. For instance,
when
⌫
= ⇥(T ) and T ! 1, our noiseless ⌦(T d ) lower

Introduction

The problem of normalizing constant (NC) estimation (also
known as (log-)partition function estimation) is of interest
in a variety fields, such as Bayesian statistics (Chen and
Shao 1997; Gelman and Meng 1998), machine learning
(Desjardins, Bengio, and Courville 2011), statistical
mechanics (Stoltz, Rousset et al. 2010), and other areas
involving the distribution of an energy function. Given
a distribution on a domain D with measure
dx, the
R
normalizing constant is the integral Z = D e f (x) dx.
In many classical works, f is assumed to be (strongly)
convex, so that the distribution is (strongly) log-concave.
Asymptotic/non-asymptotic performance bounds for the
log-concave setting have been studied in detail; see for
example (Ge, Lee, and Lu 2020) and the references therein.
Although the first-order (gradient) information of f is
usually assumed to be available in the classical setting,
it is also of interest to estimate the normalizing constant
of non-convex black-box functions using only zerothorder bandit feedback. Following the rich literature on
Bayesian optimization (BO) and Bayesian quadrature
(BQ), it is particularly natural to consider functions
lying in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), for
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11150

