The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

The Complexity of Fair Division of Indivisible Items with Externalities
Argyrios Deligkas1 , Eduard Eiben1 , Viktoriia Korchemna2 , Šimon Schierreich3
1

Royal Holloway, University of London
2
TU Wien
3
Czech Technical University in Prague
{argyrios.deligkas,eduard.eiben}@rhul.ac.uk, vkorchemna@ac.tuwien.ac.at, schiesim@fit.cvut.cz

Abstract

“fair”. Here, the “fair” part is a mathematical criterion that
has to be satisfied by the valuation function of every agent.
Traditionally, in the majority of previous works, the mathematical criterion of fairness for each agent depends only on
a pairwise comparison between bundles. Put simply, each
agent cares, i.e., derives value, only about the bundle they
receive, and they compare it against the bundle of any other
agent. However, in many real-life situations this assumption
is not sufficient due to inherent underlying externalities.
Consider for example the scenario where there is a set
of admin tasks that have to be assigned to the faculty members of a CS department. There could exist certain tasks such
that some faculty members are objectively better qualified
for them – and would even enjoy doing them – while other
faculty members are not that suited for them. Here, every
faculty member evaluates the allocation as a whole, since
they are affected, either positively or negatively, by the quality of completion of (almost) all tasks.
As a different example, assume that the agents are a priori partitioned into two teams, Team A and Team B, that
compete against each other and consider a specific agent
in Team A. Then, for any resource the agent considers as
good, they will get positive value if it is allocated to Team A
– maybe the value is discounted compared to the value the
agent would get if they got the item – while they get zero, or
even negative, value if the resource is allocated to Team B.
At the same time, for any resource/task that the agent considers that will decrease the efficiency of the team, i.e. they
view it as a chore, they would get negative value if it is allocated to some other agent from Team A.
Motivated by real-life scenarios like the two above, Aziz
et al. (2023b) recently proposed a new model suitable to capture the situations where externalities occur; interestingly,
for divisible items, the first models that incorporate externalities were proposed many years ago (Brânzei, Procaccia,
and Zhang 2013; Li, Zhang, and Zhang 2015). The foundational principle of their model is that the agents have additive valuations over the items where, for every item a, agent
i derives value Vi (j, a) if agent j gets the item; here j can
be equal to i. This way, every agent evaluates the entire allocation and not just their bundle. Furthermore, in view of the
more general valuation functions Aziz et al. appropriately
extended the most prominent fairness concepts for indivisible items: envy-freenes (EF), envy-freeness up to one item

We study the computational complexity of fairly allocating a
set of indivisible items under externalities. In this recentlyproposed setting, in addition to the utility the agent gets from
their bundle, they also receive utility from items allocated to
other agents. We focus on the extended definitions of envyfreeness up to one item (EF1) and of envy-freeness up to
any item (EFX), and we provide the landscape of their complexity for several different scenarios. We prove that it is
NP-complete to decide whether there exists an EFX allocation, even when there are only three agents, or even when
there are only six different values for the items. We complement these negative results by showing that when both
the number of agents and the number of different values for
items are bounded by a parameter the problem becomes fixedparameter tractable. Furthermore, we prove that two-valued
and binary-valued instances are equivalent and that EFX and
EF1 allocations coincide for this class of instances. Finally,
motivated from real-life scenarios, we focus on a class of
structured valuation functions, which we term agent/itemcorrelated. We prove their equivalence to the “standard” setting without externalities. Therefore, all previous results for
EF1 and EFX apply immediately for these valuations.

1

Introduction

The allocation of a set of indivisible resources, e.g., objects,
tasks, responsibilities, in a fair manner is a question that
has received a lot of attention through history. In the last
decades though, economists, mathematicians, and computer
scientists have systematically started studying the problem
with the aim of providing formal fairness guarantees (Lipton et al. 2004; Bouveret and Lang 2008; Budish 2011; Caragiannis et al. 2019); for an excellent recent survey on the
topic see (Amanatidis et al. 2023). However, despite the
significant efforts on this quest, the nature of the problem,
i.e., the indivisibility, has not allowed yet for a universally
adopted solution concept.
Typically, an instance of the fair division problem consists
of a set of indivisible items, and a set of agents each of whom
has their own valuation function. The task is to partition the
items into bundles and allocate each bundle to an agent such
that from the point of view of every agent this allocation is
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9653

