The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Factored Online Planning in Many-Agent POMDPs
Maris F.L. Galesloot1 , Thiago D. Simão2 , Sebastian Junges1 , Nils Jansen1,3
1
Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
3
Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany
maris.galesloot@ru.nl, t.simao@tue.nl, sebastian.junges@ru.nl, n.jansen@rub.de
2

Abstract

way to tackle large planning problems. These algorithms
search for local solutions in the most promising regions of
the search space (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006). In particular,
partially observable Monte Carlo planning (POMCP, Silver
and Veness 2010) derives Monte Carlo estimates in the form
of (1) an approximation of the value function and (2) distributions (beliefs) over states by generating sample trajectories from the simulation of single state particles. However,
a naive application of (single-agent) online planning is illequipped to handle the high-dimensional MPOMDP setting.
First, due to the many actions that must be explored during
simulations, the value estimation may suffer from high variance. Second, the chance of mismatch between simulated
and actual observations is high for large observation spaces,
lowering the quality of the approximation in the belief estimates (Sunberg and Kochenderfer 2018).
To address the challenge of value estimation, one can exploit the typical locality of interactions between the agents,
captured by so-called coordination graphs (Guestrin,
Lagoudakis, and Parr 2002). In particular, Amato and
Oliehoek (2015) estimate the action value for subsets of
agents instead of all agents based on such graphs. The main
concepts are to (1) factorize the value estimates over the action space of subsets of agents in the factored statistics variant and to (2) factorize both the action and the observation
space in the factored trees variant. These factorizations are
key to achieving good performance in settings with many
agents. The challenge of belief estimation is also a prevalent
issue in single-agent continuous settings. From the likelihood of sampled observations, importance sampling weights
are added to the Monte Carlo estimates of the beliefs (Thrun
1999). Such weighted beliefs are also used in single-agent
online planners that simulate weighted belief estimates instead of single states (Fischer and Tas 2020; Lim, Tomlin,
and Sunberg 2020). By simulating belief estimates, these algorithms operate on the set of possible beliefs of the agents,
which makes the branching factor insensitive to the number of observations. A particularly effective algorithm is the
so-called sparse particle filter tree (Sparse-PFT, Lim et al.
2023), which only searches for local solutions in the set of
reachable belief estimates.
To the best of our knowledge, these solutions to value and
belief estimation have only been studied independently, and
weighted belief estimates have not yet been explored in the

In centralized multi-agent systems, often modeled as
multi-agent partially observable Markov decision processes (MPOMDPs), the action and observation spaces grow
exponentially with the number of agents, making the value
and belief estimation of single-agent online planning ineffective. Prior work partially tackles value estimation by exploiting the inherent structure of multi-agent settings via so-called
coordination graphs. Additionally, belief estimation methods
have been improved by incorporating the likelihood of observations into the approximation. However, the challenges of
value estimation and belief estimation have only been tackled
individually, which prevents existing methods from scaling to
settings with many agents. Therefore, we address these challenges simultaneously. First, we introduce weighted particle
filtering to a sample-based online planner for MPOMDPs.
Second, we present a scalable approximation of the belief.
Third, we bring an approach that exploits the typical locality of agent interactions to novel online planning algorithms
for MPOMDPs operating on a so-called sparse particle filter tree. Our experimental evaluation against several state-ofthe-art baselines shows that our methods (1) are competitive
in settings with only a few agents and (2) improve over the
baselines in the presence of many agents.

1

Introduction

Planning problems with multiple agents, such as teams of
mobile robots (Ahmadi et al. 2019) or autonomous surveillance systems (Witwicki et al. 2017), can be modeled
by multi-agent partially observable Markov decision processes (MPOMDPs, Messias, Spaan, and Lima 2011). These
formal models exhibit sets of (local) observations and actions for each agent that can be shared with a central controller. This controller then makes decisions among the joint
actions of all agents. Computationally, the main challenge is
that the spaces of joint action and observations grow exponentially with the number of agents (Pynadath and Tambe
2002). Moreover, as the controller only partially observes
the system state, it must base its decisions on the history of
previous joint actions and observations.
Online algorithms, such as those based on Monte Carlo
tree search (MCTS, Browne et al. 2012), are a common
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17407

