The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

COMBAT: Alternated Training for Effective Clean-Label Backdoor Attacks
Tran Huynh1 , Dang Nguyen1, 2 , Tung Pham1 , Anh Tran1
1

VinAI Research
University of Maryland
v.tranhn2@vinai.io, dangmn@umd.edu, v.tungph4@vinai.io, v.anhtt152@vinai.io
2

Abstract

age classification, the most studied task, but the discovery
should be easily extended to other domains.
Data-poisoning-based backdoor attacks are often classified as “dirty-label” or “clean-label”. In dirty-label attacks,
the adversary poisons some data and changes its labels to
the attack’s target class. It could be easily spotted by humans, e.g., a poisoned dog image could be labeled as a “cat”.
In contrast, in clean-label attacks, the attacker only poisons
data without changing its labels, making this attack mechanism more stealthy and desirable.
However, one critical drawback of most existing cleanlabel attacks is their low efficiency. For dirty-label ones,
the poisoned examples have a fixed label regardless of the
image content, forcing the classifier to associate the backdoor trigger with the attack’s target class, leading to an almost 100% attack success rate (ASR). Meanwhile, in cleanlabel attacks, the classifier may just learn the image content and ignore the trigger since all labels are correct. For
example, a naive adaptation to clean-label style for BadNets (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017), a common dirtylabel method, completely fails. In addition, most existing
clean-label attacks (Turner, Tsipras, and Madry 2019; Barni,
Kallas, and Tondi 2019) cannot reach an 80% ASR. Although some recent works (Ning et al. 2021; Zeng et al.
2022) achieves near-perfect ASRs, they require significant
modifications to the training data. Due to the difficulty in designing a working and effective algorithm, only a few cleanlabel attacks have been proposed, and they have not been
well studied in backdoor defense research.
In our perspective, defining the optimal backdoor trigger
based on measuring its effect on the model poisoning result
is a solution for developing successful clean-label attacks.
Therefore, we propose a novel clean-label attack mechanism
called Clean-label OptiMize Backdoor Alternated Training,
or COMBAT for short. It aims to learn a generator that can
generate an effective, input-dependent backdoor trigger. As
indicated in its name, COMBAT employs an alternated training process to alternately optimize the generator and a surrogate model, aiming to maximize the generator’s poisoning
effectiveness. In the surrogate model training step, COMBAT mimics the real data poisoning and backdoor modeling
process. In the generator training step, it updates the generator to maximize the attack success rate on the surrogate
model. More loss functions can be freely added in this step

Backdoor attacks pose a critical concern to the practice of using third-party data for AI development. The data can be poisoned to make a trained model misbehave when a predefined
trigger pattern appears, granting the attackers illegal benefits.
While most proposed backdoor attacks are dirty-label, cleanlabel attacks are more desirable by keeping data labels unchanged to dodge human inspection. However, designing a
working clean-label attack is a challenging task, and existing clean-label attacks show underwhelming performance. In
this paper, we propose a novel mechanism to develop cleanlabel attacks with outstanding attack performance. The key
component is a trigger pattern generator, which is trained together with a surrogate model in an alternating manner. Our
proposed mechanism is flexible and customizable, allowing
different backdoor trigger types and behaviors for either single or multiple target labels. Our backdoor attacks can reach
near-perfect attack success rates and bypass all state-of-theart backdoor defenses, as illustrated via comprehensive experiments on standard benchmark datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/VinAIResearch/COMBAT.

1

Introduction

To deal with numerous real-life situations, AI models often
need massive training data, which is hard to collect. Thus the
data often comes from various sources like third parties or
open sources. However, recent studies have shown that the
data outsourcing practice can open a loophole for backdoor
attacks. An attacker can provide training data that is partially poisoned with a pre-defined trigger pattern. A model
trained on such data exhibits two properties. First, it performs well on normal, “clean” images like a genuine model.
However, when the trigger pattern is embedded in the input,
the model will give an erroneous prediction as designed by
the attacker. This allows the attacker to gain malicious access or cause damage to the user’s side. For example, attackers can disguise themselves as privileged users by breaking
a face-recognition-based security system, or they can fool
self-driving cars into misreading the traffic signs and causing accidents. Hence, understanding the capability of this
security threat is critical, drawing many research interests in
recent years. This paper focuses on backdoor attacks on imCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2436

