The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Controllable Mind Visual Diffusion Model
Bohan Zeng1 * , Shanglin Li1 * , Xuhui Liu1 , Sicheng Gao1
Xiaolong Jiang3 , Xu Tang3 , Yao Hu3 , Jianzhuang Liu4 , Baochang Zhang1,2,5†
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hangzhou Research Institute, Beihang University, China
2
Nanchang Institute of Technology, Nanchang, China
3
Xiaohongshu Inc
4
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China
5
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{bohanzeng, shanglin, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Brain signal visualization has emerged as an active research
area, serving as a critical interface between the human visual system and computer vision models. Diffusion-based
methods have recently shown promise in analyzing functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data, including the reconstruction of high-quality images consistent with original
visual stimuli. Nonetheless, it remains a critical challenge
to effectively harness the semantic and silhouette information extracted from brain signals. In this paper, we propose
a novel approach, termed as Controllable Mind Visual Diffusion Model (CMVDM). Specifically, CMVDM first extracts
semantic and silhouette information from fMRI data using
attribute alignment and assistant networks. Then, a control
model is introduced in conjunction with a residual block
to fully exploit the extracted information for image synthesis, generating high-quality images that closely resemble the
original visual stimuli in both semantic content and silhouette characteristics. Through extensive experimentation, we
demonstrate that CMVDM outperforms existing state-of-theart methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our code is
available at https://github.com/zengbohan0217/CMVDM.

Ground Truth (GT)

Ours

MinD-Vis

Figure 1: Illustration of synthesis results. A recent method
MinD-Vis (Chen et al. 2023) can generate photo-realistic results, but they cannot well match the visual stimuli in terms
of semantics and silhouette. Our method can generate better
results more consistent with the GT visual stimuli.

Computer Interfaces (BCI) (Nicolas-Alonso and Gomez-Gil
2012; Milekovic et al. 2018).
Early attempts (Van Gerven et al. 2010; Damarla and Just
2013; Horikawa and Kamitani 2017; Akamatsu et al. 2020)
at analyzing brain activity on visual tasks mainly focus on
matching human subjects’ brain activity with observed natural images, or reconstructing visual patterns of simple geometric shapes (Miyawaki et al. 2008; Schoenmakers et al.
2013; Van Gerven, De Lange, and Heskes 2010). These explorations demonstrate the feasibility of deriving semantic
information for perceived images from brain signals, yet
they have poor generalization to unseen semantic categories
or complicated reconstruction tasks.
Recent studies (Beliy et al. 2019; Gaziv et al. 2022; Ozcelik et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Takagi and Nishimoto
2023) have made significant progress in reconstructing visual stimuli from brain signals. (Beliy et al. 2019; Gaziv
et al. 2022) can generate images that are similar in shape
to the original visual stimuli, but the images suffer from severe distortion and blur issues. (Ozcelik et al. 2022; Chen

Introduction
Understanding the cognitive processes that occur in the human brain when observing visual stimuli (e.g., natural images) has long been a primary focus for neuroscientists.
Both objective visual stimuli and subjective cognitive activities can elicit the transmission of intricate neural signals in
the visual cortex of the brain, thus laying the foundation for
higher-order cognitive and decision-making processes. With
the advancement of techniques such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), it has become possible to capture
real-time brain activity signals with greater accuracy and
finer granularity, thereby accelerating the progress of neuroscientific research. Deciphering and reconstructing from
these intricate signals remain a great challenge to both cognitive neuroscience and downstream applications like Brain* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6935

