The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Deep Linear Array Pushbroom Image Restoration: A Degradation Pipeline and
Jitter-Aware Restoration Network
Zida Chen1 * , Ziran Zhang1,2 * , Haoying Li1 , Menghao Li1 ,
Yueting Chen1 , Qi Li1 , Huajun Feng1 , Zhihai Xu1 , Shiqi Chen1†
1

State Key Laboratory of Extreme Photonics and Instrumentation, Zhejiang University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zd chen, naturezhanghn, lhaoying, limh, chenyt, liqi, fenghj, xuzh, chenshiqi}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Two-stage
Restoration Method

Linear Array Pushbroom (LAP) imaging technology is
widely used in the realm of remote sensing. However, images
acquired through LAP always suffer from distortion and blur
because of camera jitter. Traditional methods for restoring
LAP images, such as algorithms estimating the point spread
function (PSF), exhibit limited performance. To tackle this
issue, we propose a Jitter-Aware Restoration Network (JARNet), to remove the distortion and blur in two stages. In the
first stage, we formulate an Optical Flow Correction (OFC)
block to refine the optical flow of the degraded LAP images,
resulting in pre-corrected images where most of the distortions are alleviated. In the second stage, for further enhancement of the pre-corrected images, we integrate two jitteraware techniques within the Spatial and Frequency Residual
(SFRes) block: 1) introducing Coordinate Attention (CoA) to
the SFRes block in order to capture the jitter state in orthogonal direction; 2) manipulating image features in both spatial
and frequency domains to leverage local and global priors.
Additionally, we develop a data synthesis pipeline, which applies Continue Dynamic Shooting Model (CDSM) to simulate realistic degradation in LAP images. Both the proposed
JARNet and LAP image synthesis pipeline establish a foundation for addressing this intricate challenge. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed two-stage method
outperforms state-of-the-art image restoration models. Code
is available at https://github.com/JHW2000/JARNet.

Stitched
by Column

Jitter
Pre-correction
Jitter-aware
Restoration
Network

Restored Image

Degraded LAP Image
with Jitter

Linear Array
Sensor

z
yaw

y

roll

x

pitch
Pushbroom Motion Direction
Optical Lens

Ground Scene

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea: The stitched LAP
image suffers from distortion and blur caused by camera
jitter. To restore degraded LAP image, we propose a jitter
pre-correction and enhancement method in a two-stage manner. We also design an image synthesis pipeline for training
data acquisition. Finally, our proposed JARNet outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on our LAP dataset.

pixel displacements of varying magnitudes, thereby inducing distortion and blur within LAP images. Low-frequency
jitter causes image distortion effect, while high-frequency
jitter leads to blur effect (Pan et al. 2020). In practice, roll jitter causes pixel offset in the cross-track direction, and pitch
jitter causes pixel offset in the along-track direction. Jitter
offsets in the along-track direction are much smaller than
that in the cross-track direction, while jitter in the yaw direction is tiny enough to be neglected (Wang et al. 2017).
Many efforts have been made to remove distortion and
blur in LAP images. Their efforts are directed towards acquiring more precise jitter curves, either directly measuring
from high-resolution equipment (Pan et al. 2020) or indirectly predicting from degraded images (Wang et al. 2021).
However, the former is often hindered by the scarcity of
high-precision equipment, while the latter often falls short in
terms of predicting accuracy. Over the years, deep learning
has demonstrated outstanding performance in many image
restoration tasks due to its powerful data modeling and gen-

Introduction
Linear array cameras are widely employed in remote sensing
for high-resolution optical imaging on the earth (Cui et al.
2023; Wang, Zhu, and Fan 2018). As shown in Fig. 1, a linear array camera contains an array of sensors arranged in
a straight line. The linear array sensor captures images at
ground scene while the whole camera moves along the pushbroom motion direction. This movement is similar to how a
broom sweeps forward. Pixels imaged at different moments
are stitched together to generate a LAP image. Due to adjustments in camera attitude and periodic movement (Iwasaki
2011), inevitable jitter arises in LAP imaging. This leads to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1290

