The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

On Optimal Tradeoffs between EFX and Nash Welfare*
Michal Feldman1,2 , Simon Mauras1 , Tomasz Ponitka1 ,
1

Tel Aviv University,
2
Microsoft ILDC
michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il, smauras@tauex.tau.ac.il, tomaszp@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract

work, we provide a complete characterization of this tradeoff
when agents have additive valuations and a partial characterization for the more general case of subadditive valuations.

A major problem in fair division is how to allocate a set
of indivisible resources among agents fairly and efficiently.
The goal of this work is to characterize the tradeoffs between
two well-studied measures of fairness and efficiency — envy
freeness up to any item (EFX) for fairness, and Nash welfare for efficiency — by saying, for given constants α and
β, whether there exists an α-EFX allocation that guarantees
a β-fraction of the maximum Nash welfare (β-MNW). For
additive valuations, we show that for any α ∈ [0, 1], there
1
exists a partial allocation that is α-EFX and α+1
-MNW. This
tradeoff turns out to be tight (for every α) as demonstrated
by an impossibility result that we give. We also show that for
α ∈ [0, φ−1 ≈ 0.618] these partial allocations can be turned
into complete allocations where all items are assigned. Furthermore, for any α ∈ [0, 1/2], we show that the tight tradeoff
1
-MNW with complete allocations holds
of α-EFX and α+1
for the more general setting of subadditive valuations. Our
results improve upon the current state of the art, for both additive and subadditive valuations, and match the best-known
approximations of EFX under complete allocations, regardless of Nash welfare guarantees. Notably, our constructions
for additive valuations also provide EF1 and constant approximations for maximin share guarantees.

Resource allocation problems. A resource allocation
problem is given by a set of m indivisible goods, a set of n
agents, and a valuation function vi : 2[m] → R≥0 for every
agent i, which assigns a value vi (S) to every bundle of goods
S ⊆ [m]. The most common type of valuation functions are
additive valuations,
where there exist values vig such that
P
vi (S) = g∈S vig for every bundle S and agent i. We also
consider the widely studied class of subadditive valuations,
where vi (S∪T ) ≤ vi (S)+vi (T ) for every S, T ⊆ [m]. Subadditive valuations constitute the frontier of complementfree valuations (Lehmann, Lehmann, and Nisan 2006).
An allocation of m goods amongst n agents is given by
a collection X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) where the sets Xi and Xj
are disjoint for every pair of distinct agents i and j. The
set Xi represents the set of goodsSallocated to agent i. An
allocation is said to be complete if i Xi = [m], and partial
if some items might be unallocated. In resource allocation
problems, one is typically interested in complete allocations,
but in some contexts, including in the context of this paper,
it also makes sense to consider partial allocations.

Introduction

Fairness notions. The problem of finding allocations that
are fair is called fair division. Many different definitions of
fairness have been proposed in the fair division domain, see
(Amanatidis et al. 2022) for a survey. One of the most compelling of those notions is that of envy-freeness, introduced
by Foley (1966). An allocation X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) is envyfree (EF) if for every pair of agents i and j, it holds that
vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj ), namely, every agent (weakly) prefers her
own allocation over that of any other agent. In the context
of envy-freeness, it is usually required that the allocations
are complete. Indeed, without this constraint, every instance
vacuously admits an EF allocation, namely one where no
item is allocated.
A major weakness of EF is that even the simplest settings may not admit complete EF allocations. For example,
if there is a single good and two agents with value 1 for
this good, then in any complete allocation, only one of the
agents gets the single good and the other agent is envious.
Consequently, various relaxations of EF have been introduced. One such relaxation is envy-freeness up to one item

A common resource allocation setting has m indivisible
goods and n agents with (possibly different) preferences
over bundles of goods. One of the biggest questions in such
scenarios, dating back to Steinhaus (1948), is how to allocate
goods fairly among agents, given their preferences. Another
central goal is to divide the items efficiently so that the collective welfare of the agents, represented by some efficiency
measure, is maximized. There is an extensive line of work
on providing allocations that achieve both criteria simultaneously, e.g., (Caragiannis et al. 2009; Bertsimas, Farias, and
Trichakis 2011; Bei et al. 2019).
The aim of this paper is to analyze the tradeoffs between
fairness and efficiency for two standard notions, namely
EFX for fairness and Nash welfare for efficiency. Previous
work has discovered partial results for this problem (Caragiannis, Gravin, and Huang 2019; Garg et al. 2023). In this
* See (Feldman, Mauras, and Ponitka 2023) for the full version.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9688

