The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Attentive Inductive Bias for Sequential Recommendation
beyond the Self-Attention
Yehjin Shin* , Jeongwhan Choi* , Hyowon Wi, Noseong Park
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
{yehjin.shin, jeongwhan.choi, wihyowon, noseong}@yonsei.ac.kr

Items of long-term persistent interest that are low frequencies

Abstract

...

Sequential recommendation (SR) models based on Transformers have achieved remarkable successes. The selfattention mechanism of Transformers for computer vision
and natural language processing suffers from the oversmoothing problem, i.e., hidden representations becoming similar to
tokens. In the SR domain, we, for the first time, show that the
same problem occurs. We present pioneering investigations
that reveal the low-pass filtering nature of self-attention in the
SR, which causes oversmoothing. To this end, we propose
a novel method called Beyond Self-Attention for Sequential Recommendation (BSARec), which leverages the Fourier
transform to i) inject an inductive bias by considering finegrained sequential patterns and ii) integrate low and highfrequency information to mitigate oversmoothing. Our discovery shows significant advancements in the SR domain and
is expected to bridge the gap for existing Transformer-based
SR models. We test our proposed approach through extensive experiments on 6 benchmark datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms 7 baseline
methods in terms of recommendation performance. Our code
is available at https://github.com/yehjin-shin/BSARec.

?

Fourier Domain of
Item Embedding Items of short-term abrupt interest that are high frequencies

Figure 1: Illustration of high and low-frequency signals in
SR. A user u1 ’s long-term persisting interests and tastes constitute low frequencies in the Fourier domain of embedding,
and abrupt short-term changes in u1 ’s interests correspond
to high frequencies.

Method

Inductive Bias Self-Attention High-pass Filter

SASRec
BERT4Rec
FMLPRec
DuoRec

✗
✗
✓
✗

✓
✓
✗
✓

✗
✗
✗
✗

BSARec

✓

✓

✓

Introduction
Table 1: Comparison of existing Transformer-based methods
that differ at three points: i) using inductive bias, ii) using
self-attentions, and iii) using high-pass filters

Recommender systems play a vital role in web applications,
delivering personalized item recommendations by analyzing user-item interactions (Ying et al. 2018; Lee, Kim, and
Lee 2018; He et al. 2020; Choi, Jeon, and Park 2021; Kong
et al. 2022; Hong et al. 2022; Choi et al. 2023a,d; Gao et al.
2023). As users’ preferences evolve over time, capturing
the temporal user behavior becomes essential. This is where
SR steps in, attracting substantial research attention (Hidasi
et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023; Tang and Wang
2018; Kang and McAuley 2018; Chen et al. 2019; Schedl
et al. 2018; Hansen et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2016; Huang
et al. 2018).
With the increasing popularity of sequential recommendation (SR) systems, Transformer-based models, especially
those utilizing self-attention (Vaswani et al. 2017), have
emerged as dominant approaches for providing accurate and
personalized recommendations to users (Kang and McAuley

2018; Sun et al. 2019; Li, Wang, and McAuley 2020;
Wu et al. 2020; Wu, Cai, and Wang 2020). However, despite their successes in the SR, Transformer-based models
possess inherent limitations that confine themselves to the
learned self-attention matrix. The following two key limitations need to be addressed: i) First, the models may still
suffer from suboptimal performance due to insufficient inductive bias inherent in processing sequences with selfattention (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). While the self-attention
mechanism captures long-range dependencies, it may not
only adequately consider certain fine-grained sequential patterns but also be overfitted to training data, leading to potential weak generalization capabilities. As Table 1 shows,
SASRec (Kang and McAuley 2018), BERT4Rec (Sun et al.
2019), and DuoRec (Qiu et al. 2022) rely on training the

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8984

