The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Designing Biological Sequences without Prior Knowledge Using Evolutionary
Reinforcement Learning
Xi Zeng1 , Xiaotian Hao2 , Hongyao Tang2 , Zhentao Tang3 , Shaoqing Jiao1 ,
Dazhi Lu1 , Jiajie Peng1, 4, 5 *
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data Storage and Management, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology
5
School of Computer Science, Research and Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen
{xizeng,jiaosq22,dzlu}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {xiaotianhao,bluecontra}@tju.edu.cn, tangzhentao1@huawei.com,
jiajiepeng@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

celerating scientific discovery (Zrimec et al. 2022; Repecka
et al. 2021). However, the deployment of AI may fail due to a
lack of prior knowledge (Dama et al. 2023). Unfortunately,
designing biological sequences without prior knowledge is
valuable in diverse domains, such as designing regulatory
DNA to control gene expression (Zrimec et al. 2022) and
designing proteins to catalyze desired chemical reactions
(Repecka et al. 2021). Therefore, it is important to develop
a method for novel biological sequence design without prior
knowledge.
Reinforcement learning (RL) can start without prior
knowledge (Schrittwieser et al. 2020; Silver et al. 2018).
Through training the agent with rewards, it becomes possible to devise a strategy capable of surpassing even a worldchampion human player (Silver et al. 2021). In the field
of biological science, under the constraint of limited data
availability, Dama et al. (2023) employs RL in the mapping
of microbial metabolism without prior knowledge. Moreover, RL has also been applied in the domain of biological
sequence design (Angermueller et al. 2019). However, RL
agents must balance known rewards with unfamiliar data,
resulting in limited exploration of the biological sequence
space and difficulty in finding the ideal sequence. As a result,
applying RL to designing biological sequences with desired
properties within a vast sequence space is not straightforward.
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are the more common approach for biological sequence design, recognized as the
gold standard in this field (Arnold 1998). They have risen
as formidable competitors for biological sequence design
owing to their broad applicability (Sinai et al. 2020; Ren
et al. 2022). However, the EAs focus on exploring the local
space (Auger and Hansen 2005). The inefficient utilization
of evolutionary directional information results in lower efficient searches for biological sequences that satisfy desired
properties.
In biological sequence design, multiple rounds of experimentation are often needed (Jain et al. 2022). Directly applying generated sequences to wet experiments can be timeconsuming and labor-intensive. To address the problem, cre-

Designing novel biological sequences with desired properties is a significant challenge in biological science because
of the extra large search space. The traditional design process usually involves multiple rounds of costly wet lab evaluations. To reduce the need for expensive wet lab experiments,
machine learning methods are used to aid in designing biological sequences. However, the limited availability of biological sequences with known properties hinders the training of machine learning models, significantly restricting their
applicability and performance. To fill this gap, we present
ERLBioSeq, an Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning algorithm for BIOlogical SEQuence design. ERLBioSeq leverages the capability of reinforcement learning to learn without
prior knowledge and the potential of evolutionary algorithms
to enhance the exploration of reinforcement learning in the
large search space of biological sequences. Additionally, to
enhance the efficiency of biological sequence design, we developed a predictor for sequence screening in the biological
sequence design process, which incorporates both the local
and global sequence information. We evaluated the proposed
method on three main types of biological sequence design
tasks, including the design of DNA, RNA, and protein. The
results demonstrate that the proposed method achieves significant improvement compared to the existing state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Designing biological sequences with desired properties is of
great significance for both biology and chemistry (Bennett
et al. 2023; Silva et al. 2019; Song and Li 2023; Wang et al.
2020). However, designing novel biological sequences with
desired properties, such as binding affinity (Tinberg et al.
2013), antimicrobial activity (Torres et al. 2021), or stability (Mourtada et al. 2019), poses challenges due to the requirement of exploring a discrete and extensive search space
(Jain et al. 2022). Artificial intelligence (AI) can assist humans in efficiently designing biological sequences, thus ac* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

383

