The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

DINGO: Towards Diverse and Fine-Grained Instruction-Following Evaluation
Zihui Gu1,2 * , Xingwu Sun2,3 * , Fengzong Lian2 , Zhanhui Kang2 , Cheng-Zhong Xu3 , Ju Fan1†
1

Renmin Univerisity of China
2
Tencent Inc.
3
University of Macau
{guzh, fanj}@ruc.edu.cn, sunxingwu01@gmail.com, {faxonlian, kegokang}@tencent.com, czxu@um.edu.mo

User request
: can you write a python script that will save a screenshot of the webpage

Abstract
Instruction-following is particularly crucial for large language models (LLMs) to support diverse user requests. While
existing work has made progress in aligning LLMs with human preferences, evaluating their capabilities on instructionfollowing remains a challenge due to complexity and diversity of real-world user instructions. While existing evaluation
methods focus on general skills, they suffer from two main
shortcomings, i.e., lack of fine-grained task-level evaluation
and reliance on singular instruction expression. To address
these problems, this paper introduces DINGO, a fine-grained
and diverse instruction-following evaluation dataset that has
two main advantages: (1) DINGO is based on a manualannotated, fine-grained and multi-level category tree with 130
nodes derived from real-world user requests; (2) DINGO
includes diverse instructions, generated by both GPT-4 and
human experts. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that DINGO can not only provide more challenging
and comprehensive evaluation for LLMs, but also provide
task-level fine-grained directions to further improve LLMs.

1

…
: Sure, here's a simple script that will do that …
: can you give me an example using … instead of …?
: Sure, here's an example …
: Find the intersec?on of the normal to 2x^2+y^2=18 which passes
through …
: To ﬁnd the intersec?on of the normal to the ﬁrst curve that passes
through …
: I think there are two points of intersec?on.
: You are correct, there are actually …
: Create a horse using ascii art.
: Here is a simple ASCII art representa?on of a horse: …
: Create mul?ple horses using complex ascii art.
: Here are three diﬀerent horses created using complex ASCII art: …
: I want you to take on the role of project manager. Please write in
English …
: Sure, I can take on the role of a project manager. What kind of project …
: You need to make a plan and use the GanU chart to create an
investment…
: Great, I understand the project scope. Here's a high-level plan …

Introduction

: Prove Pythagoras' theorem for right triangles.
: Pythagoras' theorem states that in a right triangle, the square of the
length …

Recently, Large language models (LLMs) exhibit surprising capabilities not previously seen in smaller models,
which are often referred to as emergent abilities (Wei
et al. 2022), including in-context learning, chain-ofthought, and instruction-following abilities. Among them,
the instruction-following ability is crucial to the interaction
between humans and LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT). Existing studies (OpenAI 2023; Chiang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023;
Longpre et al. 2023) align LLMs with human instructions
using supervised instruction-tuning or reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), which enables LLMs
to understand human instructions and make high-quality responses. Nonetheless, due to the complexity and diversity
of human instructions, it remains a challenge to comprehensively evaluate the instruction-following ability of LLMs.
Existing studies evaluate the instruction-following ability from the perspective of general skills. For example, InstructEval (Chia et al. 2023) assesses LLM’s instruction-

Figure 1: Different user request examples extracted from
ShareGPT.

following ability based on three general abilities: problemsolving, writing, and alignment to human values. Flask (Ye
et al. 2023) shifts the original coarse-grained scoring process
to instance-wise skill scoring setup, and defines 4 primary
abilities, divided into 12 specific skills, to assess the performance of LLMs. However, there are still two shortcomings
in existing evaluation methods:
• The lack of fine-grained task-level evaluation poses
challenges in improving the instruction-following ability
of LLMs. For example, the Factuality skill used in
FLASK (Ye et al. 2023) includes many sub-tasks such as
“History Knowledge QA” and “Chemical Knowledge QA”.
Consequently, even if we recognize that a particular LLM
is deficient in this skill, it is challenging to pinpoint the exact aspects of the instruction-following ability that the LLM

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Ju Fan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18108

