The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

NaRuto: Automatically Acquiring Planning Models
from Narrative Texts
Ruiqi Li1 , Leyang Cui2 , Songtuan Lin1 , Patrik Haslum1
1

Australian National University,
2
Tencent AI Lab
{ruiqi.li,songtuan.lin,patrik.haslum}@anu.edu.au,
leyangcui@tencent.com
Abstract

Input: Bryan hits Jack in the face.

Domain model acquisition has been identified as a bottleneck
in the application of planning technology, especially within
narrative planning. Learning action models from narrative
texts in an automated way is essential to overcome this barrier, but challenging because of the inherent complexities of
such texts. We present an evaluation of planning domain models derived from narrative texts using our fully automated,
unsupervised system, NaRuto. Our system combines structured event extraction, predictions of commonsense event relations, and textual contradictions and similarities. Evaluation
results show that NaRuto generates domain models of significantly better quality than existing fully automated methods, and even sometimes on par with those created by semiautomated methods, with human assistance.

Output:
(:action hit
:parameters
(?x - subject ?o - object)
:precondition (and (close-to ?x ?o)
(angry-at ?x ?o)
(in-a-fight ?x ?o))
:effect (and (yell-at ?o ?x)
(injured ?o)
(not (close-to ?x ?o))))

Figure 1: Input: A narrative sentence. Output: The corresponding generated action model.

Introduction

complex clauses to express, e.g., conditional events. Hence,
narrative texts are more difficult to comprehend, and how
to automatically extract action models from them is still an
open question.
We present NaRuto1 (an abbreviation of “narrative” and
“automated”), a fully automated system that derives planning action models from narrative texts in two stages: The
first stage extracts structured representations of event occurrences from narrative text, and has been described in detail in
a previous paper (Li, Haslum, and Cui 2023). Here, we focus
mainly on the second stage, which constructs action models
by predicting preconditions and effects of extracted events
using commonsense relations. We use a GPT (Radford et al.
2018) and BART (Lewis et al. 2019) based model, fine-tuned
on commonsense knowledge graphs (Sap et al. 2019), which
we call COMET-BM, to predict event preconditions and effects. Given an event description and a relation type (precondition, effect, or reaction) as input, it generates descriptions
of corresponding concepts with the highest probabilities. We
compare the generated models with the results of previous
methods in two classical narrative planning domains. Results indicate that NaRuto consistently generates superior
action models, surpassing SOTA fully automated methods
and sometimes even methods that rely on human input.

AI planning generates action sequences, i.e., plans, from the
initial problem state to the goals. To construct such plans,
AI planners require action models in a declarative planning
language, such as the Planning Domain Definition Language
(PDDL) (McDermott et al. 1998). Building action models by
hand is labor-intensive and demands domain expertise, driving the need for methods that ease this process (e.g., Lin,
Grastien, and Bercher 2023). It is particularly challenging in
applications of planning to narrative generation (e.g., Porteous, Charles, and Cavazza 2013), due to the large variety of
activities that occur in unstructured narrative texts.
Recently, researchers have attempted to extract action
models from narrative texts such as short stories and movie
synopses (Hayton et al. 2017; Huo et al. 2020; Hayton et al.
2020). However, the methods proposed so far either generate quite simple and highly specific action models, or rely
on human effort to complement or correct automatic extraction. Fully automated approaches have been applied to instructional texts such as recipes, manuals and navigational
instructions (Mei, Bansal, and Walter 2016; Lindsay et al.
2017; Feng, Zhuo, and Kambhampati 2018; Olmo, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2021) (or, in some cases, transcriptions of plans generated from a ground truth domain into
text). Such texts, however, lack many of the complexities of
narrative texts, which are typically more colloquial and use

1
The source code of NaRuto system is at https://github.com/
RichieLee93/NaRuto.

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20194

