The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Empirical Study of CLIP for Text-Based Person Search
Min Cao1 , Yang Bai 1 , Ziyin Zeng 1 , Mang Ye 2 * , Min Zhang 3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{caomin0719@126.com, mangye16@gmail.com}

Abstract

man walking
and looking
at phone ... a
backpack.

Text-based Person Search (TBPS) aims to retrieve the person
images using natural language descriptions. Recently, Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP), a universal large
cross-modal vision-language pre-training model, has remarkably performed over various cross-modal downstream tasks
due to its powerful cross-modal semantic learning capacity.
TPBS, as a fine-grained cross-modal retrieval task, is also
facing the rise of research on the CLIP-based TBPS. In order
to explore the potential of the visual-language pre-training
model for downstream TBPS tasks, this paper makes the first
attempt to conduct a comprehensive empirical study of CLIP
for TBPS and thus contribute a straightforward, incremental, yet strong TBPS-CLIP baseline to the TBPS community. We revisit critical design considerations under CLIP,
including data augmentation and loss function. The model,
with the aforementioned designs and practical training tricks,
can attain satisfactory performance without any sophisticated modules. Also, we conduct the probing experiments of
TBPS-CLIP in model generalization and model compression,
demonstrating the effectiveness of TBPS-CLIP from various
aspects. This work is expected to provide empirical insights
and highlight future CLIP-based TBPS research.The code is
available at https://github.com/Flame-Chasers/TBPS-CLIP.

1

CLIP Text
Encoder

CLIP Image
Encoder

Feature
Space

pull closer
push away
text feature
image feature

Back Translation
...
Random Deletion

Global Gradients BP

SS

Locking Bottom Layers

MVS

Soft Label

R-ITC

Text Augmentation
RandomResizedCrop
...
Augmentation Pool
Image Augmentation

Data Augmentation

N-ITC

Dropout

Training Tricks

C-ITC

Loss Function

Figure 1: Overview of the empirical study on CLIP.

excellent performance on various cross-modal downstream
tasks. Consequently, it has become the dominant paradigm
for solving these tasks. Considering that the research under
VLP for TBPS (Bai et al. 2023b,a) is now in its infancy, this
paper aims to fully exploit the potential of VLP for TBPS.
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) stands out among VLP methods and has verified impressive performance on various
downstream tasks (Wang et al. 2022b,a). Notably, CLIP offers efficient retrieval capabilities by encoding each modality independently. These inspire some researchers to explore
CLIP-based TBPS methods (Wang et al. 2023; Jiang and Ye
2023). These methods focus on combining complex modules into CLIP to improve performance, lacking the full
exploitation of CLIP’s pre-trained knowledge and powerful cross-modal semantic learning capacity. This paper refocuses on the essence of CLIP and explores its fine-tuning
potential for TBPS. We conduct a thorough empirical study
of CLIP for TBPS from two perspectives:
1) Data augmentation. It is a prevalent and effective technique to increase the generalization of models by learning
augmentation-invariant representations between the original
input and the augmented version. Until now, none of the
TBPS methods have deeply and systematically explored this
technique. Instead, they typically employ a simple utilization of random horizontal flip for the image while not applying any augmentation to the text (Wang et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2022; Ding et al. 2021). In this study, we comprehen-

Introduction

Text-based Person Search (TBPS) retrieves the person images from a large-scale image database given a textual description. It is gradually gaining extensive attention (Jiang
and Ye 2023; Bai et al. 2023a) due to its potential applications in searching for suspects, locating lost children, etc. As
a fine-grained retrieval task, it shows challenges in achieving
effective cross-modal alignment and efficient cross-modal
retrieval, which are crucial for practical applications.
In reply to these challenges, many methods (Zhang and
Lu 2018; Ding et al. 2021) focus on projecting representations extracted from each modality into one shared space.
However, most of them only utilize unimodal pre-trained
models as the backbones and ignore the powerful VisionLanguage Pre-training (VLP) models equipped with an adequate understanding of cross-modal alignment. Recently,
VLP methods (Lu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022) have verified
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

465

