The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Dynamic Spiking Graph Neural Networks
Nan Yin1 , Mengzhu Wang2 , Zhenghan Chen3 , Giulia De Masi4 , Huan Xiong5,1 * , Bin Gu6,1*
1

2

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology
3
Microsoft Corporation
4
Technology Innovation Institute
5
Harbin Institute of Technology
6
Jilin University
{yinnan8911,dreamkily,pandaarych,jsgubin,
huan.xiong.math}@gmail.com, giulia.demasi@tii.ae

Abstract

et al. 2021; Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019; Yin et al.
2022a) utilize the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Cho
et al. 2014) to capture the dynamic evolution of graphs for
numerous downstream tasks such as time series prediction
or graph property prediction (Yin et al. 2022b; Wieder et al.
2020; Yin et al. 2023a).
Despite the promising performance of dynamic graphs,
the majority of these approaches typically involve complex
structures that consume significant computational resources
during training and testing. Inspired by the way the brain
process information, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) represent the event or clock-driven signals as inference for updating the neuron nodes parameters (Brette et al. 2007). Different from traditional deep learning methods, SNNs utilize
discrete spikes information instead of continuous features,
resulting in significantly lower power consumption during
model training. Considering the inherent characteristics of
SNNs (Maass 1997; Pfeiffer and Pfeil 2018; Schliebs and
Kasabov 2013), a few recent works (Zhu et al. 2022; Xu
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023) have attempted to integrate SNNs
into the GNNs framework to tackle the issue of high computational complexity. These methods transform the node features into a series of spikes with Poisson rate coding, and
follow a graph convolution layer with SNN neurons, which
employ a membrane potential threshold to convert continuous features to spike information (Kim et al. 2020; Bu et al.
2022). Although Spiking Graph Networks (SGNs) are gradually gaining attention, the use of SNNs in dynamic graphs
is still less explored, which is a more common scenario in
life. To address the gap, the work focuses on the problem
of spiking dynamic graph, which applies SNNs for dynamic
graph node classification.
However, the problem is highly challenging due to the
following reasons: (1) Information Loss. The representation
of GNNs includes the information on graph structure and
neighboring nodes, which are crucial for downstream tasks.
However, SNNs employ spike signals instead of continuous
features, leading to the loss of details regarding the structure and neighbors. Moreover, with the evolution of graphs
over time, the information loss issue may further deteriorate
the graph representation. (2) Memory Consumption. The
RNN-based dynamic graph methods typically require signif-

The integration of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) and
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is gradually attracting attention due to the low power consumption and high efficiency
in processing the non-Euclidean data represented by graphs.
However, as a common problem, dynamic graph representation learning faces challenges such as high complexity and
large memory overheads. Current work often uses SNNs instead of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) by using binary features instead of continuous ones for efficient training,
which would overlooks graph structure information and leads
to the loss of details during propagation. Additionally, optimizing dynamic spiking models typically requires propagation of information across time steps, which increases memory requirements. To address these challenges, we present
a framework named Dynamic Spiking Graph Neural Networks (Dy-SIGN). To mitigate the information loss problem,
Dy-SIGN propagates early-layer information directly to the
last layer for information compensation. To accommodate the
memory requirements, we apply the implicit differentiation
on the equilibrium state, which does not rely on the exact reverse of the forward computation. While traditional implicit
differentiation methods are usually used for static situations,
Dy-SIGN extends it to the dynamic graph setting. Extensive
experiments on three large-scale real-world dynamic graph
datasets validate the effectiveness of Dy-SIGN on dynamic
node classification tasks with lower computational costs.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2008)
have been widely applied in various fields to learn the
graph representation by capturing the dependencies of nodes
and edges, such as relation detection (Schlichtkrull et al.
2018; Chen, Li, and Tang 2020; Mi and Chen 2020; Xu
et al. 2019b) and recommendation (Wu et al. 2022). However, most GNNs are primarily designed for static or nontemporal graphs, which cannot meet the requirement of dynamic evolution over time in practice. The established solution is to extend the dynamic graphs into sequence models directly. Typically, these methods (Yin et al. 2023b; Shi
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16495

