The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

CTO-SLAM: Contour Tracking for Object-Level Robust 4D SLAM
Xiaohan Li1 , Dong Liu1 , Jun Wu2 *
1

Institute of Advanced Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Fudan University
li2xh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn, wujun@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Rich static structure is certainly beneficial for estimating
ego-motion. However, having a comprehensive understanding of the dynamic environment is of paramount importance
for meeting the evolving demands of emerging applications,
such as AR/VR or autonomous driving. The predominant
approach that tackles dynamic environments involves detecting and tracking dynamic objects apart from SLAM system. These methods deal with dynamic environments by
utilizing traditional object tracking methods (Bârsan et al.
2018; Rosinol et al. 2020). The camera poses and dynamic
object poses are then optimized in a unified bundle adjustment framework. Nevertheless, the accuracy of dynamic object motion estimation is relatively poor, which tends to degrade the accuracy of ego-motion estimation when jointly
optimized. Some researchers have taken initial strides toward addressing the object tracking and visual SLAM together, which introduces additional complexity to the problem. Part of the systems are tailored to adapt to specific environments, leveraging different priors to constrain the solution space. However, priors required systems are hard to
fulfill the needs of real world applications. A minor group
of researchers tracks and estimates dynamic object motion
with optical flow inside a feature-based SLAM (Zhang et al.
2020). This certainly provides a rather accurate object motion estimation in some scenarios but is sensitive to lighting
changes and occlusion. Moreover, it fails to build a sparse
map. In summary, due to the difficulty of establishing longterm data association, existing methods cannot achieve robust and accurate motion estimation for dynamic objects.
Inspired by the pixel tracking methods that track every pixel in images (Jiang et al. 2021; Li, Zhou, and Liu
2023), we seek to develop a long-term spatiotemporal association within SLAM. Since pixel tracking can effectively
learn spatiotemporal information, it has advantages over optical flow or appearance-based methods in handling sparse
points, withstanding occlusion, and providing robust correspondence for extended periods. However, pixel tracking
lacks the ability to select robust pixels for tracking and to
establish reliable 2D-3D correspondences, which is particularly important in dynamic SLAM. Because keypoints located at the object surface often share similar textures, we
explore those situated at the object contour with semantic
information to track, referred to as contour keypoints.
In this paper, we propose CTO-SLAM, a 4D visual SLAM

The demand for 4D ( 3D+time ) SLAM system is increasingly urgent, especially for decision-making and scene understanding. However, most of the existing simultaneous localization and mapping ( SLAM ) systems primarily assume
static environments. They fail to represent dynamic scenarios due to the challenge of establishing robust long-term spatiotemporal associations in dynamic object tracking. We address this limitation and propose CTO-SLAM, a monocular
and RGB-D object-level 4D SLAM system to track moving objects and estimate their motion simultaneously. In this
paper, we propose contour tracking, which introduces contour features to enhance the keypoint representation of dynamic objects and coupled with pixel tracking to achieve
long-term robust object tracking. Based on contour tracking, we propose a novel sampling-based object pose initialization algorithm and the following adapted bundle adjustment ( BA ) optimization algorithm to estimate dynamic object poses with high accuracy. The CTO-SLAM system is
verified on both KITTI and VKITTI datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our system effectively addresses cumulative errors in long-term spatiotemporal association and hence obtains substantial improvements over
the state-of-the-art systems. The source code is available at
https://github.com/realXiaohan/CTO-SLAM.

Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping ( SLAM ) defines
the problem of generating a map and estimating camera poses when robots enter unknown environment. Visual
SLAM system is the one that relies solely on the on-board
cameras. Because images can provide abundant information,
visual SLAM has received extensive attention and developed rapidly over the past few decades. Most of the existing
SLAM approaches typically operate under the assumption of
a strictly static scene and usually consider dynamic objects
as outliers (Mur-Artal and Tardós 2017; Engel, Koltun, and
Cremers 2017). Thus, They lack enough ability to handle dynamic scenes. While the static assumption remains valid for
the scene with controlled environments, it greatly restricts
the applicability of SLAM in scenarios involving demanding settings, urban autonomous driving for example.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10323

