The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Adaptive FSS: A Novel Few-Shot Segmentation Framework
via Prototype Enhancement
Jing Wang1,2 , Jinagyun Li1,2 , Chen Chen3 , Yisi Zhang1,2 ,
Haoran Shen1,2 , Tianxiang Zhang1,2 *
School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Automation for Industrial Processes, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
3
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
m202120718@xs.ustb.edu.cn, leejy@ustb.edu.cn, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu,
{m202210579, m202220738}@xs.ustb.edu.cn, txzhang@ustb.edu.cn.

Query set

The Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS) aims to accomplish the
novel class segmentation task with a few annotated images.
Current FSS research based on meta-learning focuses on designing a complex interaction mechanism between the query
and support feature. However, unlike humans who can rapidly
learn new things from limited samples, the existing approach
relies solely on fixed feature matching to tackle new tasks,
lacking adaptability. In this paper, we propose a novel framework based on the adapter mechanism, namely Adaptive FSS,
which can efficiently adapt the existing FSS model to the
novel classes. In detail, we design the Prototype Adaptive
Module (PAM), which utilizes accurate category information provided by the support set to derive class prototypes,
enhancing class-specific information in the multi-stage representation. In addition, our approach is compatible with
diverse FSS methods with different backbones by simply
inserting PAM between the layers of the encoder. Experiments demonstrate that our method effectively improves the
performance of the FSS models (e.g., MSANet, HDMNet,
FPTrans, and DCAMA) and achieves new state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results (i.e., 72.4% and 79.1% mIoU on PASCAL5i 1-shot and 5-shot settings, 52.7% and 60.0% mIoU on
COCO-20i 1-shot and 5-shot settings). Our code is available
at https://github.com/jingw193/AdaptiveFSS.

Support set Train on base class

Test on novel class

Query set

Backbone

Previous Method (I →Ⅲ) Adaptive FSS (I → Ⅱ →Ⅲ)

Abstract

Fq

Fs

Segmentation
head
Prediction

Support set

Ⅲ. Testing on target class
Ⅱ. Fine-tuning on target class

Support set

Prototype
Feature
Enhancement

Layer n+1

Query set

Layer n

I. Training on base class

Learnable
Module

1

Fq

Fs

Segmentation
head
Prediction

Backbone

Figure 1: The overview of our Adaptive FSS. Previous works
generally train the FSS model on the base classes and directly evaluate it on novel classes. In our framework, we insert the Prototype Adaptive Module (PAM), conducting a
fine-tuning step before testing to effectively adapt the model
to novel classes through prototype enhancement.

episodic training strategy and focus on elaborately designing a base segmentation model, which includes sophisticated
feature interaction mechanisms (Zhang et al. 2021; Iqbal,
Safarov, and Bang 2022) between query images and support
images. Specifically, in each training episode, a query image and a support set are sampled to imitate the situation
of segmenting a novel category. During meta-testing, the
base segmentation model predicts the query mask without
changing any parameters as illustrated in the upper portion
of Fig. 1. A fundamental challenge of this pipeline is how to
rapidly learn task-specific information corresponding to new
concepts and adapt the model to novel classes using limited
labeled samples. Simultaneously, in the few-shot classification task (Dhillon et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2021), a common
approach to achieve the above objectives and significant performance improvements is to pre-train the entire model and
then fine-tune the specific head for new tasks.
However, designing an effective fine-tuning framework
suitable for existing FSS methods presents the following
challenges. Firstly, determining the appropriate number and

Introduction
As one of the fundamental tasks in the field of computer
vision, semantic segmentation has achieved significant improvement driven by the rapid increase of data scale. However, acquiring detailed, pixel-level annotations for images
is a well-known challenge, both time-consuming and costly
(Everingham et al. 2010; Lin et al. 2014). This complexity
compounds the challenge for models when acquiring knowledge about novel categories. To address this, few-shot segmentation (FSS) is proposed to learn new concepts on a few
labeled samples (i.e. support images), realizing new class
segmentation on unlabeled images (i.e. query images).
Recently, most FSS researches (Kang and Cho 2022;
Yang et al. 2020a; Lang et al. 2022) employ a meta-learning
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5463

