The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

An Information-Flow Perspective on Algorithmic Fairness
Samuel Teuber, Bernhard Beckert
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Am Fasanengarten 5, 76131 Karlsruhe
{teuber,beckert}@kit.edu

Abstract

initial findings from (Beckert, Kirsten, and Schefczyk 2022;
Teuber and Beckert 2023a). An extended version of this paper can be found on arXiv (Teuber and Beckert 2023b). We
demonstrate that there is a strong correspondence between
qualitative as well as quantitative information-flow properties and algorithmic fairness: if protected attributes such as
race, gender, or age are treated as secret program inputs,
then secure information flow means that these “secret” attributes cannot influence the result of a program. Our approach is thus a white-box analysis of the algorithm and analyzes the decision-making process rather than only it’s outcome. This allows us to find disparities in treatment even for
cases where these disparities are not immediately observable
in a statistical evaluation of the algorithm’s outcome.
A large body of research, see e.g. (Beutel et al. 2019;
Taskesen et al. 2021; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Mitchell
et al. 2021), studies the disparate impact of algorithms using statistical metrics such as Equalized Odds or Equality of
Opportunity (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016), Demographic
Parity or certain forms of Individual Fairness. Many of these
approaches consider the algorithm as a black-box, as they do
not take into account the algorithm’s decision mechanism,
but only its outcome. While there exist some approaches
for the white-box analysis of algorithms, e.g. (Albarghouthi
et al. 2017; Ghosh, Basu, and Meel 2021, 2022; Bastani,
Zhang, and Solar-Lezama 2019), they are fairness-specific
and do not consider the relationship between information
flow and fairness discussed here. Another direction of related research analyzed information flow on the level of software architecture (Ramadan et al. 2018, 2019) rather than
program-level to mitigate fairness risks. That research is in
some ways orthogonal to our work as it does not consider
program code analysis and furthermore does not investigate
the concrete correspondence between information flow and
algorithmic fairness presented here.
The structure of this paper is as follows: After providing
the necessary background on program analysis and causality (Section 2), we demonstrate and discuss the relationship
between multiple flavors of qualitative information flow and
demographic parity – including options to allow for certain
justified exceptions to fairness guarantees (Section 3). Section 4 then extends the relation between information flow
and fairness from the qualitative into the quantitative world.
To this end, we derive a new quantitative notion of fairness

This work presents insights gained by investigating the relationship between algorithmic fairness and the concept of
secure information flow. The problem of enforcing secure information flow is well-studied in the context of information
security: If secret information may “flow” through an algorithm or program in such a way that it can influence the program’s output, then that is considered insecure information
flow as attackers could potentially observe (parts of) the secret. There is a strong correspondence between secure information flow and algorithmic fairness: if protected attributes
such as race, gender, or age are treated as secret program inputs, then secure information flow means that these “secret”
attributes cannot influence the result of a program. While
most research in algorithmic fairness evaluation concentrates
on studying the impact of algorithms (often treating the algorithm as a black-box), the concepts derived from information
flow can be used both for the analysis of disparate treatment
as well as disparate impact w.r.t. a structural causal model.
In this paper, we examine the relationship between quantitative as well as qualitative information-flow properties
and fairness. Moreover, based on this duality, we derive a
new quantitative notion of fairness called fairness spread,
which can be easily analyzed using quantitative information
flow and which strongly relates to counterfactual fairness.
We demonstrate that off-the-shelf tools for information-flow
properties can be used in order to formally analyze a program’s algorithmic fairness properties, including the new notion of fairness spread as well as established notions such as
demographic parity.

1

Introduction

The problem of enforcing secure information flow is wellstudied in the context of information security and allows to
rigorously analyze whether secret information can “flow”
through an algorithm potentially influencing its result. A
wide spectrum of methods and tools is available to analyze and quantify to what extent a given program satisfies
information-flow properties (Lampson 1973; Denning 1975,
1976; Darvas, Hähnle, and Sands 2005; Smith 2009; Beckert
et al. 2013; Klebanov 2014; Ahrendt et al. 2016; Biondi et al.
2018). This paper investigates the relationship between algorithmic fairness and information flow by building upon our
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15337

