The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Stable Unlearnable Example: Enhancing the Robustness of Unlearnable Examples
via Stable Error-Minimizing Noise
Yixin Liu1 , Kaidi Xu2 , Xun Chen3 , Lichao Sun1
1

Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA
Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
2
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, California, USA
{yila22, lis221}@lehigh.edu, kx46@drexel.edu, Xun.chen@samsung.com
2

Clean

100

REM

89.51

The open sourcing of large amounts of image data promotes
the development of deep learning techniques. Along with this
comes the privacy risk of these image datasets being exploited
by unauthorized third parties to train deep learning models for
commercial or illegal purposes. To avoid the abuse of data, a
poisoning-based technique, “unlearnable example”, has been
proposed to significantly degrade the generalization performance of models by adding imperceptible noise to the data.
To further enhance its robustness against adversarial training,
existing works leverage iterative adversarial training on both
the defensive noise and the surrogate model. However, it still
remains unknown whether the robustness of unlearnable examples primarily comes from the effect of enhancement in the
surrogate model or the defensive noise. Observing that simply
removing the adversarial perturbation on the training process
of the defensive noise can improve the performance of robust
unlearnable examples, we identify that solely the surrogate
model’s robustness contributes to the performance. Furthermore, we found a negative correlation exists between the robustness of defensive noise and the protection performance,
indicating defensive noise’s instability issue. Motivated by
this, to further boost the robust unlearnable example, we introduce Stable Error-Minimizing noise (SEM), which trains
the defensive noise against random perturbation instead of the
time-consuming adversarial perturbation to improve the stability of defensive noise. Through comprehensive experiments,
we demonstrate that SEM achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet Subset
regarding both effectiveness and efficiency.

SEM

20

75

Test Acc (%)

25

22

Generation Time (h)

Abstract

15
50

48.16

10

31.92
6

25

0

Testing Accuracy

Generation Time

5

0

Figure 1: The performance comparison on CIFAR-10 between the current SoTA method, the robust error-minimizing
noise (REM) (Fu et al. 2022), and our proposed stable errorminimizing noise (SEM). Our SEM outperforms the REM in
terms of both effectiveness and generation efficiency.

Hill and Krolik (2019) reported that a tech company amassed
extensive facial data without consent to develop commercial
face recognition models. Besides, Edwards (2022) reported
the discovery of an artist’s private medical record photos,
initially intended for private use, in a popular AI training set.
To tackle this problem, recent works have introduced Unlearnable Examples (Fowl et al. 2021b; Huang et al. 2020;
Fowl et al. 2021a), which aims to make the training data
“unlearnable” for deep learning models by adding a type
of invisible noise. This added noise misleads the learning
model into adopting meaningless shortcut patterns from the
data rather than extracting informative knowledge (Yu et al.
2022). However, such conferred unlearnability is vulnerable to adversarial training (Huang et al. 2020). In response,
the concept of robust error-minimizing noise (REM) was
proposed in (Fu et al. 2022) to enhance the efficacy of errorminimizing noise under adversarial training, thereby shielding data from adversarial learners by minimizing adversarial
training loss. Specifically, a min-min-max optimization strategy is employed to train the robust error-minimizing noise
generator, which in turn produces robust error-minimizing
noise. To enhance stability against data transformation, REM

Introduction
The proliferation of open-source and large-scale datasets on
the Internet has significantly advanced deep learning techniques across various fields, including computer vision (He
et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2023b), natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2019;
Vaswani et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024), and
graph data analysis (Wang et al. 2018; Kipf and Welling
2016; Sun et al. 2022a). However, this emergence also poses
significant privacy threats, as these datasets can be exploited
by unauthorized third parties to train deep neural networks
(DNNs) for commercial or even illegal purposes. For instance,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3783

