The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Double Auction on Diffusion Network
Miao Li, Yuhan Cao and Dengji Zhao
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
{limiao2022, caoyh1, zhaodj}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

incentivize traders to invite their neighbours to join the same
auction (Zhao 2021). The challenge is also very obvious because the traders are competitors and they would not invite
each other with the existing mechanisms. Existing studies
investigated one-sided auctions where the network only contains buyers (Li et al. 2022), while in the double auction, we
have two different types of traders (buyers and sellers) in the
network. Therefore, we cannot directly apply the techniques
from one-sided auctions to the double auction.
The very first one-sided auction proposed for the new perspective is for selling a single item (Li et al. 2017). They
solved the problem by offering each buyer the marginal contribution on social welfare due to his participation, which
will resolve their concern about their invitees competing
with them. Following their solution, there is a rich body of
studies around single-item auctions (Guo and Hao 2021).
However, the problem is very complex in the multi-unit or
multi-item settings (Zhao 2022). Double auctions are similar
to multi-unit one-sided auctions, but the number of units to
be sold is determined by the sellers from the network which
is unknown in advance. Therefore, the problem is more challenging than the multi-unit one-sided auctions (Zhao et al.
2018; Kawasaki et al. 2020). Actually, we will propose a
double auction mechanism which is also applicable for the
one-sided multi-unit auction in the network setting.
In the paper, we propose a double auction to satisfy the
following goals: traders will truthfully report their valuations (traditional incentive compatibility), the market owner
should not run in a deficit (weakly budget balance), and
each trader (a seller or a buyer) is incentivized to invite all
his neighbours to join the auction (our new goal). In the
traditional setting without a network, to achieve the first
two goals, McAfee’s trade reduction is the classic solution (McAfee 1992). However, we will show that this cannot be directly used in the network setting to achieve the
third goal because the reduction does not consider the competition between invitees and inviters. Our solution, called
dynamic trade reduction, is inspired by McAfee’s trade reduction and we use a modified version of it as a metamechanism of our solution. The high-level intuition of the
solution is that we use the meta-mechanism to work on a
small set of traders (initially only the traders who are in the
market without invitation) to decide which traders cannot
trade for sure, and these traders are allowed to invite their

Mechanism design on social networks has attracted extensive
attention recently. The goal is to design mechanisms to incentivize participants to invite more participants via their social
networks, and the challenge is that the participants are competitors. Various mechanisms have been proposed for single/multiple-unit auctions, but it has been shown that it is challenging to design such mechanisms for more complex settings. We move this forward to investigate a double auction
on a network where each trader (a buyer or a seller) can link
to other buyers and sellers. Incentiving invitation is more difficult than in multi-unit one-sided auctions, because there are
two different roles and a buyer (seller) seems happy to invite
a seller (buyer), but again the invited seller (buyer) may invite another buyer (seller) to compete with the original buyer
(seller). To combat this, we propose a solution called dynamic
trade reduction (DTR), which also guarantees a non-negative
revenue for the market owner. Interestingly, our solution is
also applicable to the multi-unit one-sided auction when there
is only one seller linking to only buyers on the network. We
believe that the principle of our solution has the potential to
be extended to design the multi-item one-sided auction.

Introduction
Double auctions play a vital role in today’s economy, offering a rich set of trading rules for commodity exchange
among traders (Friedman and Rust 1993). Similar to other
auction studies, research in double auctions aims to identify dominant strategies for both sellers and buyers to honestly report their valuations. One well-known mechanism
for this purpose is the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanism (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves 1973). However, the VCG mechanism can lead to a deficit for the market owner. To remove the deficit, McAfee 1992 proposed a
trade reduction mechanism, which reduces the number of
traded buyers and sellers (i.e. social welfare) to increase
their payments. Following McAfee’s work, several studies
(e.g. (Yoon 2001)) were directed at improving social welfare while maintaining a no-deficit condition.
We take the study of double auctions to a new perspective, which considers a social network among traders. This
is a new trend in mechanism design, and the new goal is to
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9848

