The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

BAIT: Benchmarking (Embedding) Architectures for
Interactive Theorem-Proving
Sean Lamont1, 2 , Michael Norrish1 , Amir Dezfouli3 , Christian Walder4 , Paul Montague2
1

2

Australian National University
Defence Science and Technology Group
3
BIMLOGIQ
4
Google DeepMind
sean.lamont@anu.edu.au

Abstract

To that end, it is important to efficiently and fairly compare approaches. As mentioned in (Yang et al. 2023), problems such as compute requirements and private code have
made research in the area difficult. Adding to this difficulty
is the fragmentation of results across ITP systems. Benchmarks and environments exist for HOL Light (Bansal et al.
2019a; Kaliszyk, Chollet, and Szegedy 2017), HOL4 (Wu
et al. 2021a), Lean (Polu et al. 2023; Han et al. 2022; Yang
et al. 2023), Isabelle (Li et al. 2021) and Metamath (Kaliszyk
and Urban 2015). These provide a broad set of tasks for
benchmarking. However being isolated to a single system
complicates comparisons between them. This is magnified
by the variety and complexity of the learning algorithms,
which vary over several axes. For example, TACTIC Z ERO
(Wu et al. 2021a) uses a seq2seq autoencoder for expressions, and learns through online Reinforcement Learning
(RL) with a custom goal selection algorithm. (Bansal et al.
2019a) instead use Breadth First Search (BFS) for goal selection, with offline learning over labelled proof logs.
Despite this, we show that many fundamental components
are common across AI-ITP systems. We leverage these to
develop B AIT, the first cross-platform, unified framework
for AI-ITP research. B AIT brings together several environments, datasets and models in AI-ITP, with a central interface for experiments and sharing components between systems. Being fully open source, the addition of new benchmarks and algorithms is facilitated by a modular and decoupled design. B AIT combines automatic logging, checkpointing and configuration management to allow for rapid testing
and prototyping of ideas with minimal overhead.
We use B AIT to study an important problem in AI-ITP,
which is the choice of embedding architecture. The embedding model is critical, being used to encode ITP expressions
for subsequent tactic, premise and goal selection. Current results either use graph based approaches (Kaliszyk, Chollet,
and Szegedy 2017; Paliwal et al. 2020; Crouse et al. 2020),
or treat expressions as a sequence (Lample et al. 2022; Polu
et al. 2023; Han et al. 2022), with no thorough comparison
between them across ITP systems. INT (Wu et al. 2021b)
provides the only comparison, in a synthetic proving environment, without directly isolating the embedding architecture. We study approaches in various tasks across several
ITPs, including recent Structure Aware Transformers (Chen,
O’Bray, and Borgwardt 2022; Luo, Thost, and Shi 2023).

Artificial Intelligence for Theorem Proving has given rise to
a plethora of benchmarks and methodologies, particularly in
Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP). Research in the area is
fragmented, with a diverse set of approaches being spread
across several ITP systems. This presents a significant challenge to the comparison of methods, which are often complex
and difficult to replicate.
Addressing this, we present B AIT, a framework for fair and
streamlined comparison of learning approaches in ITP. We
demonstrate B AIT’s capabilities with an in-depth comparison,
across several ITP benchmarks, of state-of-the-art architectures applied to the problem of formula embedding. We find
that Structure Aware Transformers perform particularly well,
improving on techniques associated with the original problem sets. B AIT also allows us to assess the end-to-end proving performance of systems built on interactive environments.
This unified perspective reveals a novel end-to-end system
that improves on prior work. We also provide a qualitative
analysis, illustrating that improved performance is associated
with more semantically-aware embeddings. By streamlining
the implementation and comparison of Machine Learning algorithms in the ITP context, we anticipate B AIT will be a
springboard for future research.

Introduction
Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP), a central paradigm of
formal verification, has been used to write verified compilers (Leroy 2014; Tan et al. 2019), formalise mathematical
conjectures (Gonthier 2008), and develop provably correct
microkernels (Klein et al. 2009). As proficiency in both the
formal system and application domain is needed, large verification projects require significant human resources and expertise. This restricts their scalability and widespread adoption, with, for example, the seL4 verification taking 25 person years (Klein et al. 2009). Advances in Artificial Intelligence for Interactive Theorem Proving (AI-ITP) have shown
potential in automating and assisting human ITP guidance,
but there remain many challenges in the area. With the current state of the art achieving 42% accuracy on the (highly
difficult) miniF2F-curriculum benchmark, there is still much
progress to be made (Lample et al. 2022; Zheng, Han, and
Polu 2022).
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10607

