The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Optimizing Local Satisfaction of Long-Run Average Objectives
in Markov Decision Processes
David Klaška, Antonı́n Kučera, Vojtěch Kůr, Vı́t Musil, Vojtěch Řehák
Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia
david.klaska@mail.muni.cz, tony@fi.muni.cz, vojtech.kur@mail.muni.cz, musil@fi.muni.cz, rehak@fi.muni.cz

M should be visited once in 10 consecutive states. That is,
Freq 10 should be equal to ν with high probability.
For every y ∈ [0, 1), the memoryless strategy σy of
Fig. 1(b) satisfies Iσy = ν. However, the probability of
Probσy [Freq 10 =ν] approaches zero as y → 1. The best result is achieved for y = 0, where this probability is ≈0.43.
Hence, even the best memoryless strategy may considerably
degrade the reliability of the system.
The simple deterministic strategy π of Fig. 1(c) satisfies Iπ = ν and Probπ [Freq 10 =ν] = 1. Note that π
needs 9 memory states to “count” the repeated visits to
R before visiting M . A “tradeoff” between memory size
and the local satisfaction of the sustainability objective is
achieved by the strategy η of Fig. 1(d) where Iη = ν and
Probη [Freq 10 =ν] ≈ 0.74.

Abstract
Long-run average optimization problems for Markov decision processes (MDPs) require constructing policies with optimal steady-state behavior, i.e., optimal limit frequency of
visits to the states. However, such policies may suffer from
local instability, i.e., the frequency of states visited in a
bounded time horizon along a run differs significantly from
the limit frequency. In this work, we propose an efficient algorithmic solution to this problem.

Introduction
A long-run average objective for a Markov decision process
(MDP) D is a property depending on the proportion of time
(frequency) spent in the individual states of D. Typical examples of such properties include
• the total frequency of visits to “bad” states is ≤0.05;
• the state frequency vector is equal to a given vector ν.
The existing works on long-run average optimization (see
Related Work) concentrate on constructing a strategy σ such
that the Markov chain Dσ obtained by applying σ to D is irreducible and the invariant (also called steady-state (Norris
1998)) distribution Iσ achieves the objective. Unfortunately,
the existing algorithms cannot influence the local stability of
the invariant distribution along a run.
More concretely, for a given time horizon n, consider the
local frequency Freq n of states sampled from n consecutive
states along a run, starting at a randomly chosen pivot position (we refer to Section for precise definitions). The local
stability of the invariant distribution is the probability that
Freq n stays “close” to Iσ . If the local stability is low, then
the probability of achieving the considered objective locally
(i.e., within the prescribed time horizon) is also low, and this
may lead to severe problems in many application scenarios.
Example 1. Consider a system of Fig. 1(a) that can be either
in the running (R) or maintenance (M) state. A long-run sustainability of the system requires that the system is running
for 90% of time and the remaining 10% is spent on maintenance. Hence, we aim at constructing a strategy σ such that
Iσ = ν, where ν(R) = 0.9 and ν(M ) = 0.1. Ideally, the
maintenance should be performed regularly, i.e., the state

Other examples of long-run average objectives where the
local satisfaction/stability requirements rise naturally are
• critical supply delivery (see, e.g., (Skwirzynski 1981;
Lazar 1982)), where a bundle of items with limited lifespan should be delivered with a given frequency f . A high
level of local instability of the frequency causes a high
probability of early/late deliveries that are both undesirable (early deliveries lead to wasting the items that are
not consumed before expiration, and late deliveries lead
to a shortage of items).
• dependability, i.e., an upper bound on failure frequency
(see, e.g., (Boussemart and Limnios 2004; Boussemart,
Limnios, and Fillion 2002)). If this bound is locally violated with considerable probability, a user may interpret
this as a violation of the dependability guarantee. For example, consider a device supposed to fail at most once in
a month on average during the device lifetime. If the device fails twice in two weeks with probability 0.2 (which
is possible without violating the guarantee on the longrun average failure frequency), the device is likely to be
perceived as unreliable.
The above list of examples is not exhaustive. Scenarios documenting the importance of local satisfaction/stability can
be found in every application area involving long-run average objectives.
Our Contribution Example 1 shows that optimizing the
local satisfaction of long-run average objectives is non-

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20143

