The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Few Shot Part Segmentation Reveals Compositional Logic for
Industrial Anomaly Detection
Soopil Kim1,3 , Sion An1 , Philip Chikontwe1 , Myeongkyun Kang1,3 ,
Ehsan Adeli3 , Kilian M. Pohl3 , Sang Hyun Park1,2
1

Robotics and Mechatronics Engineering, DGIST, Daegu, Korea
2
AI Graduate School, DGIST, Daegu, Korea
3
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
{soopilkim, shpark13135}@dgist.ac.kr
(A)

Abstract
Logical anomalies (LA) refer to data violating underlying
logical constraints e.g., the quantity, arrangement, or composition of components within an image. Detecting accurately such anomalies requires models to reason about various component types through segmentation. However, curation of pixel-level annotations for semantic segmentation
is both time-consuming and expensive. Although there are
some prior few-shot or unsupervised co-part segmentation
algorithms, they often fail on images with industrial object.
These images have components with similar textures and
shapes, and a precise differentiation proves challenging. In
this study, we introduce a novel component segmentation
model for LA detection that leverages a few labeled samples
and unlabeled images sharing logical constraints. To ensure
consistent segmentation across unlabeled images, we employ
a histogram matching loss in conjunction with an entropy
loss. As segmentation predictions play a crucial role, we propose to enhance both local and global sample validity detection by capturing key aspects from visual semantics via
three memory banks: class histograms, component composition embeddings and patch-level representations. For effective LA detection, we propose an adaptive scaling strategy
to standardize anomaly scores from different memory banks
in inference. Extensive experiments on the public benchmark
MVTec LOCO AD reveal our method achieves 98.1% AUROC in LA detection vs. 89.6% from competing methods.

Unsupervised
AD

(C)

Man
Normal

Normal Images
(B)

Part
Segmentation
Few Labeled Images
Unsupervised
AD
Normal Images

Figure 1: Comparison of approaches at a conceptual level.
(A) The anomaly detection (AD) model is directly trained
using images. (B) Our proposed method guides part segmentation models using a few labeled samples to accurately segment components and then uses the segments for AD. (C)
Examples of logical anomalies show the importance of semantically segmenting components for detection.

ceeding 99% (Roth et al. 2022). This high score can be attributed to the nature of public benchmarks (e.g., MVTec
AD (Bergmann et al. 2019) and MTD (Huang et al. 2020)),
which predominantly comprises structural anomalies, resulting in models with much lower performance when targeting
logical anomalies (Bergmann et al. 2022).
To address logical AD, current methods implicitly consider global dependencies among multiple components for
effective detection, as described in Fig. 1A. For example,
(Bergmann et al. 2022) proposed a hybrid feature reconstruction model, while (Tzachor, Hoshen et al. 2023) introduced a histogram-based density estimation model. Despite
these advancements, performance is constrained by the inability to accurately differentiate various components. For
more accurate logical AD, it is essential to semantically segment the product’s components, as they often exhibit similar
features (e.g., peaches vs. mandarins in Fig. 1C). This task
is closely related to co-part segmentation (Hung et al. 2019),
as normal samples’ similar components follow pre-defined
logics. However, existing unsupervised methods (Hung et al.
2019; Gao et al. 2021) often fail to precisely segment such
components since they cannot distinguish similar features
without relying on supervised guidance.

Introduction
In industrial images, defects can be categorized into two
main types: structural and logical anomalies (Bergmann
et al. 2022). Structural anomalies (e.g., cracks and contamination) occur in localized regions often absent in normal data, whereas logical anomalies refer to data that does
not adhere to underlying logical constraints, e.g., component composition and arrangement. Herein, effective detection requires the consideration of long-range dependencies
within and across images.
Existing research on anomaly detection (AD) for industrial images has primarily focused on unsupervised approaches that aim to learn the distribution of normal data
and detect outliers as anomalies. This has resulted in stateof-the-art models that have reported impressive scores exCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8591

(C

