The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hypergraph Neural Architecture Search
Wei Lin1,2 , Xu Peng1,2 , Zhengtao Yu3,4 , Taisong Jin1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, China.
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China.
3
Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of
Science and Technology, Kunming, 650500, China
4
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Kunming University of
Science and Technology, Kunming, 650500, China
{lvvviolette, penglingxiao}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, ztyu@hotmail.com, jintaisong@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
In recent years, Hypergraph Neural Networks (HGNNs) have
achieved considerable success by manually designing architectures, which are capable of extracting effective patterns
with high-order interactions from non-Euclidean data. However, such mechanism is extremely inefficient, demanding
tremendous human efforts to tune diverse model parameters.
In this paper, we propose a novel Hypergraph Neural Architecture Search (HyperNAS) to automatically design the optimal HGNNs. The proposed model constructs a search space
suitable for hypergraphs, and derives hypergraph architectures through differentiable search strategies. A hypergraph
structure-aware distance criterion is introduced as a guideline for obtaining an optimal hypergraph architecture via the
leave-one-out method. Experimental results for node classification on benchmark Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed citation networks and hypergraph datasets show that HyperNAS outperforms existing HGNNs models and graph NAS methods.

Introduction
For real-world applications, there exist many irregular data
structures, which can be effectively modeled via the graph
structure. To extract the useful information from the graph
structured data, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been
proposed to address various learning tasks. The existing
GNNs have achieved promising performance in real applications such as node classification (Xiao et al. 2022; Tian
et al. 2023), community detection (Qiu et al. 2022), traffic
forecasting (Jiang and Luo 2022) and biological problems
(Bongini et al. 2023).
Graph neural networks (GNNs) model pairwise connections between two data samples via a normal graph. However, the data structure in real-world tasks may exceed pairwise relations that cannot be effectively modeled by normal
graphs. Instead of edges in normal graphs, the hyperedge in
a hypergraph can connect the arbitrary number of vertices.
Thus, hypergraph-based learning methods are the more flexible and natural to extract the useful information from the
complex graph data, which are attracting more and more attention from the researchers.

Figure 1: Intuitive comparison between our work and the existing graph NAS work. (a) Graph NAS is dedicated to the
study of normal graphs. (b) Our work is based on hypergraphs.

In recent years, hypergraph neural networks (HGNNs)
have become a popular learning tool to extract the complex
patterns in non-Euclidean data, which is first proposed in
(Feng et al. 2019). It designs a hyperedge convolution operation to leverage the high-order correlations across data.
Since then, a variety of hypergraph neural networks have
been proposed for different learning tasks, including but not
limited to image retrieval (Zeng et al. 2023), quadratic assignment problem (Wang, Yan, and Yang 2021), biomedical
science (Klimm, Deane, and Reinert 2021; Saifuddin et al.
2022), keypoint matching (Kim et al. 2022) and node classification (Bai, Zhang, and Torr 2021; Gao et al. 2022).
Although a lot of progress has been made in the literature,

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13837

