The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Targeted Activation Penalties Help CNNs Ignore Spurious Signals
Dekai Zhang1 , Matt Williams2,3 , Francesca Toni1
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London
Department of Radiotherapy, Charing Cross Hospital
3
Institute of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London
{dz819, matthew.williams, f.toni}@imperial.ac.uk
2

Abstract

mances, however, have been obtained on datasets requiring
relatively shallow models (i.e., VGG-16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) and shallower). It appears that they may be
less successful with deeper convolutional NNs (CNNs), as
illustrated under “RRR” and “RBR” in Figure 1. Also, these
works assume that extensive ground-truth explanations can
be obtained, typically from humans, which in practice can
be costly, especially in expert domains such as healthcare.
In this paper, we define a novel XS method for CNNs,
which adds a Targeted Activation Penalty (TAP) to spurious
signals, mitigating against the re-emergence of spurious signals in deeper layers (illustrated under “TAP” in Figure 1).
We show that TAP performs competitively and better than
RRR and RBR, while requiring lower training times and
memory usage. We further show that TAP can still perform
well when replacing ground-truth explanations with noisier
annotations generated by a teacher model pre-trained on as
little as 1% of the target domain. Our contributions can be
summarised as follows1 :
• We introduce TAP to teach CNNs to ignore spurious signals. We formally relate TAP to RRR and RBR: whereas
RRR and RBR directly target input gradients, TAP indirectly does so by minimising activations, avoiding expensive second-order derivatives. In our experiments, this results in circa 25% of the training time and half the memory usage compared to RRR and RBR.
• We compare TAP to RRR and RBR in the standard setting of a human teacher who provides ground-truth annotations, and we demonstrate that TAP can still be effective with noisy but automatically generated explanations
from a teacher model which is pre-trained on a small
clean dataset.
• Our findings are supported by experiments (i) on MNIST
(LeCun, Cortes, and Burges 1998) using a simple twolayer CNN as a standard benchmark and, to show the efficacy of TAP on higher-stakes real world datasets, (ii)
on two clinical datasets for pneumonia (Kermany et al.
2018) and osteoarthritis (Chen et al. 2019) using three
commonly used architectures: VGG-16, ResNet-18 (He
et al. 2016) and DenseNet-121 (Huang et al. 2017).
The extended version of this paper (with Appendix) is deposited at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12813

Neural networks (NNs) can learn to rely on spurious signals in the training data, leading to poor generalisation. Recent methods tackle this problem by training NNs with additional ground-truth annotations of such signals. These methods may, however, let spurious signals re-emerge in deep
convolutional NNs (CNNs). We propose Targeted Activation
Penalty (TAP), a new method tackling the same problem by
penalising activations to control the re-emergence of spurious signals in deep CNNs, while also lowering training times
and memory usage. In addition, ground-truth annotations can
be expensive to obtain. We show that TAP still works well
with annotations generated by pre-trained models as effective
substitutes of ground-truth annotations. We demonstrate the
power of TAP against two state-of-the-art baselines on the
MNIST benchmark and on two clinical image datasets, using
four different CNN architectures.

Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) have demonstrated strong performances and in some domains have exceeded experts (Rajpurkar et al. 2018; Ke et al. 2021). These success stories
come with an important caveat: NNs appear to be very good
at exploiting spurious signals which boost their performance
on the training data but lead to poor generalisation (Hendricks et al. 2018). Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin (2016), for
instance, find that a model can achieve near perfect results
in distinguishing huskies from wolves by making use of the
background in the images. More worryingly, some models
trained to detect pneumonia in chest radiographs (Zech et al.
2018) were found to make heavy use of image artifacts.
Recent work on explanatory supervision (XS) has shown
that models can be successfully protected from learning spurious signals by eliciting ground-truth explanations from humans as an additional supervision for the models (Ross,
Hughes, and Doshi-Velez 2017; Teso and Kersting 2019;
Rieger et al. 2020; Schramowski et al. 2020; Hagos, Curran, and Mac Namee 2022; Friedrich et al. 2023). Of
these methods, “right for the right reasons” (RRR) (Ross,
Hughes, and Doshi-Velez 2017) and “right for better reasons” (RBR) (Shao et al. 2021) seem to perform particularly well (Friedrich et al. 2023). These convincing perforCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

16705

Source code: https://github.com/dkaizhang/TAP

