The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Existence Is Chaos: Enhancing 3D Human Motion
Prediction with Uncertainty Consideration
Zhihao Wang1,2 , Yulin Zhou1,2 , Ningyu Zhang1 , Xiaosong Yang3 , Jun Xiao1 , Zhao Wang2 *
1

Zhejiang University
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
National Centre for Computer Animation, Bournemouth University
zhao wang@zju.edu.cn, zhihao wang@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Human motion prediction is consisting in forecasting future
body poses from historically observed sequences. It is a longstanding challenge due to motion’s complex dynamics and
uncertainty. Existing methods focus on building up complicated neural networks to model the motion dynamics. The
predicted results are required to be strictly similar to the training samples with L2 loss in current training pipeline. However, little attention has been paid to the uncertainty property which is crucial to the prediction task. We argue that
the recorded motion in training data could be an observation of possible future, rather than a predetermined result.
In addition, existing works calculate the predicted error on
each future frame equally during training, while recent work
indicated that different frames could play different roles. In
this work, a novel computationally efficient encoder-decoder
model with uncertainty consideration is proposed, which
could learn proper characteristics for future frames by a dynamic function. Experimental results on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our uncertainty consideration approach has
obvious advantages both in quantity and quality. Moreover,
the proposed method could produce motion sequences with
much better quality that avoids the intractable shaking artefacts. We believe our work could provide a novel perspective
to consider the uncertainty quality for the general motion prediction task and encourage the studies in this field. The code
will be available in https://github.com/Motionpre/AdaptiveSalient-Loss-SAGGB.

Figure 1: The uncertainty characteristic of human motion.
For a certain motion clip, the recorded future motion should
be an observation of possible future, rather than a predetermined result. The future motion could vary even with similar
historical motion.

challenging due to the complex spatial-temporal modality
and the great uncertainty of the future.
Current popular training pipeline of existing approaches
is shown in Fig. 2. A given piece of training data sample
would be divided into past pose sequences and future pose
sequences {Xobs , Xpre }. The module would generate predicted future sequence X̂pre while the parameters would be
updated with the gradient of loss(Xpre, X̂pre ). The prediction results are required to be strictly similar to the training
examples. However, the uncertainty property of motion is
overlooked. It would meet difficulties while dealing with the
scenario that different motions may begin with the similar
human motion poses. Thus, it is critical to take the uncertainty into consideration in human motion prediction.
The uncertainty of motion prediction mainly refers to
its challenging variation, e.g. a difficult pose or a distant
frame, especially for non-periodic behaviors. Most existing
approaches treat each future frame equally. However, the
uncertainty consideration of human motion is actually not
equal in each future frame. In our real-life experience, the
short-term future of a given action is much easier to be predicted , but the possible ground truth for movements in the
longer period could be diverse. Such diverse could be varied
due to the type of actions but generally become larger over
time. In other word, the recorded future sequences in a motion clip should be an observation of historical sequence’s
possible future, rather than a predetermined result. For example, humans could predict a walking action will lift their
feet off ground in the next millisecond, however, humans
can walk to the left side or walk to the right side a few min-

Introduction
Humans have the ability to predict how an action could
be extrapolated in the future. This enables humans to react timely while interacting with external world. In the field
of artificial intelligence, how to enable machines to anticipate human behaviour is a paramount challenge. Whether
the challenge is handled well affects many real-life applications such as autonomous driving (Paden et al. 2016; Djuric
et al. 2020) and human-robotics interaction (Koppula and
Saxena 2013). The task of human motion prediction can be
described as giving a series of human pose sequences in the
past and predicting future human pose sequences. Anticipating the future movement of the 3D human skeleton is very
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5841

