The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

A Framework for Data-Driven Explainability in Mathematical Optimization
Kevin-Martin Aigner1 , Marc Goerigk2 , Michael Hartisch3 , Frauke Liers1 , Arthur Miehlich1
1

Department of Data Science, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany
2
Business Decisions and Data Science, University of Passau, Germany
3
Network and Data Science Management, University of Siegen, Germany
kevin-martin.aigner@fau.de, marc.goerigk@uni-passau.de, michael.hartisch@uni-siegen.de,
frauke.liers@fau.de, arthur.miehlich@fau.de
Abstract

ture of the underlying problems, sophisticated strategies to
efficiently explore the solution space and effectively prune
infeasible or non-optimal branches. As a result, nowadays
even large instances can be solved to global optimality
within reasonable solution time.
Until now, the research focus has primarily been on obtaining solutions that can be shown to be provably optimal.
In contrast, in particular when human beings are involved in
the resulting decision-making process, it is also of crucial
importance to understand the solution itself. In the realm of
problem-solving, the explainability of a solution can actually be similarly important as, or even more important than,
its optimality. While achieving optimal results is undoubtedly important, the ability to understand and interpret a solution is equally vital. Indeed, gaining insights and comprehending the underlying decisions can lead to improved
transparency and thus to improved acceptance and trust in
an obtained solution.
Despite this fact, the explainability of mathematical programming models and algorithms has hardly received any
attention in the past. One reason for this might be that experts in the field view mathematical optimization models as
inherently interpretable, as they appear to be already transparent and easily comprehensible. Furthermore, many algorithms for solving or approximating solutions of such models are well established, being the result of several decades
of successful algorithmic developments. Hence, researchers
in operations research and optimization often have high confidence in the procedures.
Obtained solutions themselves are typically not understandable, and one can easily wonder why some particular
solution has been obtained. This is even more true for nonexperts that have to realize the optimized solution or are affected by the solution: planners have to justify the allocation
of capacities in a network, factory workers want to understand why they have to take a disliked shift, airports need to
explain to airlines why some incoming or outgoing aircraft
had to be delayed, and solar panel owners want (and might
even have the right to) an explanation of why the power feed
of their solar panels was throttled. Providing the used optimization model without extensive explanations or pointing
at correctness proofs of algorithms is certainly not enough
to provide satisfactory explanations, to build trust or to promote accountability.

Advancements in mathematical programming have made it
possible to efficiently tackle large-scale real-world problems
that were deemed intractable just a few decades ago. However, provably optimal solutions may not be accepted due to
the perception of optimization software as a black box. Although well understood by scientists, this lacks easy accessibility for practitioners. Hence, we advocate for introducing
the explainability of a solution as another evaluation criterion,
next to its objective value, which enables us to find tradeoff solutions between these two criteria. Explainability is attained by comparing against (not necessarily optimal) solutions that were implemented in similar situations in the past.
Thus, solutions are preferred that exhibit similar features. Although we prove that already in simple cases the explainable model is NP-hard, we characterize relevant polynomially
solvable cases such as the explainable shortest path problem.
Our numerical experiments on both artificial as well as realworld road networks show the resulting Pareto front. It turns
out that the cost of enforcing explainability can be very small.

Introduction
Motivation
The area of mathematical optimization plays a vital role in
decision making across many fields, from enhanced process
designs, making efficient use of scarce resources, to aids in
financial planning. For example, transportation and logistics benefit from optimized routes and deliveries, and modern challenges in energy management and in environmental
planning can be addressed.
The last decades have witnessed remarkable improvement
with respect to efficient algorithms and implementations of
optimization methods, making it possible to solve huge optimization tasks to provably global optimality within short
time. On the one hand, this is true for polynomial-time
solvable optimization problems where modern algorithm
engineering approaches have significantly reduced solution
times in practice. On the other hand, significant progress has
also been made in enhancing branch-and-bound and branchand-cut algorithms for the global solution of challenging,
NP-hard, mathematical optimization problems. These improved algorithms employ advanced insights into the strucCopyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20912

