The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Iterative Regularization with k-support Norm:
An Important Complement to Sparse Recovery
William de Vazelhes1 , Bhaskar Mukhoty1 , Xiao-Tong Yuan2 , Bin Gu1,3 *
1

MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
3
Jilin University, Changchun, China
{wdevazelhes,bhaskar.mukhoty,xtyuan1980,jsgubin}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

is formulated as follows: we seek to recover a sparse vector
w∗ ∈ R from its noisy linear measurements

Sparse recovery is ubiquitous in machine learning and signal
processing. Due to the NP-hard nature of sparse recovery, existing methods are known to suffer either from restrictive (or
even unknown) applicability conditions, or high computational
cost. Recently, iterative regularization methods have emerged
as a promising fast approach because they can achieve sparse
recovery in one pass through early stopping, rather than the
tedious grid-search used in the traditional methods. However,
most of those iterative methods are based on the ℓ1 norm which
requires restrictive applicability conditions and could fail in
many cases. Therefore, achieving sparse recovery with iterative regularization methods under a wider range of conditions
has yet to be further explored. To address this issue, we propose a novel iterative regularization algorithm, IRKSN, based
on the k-support norm regularizer rather than the ℓ1 norm.
We provide conditions for sparse recovery with IRKSN, and
compare them with traditional conditions for recovery with
ℓ1 norm regularizers. Additionally, we give an early stopping
bound on the model error of IRKSN with explicit constants,
achieving the standard linear rate for sparse recovery. Finally,
we illustrate the applicability of our algorithm on several experiments, including a support recovery experiment with a
correlated design matrix.

y δ = Xw∗ + ϵ

Introduction
Sparse recovery is ubiquitous in machine learning and signal
processing, with applications ranging from single pixel camera, to MRI, or radar1 . In particular, with the ever-increasing
amount of information, real-life datasets often contain much
more features than samples: this is for instance the case in
DNA microarray datasets (Golub et al. 1999), text data (Lang
1995), or image data such as fMRI (Belilovsky et al. 2015),
where the number of features is generally much larger than
the number of samples. In these high-dimensional settings,
finding a linear model is under-specified, and therefore, one
often needs to leverage additional assumptions about the true
model, such as sparsity, to recover it. Usually, the problem
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An introduction to this topic, as well as an extensive review
of its applications can be found in (Foucart and Rauhut 2013) and
(Wright and Ma 2022).

11731

Here, y δ is a noisy measurement vector, i.e. a noisy version of
the true target vector y = Xw∗ , X = [x1 , ..., xd ] ∈ Rn×d
is a measurement matrix, also called design matrix, ϵ ∈ Rn
is some bounded noise (∥ϵ∥2 ≤ δ, with δ ∈ R+ ), and w∗
is the unknown k-sparse vector, i.e. containing only k nonzero components, that we wish to estimate with a vector
ŵ obtained by running some sparse recovery algorithm on
observations y δ and X. Unfortunately, this problem is NPhard in general, even in the noiseless setting (Natarajan 1995).
However, most of those iterative methods are based on
the ℓ1 norm which requires restrictive applicability conditions and could fail in many cases. We discuss such related
works in more details in the next section. Therefore, achieving sparse recovery with iterative regularization methods
under a wider range of conditions has yet to be further explored.
To address this issue, we propose a novel iterative regularization algorithm, IRKSN, based on the k-support norm regularizer rather than the ℓ1 norm. That norm was first introduced
in (Argyriou, Foygel, and Srebro 2012), as a way to improve
upon the ElasticNet for sparse prediction. More precisely, we
plug the k-support norm regularizer, for which there exist
efficient proximal computations (Argyriou, Foygel, and Srebro 2012; McDonald, Pontil, and Stamos 2016b), into the
primal-dual framework for iterative regularization described
in (Matet et al. 2017).
We then provide some conditions for sparse recovery with
IRKSN, and discuss on a simple example how they compare with traditional conditions for recovery with ℓ1 norm
regularizers.
More precisely, we elaborate on why such specific conditions include cases that are not included in some usual sufficient conditions for recovery with traditional methods based
on the ℓ1 norm (see Figure 1) (we describe such conditions
for recovery with ℓ1 norm in more details in Assumption 5).
Since those types of conditions are still slightly opaque to interpret, we do as is common in the literature (such as in (Zou
and Hastie 2005; Jia and Yu 2010)), namely, we discuss and
compare those solutions with the help of an illustrative example. We also give an early stopping bound on the model error

