The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Modeling Knowledge Graphs with Composite Reasoning
Wanyun Cui, Linqiu Zhang
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
cui.wanyun@sufe.edu.cn, zhang.linqiu@stu.sufe.edu.cn

If we know the fact Google, employee, Jeff Dean), we can
infer (Alphabet, employee, ?) = Jeff Dean.
The composite reasoning unifies several existing
paradigms for knowledge graph modeling, such as translation models, tensor factorization models, and instance-based
learning models; as well as knowledge graph regularization
methods like DURA (Zhang, Cai, and Wang 2020). We
show how composite reasoning works in Fig. 1. The results
provides novel insights to interpreting and comparing
different KGC models.
Through a comparative analysis of different KGC models
from the viewpoint of composite reasoning, we have discovered an anomalous characteristic of tensor factorization
(TF) models: a query can be decomposed into several entities that are completely unrelated to the query entity. (see
Fig. 1 and Table 1) This finding unveils a fundamental issue
with traditional factorization-based approaches, namely, the
learned embeddings may violate the collaborative filtering
assumption due to erroneous knowledge composition. More
details of the comparison can be found in Sec 3.5.
To address the erroneous knowledge composition problem in TF-based models, we propose a measure to mitigate
and reduce the caused generalization risk. In this paper, we
refer to this risk as composite risk. Measuring and reducing
the composite risk pose challenges as obtaining ground truth
for knowledge composition is hard. One of our key observation is that we can relax the definition of low-risk entities
to neighbor entities, thereby obtaining a lower bound for
the composite risk. Our experiments demonstrate a strong
correlation between prediction quality and the approximated
composition risk (see Sec 4.4).
Comparison with other KGC explanations The embedding spaces of many existing KGC models are designed
according to how humans explain knowledge. For example, translational models usually explicitly represent inverse/symmetric/transitive relations via embedding translations. Tensor factorization-based models conform to the
low-rank assumption of real-world knowledge. However,
these explanations are usually only from an intra-triple perspective, i.e. explaining a single triplet fact. The composite reasoning-based explanation provides a novel inter-triplet
view to explain the interactions among different facts.
The main contribution of this paper includes: (1) We propose a novel composite reasoning perspective to unify dif-

Abstract
The ability to combine multiple pieces of existing knowledge
to infer new knowledge is both crucial and challenging. In
this paper, we explore how facts of various entities are combined in the context of knowledge graph completion (KGC).
We use composite reasoning to unify the views from different
KGC models, including translational models, tensor factorization (TF)-based models, instance-based learning models,
and KGC regularizers.
Moreover, our comprehensive examination of composite reasoning revealed an unexpected phenomenon: certain TFbased models learn embeddings with erroneous composite reasoning, which ultimately violates their fundamental
collaborative filtering assumption and reduces their effects.
This motivates us to reduce their composition error. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that mitigating the composition
risk not only enhances the performance of TF-based models across all tested settings, but also surpass or is competitive with the state-of-the-art performance on two out of four
benchmarks. Our code, data and supplementary material are
available at https://github.com/zlq147/CompilE

1

Introduction

Diverse paradigms have been developed for knowledge
graph modeling, including translation models (Bordes et al.
2013; Sun et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2015),
tensor factorization models (Hitchcock 1927; Trouillon et al.
2016; Yang et al. 2015), instance-based learning (Cui and
Chen 2022), and KGC regularizers (Zhang, Cai, and Wang
2020). Given the diversity of different KGC forms, it is crucial to provide a unified understanding for them. Firstly, this
aids in a deeper understanding of the principles and application domains of each method. Secondly, it motivates new
algorithmic innovations.
To this end, we propose a novel paradigm for representing knowledge graphs: composite reasoning. Our
motivation for adopting composite reasoning in knowledge graph modeling is straightforward. We aim to leverage the known facts about other entities to predict the
target entity. For example, consider a knowledge graph
with composition Alphabet = Google + DeepMind + · · ·.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8338

