The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Weighted Envy-Freeness for Submodular Valuations
Luisa Montanari1 , Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin2 , Warut Suksompong3 , Nicholas Teh4
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
2
TU Eindhoven, The Netherlands
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
University of Oxford, UK

Abstract

and Suksompong 2021; Suksompong and Teh 2022, 2023;
Hoefer, Schmalhofer, and Varricchio 2023; Scarlett, Teh,
and Zick 2023; Viswanathan and Zick 2023a). This model
allows us to capture settings such as inheritance division,
in which relatives are typically entitled to unequal shares of
the legacy, as well as resource allocation among groups or
organizations of different sizes. Chakraborty et al. (2021)
generalized EF1 to weighted EF1 (WEF1): for instance, if
Alice’s weight is three times as high as Bob’s, then WEF1
stipulates that, after removing some good from Bob’s bundle, Alice should have at least three times as much value
for her own bundle as for Bob’s. The same authors demonstrated that if agents have additive valuations over the goods,
a complete WEF1 allocation always exists and can be computed efficiently.1 However, they provided the following example showing that existence is no longer guaranteed once
we move beyond additivity.
Example 1 (Chakraborty et al. (2021)). Consider an instance with n = 2 agents whose weights are w1 = 1 and
w2 = 2, and m ≥ 6 goods. Agent 1 has an additive valuation with value 1 for every good, whereas agent 2 has value 0
for the empty bundle and 1 for any nonempty bundle.
If agent 1 is allocated more than one good, then agent 2
has weighted envy toward agent 1 even after removing any
good from agent 1’s bundle. Thus, assuming that all goods
need to be allocated, agent 2 must obtain at least m−1 goods
in a WEF1 allocation. Again, this causes weighted envy according to WEF1, this time from agent 1 toward agent 2.
Hence, no complete WEF1 allocation exists in this instance.
The impossibility result illustrated in this example still
holds even if WEF1 is relaxed to weak WEF1 (WWEF1),
whereby an agent is allowed to either remove a good from
the other agent’s bundle or copy one such good into her own
bundle, and stands in contrast to the aforementioned EF1
guarantee in the unweighted setting (Lipton et al. 2004). In
fact, the impossibility persists even with WWEFc for any
constant c (Chakraborty et al. 2021, Sec. 8). In light of these
observations, Chakraborty et al. left open the direction of
identifying appropriate envy-based notions for non-additive
valuations. We also remark that relaxing WEF1 using a multiplicative approximation studied in the unweighted setting
by, e.g., Amanatidis, Birmpas, and Markakis (2018) and

We investigate the fair allocation of indivisible goods to
agents with possibly different entitlements represented by
weights. Previous work has shown that guarantees for additive valuations with existing envy-based notions cannot be
extended to the case where agents have matroid-rank (i.e.,
binary submodular) valuations. We propose two families of
envy-based notions for matroid-rank and general submodular valuations, one based on the idea of transferability and
the other on marginal values. We show that our notions
can be satisfied via generalizations of rules such as picking sequences and maximum weighted Nash welfare. In addition, we introduce welfare measures based on harmonic
numbers, and show that variants of maximum weighted harmonic welfare offer stronger fairness guarantees than maximum weighted Nash welfare under matroid-rank valuations.

1

Introduction

Fair division refers to the study of how to fairly allocate resources among agents with possibly differing preferences.
Over the 75 years since Steinhaus (1948) initiated a mathematical framework of fair division, the field has given rise
to numerous fairness notions and procedures for computing fair outcomes in a variety of scenarios (Brams and Taylor 1996; Robertson and Webb 1998). For instance, in the
common scenario of allocating indivisible goods, the notion
envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) has emerged as a standard benchmark. An allocation of the goods satisfies EF1 if
any envy that an agent has toward another agent can be eliminated by removing some good in the latter agent’s bundle.
Even when agents have arbitrary monotonic valuations over
the goods, an EF1 allocation always exists and can be found
in polynomial time (Lipton et al. 2004).
The definitions of many fairness notions in the literature, including EF1, inherently assume that all agents
have the same entitlement to the resource. Recently, several researchers have examined a more general model in
which different agents may have different weights reflecting their entitlements to the goods (Farhadi et al. 2019;
Aziz, Moulin, and Sandomirskiy 2020; Babaioff, Ezra, and
Feige 2021b; Babaioff, Nisan, and Talgam-Cohen 2021;
Chakraborty et al. 2021; Chakraborty, Schmidt-Kraepelin,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9865

An allocation is called complete if it allocates all of the goods.

