The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

FontDiffuser: One-Shot Font Generation via Denoising Diffusion with
Multi-Scale Content Aggregation and Style Contrastive Learning
Zhenhua Yang1 , Dezhi Peng1 , Yuxin Kong1 , Yuyi Zhang1 , Cong Yao3 , Lianwen Jin12 *
1

South China University of Technology
SCUT-Zhuhai Institute of Modern Industrial Innovation
3
Alibaba Group
{eezhyang, pengdezhi000, kongyxscut, yuyizhang.scut, yaocong2010}@gmail.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Automatic font generation is an imitation task, which aims
to create a font library that mimics the style of reference images while preserving the content from source images. Although existing font generation methods have achieved satisfactory performance, they still struggle with complex characters and large style variations. To address these issues,
we propose FontDiffuser, a diffusion-based image-to-image
one-shot font generation method, which innovatively models the font imitation task as a noise-to-denoise paradigm.
In our method, we introduce a Multi-scale Content Aggregation (MCA) block, which effectively combines global and
local content cues across different scales, leading to enhanced
preservation of intricate strokes of complex characters. Moreover, to better manage the large variations in style transfer, we propose a Style Contrastive Refinement (SCR) module, which is a novel structure for style representation learning. It utilizes a style extractor to disentangle styles from
images, subsequently supervising the diffusion model via a
meticulously designed style contrastive loss. Extensive experiments demonstrate FontDiffuser’s state-of-the-art performance in generating diverse characters and styles. It consistently excels on complex characters and large style changes
compared to previous methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/yeungchenwa/FontDiffuser.

(a) Characters generated by our method

source ref

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Ours

(b) Complex characters

source ref

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Ours

(c) Large style variations

Figure 1: (a) Characters of different complexity generated by
our method. (b)(c) Results of different methods on complex
characters and large style variations. ‘ref’ represents the reference image. (1)-(4) represent the results of DG-Font (Xie
et al. 2021), MX-Font (Park et al. 2021b), CG-GAN (Kong
et al. 2022), and CF-Font (Wang et al. 2023) respectively.
Red boxes highlight the failures of other methods.

Introduction

to severe stroke missing, artifacts, blurriness, layout errors,
and style inconsistency as shown in Figure 1(b)(c). Retrospectively, most font generation approaches (Park et al.
2021a,b; Xie et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2022; Kong et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023) adopt a GANbased (Goodfellow et al. 2014) framework which potentially suffers from unstable training due to their adversarial training nature. Moreover, most of these methods perceive content information through only single-scale highlevel features, omitting the fine-grained details that are crucial to preserving the source content, especially for complex
characters. There are also a number of methods (Cha et al.
2020; Park et al. 2021a,b; Liu et al. 2022; Kong et al. 2022;
He et al. 2022) that employ prior knowledge to facilitate
font generation, such as stroke or component composition
of characters; however, this information is costly to annotate
for complex characters. Furthermore, the target style is commonly represented by a simple classifier or a discriminator
in previous literature, which struggles to learn the appropri-

Automatic font generation aims to create a new font library
in the required style given the reference images, which is
referred to as an imitation task. Font generation has significant applications, including new font creation, ancient character restoration, and data augmentation for optical character recognition. Therefore, it has significant commercial
and cultural values. However, this imitation process is both
costly and labor-intensive, particularly for languages with
a large number of glyphs, such as Chinese (> 90,000),
Japanese (> 50,000), and Korean (> 11000). Existing automatic methods primarily disentangle the representations of
style and content, then integrate them to output the results.
Although these methods have achieved remarkable success in font generation, they still suffer from complex character generation and large style variation transfer, leading
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6603

