The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Open-Vocabulary Video Relation Extraction
Wentao Tian1 , Zheng Wang2 † , Yuqian Fu1 , Jingjing Chen1† , Lechao Cheng3
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
3
Zhejiang Lab
{wttian22@m., fuyq20@, chenjingjing@}fudan.edu.cn, zhengwang@zjut.edu.cn, chenlc@zhejianglab.com
2

Abstract
A comprehensive understanding of videos is inseparable from
describing the action with its contextual action-object interactions. However, many current video understanding tasks prioritize general action classification and overlook the actors
and relationships that shape the nature of the action, resulting in a superficial understanding of the action. Motivated
by this, we introduce Open-vocabulary Video Relation Extraction (OVRE), a novel task that views action understanding through the lens of action-centric relation triplets. OVRE
focuses on pairwise relations that take part in the action
and describes these relation triplets with natural languages.
Moreover, we curate the Moments-OVRE dataset, which
comprises 180K videos with action-centric relation triplets,
sourced from a multi-label action classification dataset. With
Moments-OVRE, we further propose a cross-modal mapping
model to generate relation triplets as a sequence. Finally, we
benchmark existing cross-modal generation models on the
new task of OVRE. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/Iriya99/OVRE.

Figure 1: Open-vocabulary Video Relation Extraction enables a contextual-level comprehension of video content,
bridging the gap between general action classification and
precise language description.

Introduction
Videos contain abundant semantic information, including
action, actors (e.g. humans, animals, objects, and other entities), and relationships between actors. To comprehend
the dynamic and complex real-world situations depicted in
videos, researchers have investigated a wide range of video
comprehension tasks. These endeavors allow for the transition of understanding video content from broad semantic
concepts to more detailed ones. Despite the variations, all of
these tasks converge on a pivotal aspect : extracting semantic information within the videos and constructing a higherlevel representation to facilitate comprehension.
Foundational tasks, such as action classification (Kong
and Fu 2022) and temporal action localization (Xia and
Zhan 2020), primarily center on recognizing broad-level actions within videos, yet they often overlook the specific scenario in which these actions unfold. Consequently, these
tasks often struggle to offer a profound understanding of
the context and the specific actors that are part of actions.
In essence, they concentrate solely on deciphering “what”

action is transpiring and “when” it takes place, omitting the
“who” and “how” aspects. On the other hand, video captioning (Chen, Yao, and Jiang 2019), video grounding (Chen and
Jiang 2019; Wang, Chen, and Jiang 2021), and video-text
retrieval (Song, Chen, and Jiang 2023) strive to encapsulate
the videos’ essence through textual descriptions by mapping
them into a joint semantic space. Nevertheless, these textual descriptions often provide a detailed-level overview of
the action context, lacking a nuanced comprehension of relations.
To achieve a comprehensive comprehension of visual
content, researchers have introduced Video Visual Relation Detection (VidVRD) tasks (Shang et al. 2017, 2019)
specifically designed for video analysis. VidVRD tasks are
geared toward identifying objects and the relations between them within videos. For instance, VidVRD (Shang
et al. 2017) employs available video object detection data
to non-exclusively label various simplistic relationships between objects. As depicted in Figure 2 (a), relationships like
touch and watch are inherently object-centric relation-

†

Correspondence to: Zheng Wang, Jingjing Chen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5215

