The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Identifying Guarantors of War Veterans Using Robust-SEAL:
A Case of the Korean War
Jong In Choi1,2, Won Kyung Lee1,3, Jae Hwan Lee1, So Young Sohn1*
1Yonsei University

2Finance AI Data Center, Korea Credit Information Services
3The Hartree Centre, STFC Daresbury Laboratory

jichoi915@yonsei.ac.kr, wky.lee14@gmail.com, leejhi0415@yonsei.ac.kr, sohns@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

Klein, 2019), it is a big hurdle for veterans to get the proof
that they are veterans. One of the reasons is that there are
many missing military records. In the past, many records
were written manually and stored physically so they could
easily have been lost. For example, some records of the U.S.
Army were lost due to fire (Stender and Walker 1974). This
kind of loss makes it difficult to prove the applicant’s participation of the war.
Although some countries allow alternative documents
from applicants such as medical reports, prescriptions due
to the veteran’s injury or illness, photographs or letters from
the veteran’s time in the service, there are still many veterans who do not have such documents. For those who could
not submit the alternative documents can have chances to be
registered if they get buddy statements from comrades in the
war. However, it is also challenging for applicants to find
comrades on their own after the war, although the applicants
remember some of them. Some comrades might have died
during the war, or after the war. While the finding can be
accelerated by government organizations who have the military records, military records at an individual level are often
not available.
Unfortunately, however, little has been addressed to solve
such war veteran’s difficulty in proving their identification.
Most of the previous studies have dealt with aftereffects of
the war on veterans such as problems in their social life and
mental health (Ra 2017). Few studies have only mentioned
the challenges of veterans to prove their participations in the
war especially, non-regular soldiers who have insufficient
military records (Nam 2013).
We propose a framework to recommend suitable guarantors for veterans who are not able to find the records or documents for proving their identification. Beyond recommendations of guarantors who were affiliated in the same unit,
our framework can recommend guarantors from different

Most countries provide veterans with various benefits to reward their sacrifice. Unfortunately, many veterans have
failed to prove their status due to loss of military records.
Thus, some governments allow the verification of those veterans through "buddy statements" obtained from the people
who can vouch for the buddy's participation in the war. However, it is still challenging for veterans to find guarantors directly. With this background, we suggest to utilizing historical war records of combined operations to increase the pool
of potential guarantors for the buddy statements. However, a
combined operation network among troops can have missing
edges and perturbations on attributes of the troop due to inaccurate information. In this study, we learn from some recorded interactions which might be incomplete and noisy, and
predict missing linkages among the troops that might have
interacted together in the war, by proposing Robust-SEAL
(learning from Subgraphs, Embeddings, and Attributes for
Link prediction). It combines two Graph Neural Network
(GNN) architectures: robust Graph Convolutional Network
which considers the uncertainty of node attributes with a
probabilistic approach, and SEAL which improves the expressive power of the GNN with a labeling trick. Our proposed approach was applied to Korean War data with perturbations. For experimentations, we hid some actual interactions and found that Robust-SEAL restores missing interactions better than other GNN-based baselines.

Introduction
In the 20th century, numerous wars broke out, including the
Korean War, and the South African Border War. Currently,
there are wars taking place in many areas. Many citizens are
compulsorily conscripted into the military and must participate in the war. Even after the war ends, veterans suffer from
aftereffects of the war such as post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Although
there exist welfare benefits for the veterans honoring their
commitments in some countries (Casler, Fosmire, and
Equal contributions
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.


21986

