The Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24)

Hypothesis Testing for Class-Conditional Noise
Using Local Maximum Likelihood
Weisong Yang1 * , Rafael Poyiadzi2 * , Niall Twomey1 , Raul Santos-Rodriguez1
1

University of Bristol
2
GSK
{ws.yang, niall.twomey, enrsr}@bristol.ac.uk, rafaelpoyiadzi@gmail.com

Abstract

when the annotation is not carried out by domain experts,
such as in the case of crowdsourcing.
Here, our work aims to provide machine learning practitioners with tools for assessing the quality of the labels
of a binary supervised dataset of the form: (X, y) =
d
{(xi , yi )}N
i=1 ∈ (R × {−1, 1}). These tools are of the
form of hypothesis tests and are meant to take place after the data collection and annotation steps are done. The
tests provide information regarding the presence of classconditional label noise, as opposed to uniform label noise.
Class-conditional label noise (CCN) refers to the setting
where the per-class noise rates are different, i.e. P(Ỹ =
−1 | Y = 1) = α and P(Ỹ = 1 | Y = −1) = β,
with α ̸= β. Uniform label noise (UN) refers to the setting
where per-class noise rates are identical, i.e. P(Ỹ = 1 | Y =
−1) = P(Ỹ = −1 | Y = 1) = τ .
As other efforts in this area, including those that try to estimate the noise rates directly, a necessary ingredient for our
tests is anchor points, i.e. instances (x), with a known (or,
approximately known) posterior (η(x) = P(Y = 1 | X =
x)). These need to be provided by the user, probably sourced
by a domain expert.
In Poyiadzi et al. (2022), the authors introduced a framework that follows from the asymptotic properties of Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) of the logistic regression model and thus its correctness relies on whether the
assumptions of the model are met. In practice, the linear assumptions behind the method mean that, unless there is an
element of control over the data generating process, the blind
application of the test can lead to suboptimal outcomes. In
this paper, we take an alternative view by considering more
flexible nonparametric models. Instead of relying on the
asymptotics of MLE for a parametric model, we build our
approach on top of a nonparametric estimation of the underlying regression function based on local likelihood models,
such as local polynomial regression, which importantly is
more flexible and robust against model misspecification.
In the empirical analysis, we perform both experiments on
synthetic data and real-world data, focusing on understanding the benefits and limitations of the approach as compared
to parametric baselines. We show that only if the practitioner
knows the data generation process beforehand and can ensure that all the assumptions of the parametric test hold, the

In supervised learning, automatically assessing the quality of
the labels before any learning takes place remains an open
research question. In certain particular cases, hypothesis testing procedures have been proposed to assess whether a given
instance-label dataset is contaminated with class-conditional
label noise, as opposed to uniform label noise. The existing
theory builds on the asymptotic properties of the Maximum
Likelihood Estimate for parametric logistic regression. However, the parametric assumptions on top of which these approaches are constructed are often too strong and unrealistic
in practice. To alleviate this problem, in this paper we propose an alternative path by showing how similar procedures
can be followed when the underlying model is a product of
Local Maximum Likelihood Estimation that leads to more
flexible nonparametric logistic regression models, which in
turn are less susceptible to model misspecification. This different view allows for wider applicability of the tests by offering users access to a richer model class. Similarly to existing works, we assume we have access to anchor points which
are provided by the users. We introduce the necessary ingredients for the adaptation of the hypothesis tests to the case
of nonparametric logistic regression and empirically compare
against the parametric approach presenting both synthetic and
real-world case studies and discussing the advantages and
limitations of the proposed approach.

Introduction
Data quality checks are an essential part of the machine
learning process, as a dataset of poor quality would lead
to less trustworthy inferences. There have been plenty of
studies targeting different aspects of data quality, e.g. missing value imputation (Jarrett et al. 2022; Lall and Robinson
2022), anomaly detection (Xia et al. 2022; Hilal, Gadsden,
and Yawney 2022; Schmidl, Wenig, and Papenbrock 2022),
or class imbalance (Sauber-Cole and Khoshgoftaar 2022),
etc.
In this work, we focus on assessing the annotation quality
of the dataset. In many real-world applications, data annotation is inherently suboptimal, especially when data is harvested from the web (Li et al. 2017; Gong et al. 2014), or
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21744

