Structured and Efficient Variational Deep Learning with Matrix Gaussian
Posteriors
Christos Louizos
AMLAB, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam

C . LOUIZOS @ UVA . NL

Max Welling
AMLAB, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)

M . WELLING @ UVA . NL

Abstract
We introduce a variational Bayesian neural network where the parameters are governed via
a probability distribution on random matrices.
Specifically, we employ a matrix variate Gaussian (Gupta & Nagar, 1999) parameter posterior
distribution where we explicitly model the covariance among the input and output dimensions
of each layer. Furthermore, with approximate
covariance matrices we can achieve a more efficient way to represent those correlations that
is also cheaper than fully factorized parameter
posteriors. We further show that with the “local
reprarametrization trick” (Kingma et al., 2015)
on this posterior distribution we arrive at a Gaussian Process (Rasmussen, 2006) interpretation of
the hidden units in each layer and we, similarly with (Gal & Ghahramani, 2015), provide
connections with deep Gaussian processes. We
continue in taking advantage of this duality and
incorporate “pseudo-data” (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2005) in our model, which in turn allows for more efficient posterior sampling while
maintaining the properties of the original model.
The validity of the proposed approach is verified
through extensive experiments.

1. Introduction
While deep learning methods are beating every record in
terms of predictive accuracy, they do not yet provide the
user with reliable confidence intervals. Yet, for most applications where decisions are made based on these predictions, confidence intervals are key. Take the example of
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

an autonomous driving vehicle that enters a new unknown
traffic situation: recognizing that predictions become unreliable and handing the steering wheel back to the driver
is essential. Similarly, when a physician diagnoses a patient with some ailment and prescribes a drug with potentially severe side effects, it is essential that she/he knows
when predictions are unreliable and additional investigation is necessary. These considerations have motivated us
to develop a fully Bayesian deep learning framework that
is accurate, efficient and delivers reliable confidence intervals.
Furthermore, by being Bayesian we can also harvest another property as a byproduct; natural protection against
overfitting. Instead of making point estimates for the parameters of the network, which can overfit and provide
erroneously certain predictions, we estimate a full posterior distribution over these parameters. Armed with these
posterior distributions we can now perform predictions using the posterior predictive distribution, i.e. we can now
marginalize over the network parameters and make predictions on the basis of the datapoints alone. As a result
we can both obtain the aforementioned confidence intervals
and better regularize our networks, which is very important
in problems where we do not have enough data relative to
the amount of features.
Obtaining the parameter posterior distributions for large
neural networks is however intractable. To this end, many
methods for approximate posterior inference have been devised. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are
one class of methods that have been explored in this context
via Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Neal, 2012) and stochastic
gradient methods (Welling & Teh, 2011; Ahn et al., 2012).
Another family of methods that provide deterministic approximations to the posterior are based on variational inference. These cast inference as an optimization problem
and minimize the KL-divergence between the approximate
and true posterior. There have been many recent attempts

