Gaussian process nonparametric tensor estimator and
its minimax optimality

Heishiro Kanagawa†
Taiji Suzuki†,‡
†
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-8552, JAPAN
‡
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technological Agency (JST), JAPAN
Hayato Kobayashi?
Nobuyuki Shimizu?
Yukihiro Tagami?
?
Yahoo Japan Corporation, Tokyo 107-6211, JAPAN

Abstract
We investigate the statistical efficiency of a nonparametric Gaussian process method for a nonlinear tensor estimation problem. Low-rank tensor estimation has been used as a method to learn
higher order relations among several data sources
in a wide range of applications, such as multitask learning, recommendation systems, and spatiotemporal analysis. We consider a general setting where a common linear tensor learning is extended to a nonlinear learning problem in reproducing kernel Hilbert space and propose a nonparametric Bayesian method based on the Gaussian process method. We prove its statistical convergence rate without assuming any strong convexity, such as restricted strong convexity. Remarkably, it is shown that our convergence rate
achieves the minimax optimal rate. We apply our
proposed method to multi-task learning and show
that our method significantly outperforms existing methods through numerical experiments on
real-world data sets.

1. Introduction
Tensor structure naturally arises in the analysis of complex
interactions between several data sources. For example, in
a movie recommendation system, user ratings of movies
are described by a three-way tensor, which is referenced
by (user, movie, context) (Karatzoglou et al., 2010). The
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

KANAGAWAH . AB @ M . TITECH . AC . JP
SUZUKI . T. CT @ M . TITECH . AC . JP

HAKOBAYA @ YAHOO - CORP. JP
NOBUSHIM @ YAHOO - CORP. JP
YUTAGAMI @ YAHOO - CORP. JP

noteworthy success of tensor data analysis is based on the
notion of the low rank property of a tensor. The low rank
decomposition of a tensor, which is analogous to that of a
matrix, plays an important role in tensor learning, since it
enables us to decompose a tensor into a few factors that can
be analyzed, e.g., CP-decomposition (Hitchcock, 1927a;b)
and Tucker decomposition (Tucker, 1966).
Parametric models based on low rank decomposition have
been intensively investigated. A naive approach to computing tensor decomposition is to find a best approximate
decomposition that minimizes the squared error (Kolda &
Bader, 2009). However, this type of problem is not convex
and therefore it is difficult to derive an optimal solution.
In order to overcome the computational difficulty, convex
relaxation methods have been proposed by some authors
(Liu et al., 2009; Signoretto et al., 2010; Gandy et al., 2011;
Tomioka et al., 2011; Tomioka & Suzuki, 2013). The main
idea of convex relaxations is to unfold a tensor into some
matrices and apply a well investigated trace norm regularization method to these matrices.
On the other hand, Bayesian methods have also been proposed (Chu & Ghahramani, 2009; Xiong et al., 2010; Xu
et al., 2011; Rai et al., 2014). In the context of sparse estimation, it is known that a Bayesian method does not require strong conditions on the design to derive an optimal
convergence rate (Dalalyan & Tsybakov, 2008; Alquier &
Lounici, 2011). In fact, in low rank linear tensor estimation, a minimax optimal convergence rate for predictive error can be achieved without assuming strong convexity on
the design (Suzuki, 2015).
In addition to the linear models as described above, nonparametric tensor learning has also been considered (Xu
et al., 2011; Signoretto et al., 2013; Shen & Ghosal, 2016).

