Pixel Recurrent Neural Networks
Aäron van den Oord
Nal Kalchbrenner
Koray Kavukcuoglu

AVDNOORD @ GOOGLE . COM
NALK @ GOOGLE . COM
KORAYK @ GOOGLE . COM

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Modeling the distribution of natural images is
a landmark problem in unsupervised learning.
This task requires an image model that is at
once expressive, tractable and scalable. We
present a deep neural network that sequentially
predicts the pixels in an image along the two
spatial dimensions. Our method models the discrete probability of the raw pixel values and encodes the complete set of dependencies in the
image. Architectural novelties include fast twodimensional recurrent layers and an effective use
of residual connections in deep recurrent networks. We achieve log-likelihood scores on natural images that are considerably better than the
previous state of the art. Our main results also
provide benchmarks on the diverse ImageNet
dataset. Samples generated from the model appear crisp, varied and globally coherent.

1. Introduction
Generative image modeling is a central problem in unsupervised learning. Probabilistic density models can be used
for a wide variety of tasks that range from image compression and forms of reconstruction such as image inpainting
(e.g., see Figure 1) and deblurring, to generation of new
images. When the model is conditioned on external information, possible applications also include creating images
based on text descriptions or simulating future frames in a
planning task. One of the great advantages in generative
modeling is that there are practically endless amounts of
image data available to learn from. However, because images are high dimensional and highly structured, estimating
the distribution of natural images is extremely challenging.
One of the most important obstacles in generative modeling is building complex and expressive models that are
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

occluded

completions

original

Figure 1. Image completions sampled from a PixelRNN.

also tractable and scalable. This trade-off has resulted in
a large variety of generative models, each having their advantages. Most work focuses on stochastic latent variable
models such as VAE’s (Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma &
Welling, 2013) that aim to extract meaningful representations, but often come with an intractable inference step that
can hinder their performance.
One effective approach to tractably model a joint distribution of the pixels in the image is to cast it as a product of
conditional distributions; this approach has been adopted in
autoregressive models such as NADE (Larochelle & Murray, 2011) and fully visible sigmoid belief networks (Neal,
1992). The factorization turns the joint modeling problem
into a sequence problem, where one learns to predict the
next pixel given all the previously generated pixels. But to
model the highly nonlinear and long-range correlations between pixels and the complex conditional distributions that
result, a highly expressive sequence model is necessary.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are powerful models
that offer a compact, shared parametrization of a series of
conditional distributions. RNNs have been shown to excel
at hard sequence problems ranging from handwriting generation (Graves, 2013), to character prediction (Sutskever
et al., 2011) and to machine translation (Kalchbrenner &
Blunsom, 2013). A two-dimensional RNN has produced
very promising results in modeling grayscale images and
textures (Theis & Bethge, 2015).
In this paper we advance two-dimensional RNNs and apply them to large-scale modeling of natural images. The
resulting PixelRNNs are composed of up to twelve, fast
two-dimensional Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) lay-

