Copeland Dueling Bandit Problem: Regret Lower Bound,
Optimal Algorithm, and Computationally Efficient Algorithm

Junpei Komiyama
The University of Tokyo, Japan

JUNPEI @ KOMIYAMA . INFO

Junya Honda
The University of Tokyo, Japan

HONDA @ STAT. T. U - TOKYO . AC . JP

Hiroshi Nakagawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan

NAKAGAWA @ DL . ITC . U - TOKYO . AC . JP

Abstract

sures how much the algorithm explores, is widely used.

We study the K-armed dueling bandit problem, a
variation of the standard stochastic bandit problem where the feedback is limited to relative
comparisons of a pair of arms. The hardness of
recommending Copeland winners, the arms that
beat the greatest number of other arms, is characterized by deriving an asymptotic regret bound.
We propose Copeland Winners Relative Minimum Empirical Divergence (CW-RMED) and
derive an asymptotically optimal regret bound for
it. However, it is not known whether the algorithm can be efficiently computed or not. To address this issue, we devise an efficient version
(ECW-RMED) and derive its asymptotic regret
bound. Experimental comparisons of dueling
bandit algorithms show that ECW-RMED significantly outperforms existing ones.

While it is desirable to obtain rewards as direct feedback
from an arm, in a number of practical cases such direct
feedback is not available. In this paper, we consider a
version of the standard stochastic bandit problem called
the K-armed dueling bandit problem (Yue et al., 2009),
in which the forecaster receives relative feedback, which
specifies which of the two arms is preferred. Although
the original motivation of the dueling bandit problem arose
in the field of information retrieval, learning under relative
feedback is universal to many fields, such as recommender
systems (Gemmis et al., 2009), graphical design (Brochu
et al., 2010), and natural language processing (Zaidan &
Callison-Burch, 2011), which involve explicit or implicit
feedback provided by humans.

1. Introduction
A multi-armed bandit problem is a crystallized instance of
a sequential decision-making problem in an uncertain environment, and it can model many real-world scenarios. This
problem involves conceptual entities called arms. At each
round, the forecaster draws one of the K arms and receives
a corresponding reward feedback. The aim of the forecaster
is to maximize the cumulative reward over rounds, which
is achieved by running an algorithm that balances the exploration (acquisition of information) and the exploitation
(utilization of information). In evaluating the performance
of a bandit algorithm, a metric called regret, which meaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In the standard bandit problem, the best arm is naturally defined as the one with the largest expected reward. However,
if the feedback is restricted to the results of pairwise comparisons, there are several possible ways to define the best
arm. Following the literature on the dueling bandit problem, we call the best arm the winner. When there exists an
arm that beats (i.e., preferred in expectation) all the other
arms, it is natural to define it as the winner; this notion is
called a Condorcet winner. Unfortunately, the Condorcet
winner does not always exist. Still, we can define an extended notion of the Condorcet winner that always exists
as follows. Let the Copeland winners be the arms that beat
the greatest number of other arms. In this paper, we study
the difficulty of finding the Copeland winners from pairwise feedback.
1.1. Related work
Early algorithms for solving the dueling bandit problem,
such as Interleaved Filter (Yue et al., 2012) and Beat the
Mean Bandit (Yue & Joachims, 2011), require the arms to

