Stochastic Variance Reduction for Nonconvex Optimization
Sashank J. Reddi†
SJAKKAMR @ CS . CMU . EDU
Ahmed Hefny†
AHEFNY @ CS . CMU . EDU
Suvrit Sra^
SUVRIT @ MIT. EDU
Barnabás Póczós†
BAPOCZOS @ CS . CMU . EDU
Alex Smola†
ALEX @ SMOLA . ORG
†
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
^
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract

only a small amount of first-order information at each iteration. Two fundamental models in machine learning that
profit from IFO algorithms are (i) empirical risk minimization, which typically uses convex finite-sum models; and
(ii) deep learning, which uses nonconvex ones.

We study nonconvex finite-sum problems and
analyze stochastic variance reduced gradient
(S VRG) methods for them. S VRG and related
methods have recently surged into prominence
for convex optimization given their edge over
stochastic gradient descent (S GD); but their theoretical analysis almost exclusively assumes convexity. In contrast, we obtain non-asymptotic
rates of convergence of S VRG for nonconvex optimization, showing that it is provably faster than
S GD and gradient descent. We also analyze a
subclass of nonconvex problems on which S VRG
attains linear convergence to the global optimum.
We extend our analysis to mini-batch variants,
showing (theoretical) linear speedup due to minibatching in parallel settings.

The prototypical IFO algorithm, stochastic gradient descent (S GD),1 has witnessed tremendous progress in the
recent years. By now a variety of accelerated, parallel,
and faster converging variants are known. Among these, of
particular importance are variance reduced (VR) stochastic methods (Schmidt et al., 2013; Johnson & Zhang, 2013;
Defazio et al., 2014a), which have delivered progress such
as linear convergence rates (for strongly convex functions)
as opposed to sublinear rates of ordinary S GD (Robbins &
Monro, 1951; Nemirovski et al., 2009). Similar (but not
same) benefits of VR methods can also be seen in smooth
convex functions. The S VRG algorithm of (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013) is particularly attractive here because of its
low storage requirement in comparison to the algorithms
in (Schmidt et al., 2013; Defazio et al., 2014a).

1. Introduction
We study nonconvex finite-sum problems of the form
min f (x) :=

x2Rd

1 Xn
fi (x),
i=1
n

(1)

where both f and fi (i 2 [n]) may be nonconvex and have
Lipschitz continuous gradients. We denote the class of such
finite-sum Lipschitz smooth functions by Fn . We optimize
functions in Fn in the Incremental First-order Oracle (IFO)
framework (Agarwal & Bottou, 2014) defined below.
Definition 1. For f 2 Fn , an IFO takes an index i 2 [n]
and a point x 2 Rd , and returns the pair (fi (x), rfi (x)).
IFO based analysis was introduced to study lower bounds
for finite-sum problems. Algorithms that use IFOs are favored in large-scale applications as they, usually, require
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Despite the meteoric rise of VR methods, their analysis for
general nonconvex problems is largely missing. Johnson
& Zhang (2013) remark on convergence of S VRG when
f 2 Fn is locally strongly convex and provide compelling
experimental results (Fig. 4 in (Johnson & Zhang, 2013)).
However, problems encountered in practice are typically
not even locally convex, let alone strongly convex. The current analysis of S VRG does not extend to nonconvex functions as it relies heavily on convexity for controlling the
variance. Given the dominance of stochastic gradient methods in optimizing deep neural nets and other large nonconvex models, theoretical investigation of faster nonconvex
stochastic methods is much needed.
Convex VR methods are known to enjoy the faster convergence rate of batch gradient descent (G RAD D ESCENT) but
1
We use ‘incremental gradient’ and ‘stochastic gradient’ interchangeably, though we are only interested in finite-sum problems.

