Dealbreaker: A Nonlinear Latent Variable Model for Educational Data
Andrew Lan
Rice University

SL 29@ RICE . EDU

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland

TOMG @ CS . UMD . EDU

Richard Baraniuk
Rice University

RICHB @ RICE . EDU

Christoph Studer
Cornell University

STUDER @ CORNELL . EDU

Abstract
Statistical models of student responses on assessment questions, such as those in homeworks and
exams, enable educators and computer-based personalized learning systems to gain insights into
students’ knowledge using machine learning. Popular student-response models, including the Rasch
model and item response theory models, represent
the probability of a student answering a question
correctly using an affine function of latent factors.
While such models can accurately predict student
responses, their ability to interpret the underlying
knowledge structure (which is certainly nonlinear) is limited. In response, we develop a new,
nonlinear latent variable model that we call the
dealbreaker model, in which a student’s success
probability is determined by their weakest concept
mastery. We develop efficient parameter inference
algorithms for this model using novel methods for
nonconvex optimization. We show that the dealbreaker model achieves comparable or better prediction performance as compared to affine models
with real-world educational datasets. We further
demonstrate that the parameters learned by the
dealbreaker model are interpretable—they provide key insights into which concepts are critical
(i.e., the “dealbreaker”) to answering a question
correctly. We conclude by reporting preliminary
results for a movie-rating dataset, which illustrate the broader applicability of the dealbreaker
model.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A key problem in machine learning-based education is
student-response modeling, i.e., developing principled statistical models that (i) accurately predict unobserved student
responses to questions and (ii) identify the latent concepts
that govern correct or incorrect responses. A wide range
of student-response models have been proposed in the literature, including the Rasch (Rasch, 1993), item response
theory (IRT) (Lord, 1980), knowledge tracing (Corbett &
Anderson, 1994), and factor analysis-based models (Cen
et al., 2006; Pavlik et al., 2009; Gong et al., 2010; Chi et al.,
2011; Bergner et al., 2012; Lan et al., 2014b).
The Rasch model (Rasch, 1993) is simple yet effective for
analyzing student-response data. This model characterizes
the probability of a correct response as a function of two
scalar parameters: the student’s ability and the question’s
difficulty. The Rasch model lays the foundation for the
IRT model (Lord, 1980), which features additional parameters characterizing the discrimination level of the questions across students and the effect of guessing. The multidimensional IRT (MIRT) model (Reckase, 2009) and the
factor analysis-based models expand upon the IRT model by
adding multi-dimensional ability and difficulty parameters
(we refer to the model dimensions as “concepts”).
1.1. Limits of Affine Student–Response Models
A key commonality of all the models described above is
that they are affine—they characterize a student’s probability of success on a question as an affine function of the
student’s knowledge on underlying concepts. While such
models are simple and enable accurate prediction of unobserved student responses, they suffer from a key flaw
known as the “explaining away” phenomenon (Wellman &
Henrion, 1993): Affine models allow weak knowledge of

