Contextual Combinatorial Cascading Bandits

Shuai Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

SHUAILI @ CSE . CUHK . EDU . HK

Baoxiang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

BXWANG @ CSE . CUHK . EDU . HK

Shengyu Zhang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

SYZHANG @ CSE . CUHK . EDU . HK

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

Abstract
We propose the contextual combinatorial cascading bandits, a combinatorial online learning
game, where at each time step a learning agent is
given a set of contextual information, then selects
a list of items, and observes stochastic outcomes
of a prefix in the selected items by some stopping criterion. In online recommendation, the
stopping criterion might be the first item a user selects; in network routing, the stopping criterion might be the first edge blocked in a path.
We consider position discounts in the list order,
so that the agent’s reward is discounted depending on the position where the stopping criterion is
met. We design a UCB-type algorithm, C3 -UCB,
for√this problem, prove an n-step regret bound
Õ( n) in the general setting, and give finer analysis for two special cases. Our work generalizes
existing studies in several directions, including
contextual information, position discounts, and a
more general cascading bandit model. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets demonstrate
the advantage of involving contextual information and position discounts.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) has been extensively studied
in statistics and machine learning. The problem is usually formulated as a system of K base arms whose rewards
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

WEIC @ MICROSOFT. COM

are random samples from unknown distributions with unknown means. The learning agent pulls one arm every time
and tries to minimize the cumulative regret, which is the
difference in cumulative rewards between always pulling
the best arm in expectation and playing according to the agent’s strategy. The problem of MAB has to deal with the
trade-off between exploitation (pulling the best empirical
arm) and exploration (trying other arms which are not sufficiently pulled).
Recently, stochastic combinatorial bandit started to draw
much attention (Gai et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013; Lin
et al., 2014; Gopalan et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2014; Kveton et al., 2014; 2015b;a;c; Lin et al., 2015; Combes et al.,
2015b). At every time step, a learning agent chooses a subset of ground items (super arm) under certain combinatorial constraints. There are several different kinds of feedback: (1) bandit feedback, where the learning agent can
only obtain the reward of the chosen super arm; (2) semibandit feedback, where the learning agent can also obtain
the stochastic outcomes of the all base arms constituting
the chosen super arm; (3) cascading feedback, where the
learning agent can obtain the reward of the chosen super
arm and the weights of some base arms in the chosen super
arm, according to some problem-specific stopping criterion
for observation.
Cascading feedback model fits into many real application
scenarios. For example, in online or mobile recommendation, it is a typical practice that an ordered list (instead of
a single item) is recommended to a user, who usually goes
over the list based on the recommended order and selects
one of her interest to click through. Thus it is reasonable to
assume that items before the clicked item is of no interest
to the user while user’s interest to items after the clicked
item is unclear. Another example is in networking routing,

