Network Morphism

Tao Wei
TAOWEI @ BUFFALO . EDU
Changhu Wang
CHW @ MICROSOFT. COM
Yong Rui
YONGRUI @ MICROSOFT. COM
Chang Wen Chen
CHENCW @ BUFFALO . EDU
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China, 100080
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 14260

Abstract
We present a systematic study on how to morph
a well-trained neural network to a new one so
that its network function can be completely preserved. We define this as network morphism
in this research. After morphing a parent network, the child network is expected to inherit
the knowledge from its parent network and also
has the potential to continue growing into a more
powerful one with much shortened training time.
The first requirement for this network morphism
is its ability to handle diverse morphing types
of networks, including changes of depth, width,
kernel size, and even subnet. To meet this requirement, we first introduce the network morphism equations, and then develop novel morphing algorithms for all these morphing types
for both classic and convolutional neural networks. The second requirement is its ability to
deal with non-linearity in a network. We propose a family of parametric-activation functions
to facilitate the morphing of any continuous nonlinear activation neurons. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets and typical neural networks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed network morphism scheme.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
achieved state-of-the-art results on diverse computer vision
tasks such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015), object detection (Girshick et al., 2014), and semantic segmentation (Long et al., 2015). However, training such a
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Parent Network

Child Network

Figure 1: Illustration of network morphism. The child network is expected to inherit the entire knowledge from the
parent network with the network function preserved. A variety of morphing types are illustrated. The change of segment AC represents the depth morphing: s → s + t; the
inflated node r involves width and kernel size morphing; a
subnet is embedded in segment CD, which is subnet morphing. Complex network morphism can also be achieved
with a combination of these basic morphing operations.
network is very time-consuming. It usually takes weeks or
even months to train an effective deep network, let alone the
exploration of diverse network settings. It is very much desired for these well-trained networks to be directly adopted
for other related applications with minimum retraining.
To accomplish such an ideal goal, we need to systematically study how to morph a well-trained neural network to
a new one with its network function completely preserved.
We call such operations network morphism. Upon completion of such morphism, the child network shall not only inherit the entire knowledge from the parent network, but also
be capable of growing into a more powerful one in much
shortened training time as the process continues on. This is
fundamentally different from existing work related to network knowledge transferring, which either tries to mimic a
parent network’s outputs (Bucilu et al., 2006; Romero et al.,
2014), or pre-trains to facilitate the convergence or adapt to
new datasets with possible total change in network function
(Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014).

