Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic gradient descent
Moritz Hardt
Benjamin Recht
Yoram Singer

MRTZ @ GOOGLE . COM
BRECHT @ BERKELEY. EDU
SINGER @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
We show that parametric models trained by a
stochastic gradient method (SGM) with few iterations have vanishing generalization error. We
prove our results by arguing that SGM is algorithmically stable in the sense of Bousquet and
Elisseeff. Our analysis only employs elementary tools from convex and continuous optimization. We derive stability bounds for both convex and non-convex optimization under standard
Lipschitz and smoothness assumptions.
Applying our results to the convex case, we provide new insights for why multiple epochs of
stochastic gradient methods generalize well in
practice. In the non-convex case, we give a
new interpretation of common practices in neural
networks, and formally show that popular techniques for training large deep models are indeed
stability-promoting. Our findings conceptually
underscore the importance of reducing training
time beyond its obvious benefit.

1. Introduction
The most widely used optimization method in machine
learning practice is stochastic gradient method (SGM).
Stochastic gradient methods aim to minimize the empirical risk of a model by repeatedly computing the gradient of
a loss function on a single training example, or a batch of
few examples, and updating the model parameters accordingly. SGM is scalable, robust, and performs well across
many different domains ranging from smooth and strongly
convex problems to complex non-convex objectives.
In a nutshell, our results establish that: Any model trained
with stochastic gradient method in a reasonable amount of
time attains small generalization error.
As training time is inevitably limited in practice, our reProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

sults help to explain the strong generalization performance
of stochastic gradient methods observed in practice. More
concretely, we bound the generalization error of a model
in terms of the number of iterations that stochastic gradient
method took in order to train the model. Our main analysis tool is to employ the notion of algorithmic stability due
to Bousquet and Elisseeff (2002). We demonstrate that the
stochastic gradient method is stable provided that the objective is relatively smooth and the number of steps taken
is sufficiently small.
It is common in practice to perform a linear number of steps
in the size of the sample and to access each data point multiple times. Our results show in a broad range of settings
that, provided the number of iterations is linear in the number of data points, the generalization error is bounded by
a vanishing function of the sample size. The results hold
true even for complex models with large number of parameters and no explicit regularization term in the objective.
Namely, fast training time by itself is sufficient to prevent
overfitting.
Our bounds are algorithm specific: Since the number of
iterations we allow can be larger than the sample size, an
arbitrary algorithm could easily achieve small training error by memorizing all training data with no generalization
ability whatsoever. In contrast, if the stochastic gradient
method manages to fit the training data in a reasonable
number of iterations, it is guaranteed to generalize.
Conceptually, we show that minimizing training time is not
only beneficial for obvious computational advantages, but
also has the important byproduct of decreasing generalization error. Consequently, it may make sense for practitioners to focus on minimizing training time, for instance, by
designing model architectures for which stochastic gradient method converges fastest to a desired error level.
1.1. Our contributions
Our focus is on generating generalization bounds for models learned with stochastic gradient descent. Recall that the
generalization bound is the expected difference between
the error a model incurs on a training set versus the error incurred on a new data point, sampled from the same

