Efficient Private Empirical Risk Minimization for High-dimensional Learning

Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA 94043

KASIVISW @ GMAIL . COM

Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA 94043

HONGXIA . JIN @ SAMSUNG . COM

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction is a popular approach
for dealing with high dimensional data that leads
to substantial computational savings. Random
projections are a simple and effective method for
universal dimensionality reduction with rigorous
theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we theoretically study the problem of differentially private
empirical risk minimization in the projected subspace (compressed domain). We ask: is it possible to design differentially private algorithms
with small excess risk given access to only projected data? In this paper, we answer this question in affirmative, by showing that for the class
of generalized linear functions, given only the
projected data and the projection matrix, we can
2/3
1/3
obtain excess risk bounds of Õ(w(C)
p /n )
under -differential privacy, and Õ( w(C)/n)
under (, δ)-differential privacy, where n is the
sample size and w(C) is the Gaussian width of
the parameter space C that we optimize over. A
simple consequence of these results is that, for a
large class of ERM problems, in the traditional
setting (i.e., with access to the original data), under -differential privacy, we improve the worstcase risk bounds of (Bassily et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Curse of dimensionality is a well-established obstacle in
machine learning affecting aspects such as the accuracy,
computation time, storage space, and communication cost
of many common tasks. Therefore, a general strategy
for tackling many high-dimensional learning tasks is first
transforming from the data domain to some appropriate
compressed measurement domain, and then performing the
learning task in the measurement domain. This idea has led
to the development of the field of compressed learning (Eldar & Kutyniok, 2012), where the general goal is to perProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

form a machine learning task in the compressed measurement domain with almost the same performance guarantee
as that achievable in the original data domain. Efficiency
gains achievable through compressed learning have been
well documented for variety of common machine learning
tasks (Arriaga & Vempala, 2006; Davenport et al., 2006;
Maillard & Munos, 2009; Fard et al., 2012; Kabán, 2014;
Calderbank et al., 2009; Wright et al., 2009). In addition
to the efficiency gains, these techniques also work successfully in situations where one cannot observe the data domain because collecting data might be difficult or expensive. In this case, by learning in the compressed domain,
one avoids the cost of recovering back the data in the highdimensional domain.
A common approach for dimensionality reduction (compression) is using the technique of random projections (Vempala, 2005; Mahoney, 2011), where the original high-dimensional data is projected onto a lowerdimensional subspace using some appropriately chosen
random matrix. Random projections, such as the popular
Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform and its variants, preserve
the structure of the original data space, and hence can be
used as a way to reduce the cost of the learning process perceptibly, while preserving the performance approximately.
For high-dimensional data, a random projection can lead
to substantial savings in resources such as storage space,
transmission bandwidth, and processing time.
Machine learning algorithms are frequently run on sensitive data, and this has motivated the study of learning algorithms that have good performance guarantees while satisfying a rigorous notion of privacy called differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b). There currently exist differentially private algorithms for many statistical and machinelearning tasks such as classification, regression, PCA, clustering, density estimation, among others. We refer the
reader to recent surveys by Sarwate and Chaudhuri (Sarwate & Chaudhuri, 2013), and by Dwork and Roth (Dwork
& Roth, 2013) for an overview of recent developments in
machine learning with differential privacy.
In this paper, we theoretically study private compressed
learning in the framework of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). In the traditional (uncompressed) empirical
risk minimization framework, we are given n datapoints

