Stability of Controllers for Gaussian Process Forward Models

Julia Vinogradska1,2
JULIA . VINOGRADSKA @ DE . BOSCH . COM
Bastian Bischoff1
BASTIAN . BISCHOFF @ DE . BOSCH . COM
Duy Nguyen-Tuong1
DUY. NGUYEN - TUONG @ DE . BOSCH . COM
Henner Schmidt1
SCHMIDT. HENNER @ GMX . DE
Anne Romer1
FR . ANNEROMER @ GOOGLEMAIL . COM
Jan Peters2,3
MAIL @ JAN - PETERS . NET
1
2
3
Corporate Research, Robert Bosch GmbH; IAS Lab, TU Darmstadt; MPI for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Learning control has become an appealing alternative to the derivation of control laws based on classic control theory. However, a major shortcoming
of learning control is the lack of performance
guarantees which prevents its application in many
real-world scenarios. As a step in this direction,
we provide a stability analysis tool for controllers
acting on dynamics represented by Gaussian processes (GPs). We consider arbitrary Markovian
control policies and system dynamics given as
(i) the mean of a GP, and (ii) the full GP distribution. For the first case, our tool finds a state space
region, where the closed-loop system is provably
stable. In the second case, it is well known that
infinite horizon stability guarantees cannot exist. Instead, our tool analyzes finite time stability.
Empirical evaluations on simulated benchmark
problems support our theoretical results.

1. Introduction
Learning control based on Gaussian process (GP) forward
models has become an established approach in the machine
learning and control theory communities. Many successful
applications impressively demonstrate the efficiency of this
approach (Deisenroth et al., 2015; Engel et al., 2006; Pan
& Theodorou, 2014; Kocijan et al., 2004; Klenske et al.,
2013; Maciejowski & Yang, 2013; Nguyen-Tuong & Peters,
2011). In contrast to classic control theory methods, learning control does not presuppose a detailed understanding of
the underlying dynamics but tries to infer the required information from data. Thus, only very little expert knowledge
about the system dynamics is required and fewer assumpProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

tions, such as a parametric form and parameter estimates,
must be made. Employing GPs as forward models for learning control is particularly appealing since GPs incorporate
uncertainty about the system dynamics.
Unfortunately, performance guarantees do rarely exist for
system dynamics and policies learned from data. An important type of performance guarantee is (asymptotic) stability.
A stability region in the state space ensures, that all trajectories starting in this region converge to the target. Classic
control theory offers a rich variety of stability analysis, e.g.,
for linear, nonlinear, and stochastic systems (Khalil, 2014;
Skogestad & Postlethwaite, 2005; Kushner, 1967; Khasminskii & Milstein, 2011). However, to our best knowledge, no
stability guarantees exist for GP based control. Thus, in contrast to classic control theory, there is no means to assess the
effect of a controller on closed-loop structures with GP forward models. This major shortcoming prevents application
of learned controllers in many real-world scenarios.
As a contribution to overcome this drawback, we present a
tool to check the stability of learned policies for GP closedloop control systems. Two types of dynamics are considered
in this paper: dynamics given as (i) the mean of a GP, and
(ii) the full GP distribution. While the first case results in
a deterministic system, uncertainty is present in the second
case. The notions of stability from deterministic analysis do
not apply here. Especially when uncertainty is unbounded,
Input

Introduced Approach

Output

Learned Controller

Stability
Analysis Tool

Stability
Region

Dynamics GP

Figure 1. We present a tool to analyze stability for a given controller and Gaussian process (GP) dynamics model. Our tool
analytically derives a stability region where convergence to the
goal is guaranteed. Thus, we can provide stability guarantees for
many of the existing GP based learning control approaches.

