Associative Long Short-Term Memory

Ivo Danihelka
Greg Wayne
Benigno Uria
Nal Kalchbrenner
Alex Graves
Google DeepMind

DANIHELKA @ GOOGLE . COM
GREGWAYNE @ GOOGLE . COM
BURIA @ GOOGLE . COM
NALK @ GOOGLE . COM
GRAVESA @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
We investigate a new method to augment recurrent neural networks with extra memory without
increasing the number of network parameters.
The system has an associative memory based on
complex-valued vectors and is closely related to
Holographic Reduced Representations and Long
Short-Term Memory networks. Holographic Reduced Representations have limited capacity: as
they store more information, each retrieval becomes noisier due to interference. Our system
in contrast creates redundant copies of stored information, which enables retrieval with reduced
noise. Experiments demonstrate faster learning
on multiple memorization tasks.

1. Introduction
We aim to enhance LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997), which in recent years has become widely used in sequence prediction, speech recognition and machine translation (Graves, 2013; Graves et al., 2013; Sutskever et al.,
2014). We address two limitations of LSTM. The first
limitation is that the number of memory cells is linked to
the size of the recurrent weight matrices. An LSTM with
Nh memory cells requires a recurrent weight matrix with
O(Nh2 ) weights. The second limitation is that LSTM is
a poor candidate for learning to represent common data
structures like arrays because it lacks a mechanism to index its memory while writing and reading.
To overcome these limitations, recurrent neural networks
have been previously augmented with soft or hard attention mechanisms to external memories (Graves et al., 2014;
Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Joulin & Mikolov, 2015; GrefenProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

stette et al., 2015; Zaremba & Sutskever, 2015). The attention acts as an addressing system that selects memory
locations. The content of the selected memory locations
can be read or modified by the network.
We provide a different addressing mechanism in Associative LSTM, where, like LSTM, an item is stored in a distributed vector representation without locations. Our system implements an associative array that stores key-value
pairs based on two contributions:
1. We combine LSTM with ideas from Holographic Reduced Representations (HRRs) (Plate, 2003) to enable
key-value storage of data.
2. A direct application of the HRR idea leads to very
lossy storage. We use redundant storage to increase
memory capacity and to reduce noise in memory retrieval.
HRRs use a “binding” operator to implement key-value
binding between two vectors (the key and its associated
content). They natively implement associative arrays; as a
byproduct, they can also easily implement stacks, queues,
or lists. Since Holographic Reduced Representations may
be unfamiliar to many readers, Section 2 provides a short
introduction to them and to related vector-symbolic architectures (Kanerva, 2009).
In computing, Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks
(RAID) provided a means to build reliable storage from
unreliable components. We similarly reduce retrieval error inside a holographic representation by using redundant
storage, a construction described in Section 3. We then
combine the redundant associative memory with LSTM in
Section 5. The system can be equipped with a large memory without increasing the number of network parameters.
Our experiments in Section 6 show the benefits of the memory system for learning speed and accuracy.

