Recurrent Orthogonal Networks and Long-Memory Tasks

Mikael Henaff
New York University, Facebook AI Research
Arthur Szlam
Facebook AI Research

MBH 305@ NYU . EDU

ASZLAM @ FACEBOOK . COM

Yann LeCun
New York University, Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Although RNNs have been shown to be powerful tools for processing sequential data, finding
architectures or optimization strategies that allow them to model very long term dependencies
is still an active area of research. In this work,
we carefully analyze two synthetic datasets originally outlined in (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) which are used to evaluate the ability of
RNNs to store information over many time steps.
We explicitly construct RNN solutions to these
problems, and using these constructions, illuminate both the problems themselves and the way in
which RNNs store different types of information
in their hidden states. These constructions furthermore explain the success of recent methods
that specify unitary initializations or constraints
on the transition matrices.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are powerful models
which are naturally suited to processing sequential data.
They can maintain a hidden state which encodes information about previous elements in the sequence. For a classical version of RNN (Elman, 1990), at every timestep, the
hidden state is updated as a function of both the input and
the current hidden state. In theory, this recursive procedure
allows these models to store complex signals for arbitrarily
long timescales.
However, in practice RNNs are considered difficult to train
due to the so-called vanishing and exploding gradient problems (Bengio et al., 1994). These problems arise when the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YANN @ CS . NYU . EDU

spectral norm of the transition matrix is significantly different than 1, or due to the non-linear transition functions. If
the spectral norm of the transition matrix is greater than 1,
the gradients will grow exponentially in magnitude during
backpropagation, which is known as the exploding gradient problem. If the spectral norm is less than 1, the gradients will vanish exponentially quickly, which is known as
the vanishing gradient problem. Recently, a simple strategy of clipping gradients has been introduced, and has
proved effective in addressing the exploding gradient problem (Mikolov, 2012). The problem of vanishing gradients
has shown itself to be more difficult, and various strategies
have been proposed over the years to address it. One very
successful approach, known as Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) units (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), has been
to modify the architecture of the hidden units by introducing gates which explicitly control the flow of information
as a function of both the state and the input. Specifically,
the signal stored in a hidden unit must be explicitly erased
by a forget gate and is otherwise stored indefinitely. This
allows information to be carried over long periods of time.
LSTMs have become very successful in applications to language modeling, machine translation, and speech recognition (Zaremba et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014; Graves
et al., 2013). Other methods have been proposed to deal
with learning long-term dependencies, such as adding a
separate contextual memory (Mikolov et al., 2015), stabilizing activations (Krueger & Mimesevic, 2015) or using more sophisticated optimization schemes (Martens &
Sutskever, 2011). Two recent methods propose to directly
address the vanishing gradient problem by either initializing or parameterizing the transition matrix with orthogonal
or unitary matrices (Arjovsky et al., 2015; Le et al., 2015).
These works have used a set of synthetic problems (originally outlined in (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) or
variants thereof) for testing the ability of methods to learn
long-term dependencies. These synthetic problems are

