A Convolutional Attention Network
for Extreme Summarization of Source Code
Miltiadis Allamanis
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, United Kingdom

M . ALLAMANIS @ ED . AC . UK

Hao Peng†
PENGHAO . PKU @ GMAIL . COM
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Charles Sutton
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, United Kingdom

Abstract
Attention mechanisms in neural networks have
proved useful for problems in which the input and
output do not have fixed dimension. Often there
exist features that are locally translation invariant
and would be valuable for directing the model’s
attention, but previous attentional architectures
are not constructed to learn such features specifically. We introduce an attentional neural network
that employs convolution on the input tokens to
detect local time-invariant and long-range topical
attention features in a context-dependent way. We
apply this architecture to the problem of extreme
summarization of source code snippets into short,
descriptive function name-like summaries. Using
those features, the model sequentially generates
a summary by marginalizing over two attention
mechanisms: one that predicts the next summary
token based on the attention weights of the input
tokens and another that is able to copy a code
token as-is directly into the summary. We demonstrate our convolutional attention neural network’s
performance on 10 popular Java projects showing
that it achieves better performance compared to
previous attentional mechanisms.

1. Introduction
Deep learning for structured prediction problems, in which
a sequence (or more complex structure) of predictions need
to be made given an input sequence, presents special difficulties, because not only are the input and output high†
Work partially done while author was as an intern at the
University of Edinburgh.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

CSUTTON @ INF. ED . AC . UK

dimensional, but the dimensionality is not fixed in advance.
Recent research has tackled these problems using neural
models of attention (Mnih et al., 2014), which have had
great recent successes in machine translation (Bahdanau
et al., 2015) and image captioning (Xu et al., 2015). Attentional models have been successful because they separate
two different concerns: predicting which input locations are
most relevant to each location of the output; and actually
predicting an output location given the most relevant inputs.
In this paper, we suggest that many domains contain
translation-invariant features that can help to determine
the most useful locations for attention. For example, in
a research paper, the sequence of words “in this paper, we
suggest” often indicates that the next few words will be
important to the topic of the paper. As another example,
suppose a neural network is trying to predict the name of
a method in the Java programming language from its body.
If we know that this method name begins with get and
the method body contains a statement return ____ ; ,
then whatever token fills in the blank is likely to be useful
for predicting the rest of the method name. Previous architectures for neural attention are not constructed to learn
translation-invariant features specifically.
We introduce a neural convolutional attentional model, that
includes a convolutional network within the attention mechanism itself. Convolutional models are a natural choice for
learning translation-invariant features while using only a
small number of parameters and for this reason have been
highly successful in non-attentional models for images (LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and text classification (Blunsom et al., 2014). But to our knowledge
they have not been applied within an attentional mechanism.
Our model uses a set of convolutional layers — without
any pooling — to detect patterns in the input and identify
“interesting” locations where attention should be focused.
We apply this network to an “extreme” summarization prob-

