Texture Networks: Feed-forward Synthesis of Textures and Stylized Images

Dmitry Ulyanov
Computer Vision Group, Skoltech & Yandex, Russia

DMITRY. ULYANOV @ SKOLTECH . RU

Vadim Lebedev
Computer Vision Group, Skoltech & Yandex, Russia

VADIM . LEBEDEV @ SKOLTECH . RU

Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Victor Lempitsky
Computer Vision Group, Skoltech, Russia

Abstract
Gatys et al. recently demonstrated that deep networks can generate beautiful textures and stylized images from a single texture example. However, their methods require a slow and memoryconsuming optimization process. We propose
here an alternative approach that moves the computational burden to a learning stage. Given a
single example of a texture, our approach trains
compact feed-forward convolutional networks to
generate multiple samples of the same texture of
arbitrary size and to transfer artistic style from
a given image to any other image. The resulting networks are remarkably light-weight and
can generate textures of quality comparable to
Gatys et al., but hundreds of times faster. More
generally, our approach highlights the power
and flexibility of generative feed-forward models
trained with complex and expressive loss functions.

1. Introduction
Several recent works demonstrated the power of deep neural networks in the challenging problem of generating images. Most of these proposed generative networks that
produce images as output, using feed-forward calculations
from a random seed; however, very impressive results were
obtained by (Gatys et al., 2015a;b) by using networks descriptively, as image statistics. Their idea is to reduce image generation to the problem of sampling at random from
the set of images that match a certain statistics. In texture
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

VEDALDI @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

LEMPITSKY @ SKOLTECH . RU

synthesis (Gatys et al., 2015a), the reference statistics is
extracted from a single example of a visual texture, and the
goal is to generate further examples of that texture. In style
transfer (Gatys et al., 2015b), the goal is to match simultaneously the visual style of a first image, captured using
some low-level statistics, and the visual content of a second image, captured using higher-level statistics. In this
manner, the style of an image can be replaced with the one
of another without altering the overall semantic content of
the image.
Matching statistics works well in practice, is conceptually
simple, and demonstrates that off-the-shelf neural networks
trained for generic tasks such as image classification can
be re-used for image generation. However, the approach
of (Gatys et al., 2015a;b) has certain shortcomings too. Being based on an iterative optimization procedure, it requires
backpropagation to gradually change the values of the pixels until the desired statistics is matched. This iterative procedure requires several seconds in order to generate a relatively small image using a high-end GPU, while scaling
to large images is problematic because of high memory requirements. By contrast, feed-forward generation networks
can be expected to be much more efficient because they require a single evaluation of the network and do not incur in
the cost of backpropagation.
In this paper we look at the problem of achieving the synthesis and stylization capability of descriptive networks using feed-forward generation networks. Our contribution is
threefold. First, we show for the first time that a generative
approach can produce textures of the quality and diversity
comparable to the descriptive method. Second, we propose
a generative method that is two orders of magnitude faster
and one order of magnitude more memory efficient than the
descriptive one. Using a single forward pass in networks
that are remarkably compact make our approach suitable
for video-related and possibly mobile applications. Third,

