Black-box Optimization with a Politician

Sébastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research

SEBUBECK @ MICROSOFT. COM

Yin-Tat Lee
MIT

YINTAT @ MIT. EDU

Abstract
We propose a new framework for black-box convex optimization which is well-suited for situations where gradient computations are expensive. We derive a new method for this framework which leverages several concepts from convex optimization, from standard first-order methods (e.g. gradient descent or quasi-Newton methods) to analytical centers (i.e. minimizers of selfconcordant barriers). We demonstrate empirically that our new technique compares favorably
with state of the art algorithms (such as BFGS).

1. Introduction
In standard black-box convex optimization (Nemirovski
and Yudin, 1983; Nesterov, 2004; Bubeck, 2015) first-order
methods interact with an oracle: given a query point x, the
oracle reports the value and gradient of the underlying objective function f at x. In this paper we propose to replace
the oracle by a politician. Instead of answering the original
query x the politician changes the question and answers a
new query y which is guaranteed to be better than the original query x in the sense that f (y) ≤ f (x). The newly
selected query y also depends on the history of queries that
were made to the politician. Formally we introduce the following definition (for sake of simplicty we write ∇f (x) for
either a gradient or a subgradient of f at x).
Definition 1 Let X ⊂ Rn and f : X → R. A politician
n k
Φ for f is a mapping from X × ∪∞
k=0 (X × R × R ) to
X such that for any k ≥ 0, x ∈ X , h ∈ (X × R × Rn )k
one has f (Φ(x, h)) ≤ f (x). Furthermore when queried at
x with history h a politician for f also output f (Φ(x, h))
and ∇f (Φ(x, h)) (in order to not overload notation we do
not include these outputs in the range of Φ).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Let us clarify the interaction of a first-order method with
a politician. Note that we refer to the couple (first-order
method, politician) as the algorithm. Let M : ∪∞
k=0 (X ×
R × Rn )k → X be a first-order method and Φ a politician
for some function f : X → R. The course of the algorithm (M, Φ) then goes as follows: at iteration k + 1 one
first calculates the method’s query point xk+1 = M (hk )
(with h0 = ∅), then one calculates the politician’s new
query point yk+1 = Φ(xk+1 , hk ) and the first order information at this point (f (yk+1 ), ∇f (yk+1 )), and finally
one updates the history with this new information hk+1 =
(hk , (yk+1 , f (yk+1 ), ∇f (yk+1 ))). Note that a standard oracle simply corresponds to a politician O for f such that
O(x, h) = (x, f (x), ∇f (x)) (in particular the algorithm
(M, O) is the usual algorithm corresponding to the firstorder method M ).
The philosophy of the above definition is that it gives in
some sense an automatic way to combine different optimization algorithms. Say for example that we wish to combine the ellipsoid method with gradient descent. One way
to do so is to design an “ellipsoidal politician”: the politician keeps track of a feasible ellipsoidal region based on
the previously computed gradients, and when asked with
the query x the politician chooses as a new query y the result of a line-search on the line between x and the center
of current ellipsoid. Gradient descent with this ellipsoidal
politician would then replace the step x ← x − η∇f (x)
by x ← y − η∇f (y). The hope is that in practice such a
combination would integrate the fast incremental progress
of gradient descent with the geometrical progress of the ellipsoid method.
In this paper we focus on unconstrained convex optimization. We are particularly interested in situations where calculating a (sub)gradient has superlinear complexity (i.e.,
 n) such as in logistic regression and semidefinite programming. In such cases it is natural to try to make the
most out of the computed gradients by incorporating geometric reasoning (such as in the ellipsoid method). We
do so by introducing the geometric politician (Section 3),
which is based on a combination of the recent ideas of

