Differentially Private Policy Evaluation

Borja Balle
Lancaster University

B . DEBALLEPIGEM @ LANCASTER . AC . UK

Maziar Gomrokchi
Doina Precup
McGill University

MGOMRO @ CS . MCGILL . CA
DPRECUP @ CS . MCGILL . CA

Abstract
We present the first differentially private algorithms for reinforcement learning, which apply
to the task of evaluating a fixed policy. We establish two approaches for achieving differential
privacy, provide a theoretical analysis of the privacy and utility of the two algorithms, and show
promising results on simple empirical examples.

1. Introduction
Learning how to make decisions under uncertainty is becoming paramount in many practical applications, such as
medical treatment design, energy management, adaptive
user interfaces, recommender systems etc. Reinforcement
learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998) provides a variety of algorithms capable of handling such tasks. However, in many
practical applications, aside from obtaining good predictive performance, one might also require that the data used
to learn the predictor be kept confidential. This is especially true in medical applications, where patient confidentiality is very important, and in other applications which
are user-centric (such as recommender systems). Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006) is a very active research
area, originating from cryptography, but which has now
been embraced by the machine learning community. DP
is a formal model of privacy used to design mechanisms
that reduce the amount of information leaked by the result of queries to a database containing sensitive information about multiple users (Dwork, 2006). Many supervised learning algorithms have differentially private versions, including logistic regression (Chaudhuri & Monteleoni, 2009; Chaudhuri et al., 2011), support vector machines (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Rubinstein et al., 2012;
Jain & Thakurta, 2013), and the lasso (Thakurta & Smith,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

2013). However, differential privacy for reinforcement
learning tasks has not been tackled yet, except for the simpler case of bandit problems (Smith & Thakurta, 2013;
Mishra & Thakurta, 2015; Tossou & Dimitrakakis, 2016).
In this paper, we tackle differential privacy for reinforcement learning algorithms for the full Markov Decision Process (MDP) setting. We develop differentially private algorithms for the problem of policy evaluation, in which a
given way of behaving has to be evaluated quantitatively.
We start with the batch, first-visit Monte Carlo approach to
policy evaluation, which is well understood and closest to
regression algorithms, and provide two differentially private versions, which come with formal privacy proofs as
well as guarantees on the quality of the solution obtained.
Both algorithms work by injecting Gaussian noise into the
parameters vector for the value functions, but they differ
in the definition of the noise amount. Our privacy analysis
techniques are related to previous output perturbation for
empirical risk minimization (ERM), but there are some domain specific challenges that need to be addressed. In particular, the notion of neighbouring datasets we use is motivated by medical applications where individual patients
generate full trajectories. In this case two datasets differing in a single patient yield regression problems differing
in multiple correlated regression targets. Our utility analysis identifies parameters of the MDP that control how easy
it is to maintain privacy in each case. The theoretical utility analysis, as well as some illustrative experiments, show
that the accuracy of the private algorithms does not suffer
(compared to usual Monte Carlo) when the data set is large.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2
we provide background notation and results on differential privacy and Monte Carlo methods for policy evaluation. Sec. 3 presents our proposed algorithms. The privacy
analysis and the utility analysis are outlined in Sec. 4 and
Sec. 5 respectively. Detailed proofs for both of these sections are given in the Supplementary Material. In Sec. 6 we
provide empirical illustrations of the scaling behaviour of

