Differential Geometric Regularization for Supervised Learning of Classifiers

Qinxun Bai
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA

QINXUN @ CS . BU . EDU

Steven Rosenberg
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA

SR @ MATH . BU . EDU

Zheng Wu
The Mathworks Inc. Natick, MA 01760 USA

WUZHENG @ BU . EDU

Stan Sclaroff
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA

SCLAROFF @ BU . EDU

Abstract
We study the problem of supervised learning for
both binary and multiclass classification from a
unified geometric perspective. In particular, we
propose a geometric regularization technique to
find the submanifold corresponding to an estimator of the class probability P (y|x). The regularization term measures the volume of this submanifold, based on the intuition that overfitting
produces rapid local oscillations and hence large
volume of the estimator. This technique can be
applied to regularize any classification function
that satisfies two requirements: firstly, an estimator of the class probability can be obtained;
secondly, first and second derivatives of the class
probability estimator can be calculated. In experiments, we apply our regularization technique
to standard loss functions for classification, our
RBF-based implementation compares favorably
to widely used regularization methods for both
binary and multiclass classification.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning for classification, the idea of regularization seeks a balance between a perfect description of
the training data and the potential for generalization to unseen data. Most regularization techniques are defined in the
form of penalizing some functional norms. For instance,
one of the most successful classification methods, the support vector machine (SVM) (Vapnik, 1998; Schölkopf &
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Smola, 2002) and its variants (Bartlett et al., 2006; Steinwart, 2005), use a RKHS norm as a regularizer. While
functional norm based regularization is widely-used in machine learning, we feel that there is important local geometric information overlooked by this approach.
In many real world classification problems, if the feature
space is meaningful, then all samples that are locally within
a small enough neighborhood of a training sample should
have class probability P (y|x) similar to the training sample. For instance, a small enough perturbation of RGB
values at some pixels of a human face image should not
change dramatically the likelihood of correct identification of this image during face recognition. However, such
“small local oscillations” of the class probability are not
explicitly incorporated by penalizing commonly used functional norms. For instance, as reported by Goodfellow et al.
(2014), linear models and their combinations can be easily fooled by barely perceptible perturbations of a correctly
predicted image, even though a L2 regularizer is adopted.
Geometric regularization techniques have also been studied
in machine learning. Belkin et al. (2006) employed geometric regularization in the form of the L2 norm of the gradient magnitude supported on a manifold. This approach
exploits the geometry of the marginal distribution P (x)
for semi-supervised learning, rather than the geometry of
the class probability P (y|x). Other related geometric regularization methods are motivated by the success of level
set methods in image segmentation (Cai & Sowmya, 2007;
Varshney & Willsky, 2010) and Euler’s Elastica in image
processing (Lin et al., 2012; 2015). In particular, the Level
Learning Set (Cai & Sowmya, 2007) combines a counting
function of training samples and a geometric penalty on
the surface area of the decision boundary. The Geometric Level Set (Varshney & Willsky, 2010) generalizes this

