Markov-modulated Marked Poisson Processes for Check-in Data
Jiangwei Pan1
PANJIANGWEI @ GMAIL . COM
Vinayak Rao2
VARAO @ PURDUE . EDU
Pankaj K. Agarwal1
PANKAJ @ CS . DUKE . EDU
Alan E. Gelfand3
ALAN @ STAT. DUKE . EDU
1
2
3
Dept. of Comp. Sci., Duke University, Dept. of Statistics, Purdue University, Dept. of Statistical Sci., Duke Univ.

Abstract
We develop continuous-time probabilistic models to study trajectory data consisting of times
and locations of user ‘check-ins’. We model
the data as realizations of a marked point process, with intensity and mark-distribution modulated by a latent Markov jump process (MJP).
We also include user-heterogeneity in our model
by assigning each user a vector of ‘preferred locations’. Our model extends latent Dirichlet allocation by dropping the bag-of-words assumption
and operating in continuous time. We show how
an appropriate choice of priors allows efficient
posterior inference. Our experiments demonstrate the usefulness of our approach by comparing with various baselines on a variety of tasks.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of sensing technologies, trajectory
data are being collected in scenarios such as traffic monitoring (Wang et al., 2014; Westgate et al., 2013), surveillance
systems (Wang et al., 2011), and mobile and social network
check-in data (Zhang et al., 2014; Gao et al., 2012a). A trajectory is a path taken by an object over a time period, with
data consisting of observations at a discrete, often irregular,
sequence of times. In the simplest case, each observation
consists of a time and a location (latitude and longitude); it
can also include activity and user information. The observations may be noisy, due to measurement error or human
perturbation. In many cases, the trajectory sample points
are sparse, with large gaps between bursts of observations.
Furthermore, the rate of observations can vary along the
trajectory, and can depend on the the user and the location
of the trajectory.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Visualizing
the check-in locations (in the US)
of 500 random
users from the
FourSquare dataset
(Gao et al., 2012a).

Our focus in this paper is on user check-in data. In particular, we consider a dataset of FourSquare check-ins (Gao
et al., 2012a) (see Figure 1). This smartphone-based social
media tool allows individuals to publicly register visits to
interesting places: a check-in is a record of such a visit,
consisting typically of a timestamp, a location (latitude and
longitude), and additional information such as the name of
a place, a category (e.g. restaurant or museum) or a userrating. Unlike traditional trajectory data, check-in observations are not passively collected (say, every hour); instead,
the times of observations are informative about user behavior. Consequently, observation times are irregular and typically alternate between bursty and sparse episodes. Our
data is at the individual level, consisting of snapshots of individual trajectories over time intervals. The observations
of each individual form a sequence of check-in times, each
with an associated location.
Given a collection of trajectories from the same spatial domain, it is of interest to learn shared underlying patterns.
For check-in data, such information can include activity
hotspots (e.g. big cities, tourist attractions, restaurants),
transition rates across different hotspots and nature of activity in different regions. The shared patterns can assist
recommendation systems, managing traffic, identifying unusual activity patterns, understanding factors that lead to
the success or failure of a business, as well as just to summarize a large collection of activity data.
We approach the problem of identifying shared patterns
by proposing a realistic generative model for the check-in
data and performing posterior inference for the model. We
model check-ins as local excursions about a latent state:
e.g., one might visit a restaurant in Chicago, Chicago be-

