Large-Margin Softmax Loss for Convolutional Neural Networks

Weiyang Liu1†
WYLIU @ PKU . EDU . CN
Yandong Wen2†
WEN . YANDONG @ MAIL . SCUT. EDU . CN
Zhiding Yu3?
YZHIDING @ ANDREW. CMU . EDU
Meng Yang4?
YANG . MENG @ SZU . EDU . CN
1
2
School of ECE, Peking University School of EIE, South China University of Technology
3
Dept. of ECE, Carnegie Mellon University 4 College of CS & SE, Shenzhen University

Abstract
Cross-entropy loss together with softmax is arguably one of the most common used supervision components in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Despite its simplicity, popularity
and excellent performance, the component does
not explicitly encourage discriminative learning
of features. In this paper, we propose a generalized large-margin softmax (L-Softmax) loss
which explicitly encourages intra-class compactness and inter-class separability between learned
features. Moreover, L-Softmax not only can adjust the desired margin but also can avoid overfitting. We also show that the L-Softmax loss can
be optimized by typical stochastic gradient descent. Extensive experiments on four benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the deeply-learned features with L-softmax loss become more discriminative, hence significantly boosting the performance on a variety of visual classification and
verification tasks.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have significantly boosted the state-of-the-art performance in many visual classification tasks such as object recognition, (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Sermanet et al.,
2014; He et al., 2015b;a), face verification (Taigman et al.,
2014; Sun et al., 2014; 2015) and hand-written digit recognition (Wan et al., 2013). The layered learning architecture,
together with convolution and pooling which carefully extract features from local to global, renders the strong visual representation ability of CNNs as well as their current
significant positions in large-scale visual recognition tasks.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Training
Data

Convolutional Feature Learning

Convolution
Units

Fully Connected Layer
(Classifier)

Fully Connected Layer
(Feature Extraction)

Softmax
Function

Cross-entropy
Loss

Softmax Loss

Figure 1. Standard CNNs can be viewed as convolutional feature
learning machines that are supervised by the softmax loss.

Facing the increasingly more complex data, CNNs have
continuously been improved with deeper structures (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015), smaller
strides (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) and new non-linear
activations (Goodfellow et al., 2013; Nair & Hinton, 2010;
He et al., 2015b). While benefiting from the strong learning ability, CNNs also have to face the crucial issue of
overfilling. Considerable effort such as large-scale training data (Russakovsky et al., 2014), dropout (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012), data augmentation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Szegedy et al., 2015), regularization (Hinton et al., 2012;
Srivastava et al., 2014; Wan et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al.,
2013) and stochastic pooling (Zeiler & Fergus, 2013) has
been put to address the issue.
A recent trend towards learning with even stronger features
is to reinforce CNNs with more discriminative information.
Intuitively, the learned features are good if their intra-class
compactness and inter-class separability are simultaneously maximized. While this may not be easy due to the inherent large intra-class variations in many tasks, the strong
representation ability of CNNs make it possible to learn
invariant features towards this direction. Inspired by such
idea, the contrastive loss (Hadsell et al., 2006) and triplet
loss (Schroff et al., 2015) were proposed to enforce extra
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability. A con†

Authors contributed equally. ? Authors for corresponding.

