Starting Small – Learning with Adaptive Sample Sizes

Hadi Daneshmand
Aurelien Lucchi
Thomas Hofmann
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
For many machine learning problems, data is
abundant and it may be prohibitive to make multiple passes through the full training set. In this
context, we investigate strategies for dynamically
increasing the effective sample size, when using
iterative methods such as stochastic gradient descent. Our interest is motivated by the rise of
variance-reduced methods, which achieve linear
convergence rates that scale favorably for smaller
sample sizes. Exploiting this feature, we show
– theoretically and empirically – how to obtain
significant speed-ups with a novel algorithm that
reaches statistical accuracy on an n-sample in 2n,
instead of n log n steps.

1. Introduction
In empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1998) the
training set S is used to define a sample risk RS , which is
then minimized with regard to a pre-defined function class.
One effectively equates learning algorithms with optimization algorithms. However, for all practical purposes an approximate solution of RS will be sufficient, as long as the
optimization error is small relative to the statistical accuracy at sample size n := |S|. This is important for massive data sets, where optimization to numerical precision is
infeasible. Instead of performing early stopping on blackbox optimization, one ought to understand the trade-offs
between statistical and computational accuracy, cf. (Chandrasekaran & Jordan, 2013). In this paper, we investigate a
much neglected facet of this topic, namely how to dynamically control the effective sample size in optimization.
Many large-scale optimization algorithms are iterative:
they use sampled or aggregated data to perform a sequence
of update steps. This includes the popular family of graProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

HADI . DANESHMAND @ INF. ETHZ . CH
AURELIEN . LUCCHI @ INF. ETHZ . CH
THOMAS . HOFMANN @ INF. ETHZ . CH

dient descent methods. Often, the computational complexity increases with the size of the training sample, e.g. in
steepest-descent, where the cost of a gradient computation
scales with n. Does one really need a highly accurate gradient though, in particular in the early phase of optimization?
Why not use subsets Tt ⊆ S which are increased in size
with the iteration count t, matching-up statistical accuracy
with optimization accuracy in a dynamic manner? This is
the general program we pursue in this paper. In order to
make this idea concrete and to reach competitive results,
we focus on a recent variant of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), which is known as SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014). As
we will show, this algorithm has a particularly interesting
property in how its convergence rate depends on n.
1.1. Empirical Risk Minimization
Formally, we assume that training examples x ∈ S ⊆ X
have been drawn i.i.d. from some underlying, but unknown
probability distribution P. We fix a function class F
parametrized by weight vectors w ∈ Rd and define the expected risk as R(w) := Efx (w), where f is an x-indexed
family of loss functions, often convex. We denote the minimum and the minimizer of R(w) over F by R∗ and w∗ ,
respectively. Given that P is unknown, ERM suggests to
rely on the empirical (or sample) risk with regard to S
RS (w) :=

1 X
fx (w), wS∗ := arg min RS (w) . (1)
n
w∈F
x∈S

Note that one may absorb a regularizer in the definition of
the loss fx .
1.2. Generalization bounds
The relation between w∗ and wS∗ has been widely studied
in the literature on learning theory. It is usually analysed
with the help of uniform convergence bounds that take the
generic form (Boucheron et al., 2005)

ES


sup |R(w) − RS (w)| ≤ H(n) ,

w∈F

(2)

