On the Consistency of Feature Selection With Lasso for Non-linear Targets

Yue Zhang†
Soumya Ray‡
Weihong Guo†
†
Department of Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Statistics
‡
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA

Abstract
An important question in feature selection is
whether a selection strategy recovers the “true”
set of features, given enough data. We study this
question in the context of the popular Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (Lasso)
feature selection strategy. In particular, we consider the scenario when the model is misspecified
so that the learned model is linear while the underlying real target is nonlinear. Surprisingly, we
prove that under certain conditions, Lasso is still
able to recover the correct features in this case.
We also carry out numerical studies to empirically verify the theoretical results and explore the
necessity of the conditions under which the proof
holds.

1. Introduction
Feature selection is an extremely important part of machine learning algorithms. Finding a good set of features
reduces overfitting, improves robustness to noise and enables faster convergence to the target. Various strategies
have been proposed in the literature for feature selection,
including filter-based, wrapper-based and embedded methods. In this work, we are interested in embedded feature
selection methods. Here, the learning objective for a classifier is modified by introducing an extra term which typically encourages “sparsity” in the solution. If the hypothesis space being explored is linear, this means that many
coefficients associated with the features will be zero. Thus
they will be eliminated from the learned model.
One of the most well known examples of the embedded approach is the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection OpProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YUE . ZHANG 13@ CASE . EDU
SRAY @ CASE . EDU
WEIHONG . GUO @ CASE . EDU

erator, or Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996). In the Lasso, feature
sparsity is encouraged through the addition of a λkwk1
term, where λ is a coefficient that trades off the importance of the loss and Lasso terms. This L1 norm term
is the best smooth approximation to the L0 norm, which
directly counts nonzero feature coefficients. Further, the
resulting optimization problem remains convex if the loss
term is convex, so that there is a well-defined global optimum. Finally, recent advances in convex optimization have
made great strides in designing efficient and effective solution methods for objective functions extended with the
Lasso term (Boyd, 2010). As a result, the Lasso is one of
the most widely used embedded feature selection strategies
in machine learning, and has consistently shown good empirical results.
In this paper, we are interested in theoretically characterizing the behavior of the Lasso. For any feature selection
strategy, a key question is whether, given enough data, it
can recover the “true” underlying set of features for different target concepts. This question can be expressed through
selection consistency: given enough data, can we be sure
that the set of nonzero coefficients in the learned solution
will be the same as that in the target? Selection consistency
is clearly a good property to be able to guarantee for a feature selection strategy.
Typically, we are interested in the selection consistency of
a feature selection technique under model misspecification.
After all, in general we do not know what the target concept
looks like. Thus in general, the hypothesis space explored
during learning may not contain the target. A key question
then is whether a feature selection strategy can be selection
consistent even in this case.
In this work, we focus on the Lasso feature selection operator, when the hypothesis space is linear (commonly used
in many machine learning applications), and ask if the procedure is selection consistent when the underlying target is
nonlinear. Building on prior work (Brillinger, 1982; Plan
& Vershynin, 2015), we prove that, for certain data dis-

