Learning Simple Algorithms from Examples

Wojciech Zaremba§
New York University

WOJ . ZAREMBA @ GMAIL . COM

Tomas Mikolov Armand Joulin
Facebook AI Research

Rob Fergus

Abstract
We present an approach for learning simple algorithms such as copying, multi-digit addition
and single digit multiplication directly from examples. Our framework consists of a set of interfaces, accessed by a controller. Typical interfaces are 1-D tapes or 2-D grids that hold the input and output data. For the controller, we explore a range of neural network-based models
which vary in their ability to abstract the underlying algorithm from training instances and generalize to test examples with many thousands of
digits. The controller is trained using Q-learning
with several enhancements and we show that the
bottleneck is in the capabilities of the controller
rather than in the search incurred by Q-learning.

1. Introduction
Many every day tasks require a multi-step interaction with
the world. For example, picking an apple from a tree requires visual localization of the apple; extending the arm
and then fine muscle control, guided by visual feedback,
to pluck it from the tree. While each individual procedure
is not complex, the task nevertheless requires careful sequencing of operations across both visual and motor systems.
This paper explores how machines can learn algorithms involving a similar compositional structure. Since our emphasis is on learning the correct sequence of operations,
we consider the domain of arithmetic where the operations
themselves are very simple. For example, although learning to add two digits is straightforward, solving addition
of two multi-digit numbers requires precise coordination
of this operation with movement over the sequence and
§

The author is now at OpenAI.
rd

Proceedings of the 33 International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

{TMIKOLOV, AJOULIN , ROBFERGUS}@ FB . COM

recording of the carry. We explore a variety of algorithms
in this domain, including complex tasks involving addition
and multiplication.
Our approach formalizes the notion of a central controller
that interacts with the world via a set of interfaces, appropriate to the task at hand. The controller is a neural
network model which must learn to control the interfaces,
via a set of discrete actions (e.g. “move input tape left”,
“read”, “write symbol to output tape”, “write nothing this
time step” ) to produce the correct output for given input
patterns. Specifically, we train the controller from large
sets of examples of input and output patterns using reinforcement learning. Our reward signal is sparse, only being
received when the model emits the correct symbol on the
output tape.
We consider two separate settings. In the first, we provide
supervision in the form of ground truth actions. In the second, we train only with input-output pairs (i.e. no supervision over actions). While we are able to solve all the tasks
in the latter case, the supervised setting provides insights
about the model limitations and an upper bound on the performance. We evaluate our model on sequences far longer
than those present during training. Surprisingly, we find
that controllers with even modest capacity to recall previous states can easily overfit the short training sequences
and not generalize to the test examples, even if the correct
actions are provided. Even with an appropriate controller,
off-the-shelf Q-learning fails on the majority of our tasks.
We therefore introduce a series of modifications that dramatically improve performance. These include: (i) a novel
dynamic discount term that makes the reward invariant to
the sequence length; (ii) an extra penalty that aids generalization and (iii) the deployment of Watkins Q-lambda (Sutton & Barto, 1998).

2. Model
Our model consists of an RNN-based controller that accesses the environment through a series of pre-defined in-

