Factored Temporal Sigmoid Belief Networks for Sequence Learning

Jiaming Song†
JIAMING . TSONG @ GMAIL . COM
Zhe Gan‡
ZHE . GAN @ DUKE . EDU
Lawrence Carin‡
LCARIN @ DUKE . EDU
†
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Abstract
Deep conditional generative models are developed to simultaneously learn the temporal dependencies of multiple sequences. The model is designed by introducing a three-way weight tensor
to capture the multiplicative interactions between
side information and sequences. The proposed
model builds on the Temporal Sigmoid Belief
Network (TSBN), a sequential stack of Sigmoid
Belief Networks (SBNs). The transition matrices
are further factored to reduce the number of parameters and improve generalization. When side
information is not available, a general framework
for semi-supervised learning based on the proposed model is constituted, allowing robust sequence classification. Experimental results show
that the proposed approach achieves state-of-theart predictive and classification performance on
sequential data, and has the capacity to synthesize sequences, with controlled style transitioning and blending.

1. Introduction
The Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is a wellknown undirected generative model with state-of-the-art
performance on various problems. It serves as a building block for many deep generative models, such as the
Deep Belief Network (DBN) (Hinton et al., 2006) and the
Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM) (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009). Other variants of the RBM have been used for
modeling discrete time series data, such as human motion
(Taylor et al., 2006), videos (Sutskever et al., 2009), and
weather prediction (Mittelman et al., 2014). Among these
variants is the Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

(CRBM) (Taylor et al., 2006), where the hidden and visible states at the current time step are dependent on directed
connections from observations at the last few time steps.
Most RBM-based models use Contrastive Divergence (CD)
(Hinton, 2002) for efficient learning.
Recently, there has been a surging interest in deep directed
generative models, with applications in both static and dynamic data. In particular, advances in variational methods
(Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014) have yielded scalable and efficient learning
and inference for such models, avoiding poor inference
speed caused by the “explaining away” effect (Hinton et al.,
2006). One directed graphical model that is related to the
RBM is the Sigmoid Belief Network (SBN) (Neal, 1992).
The Temporal Sigmoid Belief Network (TSBN)(Gan et al.,
2015c) is a fully directed generative model for discretely
sampled time-series data, defined by a sequential stack of
SBNs. The hidden state for each SBN is inherited from the
states of the previous SBNs in the sequence. The TSBN can
be regarded as a generalization of Hidden Markov Models (HMM), with compact hidden state representations, or
as a generalization of Linear Dynamical Systems (LDS),
characterized by non-linear dynamics. The model can be
utilized to analyze many kinds of data, e.g., binary, realvalued, and counts, and has demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in many tasks.
However, the TSBN exhibits certain limitations, in that it
does not discriminate different types of sequences when
training, nor does it utilize (often available) side information during generation. For example, in the case of modeling human motion, the TSBN does not regard “walking”
and “running” as different motions, and the style of generated motions is not controlled. To allow for conditional
generation, we first propose a straightforward modification of the TSBN, introducing three-way tensors for weight
transitions, from which weight matrices for the TSBN are
extracted according to the side information provided. We
then adopt ideas from Taylor & Hinton (2009), where the

