Learning Representations for Counterfactual Inference

Fredrik D. Johansson∗
CSE, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, SE-412 96, Sweden

FREJOHK @ CHALMERS . SE

Uri Shalit∗
David Sontag
CIMS, New York University, 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY 10012 USA

SHALIT @ CS . NYU . EDU
DSONTAG @ CS . NYU . EDU

∗

Equal contribution

Abstract
Observational studies are rising in importance
due to the widespread accumulation of data in
fields such as healthcare, education, employment
and ecology. We consider the task of answering
counterfactual questions such as, “Would this patient have lower blood sugar had she received a
different medication?”. We propose a new algorithmic framework for counterfactual inference
which brings together ideas from domain adaptation and representation learning. In addition to a
theoretical justification, we perform an empirical
comparison with previous approaches to causal
inference from observational data. Our deep
learning algorithm significantly outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Inferring causal relations is a fundamental problem in the
sciences and commercial applications. The problem of
causal inference is often framed in terms of counterfactual
questions (Lewis, 1973; Rubin, 1974; Pearl, 2009) such as
“Would this patient have lower blood sugar had she received a different medication?”, or “Would the user have
clicked on this ad had it been in a different color?”. In this
paper we propose a method to learn representations suited
for counterfactual inference, and show its efficacy in both
simulated and real world tasks.
We focus on counterfactual questions raised by what are
known as observational studies. Observational studies
are studies where interventions and outcomes have been
recorded, along with appropriate context. For example,
consider an electronic health record dataset collected over
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

several years, where for each patient we have lab tests and
past diagnoses, as well as data relating to their diabetic status, and the causal question of interest is which of two existing anti-diabetic medications A or B is better for a given
patient. Observational studies are rising in importance due
to the widespread accumulation of data in fields such as
healthcare, education, employment and ecology. We believe machine learning will be called on more and more
to help make better decisions in these fields, and that researchers should be careful to pay attention to the ways in
which these studies differ from classic supervised learning,
as explained in Section 2 below.
In this work we draw a connection between counterfactual inference and domain adaptation. We then introduce
a form of regularization by enforcing similarity between
the distributions of representations learned for populations
with different interventions. For example, the representations for patients who received medication A versus those
who received medication B. This reduces the variance from
fitting a model on one distribution and applying it to another. In Section 3 we give several methods for learning
such representations. In Section 4 we show our methods
approximately minimizes an upper bound on a regret term
in the counterfactual regime. The general method is outlined in Figure 1. Our work has commonalities with recent
work on learning fair representations (Zemel et al., 2013;
Louizos et al., 2015) and learning representations for transfer learning (Ben-David et al., 2007; Gani et al., 2015). In
all these cases the learned representation has some invariance to specific aspects of the data: either an identity of a
certain group such as racial minorities for fair representations, or the identity of the data source for domain adaptation, or, in the case of counterfactual learning, the type of
intervention enacted in each population.
In machine learning, counterfactual questions typically
arise in problems where there is a learning agent which
performs actions, and receives feedback or reward for that

