Recovery guarantee of weighted low-rank approximation
via alternating minimization

Yuanzhi Li
Yingyu Liang
Andrej Risteski
Princeton University, 35 Olden St, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Abstract
Many applications require recovering a ground
truth low-rank matrix from noisy observations
of the entries, which in practice is typically formulated as a weighted low-rank approximation
problem and solved by non-convex optimization
heuristics such as alternating minimization. In
this paper, we provide provable recovery guarantee of weighted low-rank via a simple alternating
minimization algorithm. In particular, for a natural class of matrices and weights and without
any assumption on the noise, we bound the spectral norm of the difference between the recovered
matrix and the ground truth, by the spectral norm
of the weighted noise plus an additive error term
that decreases exponentially with the number of
rounds of alternating minimization, from either
initialization by SVD or, more importantly, random initialization. These provide the first theoretical results for weighted low-rank approximation via alternating minimization with nonbinary deterministic weights, significantly generalizing those for matrix completion, the special
case with binary weights, since our assumptions
are similar or weaker than those made in existing
works. Furthermore, this is achieved by a very
simple algorithm that improves the vanilla alternating minimization with a simple clipping step.

1. Introduction
Recovery of low-rank matrices has been a recurring theme
in recent years in machine learning, signal processing, and
numerical linear algebra, since in many applications, the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YUANZHIL @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU
YINGYUL @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU
RISTESKI @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

data is a noisy observation of a low-rank ground truth matrix. Typically, the noise on different entries is not identically distributed, which naturally leads to a weighted lowrank approximation problem: given the noisy observation
M, one tries to recover the ground truth by finding f
M that
P
2
2
f
f
minimizes kM−MkW = ij Wi,j (Mi,j −Mi,j ) where
the weight matrix W is chosen according to prior knowledge about the noise. For example, the co-occurrence
matrix for words in natural language processing applications (Pennington et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2016) is such
that the noise is larger when the co-occurrence of two
words is rarer. When doing low-rank approximation on
the co-occurrence matrix to get word embeddings, it has
been observed empirically that a simple weighting can lead
to much better performance than the unweighted formulation (see, e.g., (Levy & Goldberg, 2014)). In biology applications, it is often the case that the variance of the noise
is different for each entry of a data matrix, due to various
reasons such as different properties of different measuring
devices. A natural approach to recover the ground truth matrix is to solve a weighted low-rank approximation problem
where the weights are inversely proportional to the variance
in the entries (Gadian, 1982; Wentzell et al., 1997). Even
for collaborative filtering, which is typically modeled as a
matrix completion problem that assigns weight 1 on sampled entries and 0 on non-sampled entries, one can achieve
better results when allowing non-binary weights (Srebro &
Jaakkola, 2003).
In practice, the weighted low-rank approximation is typically solved by non-convex optimization heuristics. One of
the most frequently used is alternating minimization, which
f to be the product of two low-rank matrices and alsets M
ternates between updating the two matrices. Although it is
a natural heuristic to employ and also an interesting theoretical question to study, to the best of our knowledge there
is no guarantee for alternating minimization for weighted
low-rank approximation. Moreover, general weighted lowrank approximation is NP-hard, even when the ground truth
is a rank-1 matrix (Gillis & Glineur, 2011).

