A Box-Constrained Approach for Hard Permutation Problems

Cong Han Lim
CONGHAN @ CS . WISC . EDU
Stephen J. Wright
SWRIGHT @ CS . WISC . EDU
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA

matrices Π ∈ PMn (PMn is the set of n × n permutation matrices). For example, the graph matching problem
can be expressed as minΠ∈PMn kA − ΠBΠ> k2F where A
and B are the adjacency matrices of graphs on n vertices.
The Birkhoff polytope B n — the convex hull of the set of
permutation matrices — is frequently used to formulate a
continuous (but not necessarily convex) relaxation of such
problems, which takes the following form:

Abstract
We describe the use of sorting networks to form
relaxations of problems involving permutations
of n objects. This approach is an alternative to relaxations based on the Birkhoff polytope (the set
of n × n doubly stochastic matrices), providing
a more compact formulation in which the only
constraints are box constraints. Using this approach, we form a variant of the relaxation of the
quadratic assignment problem recently studied in
Vogelstein et al. (2015), and show that the continuation method applied to this formulation can be
quite effective. We develop a coordinate descent
algorithm that achieves a per-cycle complexity
of O(n2 log2 n). We compare this method with
Fast Approximate QAP (FAQ) algorithm introduced in Vogelstein et al. (2015), which uses a
conditional-gradient method whose per-iteration
complexity is O(n3 ). We demonstrate that for
most problems in QAPLIB and for a class of synthetic QAP problems, the sorting-network formulation returns solutions that are competitive
with the FAQ algorithm, often in significantly
less computing time.

min f (P ).

P ∈Bn

The conventional way to implement such formulations is
to represent the set B n explicitly via n2 variables (the components of P ), 2n linear constraints, and n2 nonnegativity
bounds, as follows:
B n = {P ∈ Rn×n | P 1 = 1, P > 1 = 1, P ≥ 0},

A permutation problem has the form
min f¯(π)

(3)

where 1 = (1, 1, . . . , 1)> ∈ Rn . Some algorithms based
on this representation rely on a projection step to remain
within the feasible region; the expense of this step can
be ameliorated by the use of an approximate projection
technique such as Sinkhorn-Knopp balancing (Sinkhorn &
Knopp, 1967). The constraints can also be incorporated
directly within a general optimization framework, such as
an active-set or interior-point method. A conditional gradient (Frank-Wolfe) framework can also be used (Vogelstein
et al., 2015; Zaslavskiy et al., 2009), at a cost of O(n3 ) operations per iteration. It has been noted that maintaining
feasibility of the iterates with respect to these constraints is
typically the bottleneck in these methods.

1. Introduction

π∈P n

(2)

(1)

where P n is the set of all permutations of n objects. Linear and quadratic assignment problems (LAP and QAP, respectively) can be formulated as permutation problems, as
can seriation problems (Fogel et al., 2013). Many NP-hard
problems are special cases of QAP. It is useful to formulate these problems equivalently in terms of permutation
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In this paper, we follow Lim & Wright (2014) in using a
sorting network to replace the permutation matrix. A sorting network is a mechanism for sorting n objects by means
of a composition of pairwise comparators, where each
comparator sorts a single pair of inputs. Sorting networks
for n numbers can in principle be composed of O(n log n)
comparators; practical networks contain O(n log2 n) comparators. Each comparator can be parametrized by a single
scalar x, which takes on the value 1 if it is necessary to
switch the two inputs to put them in the correct order, and
0 otherwise. By relaxing the feasible set for each parameter x from the binary set {0, 1} to the interval [0, 1], we can

