Convolutional Rectifier Networks as Generalized Tensor Decompositions

Nadav Cohen
Amnon Shashua
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
Convolutional rectifier networks, i.e. convolutional neural networks with rectified linear activation and max or average pooling, are the cornerstone of modern deep learning. However, despite their wide use and success, our theoretical
understanding of the expressive properties that
drive these networks is partial at best. On the
other hand, we have a much firmer grasp of these
issues in the world of arithmetic circuits. Specifically, it is known that convolutional arithmetic
circuits possess the property of ”complete depth
efficiency”, meaning that besides a negligible set,
all functions realizable by a deep network of
polynomial size, require exponential size in order to be realized (or approximated) by a shallow
network. In this paper we describe a construction based on generalized tensor decompositions,
that transforms convolutional arithmetic circuits
into convolutional rectifier networks. We then
use mathematical tools available from the world
of arithmetic circuits to prove new results. First,
we show that convolutional rectifier networks are
universal with max pooling but not with average pooling. Second, and more importantly, we
show that depth efficiency is weaker with convolutional rectifier networks than it is with convolutional arithmetic circuits. This leads us to believe that developing effective methods for training convolutional arithmetic circuits, thereby fulfilling their expressive potential, may give rise to
a deep learning architecture that is provably superior to convolutional rectifier networks but has
so far been overlooked by practitioners.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are repeatedly proving themselves
to be extremely effective machine learning models, providProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

COHENNADAV @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL
SHASHUA @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

ing state of the art accuracies on a wide range of tasks.
Arguably, the most successful deep learning architecture
to date is that of convolutional neural networks (ConvNets, (LeCun and Bengio, 1995)), which prevails in the
field of computer vision, and is recently being harnessed
for many other application domains as well (e.g. (Shen
et al., 2014; Wallach et al., 2015)). Modern ConvNets
are formed by stacking layers one after the other, where
each layer consists of a linear convolutional operator followed by Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation (σ(z) =
max{0, z}), which in turn is followed by max or average
pooling (P {cj } = max{cj } or P {cj } = mean{cj } respectively). Such models, which we refer to as convolutional rectifier networks, have driven the resurgence of deep
learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), and represent the cutting
edge of the ConvNet architecture.
Despite their empirical success, and the vast attention they
are receiving, our theoretical understanding of convolutional rectifier networks is limited. It is believed that they
enjoy depth efficiency, i.e. that when allowed to go deep,
such networks can implement with polynomial size computations that would require super-polynomial size if the
networks were shallow. However, formal arguments that
support this are scarce. It is unclear to what extent convolutional rectifier networks leverage depth efficiency, or
more formally, what is the proportion of weight settings
that would lead a deep network to implement a computation
that cannot be efficiently realized by a shallow network. We
refer to the most optimistic situation, where this takes place
for all weight settings but a negligible (zero measure) set,
as complete depth efficiency.
Compared to convolutional rectifier networks, our theoretical understanding of depth efficiency for arithmetic circuits, and in particular for convolutional arithmetic circuits,
is much more developed. Arithmetic circuits (also known
as Sum-Product Networks, (Poon and Domingos, 2011))
are networks with two types of nodes: sum nodes, which
compute a weighted sum of their inputs, and product nodes,
computing the product of their inputs. The depth efficiency
of arithmetic circuits has been studied by the theoretical
computer science community for the last five decades, long

