Gromov-Wasserstein Averaging of Kernel and Distance Matrices

Gabriel Peyré
GABRIEL . PEYRE @ CEREMADE . DAUPHINE . FR
CNRS and Univ. Paris-Dauphine, Pl. du M. De Lattre De Tassigny, 75775 Paris 16, FRANCE
Marco Cuturi
Kyoto University, 36-1 Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, JAPAN
Justin Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
This paper presents a new technique for computing the barycenter of a set of distance or kernel
matrices. These matrices, which define the interrelationships between points sampled from individual domains, are not required to have the same
size or to be in row-by-row correspondence. We
compare these matrices using the softassign criterion, which measures the minimum distortion
induced by a probabilistic map from the rows
of one similarity matrix to the rows of another;
this criterion amounts to a regularized version of
the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance between
metric-measure spaces. The barycenter is then
defined as a Fréchet mean of the input matrices with respect to this criterion, minimizing a
weighted sum of softassign values. We provide a
fast iterative algorithm for the resulting nonconvex optimization problem, built upon state-ofthe-art tools for regularized optimal transportation. We demonstrate its application to the computation of shape barycenters and to the prediction of energy levels from molecular configurations in quantum chemistry.

1. Introduction
Many classes of input data encountered in machine learning are best expressed using either pairwise distance matrices or kernels. For instance, the atoms making up proteins and other molecules have no canonical orientation and
hence are only known up to rigid motion; so, the geometry of a molecule might be better described by the pairProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MCUTURI @ I . KYOTO - U . AC . JP

JSOLOMON @ MIT. EDU

wise distances between atoms rather than by their absolute positions. Kernel and covariance matrices from different datasets exhibit similar structure, since they define data
points by their roles relative to the rest of a dataset rather
than in any absolute sense.
A major difficulty with this representation is that in
many applications these matrices are not “registered” or
“aligned,” meaning that there is no explicit correspondence
between their rows and columns. This is the case for shapes
that undergo pose variation, articulation or deformation.
Even worse, in some cases, similarities are not defined over
the same ground space. For example, different molecules
may have varying numbers of atoms. This inconsistency
yields matrices of varying dimensions.
In this paper, we propose a theoretical and computational framework for summarizing collections of unaligned
distance or kernel matrices. Building upon the notion
of Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distances between metricmeasure spaces (Mémoli, 2007), we provide machinery for
registering matrices of varying sizes while building interpolants and barycenters inheriting structure from the inputs. We also derive a fast regularized approximation
scheme providing a practical and efficient way to recover
these barycenters in practice.
1.1. Previous Work
Countless techniques leverage matrices of distances or kernels to describe a dataset. While distances and kernels
have opposite ordering—a large distance indicates small
similarity—unless it is necessary to distinguish we will use
the term “similarity matrix” to refer to any matrix containing pairwise relationships.
Aligning similarity matrices. Comparison of similarity matrices is challenging due to a lack of alignment.
Mathematically, they only define the intrinsic structure

