Variance Reduction for Faster Non-Convex Optimization

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Princeton University

ZEYUAN @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU

Elad Hazan
Princeton University

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Abstract
We consider the fundamental problem in nonconvex optimization of efficiently reaching a stationary point. In contrast to the convex case,
in the long history of this basic problem, the
only known theoretical results on first-order nonconvex optimization remain to be full gradient
descent that converges in O(1/ε) iterations for
smooth objectives, and stochastic gradient descent that converges in O(1/ε2 ) iterations for objectives that are sum of smooth functions.
We provide the first improvement in this line of
research. Our result is based on the variance reduction trick recently introduced to convex optimization, as well as a brand new analysis of variance reduction that is suitable for non-convex optimization. For objectives that are sum of smooth
functions, our first-order minibatch stochastic
method converges with an O(1/ε) rate, and is
faster than full gradient descent by Ω(n1/3 ).

1

Since global minimization of non-convex functions is NPhard, various alternative approaches are applied. For some
models, probabilistic and other assumptions on the input
can be used to give specially designed polynomial-time algorithms (Arora et al., 2014; 2013; Hsu et al., 2012).
However, the multitude and diversity of machine learning
applications require a robust, generic optimization method
that can be applied as a tool rather than reinvented per each
specific model. One approach is the design of global nonconvex heuristics such as simulated annealing or bayesian
optimization. Although believed to fail in the worst case
due to known complexity results, such heuristics many
times perform well in practice for certain problems.
Another approach, which is based on more solid theoretical foundation and is gaining in popularity, is to drop the
“global optimality” requirement and attempt to reach more
modest solution concepts. The most popular of these is the
use of iterative optimization methods to reach a stationary
point. The use of stochastic first-order methods is the primary focus of this approach, which has become the most
common method for training deep neural nets.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods
on empirical risk minimizations with non-convex
loss functions and training neural nets.1

Formally, in this paper we consider the unconstrained minimization problem
n
o
Pn
def
minx∈Rd f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) ,
(1.1)

Introduction

where each fi (x) is differentiable, possibly non-convex,
and has L-Lipschitz continuous gradient (a.k.a. L-smooth)
for some parameter L > 0.2 Many machine learning/imaging processing problems fall into Problem (1.1),
including training neural nets, ERM (empirical risk minimization) with non-convex losses, and many others.

Numerous machine learning problems are naturally formulated as non-convex optimization problems. Examples include inference in graphical models, unsupervised learning
models such as topic models, dictionary learning, and perhaps most notably, training of deep neural networks. Indeed, non-convex optimization for machine learning is one
of the fields’ main research frontiers.
1
Full version of this paper first appeared online on March 17,
2016 on arXiv: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.05643.

Following the classical benchmark for non-convex optimization (see for instance (Ghadimi & Lan, 2015)), we focus on algorithms that can efficiently find an approximate
stationary point x satisfying k∇f (x)k2 ≤ ε.
2

rd

Proceedings of the 33 International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Even if each fi (x) is not smooth but only Lipschitz continuous, standard smoothing techniques such as Chapter 2.3 of
(Hazan, 2015) usually turn each fi (x) into a smooth function
without sacrificing too much accuracy.

