Hawkes Processes with Stochastic Excitations
Young Lee∗
Kar Wai Lim†
Cheng Soon Ong†
∗
†

YOUNG . LEE @ NICTA . COM . AU
KARWAI . LIM @ ANU . EDU . AU
CHENGSOON . ONG @ ANU . EDU . AU

Data61/National ICT Australia & London School of Economics
Data61/National ICT Australia & Australian National University

Abstract
We propose an extension to Hawkes processes by
treating the levels of self-excitation as a stochastic differential equation. Our new point process allows better approximation in application
domains where events and intensities accelerate
each other with correlated levels of contagion.
We generalize a recent algorithm for simulating
draws from Hawkes processes whose levels of
excitation are stochastic processes, and propose
a hybrid Markov chain Monte Carlo approach
for model fitting. Our sampling procedure scales
linearly with the number of required events and
does not require stationarity of the point process. A modular inference procedure consisting
of a combination between Gibbs and Metropolis
Hastings steps is put forward. We recover expectation maximization as a special case. Our general approach is illustrated for contagion following geometric Brownian motion and exponential
Langevin dynamics.

1. Introduction
Motivation. Cascading chain of events usually arise in
nature or society: The economy has witnessed that financial meltdowns are often epidemic. For example, the
Asian financial crisis swept across Thailand and quickly
engulfed South Africa, Eastern Europe and even Brazil.
Similarly, criminological research (Bernasco and Nieuwbeerta, 2005) has shown that crime can spread through local
environments very rapidly where burglars will constantly
attack nearby targets because local susceptibilities are well
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

known to thieves. As another example, in genetic analysis,
Reynaud-Bouret and Schbath (2010) looked at the likelihood of occurrences of a particular event along the DNA
sequence where ‘an event’ could be any biological signals
occurring along the genomes that tend to cluster together.
The defining characteristic of these examples is that the
occurrence of one event often triggers a series of similar
events. The Hawkes process, or otherwise known as the
self-exciting process, is an extension of Poisson processes
that aims to explain excitatory interactions (Hawkes, 1971).
What makes the term self-excitation worthy of its name is
typically not the occurrence of the initial event, but the intensification of further events. We seek to characterize this
amplification magnitude, which we call the contagion parameters, or levels of self-excitation, or simply, levels of
excitation.
The use of Hawkes processes is not an attempt to describe
all features of self-excitation in their correct proportions.
Probabilistic modeling inevitably exaggerates some aspects
while disregarding others, and an accurate model is one
that takes care of the significant aspects and abandons the
less important details. Thus, there are often two streams in
modeling which are fairly contradictory; on the one hand,
the model ought to mimic excitatory relationships in a real
world application, and this pulls toward specifying wide
families of processes. On the other hand, the model should
be manageable and tractable which pulls in the direction
of identifying simpler processes in which inference and parameter estimations are feasible.
Adopting the latter view of establishing simpler processes,
we present a version of self-exciting processes that permits
the levels of excitation to be modulated by a stochastic differential equation (SDE). SDEs are natural tools used to
describe rate of change between the excitation levels. Put
differently, we attach some indeterminacy to these quantities where we model them as random values over time,
rather than being a constant as in the classical Hawkes set-

