Hierarchical Decision Making In Electricity Grid Management

Gal Dalal
Elad Gilboa
Shie Mannor
Technion, Israel

GALD @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL
EGILBOA @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL
SHIE @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL

Abstract
The power grid is a complex and vital system that necessitates careful reliability management. Managing the grid is a difficult problem with multiple time scales of decision making
and stochastic behavior due to renewable energy
generations, variable demand and unplanned outages. Solving this problem in the face of uncertainty requires a new methodology with tractable
algorithms. In this work, we introduce a new
model for hierarchical decision making in complex systems. We apply reinforcement learning
(RL) methods to learn a proxy, i.e., a level of abstraction, for real-time power grid reliability. We
devise an algorithm that alternates between slow
time-scale policy improvement, and fast timescale value function approximation. We compare
our results to prevailing heuristics, and show the
strength of our method.

1. Introduction
The power grid is a complex and vital system that requires
high level of reliability. Reliability is of utmost importance,
as the consequences of outages can be catastrophic. System
operators (SOs) achieve reliability by means of sophisticated control operations and planning, which often require
solving sequential stochastic decision problems. Sequential decision making under uncertainty in energy systems
is studied in different communities such as control theory,
dynamic programming, stochastic programming and robust optimization (Powell & Meisel, 2015; Bertsimas et al.,
2013; Bienstock, 2011; Koutsopoulos & Tassiulas, 2012;
Bienstock et al., 2014).
Reliability assessment and control are highly complicated
tasks in complex real-world systems such as the power
grid. Complications in the power grid arise because of
strict physical restrictions, such as generation must meet
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

consumption continuously and transmission lines can not
exceed their limited thermal capacity. Further complications stem from the structure of decision making in different time-horizons. For example, long-term system expansion and development such as building a new wind
farm or a high-voltage line take years, mid-term asset management decisions such as performing maintenance are
decided upon months in advance, short-term generation
schedules are planned daily, and real-time operational control decisions are made on the scale of minutes. In these
interdependent hierarchical decision making processes decisions are taken by multiple stakeholders. Furthermore,
over the last decade, wind and solar energy sources become
increasingly preeminent with further significant expansion
being envisaged (Talbot, 2009). These generators introduce high uncertainty to the system, making the control
task significantly more difficult. The complex dependence
between multiple time-horizon with growing uncertainty,
the curse of dimensionality when dealing with large systems, and the non-linear dependence of reliability measures
to the multiple time-horizon decisions, make this problem
extremely hard to tackle.
To stress the dimensionality complexity, consider the IEEE
RTS-96 power network used in our experiments (Wong
et al., 1999). This network is an example for a power
grid of a medium sized European country or a state in the
USA. Its state-space is O(10300 ), and its action space is
O(10100 ); see Sec. 5. Assessment of each control choice
carries a computational burden as it requires solving a set of
non-linear trigonometric equations named alternating current power flow (ACPF); see Sec. 2.1.
Nowadays, the common practice in industry is solving
large mixed integer programs (MIP), often with a linear relaxation, in an attempt to reach a valid solution (Grainger
& Stevenson, 1994; Allan et al., 2013). Although this
model is extensive, its computational burden makes it hard
even for deterministic predictions (taking an order of a day
in real-world systems), and inappropriate in the stochastic
case. This limits SOs to sample snapshots of future grid
states or analyze a few sequential trajectories. The narrow
view of possible outcomes is likely to miss important benefits and increase the costs of decisions, thereby offering

