A Self-Correcting Variable-Metric Algorithm for Stochastic Optimization

Frank E. Curtis
FRANK . E . CURTIS @ GMAIL . COM
Department of ISE, Lehigh University, 200 W. Packer Ave., Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Abstract
An algorithm for stochastic (convex or nonconvex) optimization is presented. The algorithm is
variable-metric in the sense that, in each iteration, the step is computed through the product of
a symmetric positive definite scaling matrix and a
stochastic (mini-batch) gradient of the objective
function, where the sequence of scaling matrices
is updated dynamically by the algorithm. A key
feature of the algorithm is that it does not overly
restrict the manner in which the scaling matrices are updated. Rather, the algorithm exploits
fundamental self-correcting properties of BFGStype updating—properties that have been overlooked in other attempts to devise quasi-Newton
methods for stochastic optimization. Numerical
experiments illustrate that the method and a limited memory variant of it are stable and outperform (mini-batch) stochastic gradient and other
quasi-Newton methods when employed to solve
a few machine learning problems.

strong local minimizer. More detailed information can be
found, e.g., in (Nocedal & Wright, 2006).
These extremes are magnified when one considers algorithms for solving smooth stochastic optimization problems, where one finds an even wider expanse between
stochastic gradient (SG) (Robbins & Monro, 1951) and
batch-Newton methods. For various reasons, such as its superior asymptotic large-scale learning trade-off (Bottou &
Bousquet, 2008; Bottou, 2010), many algorithms for solving optimization problems for large-scale machine learning (ML) have historically been based on SG technology.
However, this baseline promises to change. After all, for
a variety of applications, no extreme offers the most computationally efficient form of algorithm. Classical SG approaches are relatively easy to implement and often perform well in practice after sufficient tuning, but recent advances have illustrated various benefits of moving beyond
classical SG techniques. One such avenue has been the
investigation of noise reduction methods, such as those
in (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and (Defazio et al., 2014),
to name a couple. Another has been the investigation of
second-order-type methods, the focus of this paper.

Practical gradient-based algorithms for minimizing a
smooth deterministic objective function can be characterized as falling between two extremes. At one extreme are
steepest descent methods, i.e., algorithms in which each
step is computed as a scalar times a negative gradient of
the objective function. Such methods represent the extreme
of incurring relatively cheap per-iteration costs while only
being able to guarantee a linear rate of convergence. At
the other extreme are Newton methods in which each step
is computed by minimizing a local second-order Taylor series model of the objective function. Such methods incur
the extra costs of having to compute second-order derivatives and solve linear systems of equations of dimension
equal to the number of variables, but at the benefit of being able to guarantee a quadratic rate of convergence to a

Such a shift away from simple gradient techniques occurred in the literature for large-scale, smooth, deterministic optimization with the advent of variable-metric algorithms in the 1960s, by far one of the most important developments in that field over the past few decades.
This class of methods, which includes quasi-Newton methods such as those of the widely successful and celebrated
Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) variety (Broyden, 1970; Fletcher, 1970; Goldfarb, 1970; Shanno, 1970),
often offers a satisfactory compromise between extremes.
Such methods often perform well in practice, which many
attribute to their strong theoretical guarantees. In particular, a marvelous feature of BFGS updating when solving
smooth deterministic optimization problems is its ability
to ensure a superlinear rate of convergence with only firstorder derivative information and without the need for any
linear system solves (Dennis & Moré, 1974).

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

A variety of attempts have been made to carry BFGS-type
methods from the deterministic to the stochastic regime;
e.g., one finds online (limited memory) BFGS (oBFGS and

1. Introduction

