The Variational Nyström Method for Large-Scale Spectral Problems

Max Vladymyrov
Google, Inc.

MXV @ GOOGLE . COM

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
MCARREIRA - PERPINAN @ UCMERCED . EDU
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, School of Engineering, University of California, Merced

Abstract
Spectral methods for dimensionality reduction
and clustering require solving an eigenproblem
defined by a sparse affinity matrix. When this
matrix is large, one seeks an approximate solution. The standard way to do this is the Nyström
method, which first solves a small eigenproblem
considering only a subset of landmark points, and
then applies an out-of-sample formula to extrapolate the solution to the entire dataset. We show
that by constraining the original problem to satisfy the Nyström formula, we obtain an approximation that is computationally simple and efficient, but achieves a lower approximation error
using fewer landmarks and less runtime. We also
study the role of normalization in the computational cost and quality of the resulting solution.

Spectral problems involve finding eigenvectors of an affinity matrix and have become a standard technique in machine learning problems such as manifold learning (Cox
& Cox, 1994; Schölkopf et al., 1998; Tenenbaum et al.,
2000; Roweis & Saul, 2000; Belkin & Niyogi, 2003) or
spectral clustering (Shi & Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2002).
Their success is due to the power of neighborhood graphs
(via an affinity matrix or graph Laplacian) to express similarity between pairs of points, and to the existence of welldeveloped linear algebra routines to solve the numerical
problem. We consider a spectral problem of the type

minX tr XMXT
s.t. XXT = I
(P)

where M is an N × N symmetric matrix (usually, a graph
Laplacian) constructed on a high-dimensional dataset Y =
(y1 , . . . , yN ) of D × N , and X = (x1 , . . . , xN ) of d × N
are coordinates in Rd for the N data points (often called

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

the embedding), where d < D. Constraints of the form
XBX = I with positive definite B can be used with a suitable transformation of M. The solution of (P) is given by
the d trailing eigenvectors of M (note M need not be positive semidefinite, though it often is). When the number of
points N is very large, an exact solution becomes computationally impractical or undesirable, even if M is sparse.
Our goal is to solve problems of the type (P) approximately.
We focus on approximate methods to solve (P) that use
sampling, i.e., they solve an eigenproblem on a subset of
L ≪ N points from Y (“landmarks”) and then use this
to extrapolate the solution to all N points. The prototype of these is the Nyström method (Williams & Seeger,
2001; Fowlkes et al., 2004), based on an out-of-sample
formula that predicts x ∈ Rd for a given point y ∈ RD
as a linear combination of the landmarks’ solution using
as weights the affinity values between y and the landmarks. This has the advantage of interpolating the landmarks and being convenient—the weights are simply affinity matrix entries. It gives a good approximation if using sufficiently many landmarks. Its fundamental disadvantage is that the reduced eigenproblem on the landmarks, to which the Nyström formula applies, uses only the
landmark-landmark affinity values. If too few landmarks
are used, this eigenproblem gives a bad approximation and
so does the Nyström extrapolation.
A different approach is that of Locally Linear Landmarks
(LLL) (Vladymyrov & Carreira-Perpiñán, 2013b), which
seeks to define a reduced eigenproblem containing more
information than just landmark-landmark affinities. LLL
defines a different out-of-sample formula, a linear combination of the projections of the nearest landmarks to y
using weights that reconstruct y locally linearly in input
space. The crucial idea in LLL is that problem (P) is
solved constrained to using these weights, resulting in a
reduced eigenproblem that does use the entire affinity matrix. Hence, this obtains a better landmark embedding than
the Nyström method for the same number of landmarks.
This reasoning naturally leads to our first contribution, the

