Fast k-Nearest Neighbour Search via Dynamic Continuous Indexing
Ke Li
Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, United States

Abstract
Existing methods for retrieving k-nearest neighbours suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
We argue this is caused in part by inherent deficiencies of space partitioning, which is the underlying strategy used by most existing methods.
We devise a new strategy that avoids partitioning
the vector space and present a novel randomized
algorithm that runs in time linear in dimensionality of the space and sub-linear in the intrinsic dimensionality and the size of the dataset and takes
space constant in dimensionality of the space and
linear in the size of the dataset. The proposed
algorithm allows fine-grained control over accuracy and speed on a per-query basis, automatically adapts to variations in data density, supports
dynamic updates to the dataset and is easy-toimplement. We show appealing theoretical properties and demonstrate empirically that the proposed algorithm outperforms locality-sensitivity
hashing (LSH) in terms of approximation quality,
speed and space efficiency.

1. Introduction
The k-nearest neighbour method is commonly used both as
a classifier and as subroutines in more complex algorithms
in a wide range domains, including machine learning, computer vision, graphics and robotics. Consequently, finding
a fast algorithm for retrieving nearest neighbours has been
a subject of sustained interest among the artificial intelligence and the theoretical computer science communities
alike. Work over the past several decades has produced
a rich collection of algorithms; however, they suffer from
one key shortcoming: as the ambient or intrinsic dimenrd

Proceedings of the 33 International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

KE . LI @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
MALIK @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

sionality1 increases, the running time and/or space complexity grows rapidly; this phenomenon is often known as
the curse of dimensionality. Finding a solution to this problem has proven to be elusive and has been conjectured to be
fundamentally impossible (Minsky & Seymour, 1969). In
this era of rapid growth in both the volume and dimensionality of data, it has become increasingly important to devise
a fast algorithm that scales to high dimensional space.
We argue that the difficulty in overcoming the curse of dimensionality stems in part from inherent deficiencies in
space partitioning, the strategy that underlies most existing algorithms. Space partitioning is a divide-and-conquer
strategy that partitions the vector space into a finite number
of cells and keeps track of the data points that each cell contains. At query time, exhaustive search is performed over
all data points that lie in cells containing the query point.
This strategy forms the basis of most existing algorithms,
including k-d trees (Bentley, 1975) and locality-sensitive
hashing (LSH) (Indyk & Motwani, 1998).
While this strategy seems natural and sensible, it suffers
from critical deficiencies as the dimensionality increases.
Because the volume of any region in the vector space grows
exponentially in the dimensionality, either the number or
the size of cells must increase exponentially in the number
of dimensions, which tends to lead to exponential time or
space complexity in the dimensionality. In addition, space
partitioning limits the algorithm’s “field of view” to the cell
containing the query point; points that lie in adjacent cells
have no hope of being retrieved. Consequently, if a query
point falls near cell boundaries, the algorithm will fail to
retrieve nearby points that lie in adjacent cells. Since the
number of such cells is exponential in the dimensionality,
it is intractable to search these cells when dimensionality
is high. One popular approach used by LSH and spill trees
(Liu et al., 2004) to mitigate this effect is to partition the
space using overlapping cells and search over all points that
lie in any of the cells that contain the query point. Because
1
We use ambient dimensionality to refer to the original dimensionality of the space containing the data in order to differentiate
it from intrinsic dimensionality, which measures density of the
dataset and will be defined precisely later.

