Deep Speech 2 : End-to-End Speech Recognition in English and Mandarin

Dario Amodei, Sundaram Ananthanarayanan, Rishita Anubhai, Jingliang Bai, Eric Battenberg, Carl Case,
Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Qiang Cheng, Guoliang Chen, Jie Chen, Jingdong Chen, Zhijie Chen,
Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates, Greg Diamos, Ke Ding, Niandong Du, Erich Elsen, Jesse Engel, Weiwei Fang,
Linxi Fan, Christopher Fougner, Liang Gao, Caixia Gong, Awni Hannun, Tony Han, Lappi Vaino Johannes,
Bing Jiang, Cai Ju, Billy Jun, Patrick LeGresley, Libby Lin, Junjie Liu, Yang Liu, Weigao Li, Xiangang Li,
Dongpeng Ma, Sharan Narang, Andrew Ng, Sherjil Ozair, Yiping Peng, Ryan Prenger, Sheng Qian,
Zongfeng Quan, Jonathan Raiman, Vinay Rao, Sanjeev Satheesh, David Seetapun, Shubho Sengupta,
Kavya Srinet, Anuroop Sriram, Haiyuan Tang, Liliang Tang, Chong Wang, Jidong Wang, Kaifu Wang, Yi Wang,
Zhijian Wang, Zhiqian Wang, Shuang Wu, Likai Wei, Bo Xiao, Wen Xie, Yan Xie, Dani Yogatama, Bin Yuan,
Jun Zhan, Zhenyao Zhu
Baidu Silicon Valley AI Lab1 , 1195 Bordeaux Avenue, Sunnyvale CA 94086 USA
Baidu Speech Technology Group, No. 10 Xibeiwang East Street, Ke Ji Yuan, Haidian District, Beijing 100193 CHINA

Abstract
We show that an end-to-end deep learning approach can be used to recognize either English
or Mandarin Chinese speech–two vastly different
languages. Because it replaces entire pipelines
of hand-engineered components with neural networks, end-to-end learning allows us to handle a diverse variety of speech including noisy
environments, accents and different languages.
Key to our approach is our application of HPC
techniques, enabling experiments that previously
took weeks to now run in days. This allows us
to iterate more quickly to identify superior architectures and algorithms. As a result, in several
cases, our system is competitive with the transcription of human workers when benchmarked
on standard datasets. Finally, using a technique
called Batch Dispatch with GPUs in the data center, we show that our system can be inexpensively deployed in an online setting, delivering
low latency when serving users at scale.

1. Introduction
Decades worth of hand-engineered domain knowledge has
gone into current state-of-the-art automatic speech recognition (ASR) pipelines. A simple but powerful alternative solution is to train such ASR models end-to-end, using deep
1

Contact author: sanjeevsatheesh@baidu.com

Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

learning to replace most modules with a single model as
in (Hannun et al., 2014a) and (Graves & Jaitly, 2014b).
This "end to end" vision of training simplyfies the training process by removing the engineering required for the
bootstrapping/alignment/clustering/HMM machinery often
used to build state-of-the-art ASR models. On such a system, built on end-to-end deep learning, we can employ a
range of deep learning techniques: capturing large training
sets, training larger models with high performance computing, and methodically exploring the space of neural network architectures.
This paper details our contribution to the model architecture, large labeled training datasets, and computational
scale for speech recognition. This includes an extensive investigation of model architectures, and our data capturing
pipeline that has enabled us to create larger datasets than
what is typically used to train speech recognition systems.
We benchmark our system on several publicly available test
sets with a goal of eventually attaining human-level performance. To that end, we have also measured the performance of crowd workers on each benchmark for comparison. We find that our best Mandarin Chinese speech system
transcribes short voice-query like utterances better than a
typical Mandarin Chinese speaker.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. We begin with a
review of related work in deep learning, end-to-end speech
recognition, and scalability in Section 2. Section 3 describes the architectural and algorithmic improvements to
the model and Section 4 explains how to efficiently compute them. We discuss the training data and steps taken to
further augment the training set in Section 5. An analysis
of results for our system in English and Mandarin is presented in Section 6. We end with a description of the steps
needed to deploy our system to real users in Section 7.

