Simultaneous Safe Screening of Features and Samples
in Doubly Sparse Modeling

Atsushi Shibagaki †
Masayuki Karasuyama †
Kohei Hatano ‡
Ichiro Takeuchi †
†
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan
‡
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan

Abstract
The problem of learning a sparse model is conceptually interpreted as the process of identifying active features/samples and then optimizing
the model over them. Recently introduced safe
screening allows us to identify a part of nonactive features/samples. So far, safe screening
has been individually studied either for feature
screening or for sample screening. In this paper,
we introduce a new approach for safely screening features and samples simultaneously by alternatively iterating feature and sample screening steps. A significant advantage of considering them simultaneously rather than individually is that they have a synergy effect in the
sense that the results of the previous safe feature
screening can be exploited for improving the next
safe sample screening performances, and viceversa. We first theoretically investigate the synergy effect, and then illustrate the practical advantage through intensive numerical experiments
for problems with large numbers of features and
samples.

1. Introduction
In many areas of science and industry, large-scale datasets
with many features and samples are collected and analyzed
for data-driven scientific discovery and decision making.
One promising approach to handle large numbers of features and samples is introducing sparsity constraints in statistical models (Hastie et al., 2015). The most common approach for inducing feature sparsity, e.g., in a linear leastProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SHIBAGAKI . A . MLLAB . NIT @ GMAIL . COM
KARASUYAMA @ NITECH . AC . JP
HATANO @ INF. KYUSHU - U . AC . JP
TAKEUCHI . ICHIRO @ NITECH . AC . JP

square model fitting, is using sparsity-inducing penalties
such as L1 -norm of the coefficients (Tibshirani, 1996). A
feature sparse model depends only on a subset of features
(called active features), and the rest of the features (called
non-active features) are irrelevant. On the other hand, the
most popular machine learning algorithm that induces sample sparsity would be the support vector machine (SVM)
(Boser et al., 1992). In the SVM, the large margin principle enhances sample sparsity in the sense that it depends
only on a subset of samples (called support vectors (SVs)
or active samples) and does not depend on the rest of the
samples (called non-SVs or non-active samples).
The problem of learning a sparse model is conceptually interpreted as the process of identifying active features or
samples and then optimizing the model over them. Recently, a new approach called safe screening has been studied by several authors. Safe screening enables to identify
a subset of non-active features or samples before or during
the model training process. A nice thing about safe screening is that it is guaranteed to have no false negatives, i.e.,
safe screening never identify active features or samples as
non-active. It means that, if we train the model by only
using the remaining set of features or samples after safe
screening, the solution is guaranteed to be optimal. The
basic technical idea behind safe screening is to bound the
solution of the problem within a region, and show that some
features or samples cannot be active wherever the optimal
solution is located within the region.
After the seminal work by (El Ghaoui et al., 2012), safe
feature screening (safely screening a part of non-active features in sparse feature models such as LASSO) has been
intensively studied in the literature (Xiang et al., 2011;
Wang et al., 2013; Bonnefoy et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2014;
Wang et al., 2014b; Xiang et al., 2014; Fercoq et al., 2015;
Ndiaye et al., 2015). Safe feature screening exploits the
fact that the sparseness of a feature is characterized by a
property of the dual solution, i.e., if the dual solution satis-

