ADIOS: Architectures Deep In Output Space

Moustapha Cissé∗
Maruan Al-Shedivat†
Samy Bengio‡
Facebook AI Research∗ , Carnegie Mellon University† , Google Brain‡

Abstract
Multi-label classification is a generalization of
binary classification where the task consists in
predicting sets of labels. With the availability
of ever larger datasets, the multi-label setting has
become a natural one in many applications, and
the interest in solving multi-label problems has
grown significantly. As expected, deep learning approaches are now yielding state-of-the-art
performance for this class of problems. Unfortunately, they usually do not take into account
the often unknown but nevertheless rich relationships between labels. In this paper, we propose
to make use of this underlying structure by learning to partition the labels into a Markov Blanket Chain and then applying a novel deep architecture that exploits the partition. Experiments
on several popular and large multi-label datasets
demonstrate that our approach not only yields
significant improvements, but also helps to overcome trade-offs specific to the multi-label classification setting.

1. Introduction
Data sources, such as social media, news services, and
crowd-sourced experiments, usually generate data where
every instance can be assigned several labels (also called
classes, categories, or tags). This turns modern classification problems into not only enormous scale but also multilabel in many practical settings. For example in text classification, a document naturally conveys different related
topics (e.g. sports and tourism). In image categorization
as well, a picture contains more than one object of interest.
Furthermore, the labels usually carry rich semantic structures (Deng et al., 2009; Partalas et al., 2015).
A straightforward approach to Multi-Label Classification
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MOUSTAPHACISSE @ FB . COM
ALSHEDIVAT @ CS . CMU . EDU
BENGIO @ GOOGLE . COM

(MLC) consists in reducing the original problem to several independent single-label tasks (Tsoumakas & Katakis,
2007). This decomposition, called binary relevance, is appealing because of its simplicity and scalability. Unfortunately, it disregards the complex inter-dependencies that often exist between the labels. Consequently, it suffers from
the lack of expressiveness and is prone to inconsistent predictions. On the other hand, the methods that exploit label
dependencies can significantly improve the classification
performance. However, most of the contributions hitherto
suffer from the cost of increased training and prediction
complexity and, hence, are limited in their applicability to
cases with modest numbers of examples and categories.
The recent advancements in deep and representation learning have been successfully applied to address some of the
issues of MLC (Nam et al., 2014). The proposed model in
this prior study highlights the amenability of several tools,
either developed or commonly used in deep learning, in
the multi-label setting. In particular, it demonstrates that
a simple multilayer perceptron with hidden rectified linear units (ReLU) (Glorot et al., 2011) trained with AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011) to jointly predict all the labels correctly can achieve state-of-the-art performance. The reason for this significant performance improvement in comparison to several existing approaches is threefold: Firstly,
many real-world MLC problems exhibit Zipf’s law-like label frequency distribution, i.e., few categories are very popular while the majority is rare. Therefore, when AdaGrad
is used, the learning rate becomes adapted to the data distribution by allowing larger gradient steps for the rarely occurring labels in comparison to more frequent ones. Secondly, hidden ReLUs encourage a sparse intermediate representation that is presumably more discriminative (Bengio et al., 2013b; Olshausen & Field, 1997). Moreover,
dropout regularization (Hinton et al., 2012) prevents specialization of groups of hidden units into predicting only
some particular classes. Finally, the shared intermediate
representation across the tasks (labels) implicitly models
the dependencies between them and provides sharing of the
statistical strength. This procedure, also called multitasking (Caruana, 1997), is an important argument for learning deep architectures for MLC. It naturally exploits la-

