Bayesian Poisson Tucker Decomposition
for Learning the Structure of International Relations

Aaron Schein
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Mingyuan Zhou
University of Texas at Austin

ASCHEIN @ CS . UMASS . EDU

MINGYUAN . ZHOU @ MCCOMBS . UTEXAS . EDU

David M. Blei
Columbia University

DAVID . BLEI @ COLUMBIA . EDU

Hanna Wallach
Microsoft Research New York City

WALLACH @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
We introduce Bayesian Poisson Tucker decomposition (BPTD) for modeling country–
country interaction event data. These data consist of interaction events of the form “country i took action a toward country j at time
t.”
BPTD discovers overlapping country–
community memberships, including the number
of latent communities. In addition, it discovers
directed community–community interaction networks that are specific to “topics” of action types
and temporal “regimes.” We show that BPTD
yields an efficient MCMC inference algorithm
and achieves better predictive performance than
related models. We also demonstrate that it discovers interpretable latent structure that agrees
with our knowledge of international relations.

1. Introduction
Like their inhabitants, countries interact with one another:
they consult, negotiate, trade, threaten, and fight. These
interactions are seldom uncoordinated. Rather, they are
connected by a fabric of overlapping communities, such as
security coalitions, treaties, trade cartels, and military alliances. For example, OPEC coordinates the petroleum export policies of its thirteen member countries, LAIA fosters
trade among Latin American countries, and NATO guarantees collective defense against attacks by external parties.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

A single country can belong to multiple communities, reflecting its different identities. For example, Venezuela—
an oil-producing country and a Latin American country—is
a member of both OPEC and LAIA. When Venezuela interacts with other countries, it sometimes does so as an OPEC
member and sometimes does so as a LAIA member.
Countries engage in both within-community and betweencommunity interactions. For example, when acting as
an OPEC member, Venezuela consults with other OPEC
countries, but trades with non-OPEC, oil-importing countries. Moreover, although Venezuela engages in betweencommunity interactions when trading as an OPEC member,
it engages in within-community interactions when trading
as a LAIA member. To understand or predict how countries
interact, we must account for their community memberships and how those memberships influence their actions.
In this paper, we take a new approach to learning overlapping communities from interaction events of the form
“country i took action a toward country j at time t.” A data
set of such interaction events can be represented as either
1) a set of event tokens, 2) a tensor of event type counts, or
3) a series of weighted multinetworks. Models that use the
token representation naturally yield efficient inference algorithms, models that use the tensor representation exhibit
good predictive performance, and models that use the network representation learn latent structure that aligns with
well-known concepts such as communities. Previous models of interaction event data have each used a subset of these
representations. Our approach—Bayesian Poisson Tucker
decomposition (BPTD)—takes advantage of all three.

