Analysis of VB Factorizations for Sparse and Low-Rank Estimation
David Wipf
Microsoft Research, Beijing

Abstract
Variational Bayesian (VB) factorial approximations anchor a wide variety of probabilistic models, where tractable posterior inference is almost
never possible. This basic strategy is particularly attractive when estimating structured lowdimensional models of high-dimensional data,
exemplified by the search for minimal rank
and/or sparse approximations to observed data.
To this end, VB models are frequently deployed
across applications including multi-task learning,
robust PCA, subspace clustering, matrix completion, affine rank minimization, source localization, compressive sensing, and assorted combinations thereof. Perhaps surprisingly however,
there exists almost no attendant theoretical explanation for how various VB factorizations operate,
and in which situations one may be preferable to
another. We address this relative void by comparing arguably two of the most popular factorizations, one built upon Gaussian scale mixture
priors, the other bilinear Gaussian priors, both
of which can favor minimal rank or sparsity depending on the context. More specifically, by reexpressing the respective VB objective functions,
we weigh multiple factors related to local minima avoidance, feature transformation invariance
and correlation, and computational complexity to
arrive at insightful conclusions useful in explaining performance and deciding which VB flavor
is advantageous. We also envision that the principles explored here are quite relevant to other
structured inverse problems where VB serves as
a viable solution.

1. INTRODUCTION
Variational Bayesian (VB) techniques (Attias, 2000;
Bishop, 2006) are now commonplace for performing approximate inference in structured probabilistic models
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DAVIDWIPF @ GMAIL . COM

of high-dimensional data, usually representing the only
tractable alternative to computationally expensive MCMC
sampling. Unfortunately however, even with a specific data
set and operational goal, there is often no established prescription for how to optimally apply VB, and different parameterizations and associated distributional factorizations
can have wide-ranging impacts. To elucidate these differences, we will consider observational models of the form
Pm
Pm
y =
i=1 Ai (Xi ) + e ≡
i=1 Φi vec[Xi ] + e, (1)
where y ∈ Rn is an observed data vector, {Xi } represents
a set of unknown latent matrices we would like to estimate,1 and e is noise with distribution N (0, λI), λ > 0.
Additionally, {Ai } represents a set of known linear operators defined by the corresponding matrices {Φi }, and vec[·]
denotes the column-wise vectorization of a matrix. We also
assume Xi ∈ Rpi ×ρi for all i, and without loss of generality that pi ≤ ρi . Also, if pi = ρi = 1 for some i, we
may include scalars as a special case. Compounding the
estimation difficulty is the allowance that the combined dimensionality
of all {Xi } may be substantially larger than
P
y, or i pi ρi  n, meaning the measurement process
is severely underdetermined or only partially observable.
Consequently prior assumptions are required to restrict the
solution space if we hope to recover {Xi }.
In this work we will be assuming that each unknown element Xi has relatively small rank,
Ppossibly even zero
for many indeces, such that overall i rank[Xi ], or some
weighted alternative, is minimal. While perhaps deceptively simple on the surface, special cases encompass a
wide range of machine learning applications and data analysis tools including trace regression (Rohde & Tsybakov,
2011), multi-task learning (Jalali et al., 2010), robust PCA
(Candès et al., 2011), subspace clustering (Liu et al., 2013),
matrix completion (Candès & Recht, 2009), general affine
rank minimization (Chandrasekaran et al., 2012), source
localization (Limpiti et al., 2006), compressive sensing
(Candès et al., 2006), and assorted combinations thereof
(McCoy & Tropp, 2013; Nakajima et al., 2013a). Moreover, we envision that the underlying VB principles we
1

We frequently adopt the abbreviated notation {Xi } to denote
the set {Xi : i ∈ I}, with I an index set which should be apparent by context.

