Graying the black box: Understanding DQNs

Tom Zahavy*
TOMZAHAVY @ CAMPUS . TECHNION . AC . IL
Nir Ben Zrihem*
NIRB @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL
Shie Mannor
SHIE @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL
Electrical Engineering Department, The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract
In recent years there is a growing interest in using deep representations for reinforcement learning. In this paper, we present a methodology
and tools to analyze Deep Q-networks (DQNs)
in a non-blind matter. Using our tools we reveal that the features learned by DQNs aggregate
the state space in a hierarchical fashion, explaining its success. Moreover we are able to understand and describe the policies learned by DQNs
for three different Atari2600 games and suggest
ways to interpret, debug and optimize deep neural networks in reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
In the Reinforcement Learning (RL) paradigm, an agent
autonomously learns from experience in order to maximize
some reward signal. Learning to control agents directly
from high-dimensional inputs like vision and speech is
a long standing problem in RL, known as the curse of
dimensionality. Countless solutions to this problem have
been offered including linear function approximators
(Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997), hierarchical representations
(Dayan & Hinton, 1993), state aggregation (Singh et al.,
1995) and options (Sutton et al., 1999). These methods
rely upon engineering problem-specific state representations, hence, reducing the agent’s flexibility and making
the learning more tedious. Therefore, there is a growing
interest in using nonlinear function approximators, that are
more general and require less domain specific knowledge,
e.g., TD-gammon (Tesauro, 1995). Unfortunately, such
methods are known to be unstable or even to diverge when
used to represent the action-value function (Tsitsiklis &
Van Roy, 1997; Gordon, 1995; Riedmiller, 2005).
*These authors have contributed equally.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

The Deep Q-Network (DQN) algorithm (Mnih et al., 2015)
increased training stability by introducing the target network and by using Experience Replay (ER) (Lin, 1993). Its
success was demonstrated in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2012), a challenging framework composed of dozens of Atari games used to evaluate
general competency in AI. DQN achieved dramatically better results than earlier approaches, showing a robust ability
to learn representations.
While using Deep Learning (DL) in RL seems promising,
there is no free lunch. Training a Deep Neural Network
(DNNs) is a complex two-levels optimization process. At
the inner level we fix a hypothesis class and learn it using some gradient descent method. The optimization of the
outer level addresses the choice of network architecture,
setting hyper-parameters, and even the choice of optimization algorithm. While the optimization of the inner level is
analytic to a high degree, the optimization of the outer level
is far from being so. Currently, most practitioners tackle
this problem by either a trial and error methodology, or by
exhaustively searching over the space of possible configurations. Moreover, in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
we also need to choose how to model the environment as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP), i.e., to choose the discount factor, the amount of history frames that represent
a state, and to choose between the various algorithms and
architectures (Nair et al., 2015; Van Hasselt et al., 2015;
Schaul et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015; Bellemare et al.,
2015).
A key issue in RL is that of representation, i.e., allowing the
agent to locally generalize the policy across similar states.
Unfortunately, spatially similar states often induce different
control rules (”labels”) in contrast to other machine learning problems that enjoy local generalization. In fact, in
many cases the optimal policy is not a smooth function of
the state, thus using a linear approximation is far from being optimal. For example, in the Atari2600 game Seaquest,
whether or not a diver has been collected (represented by a
few pixels) controls the outcome of the submarine surface
action (with: fill air, without: loose a life) and therefore the

