Fast Stochastic Algorithms for SVD and PCA:
Convergence Properties and Convexity

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

Abstract
We study the convergence properties of the VRPCA algorithm introduced by (Shamir, 2015) for
fast computation of leading singular vectors. We
prove several new results, including a formal
analysis of a block version of the algorithm, and
convergence from random initialization. We also
make a few observations of independent interest,
such as how pre-initializing with just a single exact power iteration can significantly improve the
analysis, and what are the convexity and nonconvexity properties of the underlying optimization problem.

1. Introduction

OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

for several decades ((Krasulina, 1969; Oja, 1982)), and enjoyed renewed interest in recent years, e.g. (Arora et al.,
2012; Balsubramani et al., 2013; Arora et al., 2013; Hardt
& Price, 2014; De Sa et al., 2015). Another stochastic approach is based on SVD of a random projection of the data
matrix, e.g. (Halko et al., 2011; Woodruff, 2014).
Unfortunately, each of these algorithms suffer from a different disadvantage: The deterministic algorithms are accurate (runtime logarithmic in the required accuracy , under an eigengap condition), but require a full pass over the
matrix for each iteration, and in the worst-case many such
passes would be required (polynomial in the eigengap). On
the other hand, each iteration of the stochastic algorithms
is cheap, and their number is independent of the size of the
matrix, but on the flip side, their noisy stochastic nature
means they are not suitable for obtaining a high-accuracy
solution (the runtime scales polynomially with ).

We consider the problem of computing the subspace
spanned by the top k left singular vectors of a d × n matrix
X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), where k  min{n, d}. This is equivalent to computing the subspace of the top k eigenvectors of
XX > , or equivalently, solving the optimization problem
! !
n
1X
>
>
xi xi W .
min
−Trace W
n i=1
W ∈Rd×k :W > W =I
(1)
This is one of the most fundamental matrix computation
problems, and has numerous uses (such as low-rank matrix
approximation and principal component analysis).

Recently, (Shamir, 2015) proposed a new practical algorithm, VR-PCA, for solving Eq. (1), which has a “bestof-both-worlds” property: The algorithm is based on cheap
stochastic iterations, yet the algorithm’s runtime is logarithmic in the required accuracy . More precisely, for the case
k = 1, xi of bounded norm, and when there is an eigengap of λ between the first and second leading eigenvalues
of the covariance matrix n1 XX > , the required runtime was
shown to be on the order of


 
1
1
d n + 2 log
.
(2)
λ


For large-scale matrices X, where exact eigendecomposition is infeasible, standard deterministic approaches are
based on power iterations or variants thereof (e.g. the Lanczos method) (Golub & Van Loan, 2012). Alternatively, one
can exploit the structure of Eq. (1) and apply stochastic
iterative algorithms, where in each iteration we update a
current d × k matrix W based on one or more randomlydrawn columns xi of X. Such algorithms have been known

The algorithm is therefore suitable for obtaining high accuracy solutions (the dependence on  is logarithmic), essentially at the cost of only
√ O(log(1/)) passes over the
data, assuming λ = Ω(1/ n). The algorithm is based on
the variance-reduction technique introduced in (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013) to speed up stochastic algorithms for convex
optimization problems, even though the optimization problem in Eq. (1) is inherently non-convex. See Section 3 for
a more detailed description of this algorithm, and (Shamir,
2015) for more discussions as well as experiments.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

These results left several questions open. For example, it
is not clear if the quadratic dependence on 1/λ in Eq. (2)

