The Segmented iHMM: A Simple, Efficient Hierarchical Infinite HMM

Ardavan Saeedi
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT

ARDAVANS @ MIT. EDU

Matthew Hoffman
Adobe Research

MATHOFFM @ ADOBE . COM

Matthew Johnson
Harvard University

MATTJJ @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU

Ryan Adams
Harvard University and Twitter

Abstract
We propose the segmented iHMM (siHMM),
a hierarchical infinite hidden Markov model
(iHMM) that supports a simple, efficient inference scheme. The siHMM is well suited to segmentation problems, where the goal is to identify
points at which a time series transitions from one
relatively stable regime to a new regime. Conventional iHMMs often struggle with such problems, since they have no mechanism for distinguishing between high- and low-level dynamics.
Hierarchical HMMs (HHMMs) can do better, but
they require much more complex and expensive
inference algorithms. The siHMM retains the
simplicity and efficiency of the iHMM, but outperforms it on a variety of segmentation problems, achieving performance that matches or exceeds that of a more complicated HHMM.

1. Introduction
The infinite hidden Markov model (iHMM) (Beal et al.,
2001) and its variants (e.g., Fox et al. (2008); Saeedi &
Bouchard-Côté (2011)) have been among the most successful Bayesian nonparametric models, with applications from
speech recognition (Fox et al., 2011) to biology (Beal &
Krishnamurthy, 2012). However, despite their success in
modeling time series with complicated low-level dynamics,
their application to time series with multiple timescales has
been limited.
Such hierarchically structured sequences characterized by
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

multiple timescales arise in many domains, including natural language (Lee et al., 2013), handwriting (Lake et al.,
2014), and motion recognition (Heller et al., 2009). For
example, it is natural in motion recognition to model the
sequence of high-level actions (such as walking to a chair,
then sitting down) and steps within the actions (e.g., bending one’s knees then leaning back to sit down) at two different levels.
We will focus on the problem of segmentation, in which
the goal is to identify points at which a time series transitions from one relatively stable regime to a new regime. In
the motion recognition example, the segmentation problem
would be to identify when a subject transitioned from one
type of action (e.g., walking) to another (e.g., sitting down),
without necessarily identifying what they were doing. This
is one of the easiest problems in time-series modeling that
involves multiple timescales, but (as we will see) it is quite
hard for (i)HMMs, which have no mechanism for distinguishing between high- and low-level dynamics.
The hierarchical HMM (HHMM) is a generalization of
the HMM that naturally deals with dynamics at multiple
timescales (Fine et al., 1998; Murphy & Paskin, 2002). But
this generality comes at a price: these models lack the simple predictive distributions and efficient inference schemes
that make (i)HMMs so popular. And the available nonparametric versions of the HHMM (e.g., Heller et al., 2009;
Stepleton et al., 2009) are complex to implement and not
readily amenable to efficient inference.
In this paper, we propose the segmented iHMM (siHMM),
a simple extension to the iHMM that does not suffer from
the above problems and can discover segment boundaries
in time series with dynamics at two timescales. Unlike the
HHMM, our model does not explicitly model higher-level
state; instead, it assumes dynamics that evolve according

