Nonlinear Statistical Learning with Truncated Gaussian Graphical Models

Qinliang Su, Xuejun Liao, Changyou Chen, Lawrence Carin
Duke University, Durham, NC 27519, USA

Abstract
We introduce the truncated Gaussian graphical
model (TGGM) as a novel framework for designing statistical models for nonlinear learning. A
TGGM is a Gaussian graphical model (GGM)
with a subset of variables truncated to be nonnegative. The truncated variables are assumed latent
and integrated out to induce a marginal model.
We show that the variables in the marginal model
are non-Gaussian distributed and their expected
relations are nonlinear. We use expectationmaximization to break the inference of the nonlinear model into a sequence of TGGM inference
problems, each of which is efficiently solved by
using the properties and numerical methods of
multivariate Gaussian distributions. We use the
TGGM to design models for nonlinear regression and classification, with the performances of
these models demonstrated on extensive benchmark datasets and compared to state-of-the-art
competing results.

1. Introduction
Graphical models, which use graph-based visualization to
represent statistical dependencies among random variables,
have been widely used to construct multivariate statistical
models (Koller & Friedman, 2009). A sophisticated model
can generally represent richer statistical dependencies, but
the inference can quickly become intractable as the model’s
complexity increases. A simple model, on the contrary, is
easy to infer, but its representational power is limited.
To balance representational versatility and inferential
tractability, latent variables are often added into the graphical model to obtain a tractable joint probability distribution which, when the latent variables are integrated out, induces a complicated and expressive marginal distribution
over the target variables, i.e., the variables of interest (GalProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

QS15, XJLIAO, CC448, LCARIN@ DUKE . EDU

braith et al., 2002). Since the complexity of these models
is induced by integration, expectation-maximization (EM)
(Dempster et al., 1977) can be employed to facilitate inference. The approach of EM is to break the original problem of inferring the marginal distribution into a sequence of
easier problems, each of which is to infer the expected logarithmic joint distribution, where the expectation is taken
over the terms of latent variables in the logarithmic domain,
using the information from the previous iteration of this
sequential procedure. The restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM) (Hinton, 2002) and sigmoid belief network (SBN)
(Neal, 1992; Gan et al., 2015), as well as the deep networks
built upon them (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Hinton
et al., 2006), are good examples of using latent variables to
enhance modeling versatility while at the same time admitting tractable statistical inference.
Gaussian graphical models (GGM) constitute a subset of
graphical models that have found successful application in
a diverse range of areas (Honorio et al., 2009; Liu & Willsky, 2013; Oh & Deasy, 2014; Meng et al., 2014; Su &
Wu, 2015a;b). The popularity of GGM may partially be
attributed to the abundant applications for which the data
are Gaussian distributed or approximately so, and partially
attributed to the attractive properties of the multivariate
Gaussian distribution which facilitate inference. However,
there are many applications where the data are distributed
in a way that heavily deviates from Gaussianity, and the
GGM may not reveal meaningful statistical dependencies
underlying the data.
What is worse, adding latent variables into a GGM does
not induce enhanced marginal versatility for the target variables, as it typically does in other graphical models; this is
so because the marginals of a multivariate Gaussian distribution are still Gaussian. In addition, the conditional
mean of y given x is always linear in x whenever (y, x) are
jointly Gaussian. In this sense, a GGM is inherently a linear model no matter how many latent variables are added.
To overcome the linearity of GGMs, Frey (1997), Hinton &
Ghahramani (1997), and Frey & Hinton (1999) proposed to
apply nonlinear transformations to Gaussian hidden variables. More recently, a deep latent Gaussian model was
proposed in (Rezende et al., 2014), in which each hid-

