Supervised and Semi-Supervised Text Categorization
using LSTM for Region Embeddings

Rie Johnson
RJ Research Consulting, Tarrytown NY, USA

RIEJOHNSON @ GMAIL . COM

Tong Zhang
Big Data Lab, Baidu Inc, Beijing, China

TONGZHANG @ BAIDU . COM

Abstract
One-hot CNN (convolutional neural network)
has been shown to be effective for text categorization (Johnson & Zhang, 2015a;b). We view it
as a special case of a general framework which
jointly trains a linear model with a non-linear
feature generator consisting of ‘text region embedding + pooling’. Under this framework, we
explore a more sophisticated region embedding
method using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM).
LSTM can embed text regions of variable (and
possibly large) sizes, whereas the region size
needs to be fixed in a CNN. We seek effective and
efficient use of LSTM for this purpose in the supervised and semi-supervised settings. The best
results were obtained by combining region embeddings in the form of LSTM and convolution
layers trained on unlabeled data. The results indicate that on this task, embeddings of text regions, which can convey complex concepts, are
more useful than embeddings of single words in
isolation. We report performances exceeding the
previous best results on four benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Text categorization is the task of assigning labels to documents written in a natural language, and it has numerous real-world applications including sentiment analysis as
well as traditional topic assignment tasks. The state-of-the
art methods for text categorization had long been linear predictors (e.g., SVM with a linear kernel) with either bag-ofword or bag-of-n-gram vectors (hereafter bow) as input,
e.g., (Joachims, 1998; Lewis et al., 2004). This, however,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

has changed recently. Non-linear methods that can make
effective use of word order have been shown to produce
more accurate predictors than the traditional bow-based linear models, e.g., (Dai & Le, 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). In
particular, let us first focus on one-hot CNN which we proposed in JZ15 (Johnson & Zhang, 2015a;b).
A convolutional neural network (CNN) (LeCun et al.,
1986) is a feedforward neural network with convolution
layers interleaved with pooling layers, originally developed
for image processing. In its convolution layer, a small region of data (e.g., a small square of image) at every location
is converted to a low-dimensional vector with information
relevant to the task being preserved, which we loosely term
‘embedding’. The embedding function is shared among
all the locations, so that useful features can be detected
irrespective of their locations. In its simplest form, onehot CNN works as follows. A document is represented
as a sequence of one-hot vectors (each of which indicates
a word by the position of a 1); a convolution layer converts small regions of the document (e.g., “I love it”) to
low-dimensional vectors at every location (embedding of
text regions); a pooling layer aggregates the region embedding results to a document vector by taking componentwise maximum or average; and the top layer classifies a
document vector with a linear model (Figure 1). The onehot CNN and its semi-supervised extension were shown to
be superior to a number of previous methods.
In this work, we consider a more general framework (subsuming one-hot CNN) which jointly trains a feature generator and a linear model, where the feature generator consists of ‘region embedding + pooling’. The specific region
embedding function of one-hot CNN takes the simple form
v(x` ) = max(0, Wx` + b) ,

(1)

where x` is a concatenation of one-hot vectors (therefore,
‘one-hot’ in the name) of the words in the `-th region (of
a fixed size), and the weight matrix W and the bias vector
b need to be trained. It is simple and fast to compute, and

