Continuous Deep Q-Learning with Model-based Acceleration

Shixiang Gu1 2 3
SG 717@ CAM . AC . UK
Timothy Lillicrap4
COUNTZERO @ GOOGLE . COM
Ilya Sutskever3
ILYASU @ GOOGLE . COM
Sergey Levine3
SLEVINE @ GOOGLE . COM
1
University of Cambridge 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 Google Brain 4 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Model-free reinforcement learning has been successfully applied to a range of challenging problems, and has recently been extended to handle large neural network policies and value functions. However, the sample complexity of modelfree algorithms, particularly when using highdimensional function approximators, tends to
limit their applicability to physical systems. In
this paper, we explore algorithms and representations to reduce the sample complexity of
deep reinforcement learning for continuous control tasks. We propose two complementary techniques for improving the efficiency of such algorithms. First, we derive a continuous variant of
the Q-learning algorithm, which we call normalized advantage functions (NAF), as an alternative
to the more commonly used policy gradient and
actor-critic methods. NAF representation allows
us to apply Q-learning with experience replay to
continuous tasks, and substantially improves performance on a set of simulated robotic control
tasks. To further improve the efficiency of our
approach, we explore the use of learned models
for accelerating model-free reinforcement learning. We show that iteratively refitted local linear models are especially effective for this, and
demonstrate substantially faster learning on domains where such models are applicable.

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied to a range of challenging problems (Kober
& Peters, 2012; Deisenroth et al., 2013), and has recently
been extended to handle large neural network policies and
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

value functions (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2015; Heess et al., 2015; Hausknecht & Stone,
2015; Schulman et al., 2015). This makes it possible to
train policies for complex tasks with minimal feature and
policy engineering, using the raw state representation directly as input to the neural network. However, the sample
complexity of model-free algorithms, particularly when using very high-dimensional function approximators, tends to
be high (Schulman et al., 2015), which means that the benefit of reduced manual engineering and greater generality
is not felt in real-world domains where experience must be
collected on real physical systems, such as robots and autonomous vehicles. In such domains, the methods of choice
have been efficient model-free algorithms that use more
suitable, task-specific representations (Peters et al., 2010;
Deisenroth et al., 2013), as well as model-based algorithms
that learn a model of the system with supervised learning
and optimize a policy under this model (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Levine et al., 2016). Using task-specific
representations dramatically improves efficiency, but limits
the range of tasks that can be learned and requires greater
domain knowledge. Using model-based RL also improves
efficiency, but limits the policy to only be as good as the
learned model. For many real-world tasks, it may be easier
to represent a good policy than to learn a good model. For
example, a simple robotic grasping behavior might only require closing the fingers at the right moment, while the corresponding dynamics model requires learning the complexities of rigid and deformable bodies undergoing frictional
contact. It is therefore desirable to bring the generality of
model-free deep reinforcement learning into real-world domains by reducing their sample complexity.
In this paper, we propose two complementary techniques
for improving the efficiency of deep reinforcement learning in continuous control domains: we derive a variant of
Q-learning that can be used in continuous domains, and
we propose a method for combining this continuous Qlearning algorithm with learned models so as to accelerate
learning while preserving the benefits of model-free RL.
Model-free reinforcement learning in domains with contin-

