Stochastic Variance Reduced Optimization for Nonconvex Sparse Learning
Xingguo Li∗
LIXX 1661@ UMN . EDU
Tuo Zhao†
TZHAO 5@ JHU . EDU
Raman Arora†
ARORA @ CS . JHU . EDU
Han Liu‡
HANLIU @ PRINCETON . EDU
Jarvis Haupt∗
JDHAUPT @ UMN . EDU
∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
†
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218
‡
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, NJ 08544
Xingguo Li and Tuo Zhao equally contributed.

Abstract
We propose a stochastic variance reduced optimization algorithm for solving a class of largescale nonconvex optimization problems with cardinality constraints, and provide sufficient conditions under which the proposed algorithm enjoys
strong linear convergence guarantees and optimal estimation accuracy in high dimensions. Numerical experiments demonstrate the efficiency
of our method in terms of both parameter estimation and computational performance.

1. Introduction
High dimensionality is challenging from both the statistical and computational perspectives. To make the analysis
manageable, we usually assume that only a small number
of variables are relevant for modeling the response variable.
In the past decade, a large family of `1 regularized or `1
constrained sparse estimators have been proposed, including Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), Logistic Lasso (Van de Geer,
2008), Group Lasso (Yuan & Lin, 2006), Graphical Lasso
(Banerjee et al., 2008; Friedman et al., 2008), and more.
The `1 regularization serves as a convex surrogate for controlling the cardinality of the parameters, and a large family
of algorithms such as proximal gradient algorithms (Nesterov, 2013) have been developed for finding `1 regularized estimators in polynomial time. However, techniques
based on convex relaxation, using `1 norm as a surrogate
for `0 constraint, often incur large estimation bias, and attain worse empirical performance than those based on the
cardinality constraint (Fan & Li, 2001; Zhang, 2010; Zhao
et al., 2014a; Zhao & Liu, 2016). This motivates us to study
a family of cardinality constrained M-estimators. Formally,
we consider the nonconvex problem:
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

min F(w) s.t. kwk0 ≤ k,

w∈Rd

(1.1)

where F(w) is a smooth and nonstrongly convex loss function, and kwk0 denotes the number of nonzero entries in w.
To solve (1.1), a gradient hard thresholding (GHT) algorithm has been studied in the statistics as well as the machine learning community over the past few years (Blumensath & Davies, 2009; Foucart, 2011; Yuan et al., 2013;
Jain et al., 2014). GHT involves performing a gradient update followed by a hard thresholding operation. Let Hk (w)
denote a hard thresholding operator that keeps the largest
k entries in magnitude and sets the other entries equal to
zero. Then, given a solution w(t+1) at the t-th iteration,
GHT performs the following update:


w(t+1) = Hk w(t+1) − η∇F(w(t+1) ) ,
where Hk (·) is the hard thresholding operator, which keeps
the largest k (in magnitude) entries and sets the other entries equal to zero, ∇F(w(t+1) ) is the gradient of the objective at w(t+1) and η is a step size. Existing literature has
shown that under suitable conditions, the GHT algorithm
attains linear convergence to an approximately global optimum with optimal estimation accuracy with high probability (Yuan et al., 2013; Jain et al., 2014).
The GHT algorithm, though enjoying good convergence
rates, is not suitable for solving large-scale problems. The
computational bottleneck stems from the fact that the GHT
algorithm evaluates the (full) gradient at each iteration;
its computational complexity therefore depends linearly on
the number of samples. The GHT algorithm, therefore,
becomes computationally expensive for high-dimensional
problems with large sample size.
To address the scalability issue, (Nguyen et al., 2014) considers a scenario that is a typical setting in machine learning
wherein the objective function decomposes over samples,
i.e. where the objective function F(w) takes an additive
form over many smooth component functions:

