Stochastic Optimization for Multiview Representation Learning
using Partial Least Squares

Raman Arora
Poorya Mianjy
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218
Teodor V. Marinov
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh UK, EH8 9AB

Abstract
Partial Least Squares (PLS) is a ubiquitous statistical technique for bilinear factor analysis. It
is used in many data analysis, machine learning,
and information retrieval applications to model
the covariance structure between a pair of data
matrices. In this paper, we consider PLS for representation learning in a multiview setting where
we have more than one view in data at training
time. Furthermore, instead of framing PLS as a
problem about a fixed given data set, we argue
that PLS should be studied as a stochastic optimization problem, especially in a “big data” setting, with the goal of optimizing a population objective based on sample. This view suggests using Stochastic Approximation (SA) approaches,
such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and
enables a rigorous analysis of their benefits. In
this paper, we develop SA approaches to PLS
and provide iteration complexity bounds for the
proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Learning useful representations of data is one of the most
basic challenges in machine learning. Unsupervised representation learning techniques capitalize on unlabeled data
which is often cheap and abundant and sometimes virtually unlimited. The goal of these ubiquitous techniques
is to learn a representation that reveals intrinsic lowdimensional structure in data and dis-entangles underlying
factors of variation. This paper focuses on new theory and
methods for large-scale multiview representation learning.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ARORA @ CS . JHU . EDU
MIANJY @ JHU . EDU

T. V. MARINOV @ SMS . ED . AC . UK

Representation learning is typically phrased as a question about a fixed data set. For instance, partial least
squares (PLS), a ubiquitous procedure in data science, is
often posed as the following problem: given a data set of
n samples of two set of variates (or views), x ∈ Rdx and
y ∈ Rdy , respectively, what is the k-dimensional subspace
that captures most of the covariance between the two views.
It is well known that this subspace is given by the leading
k components of the singular value decomposition of the
cross-covariance matrix E[xy> ]. And so, the study of computational approaches for PLS has mostly focused on methods for finding the singular value decomposition (SVD), or
leading components of the SVD, for a given dx ×dy matrix.
We argue that if we aim to capitalize on massive amounts
of unlabeled data, we must also develop appropriate computational approaches and study them in the “data laden”
regime. Accordingly, in this paper, we take a stochastic
optimization view of representation learning rather than
thinking of them as dimensionality reduction techniques
for a given finite data set. In this paper, we argue that in
the data laden (“big data”) regime, representation learning
techniques, including PLS, and other related problems, are
better studied as stochastic optimization problems, where
the goal is to optimize a “population objective” based on
i.i.d. draws from the population. That is, in the case of PLS,
we consider a setting in which we have some unknown
source (“population”) distribution D over Rdx × Rdy , and
the goal is to find the k-dimensional subspace maximizing the (uncentered) covariance of D inside the subspace
based on i.i.d. samples from D. The main point here is
that the true objective is not how well the subspace captures the sample (i.e. the “training error”), but rather how
well the subspace captures the underlying source distribution (i.e. the “generalization error”). Furthermore, we are
not concerned here with capturing some “true” subspace,
and so do not measure the angle to it, but rather at finding a
“good” subspace, that is almost as good as the optimal one.

