Minimum Regret Search for Single- and Multi-Task Optimization

Jan Hendrik Metzen
Universität Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany
Corporate Research, Robert Bosch GmbH, 70442 Stuttgart, Germany

Abstract
We propose minimum regret search (MRS),
a novel acquisition function for Bayesian optimization.
MRS bears similarities with
information-theoretic approaches such as entropy search (ES). However, while ES aims in
each query at maximizing the information gain
with respect to the global maximum, MRS aims
at minimizing the expected simple regret of
its ultimate recommendation for the optimum.
While empirically ES and MRS perform similar
in most of the cases, MRS produces fewer outliers with high simple regret than ES. We provide
empirical results both for a synthetic single-task
optimization problem as well as for a simulated
multi-task robotic control problem.

1. INTRODUCTION
Bayesian optimization (BO, Shahriari et al., 2016) denotes
a sequential, model-based, global approach for optimizing black-box functions. It is particularly well-suited for
problems which are non-convex, do not necessarily provide derivatives, are expensive to evaluate (either computationally, economically, or morally), and can potentially be
noisy. Under these conditions, there is typically no guarantee for finding the true optimum of the function with a finite
number of function evaluations. Instead, one often aims at
finding a solution which has small simple regret (Bubeck
et al., 2009) with regard to the true optimum, where simple regret denotes the difference of the true optimal function value and the function value of the “solution” selected
by the algorithm after a finite number of function evaluations. BO aims at finding such a solution of small simple regret while minimizing at the same time the number
of evaluations of the expensive target function. For this,
BO maintains a probabilistic surrogate model of the objective function, and a myopic utility or acquisition function,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

JANMETZEN @ MAILBOX . ORG

which defines the “usefulness” of performing an additional
function evaluation at a certain input for learning about the
optimum.
BO has been applied to a diverse set of problems, ranging from hyperparameter optimization of machine learning models (Bergstra et al., 2011; Snoek et al., 2012)
over robotics (Calandra et al., 2015; Lizotte et al., 2007;
Kroemer et al., 2010; Marco et al., 2015) to sensor networks (Srinivas et al., 2010) and environmental monitoring
(Marchant & Ramos, 2012). For a more comprehensive
overview of application areas, we refer to Shahriari et al.
(2016).
A critical component for the performance of BO is the acquisition function, which controls the exploratory behavior of the sequential search procedure. Different kinds of
acquisition functions have been proposed, ranging from
improvement-based acquisition functions over optimistic
acquisition functions to information- theoretic acquisition
functions (see Section 2). In the latter class, the group
of entropy search-based approaches (Villemonteix et al.,
2008; Hennig & Schuler, 2012; Hernández-Lobato et al.,
2014), which aims at maximizing the information gain regarding the true optimum, has achieved state-of-the-art performance on a number of synthetic and real-world problems. However, performance is often reported as the median over many runs, which bears the risk that the median
masks “outlier” runs that perform considerably worse than
the rest. In fact, our results indicate that the performance
of sampling-based entropy search is not necessarily better
than traditional and cheaper acquisition functions according to the mean simple regret.
In this work, we propose minimum regret search (MRS), a
novel acquisition function that explicitly aims at minimizing the expected simple regret (Section 3). MRS performs
well according to both the mean and median performance
on a synthetic problem (Section 5.1). Moreover, we discuss
how MRS can be extended to multi-task optimization problems (Section 4) and present empirical results on a simulated robotic control problem (Section 5.2).

