Revisiting Semi-Supervised Learning with Graph Embeddings

Zhilin Yang
William W. Cohen
Ruslan Salakhutdinov
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We present a semi-supervised learning framework based on graph embeddings. Given a graph
between instances, we train an embedding for
each instance to jointly predict the class label and
the neighborhood context in the graph. We develop both transductive and inductive variants of
our method. In the transductive variant of our
method, the class labels are determined by both
the learned embeddings and input feature vectors, while in the inductive variant, the embeddings are defined as a parametric function of the
feature vectors, so predictions can be made on instances not seen during training. On a large and
diverse set of benchmark tasks, including text
classification, distantly supervised entity extraction, and entity classification, we show improved
performance over many of the existing models.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning aims to leverage unlabeled data
to improve performance. A large number of semisupervised learning algorithms jointly optimize two training objective functions: the supervised loss over labeled
data and the unsupervised loss over both labeled and unlabeled data. Graph-based semi-supervised learning defines
the loss function as a weighted sum of the supervised loss
over labeled instances and a graph Laplacian regularization term (Zhu et al., 2003; Zhou et al., 2004; Belkin et al.,
2006; Weston et al., 2012). The graph Laplacian regularization is based on the assumption that nearby nodes in a
graph are likely to have the same labels. Graph Laplacian
regularization is effective because it constrains the labels to
be consistent with the graph structure.
Recently developed unsupervised representation learning
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ZHILINY @ CS . CMU . EDU
WCOHEN @ CS . CMU . EDU
RSALAKHU @ CS . CMU . EDU

methods learn embeddings that predict a distributional context, e.g. a word embedding might predict nearby context
words (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014), or
a node embedding might predict nearby nodes in a graph
(Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015). Embeddings
trained with distributional context can be used to boost the
performance of related tasks. For example, word embeddings trained from a language model can be applied to partof-speech tagging, chunking and named entity recognition
(Collobert et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2016).
In this paper we consider not word embeddings but graph
embeddings. Existing results show that graph embeddings
are effective at classifying the nodes in a graph, such as
user behavior prediction in a social network (Perozzi et al.,
2014; Tang et al., 2015). However, the graph embeddings
are usually learned separately from the supervised task,
and hence do not leverage the label information in a specific task. Hence graph embeddings are in some sense
complementary to graph Laplacian regularization that does
not produce useful features itself and might not be able to
fully leverage the distributional information encoded in the
graph structure.
The main highlight of our work is to incorporate embedding techniques into the graph-based semi-supervised
learning setting. We propose a novel graph-based semisupervised learning framework, Planetoid (Predicting Labels And Neighbors with Embeddings Transductively Or
Inductively from Data). The embedding of an instance is
jointly trained to predict the class label of the instance and
the context in the graph. We then concatenate the embeddings and the hidden layers of the original classifier and
feed them to a softmax layer when making the prediction.
Since the embeddings are learned based on the graph structure, the above method is transductive, which means we
can only predict instances that are already observed in the
graph at training time. In many cases, however, it may be
desirable to have an inductive approach, where predictions
can be made on instances unobserved in the graph seen at
training time. To address this issue, we further develop an
inductive variant of our framework, where we define the

