Discrete Deep Feature Extraction: A Theory and New Architectures

Thomas Wiatowski1
Michael Tschannen1
Aleksandar Stanić1
Philipp Grohs2
Helmut Bölcskei1
1
Dept. IT & EE, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Dept. Math., University of Vienna, Austria

Abstract
First steps towards a mathematical theory of deep
convolutional neural networks for feature extraction were made—for the continuous-time case—
in Mallat, 2012, and Wiatowski and Bölcskei,
2015. This paper considers the discrete case,
introduces new convolutional neural network architectures, and proposes a mathematical framework for their analysis. Specifically, we establish deformation and translation sensitivity results of local and global nature, and we investigate how certain structural properties of the
input signal are reflected in the corresponding feature vectors. Our theory applies to
general filters and general Lipschitz-continuous
non-linearities and pooling operators. Experiments on handwritten digit classification and facial landmark detection—including feature importance evaluation—complement the theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have proven
tremendously successful in a wide range of machine learning tasks (Bengio et al., 2013; LeCun et al., 2015). Such
networks are composed of multiple layers, each of which
computes convolutional transforms followed by the application of non-linearities and pooling operators.
DCNNs are typically distinguished according to (i)
whether the filters employed are learned (in a supervised
(LeCun et al., 1998; Huang & LeCun, 2006; Jarrett et al.,
2009) or unsupervised (Ranzato et al., 2006; 2007; JarProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

WITHOMAS @ NARI . EE . ETHZ . CH
MICHAELT @ NARI . EE . ETHZ . CH
ASTANIC @ STUDENT. ETHZ . CH
PHILIPP. GROHS @ UNIVIE . AC . AT
BOELCSKEI @ NARI . EE . ETHZ . CH

rett et al., 2009) fashion) or pre-specified (and structured,
such as, e.g., wavelets (Serre et al., 2005; Mutch & Lowe,
2006; Mallat, 2012), or unstructured, such as random filters (Ranzato et al., 2007; Jarrett et al., 2009)), (ii) the
non-linearities used (e.g., logistic sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, modulus, or rectified linear unit), and (iii) the pooling operator employed (e.g., sub-sampling, average pooling, or max-pooling). While a given choice of filters, nonlinearities, and pooling operators will lead to vastly different performance results across datasets, it is remarkable
that the overall DCNN architecture allows for impressive
classification results across an extraordinarily broad range
of applications. It is therefore of significant interest to understand the mechanisms underlying this universality.
First steps towards addressing this question and developing a mathematical theory of DCNNs for feature extraction were made—for the continuous-time case—in (Mallat,
2012; Wiatowski & Bölcskei, 2015). Specifically, (Mallat, 2012) analyzed so-called scattering networks, where
signals are propagated through layers that employ directional wavelet filters and modulus non-linearities but
no intra-layer pooling. The resulting wavelet-modulus
feature extractor is horizontally (i.e., in every network
layer) translation-invariant (accomplished by letting the
wavelet scale parameter go to infinity) and deformationstable, both properties of significance in practical feature extraction applications. Recently, (Wiatowski &
Bölcskei, 2015) considered Mallat-type networks with arbitrary filters (that may be learned or pre-specified), general Lipschitz-continuous non-linearities (e.g., rectified linear unit, shifted logistic sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, and
the modulus function), and a continuous-time pooling operator that amounts to a dilation. The essence of the results in (Wiatowski & Bölcskei, 2015) is that vertical (i.e.,
asymptotically in the network depth) translation invariance
and Lipschitz continuity of the feature extractor are induced by the network structure per se rather than the specific choice of filters and non-linearities. For band-limited

