Stochastic Quasi-Newton Langevin Monte Carlo

Umut Şimşekli1
UMUT. SIMSEKLI @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
Roland Badeau1
ROLAND . BADEAU @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
A. Taylan Cemgil2
TAYLAN . CEMGIL @ BOUN . EDU . TR
Gaël Richard1
GAEL . RICHARD @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
1: LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013, Paris, France
2: Department of Computer Engineering, Boğaziçi University, 34342, Bebek, İstanbul, Turkey

Abstract
Recently, Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) methods have been
proposed for scaling up Monte Carlo computations to large data problems. Whilst these
approaches have proven useful in many applications, vanilla SG-MCMC might suffer from
poor mixing rates when random variables exhibit
strong couplings under the target densities or big
scale differences. In this study, we propose a
novel SG-MCMC method that takes the local geometry into account by using ideas from QuasiNewton optimization methods. These second
order methods directly approximate the inverse
Hessian by using a limited history of samples and
their gradients. Our method uses dense approximations of the inverse Hessian while keeping
the time and memory complexities linear with
the dimension of the problem. We provide a
formal theoretical analysis where we show that
the proposed method is asymptotically unbiased
and consistent with the posterior expectations.
We illustrate the effectiveness of the approach on
both synthetic and real datasets. Our experiments
on two challenging applications show that our
method achieves fast convergence rates similar to
Riemannian approaches while at the same time
having low computational requirements similar
to diagonal preconditioning approaches.

1. Introduction
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are one of
the most important family of algorithms in Bayesian machine learning. These methods lie in the core of various
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

applications such as the estimation of Bayesian predictive
densities and Bayesian model selection. They also provide
important advantages over optimization-based point estimation methods, such as having better predictive accuracy
and being more robust to over-fitting (Chen et al., 2014;
Ahn et al., 2015). Despite their well-known benefits, during the last decade, conventional MCMC methods have lost
their charm since they are often criticized as being computationally very demanding. Indeed, classical approaches
based on batch Metropolis Hastings would require passing
over the whole data set at each iteration and the acceptancerejection test makes the methods even more impractical for
modern data sets.
Recently, alternative approaches have been proposed to
scale-up MCMC inference to large-scale regime. An important attempt was made by Welling & Teh (2011), where
the authors combined the ideas from Langevin Monte Carlo
(LMC) (Rossky et al., 1978; Roberts & Stramer, 2002;
Neal, 2010) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Kushner & Yin, 2003), and developed a scalable MCMC framework referred to as stochastic
gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD). Unlike conventional
batch MCMC methods, SGLD uses subsamples of the data
per iteration similar to SGD. With this manner, SGLD is
able to scale up to large datasets while at the same time
being a valid MCMC method that forms a Markov chain
asymptotically sampling from the target density. Several
extensions of SGLD have been proposed (Ahn et al., 2012;
Patterson & Teh, 2013; Ahn et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2014;
Ding et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015; Shang
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016), which are coined under the
term Stochastic Gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC).
One criticism that is often directed at SGLD is that it suffers
from poor mixing rates when the target densities exhibit
strong couplings and scale differences across dimensions.
This problem is caused by the fact that SGLD is based on
an isotropic Langevin diffusion, which implicitly assumes
that different components of the latent variable are uncor-

