Online Stochastic Linear Optimization under One-bit Feedback

Lijun Zhang
ZHANGLJ @ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
Rong Jin
Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA

TIANBAO - YANG @ UIOWA . EDU

JINRONG . JR @ ALIBABA - INC . COM

Yichi Xiao
XIAOYC @ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
Zhi-Hua Zhou
ZHOUZH @ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China

Abstract
In this paper, we study a special bandit setting of
online stochastic linear optimization, where only
one-bit of information is revealed to the learner at each round. This problem has found many
applications including online advertisement and
online recommendation. We assume the binary
feedback is a random variable generated from the
logit model, and aim to minimize the regret defined by the unknown linear function. Although
the existing method for generalized linear bandit
can be applied to our problem, the high computational cost makes it impractical for real-world
applications. To address this challenge, we develop an efficient online learning algorithm by
exploiting particular structures of the observation model. Specifically, we adopt online Newton step to estimate the unknown parameter and
derive a tight confidence region based on the exponential concavity of the logistic loss. Our analysis shows that the proposed
algorithm achieves
√
e
a regret bound of O(d
T ), which matches the
optimal result of stochastic linear bandits.

problem is the multi-armed bandits (MAB), which models
the situation that a gambler must choose which of K slot
machines to play (Robbins, 1952). In the basic stochastic MAB, each arm is assumed to deliver rewards that are
drawn from a fixed but unknown distribution. The goal of
the gambler is to minimize the regret, namely the difference between his expected cumulative reward and that of
the best single arm in hindsight (Auer et al., 2002).
Although MAB is a powerful framework for modeling online decision problems, it becomes intractable when the
number of arms is very large or even infinite. To address
this challenge, various algorithms have been designed to
exploit different structure properties of the reward function, such as Lipschitz (Kleinberg et al., 2008) and convex (Flaxman et al., 2005; Agarwal et al., 2013). Among
them, stochastic linear bandits (SLB) has received considerable attentions during the past decade (Auer, 2002; Dani
et al., 2008; Abbasi-yadkori et al., 2011). In each round
of SLB, the learner is asked to choose an action xt from a
decision set D ⊆ Rd , then he observes yt such that
E[yt |xt ] = x>
t w∗ ,

where w∗ ∈ Rd is a vector of unknown parameters. The
goal of the learner is to minimize the (pseudo) regret

1. Introduction
Online learning with bandit feedback plays an important role in several industrial domains, such as ad placement,
website optimization, and packet routing (Bubeck & CesaBianchi, 2012). A canonical framework for studying this
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

(1)

>

T max x w∗ −
x∈D

T
X

x>
t w∗ .

(2)

t=1

In this paper, we consider a special bandit setting of online linear optimization where the feedback yt only contains one-bit of information. In particular, yt ∈ {±1}. Our
setting is motivated from the fact that in many real-world
applications, such as online advertising and recommender

