Quadratic Optimization with Orthogonality Constraints: Explicit Łojasiewicz
Exponent and Linear Convergence of Line-Search Methods

Huikang Liu
Weijie Wu
Anthony Man-Cho So
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin NT, Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract
A fundamental class of matrix optimization problems that arise in many areas of science and engineering is that of quadratic optimization with
orthogonality constraints. Such problems can be
solved using line-search methods on the Stiefel
manifold, which are known to converge globally
under mild conditions. To determine the convergence rates of these methods, we give an explicit
estimate of the exponent in a Łojasiewicz inequality for the (non-convex) set of critical points
of the aforementioned class of problems. This
not only allows us to establish the linear convergence of a large class of line-search methods but
also answers an important and intriguing problem in mathematical analysis and numerical optimization. A key step in our proof is to establish
a local error bound for the set of critical points,
which may be of independent interest.

1. Introduction
Quadratic optimization problems with orthogonality constraints constitute an important class of matrix optimization problems that have found applications in many areas of
science and engineering, such as combinatorial optimization, data mining, dynamical systems, multivariate statistical analysis, and signal processing, just to mention a few
(see, e.g., (Bolla et al., 1998; Manton, 2002; Absil et al.,
2008; Journée et al., 2010; Kokiopoulou et al., 2011; Saad,
2011; So, 2011; Yger et al., 2012)). A prototypical form of
such problems is


min
F (X) = tr X T AXB ,
(QP-OC)
X∈St(m,n)

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

HKLIU @ SE . CUHK . EDU . HK
WWU @ SE . CUHK . EDU . HK
MANCHOSO @ SE . CUHK . EDU . HK


where St(m, n) = X ∈ Rm×n | X T X = In (with
m ≥ n and In being the n × n identity matrix) is the compact Stiefel manifold and A ∈ S m , B ∈ S n are given
symmetric matrices. The algorithmic aspects of Problem (QP-OC) have been extensively investigated in the literature; see, e.g., the references above. One approach is to
exploit the manifold structure of the constraint set St(m, n)
and apply retraction-based line-search methods. Specifically, the update formulae of these methods take the form
Xk+1 = R (Xk , αk ξk )

for k = 0, 1, . . . ,

(1)

where αk > 0 is the step size, ξk is a search direction in the
tangent space to St(m, n) at Xk , and R(Xk , ·) is a function
that maps a vector in the tangent space to St(m, n) at Xk
into a point on St(m, n). In particular, the iterates produced by (1) are all feasible for Problem (QP-OC). Naturally, the choice of step sizes, search directions, and the
retraction will affect the convergence and efficiency of the
resulting method. For the general problem of optimizing a
smooth function over the Stiefel manifold (which includes
Problem (QP-OC) as a special case), various choices have
been proposed over the years, and the convergence properties of the resulting methods are relatively well understood;
see, e.g., (Abrudan et al., 2008; Absil et al., 2008; Absil &
Malick, 2012; Wen & Yin, 2013; Jiang & Dai, 2015) and
the references therein. However, very little is known about
the convergence rates of these methods, even when they are
applied to the much more structured problem (QP-OC). In
an early work, Smith (Smith, 1994) showed that when used
to optimize a smooth function over a Riemannian manifold, the method of steepest descent (which is a special case
of (1)) will converge linearly to a critical point if the function is strongly convex on the manifold. However, such a
notion of convexity is much stronger than that on the Euclidean space. In particular, it is known that every smooth
function that is convex on a compact Riemannian manifold (such as the Stiefel manifold) is constant (Bishop &
O’Neill, 1969). Therefore, one cannot hope to obtain linear convergence results for Problem (QP-OC) using the

