Scalable Discrete Sampling as a Multi-Armed Bandit Problem
Yutian Chen
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK

YUTIAN . CHEN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

Zoubin Ghahramani
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
Alan Turing Institute, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK

ZOUBIN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

Abstract
Drawing a sample from a discrete distribution is
one of the building components for Monte Carlo
methods. Like other sampling algorithms, discrete sampling suffers from the high computational burden in large-scale inference problems.
We study the problem of sampling a discrete
random variable with a high degree of dependency that is typical in large-scale Bayesian inference and graphical models, and propose an efficient approximate solution with a subsampling
approach. We make a novel connection between
the discrete sampling and Multi-Armed Bandits
problems with a finite reward population and provide three algorithms with theoretical guarantees.
Empirical evaluations show the robustness and
efficiency of the approximate algorithms in both
synthetic and real-world large-scale problems.

1. Introduction
Sampling a random variable from a discrete (conditional)
distribution is one of the core operations in Monte Carlo
methods. It is an ubiquitous and often necessary component for inference algorithms such as Gibbs sampling and
particle filtering. Applying discrete sampling for largescale problems has been a challenging task like other
Monte Carlo algorithms due to the high computational
burden. Various approaches have been proposed to address different dimensions of “large scales”. For example,
distributed algorithms have been used to sample a model
with a large number of discrete variables (Newman et al.,
2009; Bratires et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2011), smart transition kernels were described for Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithms to sample efficiently a single variable
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

with a large or even infinite state space (Li et al., 2014;
Kalli et al., 2011). This paper is focused on another dimension of the “large-scales” where the variable to sample has
a large degree of statistical dependency.
Consider a random variable with a finite domain X 2 X
and a distribution in the following form
p(X = x) / p̃(X = x), with p̃(X = x) = f0 (x)

N
Y

n=1

fn (x),
(1)

where fn can be any function of x. Such distribution occurs
frequently in machine learning problems. For example, in
Bayesian inference for a model with parameter X and N
i.i.d. observations D = {yn }N
n=1 , the posterior distribution of X depends on all the observations when sufficient
statistics is not available. The unnormalizedQposterior disN
tribution can be written as p̃(X|D) = p(X) i=1 p(yi |X).
In undirected graphical model inference problems where
a node Xi appears in N potential functions, the distribution of Xi depends on the value of all of the N functions.
The unnormalized conditional distribution is p̃(Xi |x i ) =
QN
n=1 n (Xi , x i ), where x i denotes the value of all the
other nodes in the graph and n denotes a potential function that includes Xi in the scope. In this paper we study
how to sample a discrete random variable X in a manner
that is scalable in N .
A common approach to address the big data problem is
divide-and-conquer that uses parallel or distributed computing resources to process data in parallel and then synchronize the results periodically or merely once in the end
(Scott et al., 2013; Medlar et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2014).
An orthogonal approach has been studied for the
Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm in a general state
space by running a sampler with subsampled data. This approach can be combined easily with the distributed computing idea for even better scalability (e.g. Ahn et al., 2015).
Maclaurin & Adams (2015) introduced an MH algorithm

