Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent for PCA

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Abstract

The conceptually simplest method for this task, given m
sampled points x1 , . .P
. , xm , is to construct the empirical
m
1
>
covariance matrix m
i=1 xi xi , and compute its leading
eigenvector by an eigendecomposition. Based on concentration of measure arguments, itpis not difficult to show
that this would result in an O( 1/m)-optimal solution
to Eq. (1). Unfortunately, the runtime of this method is
O(md2 + d3 ). In large-scale applications, both m and d
might be huge, and even forming the d × d covariance matrix, let alone performing an eigendecomposition, can be
computationally prohibitive. A standard alternative to exact eigendecomposition is iterative methods, such as power
iterations or the Lanczos method, which require performing multiple products of a vector with the empirical covariance matrix. Although this doesn’t require computing and
storing the matrix explicitly, it still requires multiple passes
over the data, whose number may scale with eigengap parameters of the matrix or the target accuracy (Kuczynski &
Wozniakowski, 1992; Musco & Musco, 2015). Recently,
new randomized algorithms for this problem were able to
significantly reduce the required number of passes, while
maintaining the ability to compute high-accuracy solutions
(Shamir, 2015b;a; Garber & Hazan, 2015; Jin et al., 2015).

We consider the problem of principal component
analysis (PCA) in a streaming stochastic setting,
where our goal is to find a direction of approximate maximal variance, based on a stream of
i.i.d. data points in Rd . A simple and computationally cheap algorithm for this is stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), which incrementally updates its estimate based on each new data point.
However, due to the non-convex nature of the
problem, analyzing its performance has been a
challenge. In particular, existing guarantees rely
on a non-trivial eigengap assumption on the covariance matrix, which is intuitively unnecessary.
In this paper, we provide (to the best of our
knowledge) the first eigengap-free convergence
guarantees for SGD in the context of PCA. This
also partially resolves an open problem posed
in (Hardt & Price, 2014). Moreover, under an
eigengap assumption, we show that the same
techniques lead to new SGD convergence guarantees with better dependence on the eigengap.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901;
Hotelling, 1933) is a fundamental tool in data analysis and
visualization, designed to find the subspace of largest variance in a given dataset (a set of points in Euclidean space).
We focus on a simple stochastic setting, where the data
x1 , x2 , . . . ∈ Rd is assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from an
unknown underlying distribution, and our goal is to find a
direction of approximately maximal variance. This can be
written as the optimization problem
min
w:kwk=1

−w> E[xx> ]w,

(1)

or equivalently, finding an approximate leading eigenvector
of the covariance matrix E[xx> ].
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In this work, we consider the efficacy of algorithms which
perform a single pass over the data, and in particular,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). For solving Eq. (1),
SGD corresponds to initializing at some unit vector w0 ,
and then at each iteration t perform a stochastic gradient
step with respect to xt x>
t (which is an unbiased estimate
of E[xx> ]), followed by a projection to the unit sphere:
wt := (I + ηxt x>
t )wt−1 , wt := wt /kwt k.
Here, η is a step size parameter. In the context of PCA,
this is also known as Oja’s method (Oja, 1982; Oja &
Karhunen, 1985). The algorithm is highly efficient in terms
of memory and runtime per iteration, requiring storage of
a single d-dimensional vector, and performing only vectorvector and a vector-scalar products in each iteration.
In the world of convex stochastic optimization and learning, SGD has another remarkable property: Despite it being
a simple, one-pass algorithm, it is essentially (worst-case)
statistically optimal, attaining the same statistical estima-

