An optimal algorithm for the Thresholding Bandit Problem

Andrea Locatelli
Maurilio Gutzeit
Alexandra Carpentier
Department of Mathematics, University of Potsdam, Germany

Abstract
We study a specific combinatorial pure exploration stochastic bandit problem where the
learner aims at finding the set of arms whose
means are above a given threshold, up to a given
precision, and for a fixed time horizon. We
propose a parameter-free algorithm based on an
original heuristic, and prove that it is optimal
for this problem by deriving matching upper and
lower bounds. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first non-trivial pure exploration setting
with fixed budget for which optimal strategies are
constructed.

1. Introduction
In this paper we study a specific combinatorial, pure exploration, stochastic bandit setting. More precisely, consider a stochastic bandit setting where each arm has mean
µk . The learner can sample sequentially T > 0 samples
from the arms and aims at finding as efficiently as possible the set of arms whose means are larger than a threshold τ ∈ R. In this paper, we refer to this setting as the
Thresholding Bandit Problem (TBP), which is a specific instance of the combinatorial pure exploration bandit setting
introduced in (Chen et al., 2014). A simpler ”one armed”
version of this problem is known as the SIGN-ξ problem,
see (Chen & Li, 2015).
This problem is related to the popular combinatorial pure
exploration bandit problem known as the TopM problem
where the aim of the learner is to return the set of M arms
with highest mean (Bubeck et al., 2013b; Gabillon et al.,
2012; Kaufmann et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2014; Cao et al.,
2015) - which is a combinatorial version of the best arm
identification problem (Even-Dar et al., 2002; Mannor &
Tsitsiklis, 2004; Bubeck et al., 2009; Audibert & Bubeck,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ANDREA . LOCATELLI @ UNI - POTSDAM . DE
MGUTZEIT @ UNI - POTSDAM . DE
CARPENTIER @ UNI - POTSDAM . DE

2010; Gabillon et al., 2012; Jamieson et al., 2014; Karnin
et al., 2013; Kaufmann et al., 2015; Chen & Li, 2015). To
formulate this link with a simple metaphor, the TopM problem is a ”contest” and the TBP problem is an ”exam”: in
the former, the learner wants to select the M arms with
highest mean, in the latter the learner wants to select the
arms whose means are higher than a certain threshold. We
believe that this distinction is important and that in many
applications the TBP problem is more relevant than the
TopM, as in many domains one has a natural ”efficiency”,
or ”correctness” threshold above which one wants to use an
option. For instance in industrial applications, one wants to
keep a machine if its production’s value is above its functioning costs, in crowd-sourcing one wants to hire a worker
as long as its productivity is higher than its wage, etc. In
addition to these applications derived from the TopM problem, the TBP problem has applications in dueling bandits
and is a natural way to cast the problem of active and discrete level set detection, which is in turn related to the
important applications of active classification, and active
anomaly detection - we detail this point more in Subsection 3.1.
As mentioned previously, the TBP problem is a specific instance of the combinatorial pure exploration bandit framework introduced in (Chen et al., 2014). Without going into
the details of the combinatorial pure exploration setting for
which the paper (Chen et al., 2014) derives interesting general results, we will summarize what these results imply
for the particular TBP and TopM problems, which are specific cases of the combinatorial pure exploration setting. As
it is often the case for pure exploration problems, the paper (Chen et al., 2014) distinguishes between two settings:

• The fixed budget setting where the learner aims, given
a fixed budget T , at returning the set of arms that are
above the threshold (in the case of TBP) or the set
of M best arms (in the case of TopM), with highest
possible probability. In this setting, upper and lower
bounds are on the probability of making an error when
returning the set of arms.

