Opponent Modeling in Deep Reinforcement Learning

He He
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20740 USA

HHE @ UMIACS . UMD . EDU

Jordan Boyd-Graber
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA

J ORDAN .B OYD .G RABER @ COLORADO . EDU

Kevin Kwok
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Hal Daumé III
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20740 USA

Abstract
Opponent modeling is necessary in multi-agent
settings where secondary agents with competing
goals also adapt their strategies, yet it remains
challenging because strategies interact with each
other and change. Most previous work focuses on
developing probabilistic models or parameterized
strategies for specific applications. Inspired by
the recent success of deep reinforcement learning,
we present neural-based models that jointly learn
a policy and the behavior of opponents. Instead
of explicitly predicting the opponent’s action, we
encode observation of the opponents into a deep
Q-Network (DQN); however, we retain explicit
modeling (if desired) using multitasking. By using a Mixture-of-Experts architecture, our model
automatically discovers different strategy patterns
of opponents without extra supervision. We evaluate our models on a simulated soccer game and
a popular trivia game, showing superior performance over DQN and its variants.

1. Introduction
An intelligent agent working in strategic settings (e.g., collaborative or competitive tasks) must predict the action of
other agents and reason about their intentions. This is important because all active agents affect the state of the world.
For example, a multi-player game AI can exploit suboptimal players if it can predict their bad moves; a negotiating
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

KKWOK @ MIT. EDU

HAL @ UMIACS . UMD . EDU

agent can reach an agreement faster if it knows the other
party’s bottom line; a self-driving car must avoid accidents
by predicting where cars and pedestrians are going. Two critical questions in opponent modeling are what variable(s) to
model and how to use the predicted information. However,
the answers depend much on the specific application, and
most previous work (Billings et al., 1998a; Southey et al.,
2005; Ganzfried & Sandholm, 2011) focuses exclusively on
poker games which require substantial domain knowledge.
We aim to build a general opponent modeling framework in
the reinforcement learning setting, which enables the agent
to exploit idiosyncrasies of various opponents. First, to account for changing behavior, we model uncertainty in the
opponent’s strategy instead of classifying it into a set of
stereotypes. Second, domain knowledge is often required
when prediction of the opponents are separated from learning the dynamics of the world. Therefore, we jointly learn a
policy and model the opponent probabilistically.
We develop a new model, DRON (Deep Reinforcement Opponent Network), based on the recent deep Q-Network of
Mnih et al. (2015, DQN) in Section 3. DRON has a policy
learning module that predicts Q-values and an opponent
learning module that infers opponent strategy.1 Instead
of explicitly predicting opponent properties, DRON learns
hidden representation of the opponents based on past observations and uses it (in addition to the state information)
to compute an adaptive response. More specifically, we
propose two architectures, one using simple concatenation
to combine the two modules and one based on the Mixtureof-Experts network. While we model opponents implicitly,
additional supervision (e.g., the action or strategy taken)
1
Code and data:
opponent

https://github.com/hhexiy/

