Compressive Spectral Clustering

Nicolas Tremblay∗†
NICOLAS . TREMBLAY @ INRIA . FR
Gilles Puy§∗
GILLES . PUY @ TECHNICOLOR . COM
Rémi Gribonval∗
REMI . GRIBONVAL @ INRIA . FR
Pierre Vandergheynst†∗
PIERRE . VANDERGHEYNST @ EPFL . CH
∗
INRIA Rennes - Bretagne Atlantique, Campus de Beaulieu, FR-35042 Rennes Cedex, France
†
Institute of Electrical Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
§
Technicolor, 975 Avenue des Champs Blancs, 35576 Cesson-Sévigné, France

Abstract
Spectral clustering has become a popular technique due to its high performance in many contexts. It comprises three main steps: create a similarity graph between N objects to cluster, compute the first k eigenvectors of its Laplacian matrix to define a feature vector for each object, and
run k-means on these features to separate objects
into k classes. Each of these three steps becomes
computationally intensive for large N and/or k.
We propose to speed up the last two steps based
on recent results in the emerging field of graph
signal processing: graph filtering of random signals, and random sampling of bandlimited graph
signals. We prove that our method, with a gain in
computation time that can reach several orders of
magnitude, is in fact an approximation of spectral clustering, for which we are able to control
the error. We test the performance of our method
on artificial and real-world network data.

1. Introduction
Spectral clustering (SC) is a fundamental tool in data mining (Nascimento & de Carvalho, 2011). Given a set of N
data points {x1 , . . . , xN }, the goal is to partition this set
into k weakly inter-connected clusters. Several spectral
clustering algorithms exist, e.g., (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003;
Ng et al., 2002; Shi & Malik, 2000; Zelnik-Manor & Perona, 2004), but all follow the same scheme. First, compute weights Wij ⩾ 0 that model the similarity between
pairs of data points (xi , xj ). This gives rise to a graph G
with N nodes and adjacency matrix W = (Wij )1⩽i,j⩽N ∈
RN ×N . Second, compute the first k eigenvectors Uk :=
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

(u1 , . . . , uk ) ∈ RN ×k of the Laplacian matrix L ∈ RN ×N
associated to G (see Sec. 2 for L’s definition). And finally,
run k-means using the rows of Uk as feature vectors to partition the N data points into k clusters. This k-way scheme
is a generalisation of Fiedler’s pioneering work (1973).
SC is mainly used in two contexts: 1) if the N data
points show particular structures (e.g., concentric circles)
for which naive k-means clustering fails; 2) if the input
data is directly a graph G modeling a network (White &
Smyth, 2005), such as social, neuronal, or transportation
networks. SC suffers nevertheless from three main computational bottlenecks for large N and/or k: the creation of
the similarity matrix W; the partial eigendecomposition of
the graph Laplacian matrix L; and k-means.
1.1. Related work
Circumventing these bottlenecks has raised a significant interest in the past decade. Several authors have proposed
ideas to tackle the eigendecomposition bottleneck, e.g.,
via the power method (Boutsidis & Gittens, 2015; Lin &
Cohen, 2010), via a careful optimisation of diagonalisation algorithms in the context of SC (Liu et al., 2007),
or via matrix column-subsampling such as in the Nyström
method (Fowlkes et al., 2004), the nSPEC and cSPEC
methods of (Wang et al., 2009), or in (Chen & Cai, 2011;
Sakai & Imiya, 2009). All these methods aim to quickly
compute feature vectors, but k-means is still applied on N
feature vectors. Other authors, inspired by research aiming
at reducing k-means complexity (Jain, 2010), such as the
line of work on coresets (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004),
have proposed to circumvent k-means in high dimension
by subsampling a few data points out of the N available
ones, applying SC on its reduced similarity graph, and interpolating the results back on the complete dataset. One
can find similar methods in (Yan et al., 2009) and (Wang
et al., 2009)’s eSPEC proposition, where two different interpolation methods are used. Both methods are heuristic:

