Minimizing the Maximal Loss: How and Why

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
Yonatan Wexler
Orcam

SHAIS @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

YONATAN . WEXLER @ ORCAM . COM

Abstract

Another option is to approximately minimize the maximal
loss, namely,

A commonly used learning rule is to approximately minimize the average loss over the training set. Other learning algorithms, such as AdaBoost and hard-SVM, aim at minimizing the
maximal loss over the training set. The average
loss is more popular, particularly in deep learning, due to three main reasons. First, it can be
conveniently minimized using online algorithms,
that process few examples at each iteration. Second, it is often argued that there is no sense to
minimize the loss on the training set too much, as
it will not be reflected in the generalization loss.
Last, the maximal loss is not robust to outliers.
In this paper we describe and analyze an algorithm that can convert any online algorithm to a
minimizer of the maximal loss. We prove that
in some situations better accuracy on the training
set is crucial to obtain good performance on unseen examples. Last, we propose robust versions
of the approach that can handle outliers.

min Lmax (w) := max `(w, xi , yi ) .

w∈W

i∈[m]

(2)

Obviously, if there exists w∗ ∈ W such that `(w∗ , xi , yi ) =
0 for every i then the minimizers of both problems coincide. However, approximate solutions can be very different. In particular, since Lmax (w) ≥ Lavg (w) for every w,
the guarantee Lmax (w) <  is stronger than the guarantee
Lavg (w) < . Furthermore, for binary classification with
the zero-one loss, any vector for which Lmax (w) < 1 must
predict all the labels on the training set correctly, while the
guarantee Lavg (w) < 1 is meaningless.
Some classical machine learning algorithms can be viewed
as approximately minimizing Lmax . For example, HardSVM effectively solves Lmax with respect to the loss function `(w, xi , yi ) = λkwk2 + 1[yi hw, xi i < 1]. However,
minimizing Lavg is a more popular approach, especially for
deep learning problems, in which w is the vector of weights
of a neural network and the optimization is performed using variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). There are
several reasons to prefer Lavg over Lmax :

1. Introduction
In a typical supervised learning scenario, we have training
examples, S = ((x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym )) ∈ (X ×Y)m , and
our goal is to learn a function h : X → Y. We focus on the
case in which h is parameterized by a vector w ∈ W ⊂ Rd ,
and we use hw to denote the function induced by w. The
performance of w on an example (x, y) is assessed using a
loss function, ` : W × X × Y → [0, 1]. A commonly used
learning rule is to approximately minimize the average loss,
namely,

1. If m is very large, it is not practical to perform operations on the entire training set. Instead, we prefer
iterative algorithms that update w based on few examples at each iteration. This can be easily done for Lavg
by observing that if we sample i uniformly at random from [m], then the gradient of `(w, xi , yi ) with
respect to w is an unbiased estimator of the gradient
of Lavg (w). This property, which lies at the heart of
the SGD algorithm, does not hold for Lmax .

m

min Lavg (w) :=

w∈W

1 X
`(w, xi , yi ) .
m i=1

(1)

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

2. Our ultimate goal is not to minimize the loss on the
training set but instead to have a small loss on unseen
examples. As argued before, approximately minimizing Lmax can lead to a smaller loss on the training set,
but it is not clear if this added accuracy will also be
reflected in performance on unseen examples. Formal

