Metadata-Conscious Anonymous Messaging
Giulia Fanti†
Peter Kairouz†
Sewoong Oh†
Kannan Ramchandran‡
Pramod Viswanath†
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61801
‡

FANTI @ ILLINOIS . EDU
KAIROUZ 2@ ILLINOIS . EDU
SWOH @ ILLINOIS . EDU
KANNANR @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
PRAMODV @ ILLINOIS . EDU

University of California, Berkeley, CA 94701

Abstract
Anonymous messaging platforms like Whisper
and Yik Yak allow users to spread messages over
a network (e.g., a social network) without revealing message authorship to other users. The
spread of messages on these platforms can be
modeled by a diffusion process over a graph.
Recent advances in network analysis have revealed that such diffusion processes are vulnerable to author deanonymization by adversaries
with access to metadata, such as timing information. In this work, we ask the fundamental
question of how to propagate anonymous messages over a graph to make it difficult for adversaries to infer the source. In particular, we study
the performance of a message propagation protocol called adaptive diffusion introduced in (Fanti
et al., 2015). We prove that when the adversary has access to metadata at a fraction of corrupted graph nodes, adaptive diffusion achieves
asymptotically optimal source-hiding and significantly outperforms standard diffusion. We further demonstrate empirically that adaptive diffusion hides the source effectively on real social
networks.

1. Introduction
Popular social media platforms (Facebook, Twitter, Whatsapp, Kakao) allow users to seamlessly share potentially
sensitive content with their friends. The privacy implications of such platforms are gaining attention, leading to
the emergence of anonymous social networks like WhisProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

per (whi), Yik Yak (yik), Blind (bli) and the now-defunct
Secret (sec). These anonymous messaging apps are microblogging services that hide message authorship from
other users. When a user posts a message, the message
passes (without authorship information) to the users’ contacts, or friends, in an underlying social network. If a message recipient approves a message by pressing the ‘like’
button, the message is further propagated to the recipient’s
friends, and so on. The message thus spreads anonymously
through the network, in the sense that no single user can
learn who authored a message.
A natural question is whether a group of colluding nodes
can identify which node in the social network authored a
given message. This poses an interesting estimation problem on a random process over a network. Statistical inference plays a crucial role in understanding the propagation of influence and diffusion as studied in the data
mining community (Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2010; Bakshy et al., 2011). In particular, recent advances in network
analysis such as (Shah & Zaman, 2011; Pinto et al., 2012;
Zhu et al., 2015) suggest that a moderately-powerful adversary can infer which node started the message, using
limited metadata. However, the designers of anonymous
messaging platforms have the freedom to influence content
propagation by adding appropriately-chosen delays on top
of natural human delays. Our goal is to design messaging
protocols that make it provably difficult to infer the initial
source node, even for an adversary with infinite computational power.
Adversarial Models. We consider an adversary that has
access to the underlying contact network G(V, E). The adversary lacks the resources to monitor all network traffic,
but it can collect partial metadata in a number of ways:
One way is to explicitly corrupt some fraction of nodes
by bribery or coercion; these corrupted spy nodes continuously monitor metadata like message timestamps and relay

