Dirichlet Process Mixture Model for Correcting Technical Variation in
Single-Cell Gene Expression Data

Sandhya Prabhakaran*
SANDHYA . PRABHAKARAN @ COLUMBIA . EDU
Elham Azizi*
ELHAM . AZIZI @ COLUMBIA . EDU
Ambrose Carr
AMBROSE . J . CARR @ COLUMBIA . EDU
Dana Pe’er
DPEER @ BIOLOGY. COLUMBIA . EDU
Departments of Biological Sciences, Systems Biology and Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
* These authors contributed equally.

Abstract
We introduce an iterative normalization and clustering method for single-cell gene expression
data. The emerging technology of single-cell
RNA-seq gives access to gene expression measurements for thousands of cells, allowing discovery and characterization of cell types. However, the data is confounded by technical variation emanating from experimental errors and
cell type-specific biases. Current approaches perform a global normalization prior to analyzing
biological signals, which does not resolve missing data or variation dependent on latent cell
types. Our model is formulated as a hierarchical
Bayesian mixture model with cell-specific scalings that aid the iterative normalization and clustering of cells, teasing apart technical variation
from biological signals. We demonstrate that
this approach is superior to global normalization
followed by clustering. We show identifiability
and weak convergence guarantees of our method
and present a scalable Gibbs inference algorithm.
This method improves cluster inference in both
synthetic and real single-cell data compared with
previous methods, and allows easy interpretation
and recovery of the underlying structure and cell
types.

1. Introduction
Single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) is a recent breakthrough technology that measures gene expression at the
resolution of individual cells (Hashimshony et al., 2012;

Jaitin et al., 2014; Shalek et al., 2013) presenting exciting opportunities to study heterogeneity of expression and
characterize unknown cell types. This contrasts traditional
bulk gene expression data where the gene expression is
measured by an average readout across a bulk of cells.
Analyzing scRNA-seq measurements involves many challenges, including the fact that the data is only one sample
set from the transcriptome (the full range of mRNAs representing gene expression) with high chances of missing
low-expression genes termed as dropouts1 , biases in cell
sampling, significant differences in total number of mRNA
molecules, as well as variation in library size, defined as
sum of amplified mRNA molecules per cell (Kharchenko
et al., 2014). These cell type-specific biases can not be
resolved with common normalization techniques designed
for bulk RNA-seq data. Global normalization by median
library size (Oshlack et al., 2010) or through spike-ins2
(Vallejos & Richardson, 2015) would not resolve dropouts,
and can lead to spurious differential expression or removal
of biological stochasticity specific to each cell type, both
of which induce improper clustering and characterization
of latent cell types. Thus, normalization prior to clustering fails to consider cell type dependent technical variation,
and the cell types are not known a priori, hence the normalization and clustering become a chicken-and-egg problem.
To address this problem, we model biological and technical variation in parallel, which we refer to as BISCUIT
(Bayesian Inference for Single-cell ClUstering and ImpuTing). This is done through incorporating parameters denoting technical variation into a Hierarchical Dirichlet Process
mixture model (HDPMM). This allows inference of clusters of cells based on similar gene expression and identifies
technical variation per cell. Furthermore, this model can be
1

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Not related to dropouts in Deep Learning (Bengio, 2013)
Artificially-introduced genes to correct for cell-specific variations.
2

