Isotonic Hawkes Processes
Yichen Wang, Bo Xie, Nan Du
{YICHEN . WANG , BO . XIE , DUNAN}@ GATECH . EDU
Le Song
LSONG @ CC . GATECH . EDU
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 266 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

Abstract
Hawkes processes are powerful tools for
modeling the mutual-excitation phenomena
commonly observed in event data from a
variety of domains, such as social networks,
quantitative finance and healthcare records.
The intensity function of a Hawkes process is
typically assumed to be linear in the sum of
triggering kernels, rendering it inadequate to
capture nonlinear effects present in real-world
data. To address this shortcoming, we propose
an Isotonic-Hawkes process whose intensity
function is modulated by an additional nonlinear
link function. We also developed a novel iterative
algorithm which learns both the nonlinear link
function and other parameters provably. We
showed that Isotonic-Hawkes processes can fit
a variety of nonlinear patterns which cannot be
captured by conventional Hawkes processes, and
achieve superior empirical performance in real
world applications.

1. Introduction

Temporal point processes are powerful tools for modeling
the complex dynamics of events occurrences. In particular,
Hawkes processes (Hawkes, 1971) are well-suited to
capture the phenomenon of mutual excitation between the
occurrence of events, and have been applied successfully in
modeling criminal retaliations (Mohler et al., 2011), online
users behaviors (Farajtabar et al., 2014; 2015; Du et al.,
2015), and opinion dynamics (Wang et al., 2016).
A Hawkes process is characterized by a linear intensity
function, i.e., (t) = w · xt where xt denotes
time-dependent features and w is the weight. The intensity
function parametrizes the likelihood of observing an event
in the time window [t, t + dt) given that it has not occurred
before t. Such linearity may be insufficient to model many
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

real world scenarios. For example, after purchasing a new
album, users may be initially highly engaged, and play the
album over and over again. However, the engagement will
saturate at some point as they become bored of the same
album. Such plateau pattern may not be captured by a
simple linear relation. In another scenario, a recent hospital
visit may trigger more future visits due to the progression
of a disease into a more severe stage. Such cumulative
influence from recent events may grow faster than a linear
model can explain.
Nonlinear Hawkes process (Brémaud & Massoulié, 1996)
has been introduced to provide more flexibility in
explaining the real-world phenomena. It applies a fixed
nonlinear link function g to the linear combination, i.e.,
(t) = g(w · xt ). For computational considerations, g(·)
is often assumed to be in some simple parametric forms,
such as exp(u) and max {0, u} (Carstensen et al., 2010;
Hansen et al., 2015). Although these models are more
flexible, they are still restricted to a few nonlinear patterns
with a fixed parametrization, which may not be correct
for real world data. Ideally, both g(·) and w should be
learned from data. Unfortunately, such desideratum leads
to a non-convex optimization problem, where efficient
algorithms with provable guarantees do not exist.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel model,
referred to as the Isotonic-Hawkes process, where both
g(·) and w can be directly learned from data. Rather
than committing to a fixed parametric form, we instead
use a non-parametric, monotonic nonlinear link function.
Therefore, it is extremely flexible to capture different
temporal dynamics without the need to select a fixed form
in advance.
To solve the non-convex learning problem with guarantees,
we propose a different loss function than the typical
log-likelihood for point processes. Moreover, by exploiting
the problem structure, we are still able to provide
theoretical guarantees on the computational and statistical
performance. Our work makes the following contributions:
• We propose a novel method for nonlinear Hawkes
process that can learn both the link function and other

