Data-driven Rank Breaking for Efficient Rank Aggregation
Ashish Khetan
ISE Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

KHETAN 2@ ILLINOIS . EDU

Sewoong Oh
ISE Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

SWOH @ ILLINOIS . EDU

Abstract
Rank aggregation systems collect ordinal preferences from individuals to produce a global ranking that represents the social preference. To
reduce the computational complexity of learning the global ranking, a common practice is to
use rank-breaking. Individuals’ preferences are
broken into pairwise comparisons and then applied to efficient algorithms tailored for independent pairwise comparisons. However, due to the
ignored dependencies, naive rank-breaking approaches can result in inconsistent estimates. The
key idea to produce unbiased and accurate estimates is to treat the paired comparisons outcomes unequally, depending on the topology of
the collected data. In this paper, we provide the
optimal rank-breaking estimator, which not only
achieves consistency but also achieves the best
error bound. This allows us to characterize the
fundamental tradeoff between accuracy and complexity in some canonical scenarios. Further, we
identify how the accuracy depends on the spectral gap of a corresponding comparison graph.

1. Introduction

to model such individual choices and preferences (McFadden, 1980). This allows one to infer the global ranking by
learning the inherent utility from individuals’ revealed preferences, which are noisy manifestations of the underlying
true utility of the alternatives.
Traditionally, learning to rank has been studied under the
following data collection scenarios: pairwise comparisons,
best-out-of-k comparisons, and k-way comparisons. Pairwise comparisons are commonly studied in the classical
context of sports matches as well as more recent applications in crowdsourcing, where each worker is presented
with a pair of choices and asked to choose the more favorable one. Best-out-of-k comparisons datasets are commonly available from purchase history of customers. Typically, a set of k alternatives are offered among which
one is chosen or purchased by each customer. This has
been widely studied in operations research in the context
of modeling customer choices for revenue management
and assortment optimization. The k-way comparisons are
assumed in traditional rank aggregation scenarios, where
each person reveals his/her preference as a ranked list over
a set of k items. In some real-world elections, voters provide ranked preferences over the whole set of candidates
(Lundell, 2007). We refer to these three types of ordinal
data collection scenarios as ‘traditional’ throughout.

In several applications such as electing officials, choosing
policies, or making recommendations, we are given partial
preferences from individuals over a set of alternatives, with
the goal of producing a global ranking that represents the
collective preference of the population or the society. This
process is referred to as rank aggregation. One popular approach is learning to rank. Economists have modeled each
individual as a rational being maximizing his/her perceived
utility. Parametric probabilistic models, known collectively
as Random Utility Models (RUMs), have been proposed

For such traditional datasets, there are several computationally efficient inference algorithms for finding the Maximum
Likelihood (ML) estimates that provably achieve the minimax optimal performance (Negahban et al., 2012; Shah
et al., 2015a; Hajek et al., 2014). However, modern datasets
can be unstructured. This calls for a more flexible approaches for rank aggregation that can take such diverse
forms of ordinal data into account. For such non-traditional
datasets, finding the ML estimate can become significantly
more challenging, requiring run-time exponential in the
problem parameters.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

To avoid such a computational bottleneck, a common
heuristic is to resort to rank-breaking. The collected ordinal data is first transformed into a bag of pairwise com-

