Heteroscedastic Sequences: Beyond Gaussianity

Oren Anava
Technion, Haifa, Israel

OANAVA @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL

Shie Mannor
Technion, Haifa, Israel

SHIE @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL

Abstract
We address the problem of sequential prediction
in the heteroscedastic setting, when both the signal and its variance are assumed to depend on
explanatory variables. By applying regret minimization techniques, we devise an efficient online learning algorithm for the problem, without
assuming that the error terms comply with a specific distribution. We show that our algorithm
can be adjusted to provide confidence bounds
for its predictions, and provide an application to
ARCH models. The theoretical results are corroborated by an empirical study.

1. Introduction
Heteroscedasticity refers to the case in which the variability of the dependent variable (also called signal) is unequal
across the range of values of the explanatory variables (also
called features). In statistical modeling, the variability
is usually characterized through the conditional variance,
which is a key parameter in many statistical applications
such as volatility estimation in finance, disease phenotypes
prediction in medicine, and more.
Much work has been done on parameter estimation and
signal prediction using heteroscedastic models, mostly
relying on statistical assumptions on the error terms such
as Gaussianity or other symmetrical distributions. These
assumptions allow the use of Maximum Likelihood (ML)
techniques to recover consistent estimators for the signal
and its conditional variance. However, if these assumptions are not met in practice, the resulting estimators are
no longer consistent and the following statement from
(Whittaker & Robinson, 1967) is sometimes quoted:
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

“Everybody believes in the exponential law of
errors: the experimenters, because they think it
can be proved by mathematics; and the mathematicians, because they believe it has been established by observation.”
In this paper we argue that traditional modeling assumptions on the signal generation can be substantially relaxed
while still maintaining the ability to solve the problem.
Moreover, we offer a novel online learning approach that
allows the signal to be partially adversarial and partially
stochastic. We show that our approach is more general than
a ML-based approach, and is capable of coping with rather
complex scenarios and models.
An important aspect of our work is bridging the gap between a statistical approach and a “pure” online learning
approach for sequential prediction problems. We claim that
while the statistical approach fails to model real-world data
due to strict distributional assumptions, the online learning
approach fails to do so due to lack of such assumptions, and
the actual “truth” lies somewhere in between them.
1.1. Main contribution
In this work we propose a new approach to handle heteroscedasticity —an online learning approach— that does
not require the error terms to be Gaussian, nor to comply
with a specific distribution as is common in the statistical
approach to the problem. The main contributions of this
work are as follows:
Casting the problem of heteroscedastic signal prediction
as an online learning problem, in which two terms of
regret are minimized in parallel: one captures the prediction accuracy, and the other measures the quality
of the conditional variance estimation. This casting is
the key idea that enables handling non-Gaussian error
terms in this setting.
Design of an online learning algorithm that is suitable
to work with biased gradients. The necessity in our
case arises since the conditional variance is not observed, and can only be estimated with bias.

