Meta–Gradient Boosted Decision Tree Model for Weight and Target Learning

Yury Ustinovskiy
Valentina Fedorova
Gleb Gusev
Pavel Serdyukov
Yandex, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Labeled training data is an essential part of any
supervised machine learning framework. In practice, there is a trade-off between the quality of
a label and its cost. In this paper, we consider
a problem of learning to rank on a large-scale
dataset with low-quality relevance labels aiming at maximizing the quality of a trained ranker
on a small validation dataset with high-quality
ground truth relevance labels. Motivated by
the classical Gauss-Markov theorem for the linear regression problem, we formulate the problems of (1) reweighting training instances and (2)
remapping learning targets. We propose meta–
gradient decision tree learning framework for optimizing weight and target functions by applying gradient-based hyperparameter optimization.
Experiments on a large-scale real-world dataset
demonstrate that we can significantly improve
state-of-the-art machine-learning algorithms by
incorporating our framework.

1. Introduction
The fundamental issue faced by many of supervised machine learning algorithms is the presence of noise in labels
and features. Clearly, label noise is likely to have a negative impact on both the quality of the trained models and
the evaluation accuracy. In this paper, we address the problem of label noise from the perspective of the quality of the
trained model.
Traditionally, this problem is dealt with by various noise
reduction techniques (Frénay & Verleysen, 2014; Strutz,
2010).
For example, common approaches to noise
reduction include cleansing (Brodley & Friedl, 1999)
and weighting techniques. Noise cleansing techniques are
similar to outlier detection and amount to filtering out samProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YURAUST @ YANDEX - TEAM . RU
VALYA 17@ YANDEX - TEAM . RU
GLEB 57@ YANDEX - TEAM . RU
PAVSER @ YANDEX - TEAM . RU

ples which ‘look like’ mislabeled for some reason. With
the weighting approach none of the samples are completely
discarded, while their impact on a machine learning algorithm is controlled by weights, representing our confidence
in a particular label. In both approaches, one has to use certain heuristics (Verbaeten & Van Assche, 2003) or assume
some underlying model for the noise generation (Li et al.,
2007).
With this paper we study a general problem of supervised learning in the presence of noise in labels (noisy
supervised learning, or NSL for short). Unlike the classical approaches (Hastie et al., 2009, §3.2.2, Lawrence &
Schölkopf, 2001), we do not assume any prior knowledge
on the noise nature and its distribution. Moreover, we let
the labels in the training dataset (1) to be biased relative to
the implicit ground-truth labels; (2) to have different noise
variance.
Let us discuss several important examples of such training
tasks. Click prediction problem is an important task in
online advertising and Web search personalization (Graepel et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2005). Typically, samples in
the training datasets for these tasks are labeled using implicit feedback, i.e., labels are inferred from user behavior,
such as clicks on documents/advertisements, time spent on
a document, fact of transaction after an advertisement click,
etc. It is well-known that such labels are liable to positional and presentational bias (Ciaramita et al., 2008). A
possible common solution to this problem is to reduce the
noise by samples relabeling technique. For example, one
might assign positive value only to satisfied clicks, assign
different values to clicks with long/short dwell-time or discount the click value by snippet/advertisement attractiveness. Another problem is learning with crowdsourced labels. Recent rapid take-up of crowdsourcing marketplaces,
e.g., Amazon MTurk1 , provides a cheap way of collecting large supervised datasets (Muhammadi et al., 2013).
However, due to a lack of expertise and presence of spammer workers, such labels often hugely vary in quality. To
overcome this issue, employers assign each item to multi1

http://www.mturk.com/

