Conditional Bernoulli Mixtures for Multi-Label Classification
Cheng Li
CHENGLI @ CCS . NEU . EDU
Bingyu Wang
RAINICY @ CCS . NEU . EDU
Virgil Pavlu
VIP @ CCS . NEU . EDU
Javed Aslam
JAA @ CCS . NEU . EDU
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Abstract
Multi-label classification is an important machine learning task wherein one assigns a subset
of candidate labels to an object. In this paper, we
propose a new multi-label classification method
based on Conditional Bernoulli Mixtures. Our
proposed method has several attractive properties: it captures label dependencies; it reduces the
multi-label problem to several standard binary
and multi-class problems; it subsumes the classic independent binary prediction and power-set
subset prediction methods as special cases; and
it exhibits accuracy and/or computational complexity advantages over existing approaches. We
demonstrate two implementations of our method
using logistic regressions and gradient boosted
trees, together with a simple training procedure
based on Expectation Maximization. We further
derive an efficient prediction procedure based on
dynamic programming, thus avoiding the cost of
examining an exponential number of potential label subsets. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method against competitive alternatives on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification is an important machine learning
task wherein one assigns a subset of candidate labels to
an object. Such problems arise naturally in the context of
medical diagnostics, text classification, image tagging, and
a host of other areas. For example, in the medical domain,
a patient may present multiple illnesses or undergo a procedure with multiple billing codes; in news categorization, an
article can be associated with multiple categories; in image
tagging, a photo may have multiple tags (see Figure 1).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An image from the NUS-WIDE multi-label dataset.
Independent binary logistic regressions predict the labels
{clouds, lake, sky, sunset, water}.
Our proposed method correctly predicts {clouds, lake, sky,
sunset, water, reflection}, because it captures the
dependencies between reflection and the other labels.

Multi-label classification is particularly difficult in the
common case when the labels are many and dependent.
In this case, simple approaches such as independent binary label prediction and power-set subset prediction fail
due to label dependencies and combinatorial explosion, respectively. More sophisticated approaches such as classifier chains, conditional dependency networks, and conditional random fields suffer due to accuracy/computationalcomplexity trade-offs in training and/or prediction. We
introduce Conditional Bernoulli Mixtures for multi-label
classification to address these challenges, yielding multilabel classifiers that are flexible, accurate and efficient.
Formally, in a multi-label classification problem, we are
given a set of label candidates Y = {1, 2, ..., L}. Every
data point x ∈ RD matches a subset of labels y ⊆ Y,
which can be equivalently written in the form of a binary
vector y ∈ {0, 1}L , with each bit y` indicating the presence
or absence of the corresponding label. The goal of learning
is to build a classier h : RD 7→ {0, 1}L which maps an in-

