Efficient Learning with a Family of Nonconvex Regularizers
by Redistributing Nonconvexity

Quanming Yao
QYAOAA @ CSE . UST. HK
James T. Kwok
JAMESK @ CSE . UST. HK
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong

Abstract

regularizers are used in the learning of matrices (Candès
& Recht, 2009) and tensors (Liu et al., 2013).

The use of convex regularizers allow for easy
optimization, though they often produce biased
estimation and inferior prediction performance.
Recently, nonconvex regularizers have attracted
a lot of attention and outperformed convex ones.
However, the resultant optimization problem is
much harder. In this paper, for a large class
of nonconvex regularizers, we propose to move
the nonconvexity from the regularizer to the loss.
The nonconvex regularizer is then transformed
to a familiar convex regularizer, while the
resultant loss function can still be guaranteed
to be smooth. Learning with the convexified
regularizer can be performed by existing efficient
algorithms originally designed for convex regularizers (such as the standard proximal algorithm
and Frank-Wolfe algorithm). Moreover, it can
be shown that critical points of the transformed
problem are also critical points of the original
problem. Extensive experiments on a number of
nonconvex regularization problems show that the
proposed procedure is much faster than the stateof-the-art nonconvex solvers.

Traditionally, both the loss and regularizer are convex,
leading to the popularity of convex optimization tools in
machine learning (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). Prominent examples include the proximal algorithm (Parikh &
Boyd, 2013) and, more recently, the Frank-Wolfe (FW)
algorithm (Jaggi, 2013). Many of them are efficient,
scalable, and have sound convergence properties.
However, the use of convex regularizers often produces
biased estimation, and produces solutions that are not as
sparse and accurate as desired (Zhang, 2010b). To alleviate
this problem, a number of nonconvex regularizers have
been recently proposed (Geman & Yang, 1995; Fan &
Li, 2001; Candès et al., 2008; Zhang, 2010a; Trzasko &
Manduca, 2009). They are all (i) nonsmooth at zero,
which encourages a sparse solution; and (ii) concave,
which places a smaller penalty than the `1 regularizer on
features with large magnitudes. Empirically, they usually
outperform convex regularizers.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning models, the associated optimization problems are of the form
min F (x) ≡ f (x) + g(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where x is the model parameter, f is the loss and g
is the regularizer. Obviously, the choice of regularizers
is important and application-specific.
For example,
sparsity-inducing regularizers are commonly used on highdimensional data (Jacob et al., 2009); while low-rank
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

However, the resulting nonconvex problem is much harder
to optimize. The concave-convex procedure (Yuille &
Rangarajan, 2002) is a general technique for nonconvex
optimization. However, at each iteration, the subproblem
can be as expensive as the original problem, and are thus
slow in practice (Gong et al., 2013; Zhong & Kwok, 2014).
Recently, proximal algorithms have also been extended for
nonconvex regularization (Gong et al., 2013; Li & Lin,
2015). However, efficient computation of the underlying
proximal operator is only possible for simple nonconvex
regularizers. When the regularizer is complicated, such as
the nonconvex versions of the fused lasso or overlapping
group lasso regularizers, the proximal step has to be solved
numerically and is again expensive. Another approach is
by using the proximal average (Zhong & Kwok, 2014),
which computes and averages the proximal step of each
underlying regularizer separately. However, because of its
approximate proximal step, convergence is usually slower
than typical applications of the proximal algorithm.

