Interactive Bayesian Hierarchical Clustering

Sharad Vikram
Sanjoy Dasgupta
Computer Science and Engineering, UCSD, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093

Abstract
Clustering is a powerful tool in data analysis,
but it is often difficult to find a grouping that
aligns with a user’s needs. To address this,
several methods incorporate constraints obtained
from users into clustering algorithms, but unfortunately do not apply to hierarchical clustering. We design an interactive Bayesian algorithm
that incorporates user interaction into hierarchical clustering while still utilizing the geometry of
the data by sampling a constrained posterior distribution over hierarchies. We also suggest several ways to intelligently query a user. The algorithm, along with the querying schemes, shows
promising results on real data.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a basic tool of exploratory data analysis.
There are a variety of efficient algorithms—including kmeans, EM for Gaussian mixtures, and hierarchical agglomerative schemes—that are widely used for discovering
“natural” groups in data. Unfortunately, they don’t always
find a grouping that suits the user’s needs.
This is inevitable. In any moderately complex data set,
there are many different plausible grouping criteria. Should
a collection of rocks be grouped according to value, or
shininess, or geological properties? Should animal pictures
be grouped according to the Linnaean taxonomy, or cuteness? Different users have different priorities, and an unsupervised algorithm has no way to magically guess these.
As a result, a rich body of work on constrained clustering has emerged. In this setting, a user supplies guidance, typically in the form of “must-link” or “cannot-link”
constraints, pairs of points that must be placed together
or apart. Introduced by Wagstaff & Cardie (2000), these
constraints have since been incorporated into many differProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SVIKRAM @ CS . UCSD . EDU
DASGUPTA @ CS . UCSD . EDU

ent flat clustering procedures (Wagstaff et al., 2001; Bansal
et al., 2004; Basu et al., 2004; Kulis et al., 2005; Biswas &
Jacobs, 2014).
In this paper, we introduce constraints to hierarchical clustering, the recursive partitioning of a data set into successively smaller clusters to form a tree. A hierarchy has several advantages over a flat clustering. First, there is no need
to specify the number of clusters in advance. Second, the
tree captures cluster structure at multiple levels of granularity, simultaneously. As such, trees are particularly wellsuited for exploratory data analysis and the discovery of
natural groups.
There are several well-established methods for hierarchical clustering, the most prominent among which are the
bottom-up agglomerative methods such as average linkage
(see, for instance, Chapter 14 of Hastie et al. (2009)). But
they suffer from the same problem of under-specification
that is the scourge of unsupervised learning in general.
And, despite the rich literature on incorporating additional
guidance into flat clustering, there has been relatively little
work on the hierarchical case.
What form might the user’s guidance take? The usual mustlink and cannot-link constraints make little sense when data
has hierarchical structure. Among living creatures, for instance, should elephant and tiger be linked? At some
level, yes, but at a finer level, no. A more straightforward
assertion is that elephant and tiger should be linked
in a cluster that does not include snake. We can write this
as a triplet ({elephant, tiger}, snake). We could
also assert ({tiger, leopard}, elephant). Formally,
({a, b}, c) stipulates that the hierarchy contains a subtree
(that is, a cluster) containing a and b but not c.
A wealth of research addresses learning taxonomies from
triplets alone, mostly in the field of phylogenetics: see
Felsenstein (2004) for an overview, and Aho et al. (1981)
for a central algorithmic result. Let’s say there are n data
items to be clustered, and that the user seeks a particular
hierarchy
T ∗ on these items. This T ∗ embodies at most

n
3 triplet constraints, possibly less if it is not binary. It
was pointed out in Tamuz et al. (2011) that roughly n log n

