Power of Ordered Hypothesis Testing

Lihua Lei
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley

LIHUA . LEI @ BERKELEY. EDU

William Fithian
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley

WFITHIAN @ BERKELEY. EDU

Abstract
Ordered testing procedures are multiple testing
procedures that exploit a pre-specified ordering
of the null hypotheses, from most to least promising. We analyze and compare the power of several recent proposals using the asymptotic framework of Li & Barber (2015). While accumulation
tests including ForwardStop can be quite powerful when the ordering is very informative, they
are asymptotically powerless when the ordering
is weaker. By contrast, Selective SeqStep, proposed by Barber & Candès (2015), is much less
sensitive to the quality of the ordering. We compare the power of these procedures in different
régimes, concluding that Selective SeqStep dominates accumulation tests if either the ordering is
weak or non-null hypotheses are sparse or weak.
Motivated by our asymptotic analysis, we derive
an improved version of Selective SeqStep which
we call Adaptive SeqStep, analogous to Storey’s
improvement on the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. We compare these methods using the GEOQuery data set analyzed by (Li & Barber, 2015)
and find Adaptive SeqStep has favorable performance for both good and bad prior orderings.

1. Introduction
Since the invention of the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) procedure (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995), control of the false
discovery rate (FDR) has gained widespread adoption as
a reasonable measure of error in multiple hypothesis testing problems. In a typical setup, we observe a sequence
of p-values p1 , . . . , pn corresponding to null hypotheses
H1 , . . . , Hn , then apply some procedure to reject a subset
of them. If we make R total rejections (also called “discovProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

eries”) of which V are true nulls (false discoveries), then
the false discovery proportion (FDP) and false discovery
rate (FDR) are defined respectively as
FDP =

V
,
R∨1

FDR = E FDP.

Let S = {i : Hi is rejected} and H0 = {i : Hi is true},
so that R = |S| and V = |S ∩ H0 |.
We can classify testing problems into three types: batch
testing, ordered testing and online testing. In batch testing, the ordering of hypotheses is irrelevant. The BH procedure and its many variants (e.g., Benjamini & Hochberg,
1997; Benjamini et al., 2006; Storey, 2002; Genovese et al.,
2006) have been shown effective in this setting both in finite samples and asymptotically (Genovese & Wasserman,
2002; Storey, 2002; Storey et al., 2004; Ferreira & Zwinderman, 2006).
By contrast, in ordered testing, the ordering of hypotheses encodes prior information, typically telling us which
hypotheses are most “promising” (i.e., most likely to be
discoveries). For example, in genomic association studies,
biologists could have prior knowledge about which genes
are more likely to be associated with a disease of interest,
and use this knowledge to concentrate statistical power on
the more promising genes. Because prior information of
this type is quite prevalent in scientific research, procedures
that exploit it are attractive. Alternatively, the ordering may
arise from the mathematical structure of the problem. For
example, the co-integration test (Engle & Granger, 1987),
which is widely used in macro-economics, involves testing
Hj : rank(A) ≤ j where A is a coefficient matrix. Because the hypotheses are nested, it makes no sense to accept
Hj and reject Hj+1 . Other examples include sequential
goodness-of-fit testing for the LASSO and other forward
selection procedures such as Lockhart et al. (2014); Kozbur
(2015); Fithian et al. (2015), which test Hk : M∗ ⊂ Mk−1
where M∗ is the true model and Mk−1 is the model selected in (k − 1)-th step. Section 2 reviews methods for
ordered testing include ForwardStop (G’Sell et al., 2015),
Accumulation Tests (Li & Barber, 2015), SeqStep and Se-

