Sparse Parameter Recovery from Aggregated Data

Avradeep Bhowmik
Joydeep Ghosh
The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA

AVRADEEP.1@ UTEXAS . EDU
GHOSH @ ECE . UTEXAS . EDU

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Stanford University, CA & University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, IL, USA

Abstract
Data aggregation is becoming an increasingly
common technique for sharing sensitive information, and for reducing data size when storage
and/or communication costs are high. Aggregate quantities such as group-average are a form
of semi-supervision as they do not directly provide information of individual values, but despite
their wide-spread use, prior literature on learning
individual-level models from aggregated data is
extremely limited. This paper investigates the
effect of data aggregation on parameter recovery for a sparse linear model, when known results are no longer applicable. In particular, we
consider a scenario where the data are collected
into groups e.g. aggregated patient records, and
first-order empirical moments are available only
at the group level. Despite this obfuscation of individual data values, we can show that the true
parameter is recoverable with high probability
using these aggregates when the collection of
true group moments is an incoherent matrix, and
the empirical moment estimates have been computed from a sufficiently large number of samples. To the best of our knowledge, ours are
the first results on structured parameter recovery using only aggregated data. Experimental results on synthetic data are provided in support
of these theoretical claims. We also show that
parameter estimation from aggregated data approaches the accuracy of parameter estimation
obtainable from non-aggregated or “individual”
samples, when applied to two real world healthcare applications- predictive modeling of CMS
Medicare reimbursement claims, and modeling
of Texas State healthcare charges.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SANMI @ ILLINOIS . EDU

1. Introduction
As the scale and scope of data collection continues to grow,
data aggregation has become increasingly popular in such
varied domains as healthcare and sensor networks. Aggregation is a common technique for sharing of privacysensitive healthcare data, where sensitive patient information is subject to various Statistical Disclosure Limitation
(SDL) techniques [Armstrong et al. 1999] before public release. Similarly, large scale data collection programs like
the General Social Survey (GSS) report data in aggregated
form1 . Data from IoTs and other distributed sensor networks are often collected in aggregated form to mitigate
communication costs, and improve robustness to noise and
malicious interference [Wagner 2004; Zhao et al. 2003].
Building individual-level models given aggregates in the
form of means, sample statistics, etc., constitutes a relatively unexplored semi-supervision framework. We note
that even standard problems like regression and parameter
recovery become very challenging in the context of aggregated data. Specifically, naı̈ve application of standard techniques in the aggregated context is vulnerable to the ecological fallacy [Robinson 2009; Goodman 1953], wherein
conclusions drawn from aggregated data can differ significantly from inferences at individual level, and are misleading to researchers/policy makers using the data.
As a first work on parameter recovery from aggregated
data, we investigate the problem for regression in the case
of linear models, where the mapping between input features and the output variable is defined by a vector parameter. We consider the scenario, very common in domains
like healthcare, sociological studies, etc., where data is collected and aggregated within groups, e.g., patient records
aggregated at county or hospital level, and empirical estimates of true group level moments for features and targets
are the only available information.
1

The General Social Survey, NORC, http://www3.
norc.org/GSS+Website/

