False Discovery Rate Control and Statistical Quality Assessment of Annotators
in Crowdsourced Ranking

Qianqian Xu
XUQIANQIAN @ IIE . AC . CN
State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS), Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093 & BICMR, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Jiechao Xiong
XIONGJIECHAO @ PKU . EDU . CN
BICMR-LMAM-LMEQF-LMP, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Xiaochun Cao
CAOXIAOCHUN @ IIE . AC . CN
State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS), Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China
Yuan Yao
YUANY @ MATH . PKU . EDU . CN
BICMR-LMAM-LMEQF-LMP, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

Abstract
With the rapid growth of crowdsourcing platforms it has become easy and relatively inexpensive to collect a dataset labeled by multiple annotators in a short time. However due to the lack of
control over the quality of the annotators, some
abnormal annotators may be affected by position
bias which can potentially degrade the quality of
the final consensus labels. In this paper we introduce a statistical framework to model and detect
annotator’s position bias in order to control the
false discovery rate (FDR) without a prior knowledge on the amount of biased annotators – the
expected fraction of false discoveries among all discoveries being not too high, in order to assure that most of the discoveries are indeed true
and replicable. The key technical development relies on some new knockoff filters adapted to
our problem and new algorithms based on the Inverse Scale Space dynamics whose discretization
is potentially suitable for large scale crowdsourcing data analysis. Our studies are supported by
experiments with both simulated examples and
real-world data. The proposed framework provides us a useful tool for quantitatively studying
annotator’s abnormal behavior in crowdsourcing.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In applications, building good predictive models is challenging primarily due to the difficulties in obtaining annotated training data. A traditional way for data labeling is
to hire a small group of experts to provide labels for the
entire set of data. However, such an approach can be expensive and time consuming for large scale data. Thanks to
the wide spread of crowdsourcing platforms (e.g., MTurk,
Innocentive, CrowdFlower, CrowdRank, and Allourideas),
a much more efficient way is to post unlabeled data to a
crowdsourcing marketplace, where a big crowd of low-paid
workers can be hired instantaneously to perform labeling
tasks (Sheng et al., 2008; Snow et al., 2008; Hsueh et al.,
2009; Nowak & Rüger, 2010; Chen et al., 2009).
Despite of its high efficiency and immediate availability,
crowd labeling raises many new challenges. Since typical crowdsourced tasks are tedious and annotators usually come from a diverse pool including genuine experts,
novices, biased workers, and malicious annotators, labels
generated by the crowd suffer from low quality. Thus, all crowdsourcers need strategies to ensure the reliability of
answers. In other words, outlier detection is a critical task
in order to achieve a robust labeling results. Various methods have been developed in literature for outlier detection,
of which majority voting strategy (Gygli et al., 2013; Jiang
et al., 2013) is the most typical one. In this setting, each
pair is allocated to multiple annotators and their opinions
are averaged over so as to identify and discard noisy data provided by unreliable raters. They thus require large
amount of pairwise labels to be collected. More impor-

