Stratified Sampling Meets Machine Learning

Kevin Lang
Yahoo Research

LANGK @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Edo Liberty
Yahoo Research

EDO @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Konstantin Shmakov
Yahoo Research

KSHMAKOV @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Abstract
This paper solves a specialized regression problem to obtain sampling probabilities for records
in databases. The goal is to sample a small set of
records over which evaluating aggregate queries
can be done both efficiently and accurately. We
provide a principled and provable solution for
this problem; it is parameterless and requires no
data insights. Unlike standard regression problems, the loss is inversely proportional to the
regressed-to values. Moreover, a cost zero solution always exists and can only be excluded by
hard budget constraints. A unique form of regularization is also needed. We provide an efficient and simple regularized Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) algorithm along with a theoretical generalization result. Our extensive experimental results significantly improve over both
uniform sampling and standard stratified sampling which are de-facto the industry standards.

P
qi = 0 otherwise. The result y = i qi is the number of
articles read by Yahoo’s New York based users. In an internal system at Yahoo (YAM+) such queries are performed in
rapid succession by advertisers when designing advertising
campaigns.
Answering such queries efficiently poses a challenge. On
the one hand, the number of users n is too large for an efficient linear scan, i.e., evaluating y explicitly. This is both
in terms of running time and space (disk) usage. On the
other hand, the values qi could be results of applying arbitrarily complex functions to records. Consider for example
the Flurry SDK (Yahoo) where users issue arbitrary queries
on their dataset. This means no indexing, intermediate preaggregation, or sketching based solutions could be applied.
Fortunately, executing queries on a random sample of
records can provide good approximate answers. See the
work of Olken, Rotem and Hellerstein (Olken & Rotem,
1986; 1990; Olken, 1993; Hellerstein et al., 1997) for motivations and efficient algorithms for database sampling. It
is well known (and easy to show) that a uniform sample of
records provides a provably good solution to this problem.

1. Introduction

1.1. Uniform Sampling

Given a database of n records 1, 2, . . . , n we P
define the result y of an aggregate query q to be y =
i qi . Here,
qi is the scalar result of evaluating query q on record i.1
For example, consider a database containing user actions
on a popular site such as the Yahoo homepage. Here, each
record corresponds to a single user and contains his/her past
actions on the site. The value qi can be the number of times
user i read a full news story if they are New York based and

Let S ⊂ {1, 2, . . . , n} be the set of sampled records and
Pr(i ∈ S) = pi independently for all i. PThe HorvitzThompson estimator for y is given by ỹ = i∈S qi /pi . If
pi ≥ ζ > 0 the following statements hold true.

1
For notational brevity, the index i ranges over 1, 2, . . . , n unless otherwise specified.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

• E[ỹ − y] = 0
p
• σ[ỹ − y] ≤ y 1/(ζ · card(q))
2

• Pr[|ỹ − y| ≥ εy] ≤ e−O(ε ζ·card(q))
Here,
:=
P σ[·] stands for the standard deviation and card(q)
|qi |/ max |qi | is the numeric cardinality of a query.2 The
2

Note that for binary, or ‘select’, queries the numeric cardinality card(q) is equal to the cardinality of the set of selected
records.

