Auxiliary Deep Generative Models

Lars Maaløe1
LARSMA @ DTU . DK
Casper Kaae Sønderby2
CASPERKAAE @ GMAIL . COM
Søren Kaae Sønderby2
SKAAESONDERBY @ GMAIL . COM
Ole Winther1,2
OLWI @ DTU . DK
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
2
Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen

Abstract
Deep generative models parameterized by neural networks have recently achieved state-ofthe-art performance in unsupervised and semisupervised learning. We extend deep generative models with auxiliary variables which improves the variational approximation. The auxiliary variables leave the generative model unchanged but make the variational distribution
more expressive. Inspired by the structure of the
auxiliary variable we also propose a model with
two stochastic layers and skip connections. Our
findings suggest that more expressive and properly specified deep generative models converge
faster with better results. We show state-of-theart performance within semi-supervised learning
on MNIST, SVHN and NORB datasets.

1. Introduction
Stochastic backpropagation, deep neural networks and approximate Bayesian inference have made deep generative
models practical for large scale problems (Kingma, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014), but typically they assume a mean
field latent distribution where all latent variables are independent. This assumption might result in models that
are incapable of capturing all dependencies in the data. In
this paper we show that deep generative models with more
expressive variational distributions are easier to optimize
and have better performance. We increase the flexibility of
the model by introducing auxiliary variables (Agakov and
Barber, 2004) allowing for more complex latent distributions. We demonstrate the benefits of the increased flexibility by achieving state-of-the-art performance in the semisupervised setting for the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998),
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011) and NORB (LeCun et al., 2004)
datasets.
Recently there have been significant improvements within
the semi-supervised classification tasks. Kingma et al.
(2014) introduced a deep generative model for semisupervised learning by modeling the joint distribution over
data and labels. This model is difficult to train end-to-end
with more than one layer of stochastic latent variables, but
coupled with a pretrained feature extractor it performs well.
Lately the Ladder network (Rasmus et al., 2015; Valpola,
2014) and virtual adversarial training (VAT) (Miyato et al.,
2015) have improved the performance further with end-toend training.
In this paper we train deep generative models with multiple stochastic layers. The Auxiliary Deep Generative
Models (ADGM) utilize an extra set of auxiliary latent variables to increase the flexibility of the variational distribution (cf. Sec. 2.2). We also introduce a slight change to
the ADGM, a 2-layered stochastic model with skip connections, the Skip Deep Generative Model (SDGM) (cf.
Sec. 2.4). Both models are trainable end-to-end and offer
state-of-the-art performance when compared to other semisupervised methods. In the paper we first introduce toy data
to demonstrate that:
(i) The auxiliary variable models can fit complex latent distributions and thereby improve the variational
lower bound (cf. Sec. 4.1 and 4.3).
(ii) By fitting a complex half-moon dataset using only six
labeled data points the ADGM utilizes the data manifold for semi-supervised classification (cf. Sec. 4.2).
For the benchmark datasets we show (cf. Sec. 4.4):
(iii) State-of-the-art results on several semi-supervised
classification tasks.
(iv) That multi-layered deep generative models for semisupervised learning are trainable end-to-end without
pre-training or feature engineering.

