Softened Approximate Policy Iteration for Markov Games
Julien Pérolat(a)
JULIEN . PEROLAT @ ED . UNIV- LILLE 1. FR
Bilal Piot(a)
BILAL . PIOT @ UNIV- LILLE 1. FR
Matthieu Geist(d)
MATTHIEU . GEIST @ CENTRALESUPELEC . FR
Bruno Scherrer(b)
BRUNO . SCHERRER @ INRIA . FR
Olivier Pietquin1(a,c)
OLIVIER . PIETQUIN @ UNIV- LILLE 1. FR
(a)
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Inria UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
(b)
Inria, Villers-lès-Nancy, F-54600, France
(c)
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), France
(d)
UMI 2958, GeorgiaTech-CNRS, CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay, Metz, France,

Abstract
This paper reports theoretical and empirical investigations on the use of quasi-Newton methods to minimize the Optimal Bellman Residual
(OBR) of zero-sum two-player Markov Games.
First, it reveals that state-of-the-art algorithms
can be derived by the direct application of Newton’s method to different norms of the OBR.
More precisely, when applied to the norm of the
OBR, Newton’s method results in the Bellman
Residual Minimization Policy Iteration (BRMPI)
and, when applied to the norm of the Projected
OBR (POBR), it results into the standard Least
Squares Policy Iteration (LSPI) algorithm. Consequently, new algorithms are proposed, making
use of quasi-Newton methods to minimize the
OBR and the POBR so as to take beneﬁt of enhanced empirical performances at low cost. Indeed, using a quasi-Newton method approach introduces slight modiﬁcations in term of coding of
LSPI and BRMPI but improves signiﬁcantly both
the stability and the performance of those algorithms. These phenomena are illustrated on an
experiment conducted on artiﬁcially constructed
games called Garnets.

1. Introduction
A two-player zero-sum Markov Game (MG) is a model
for adversarial interaction between two agents. Players are
considered as agents stepping from state to state and collecting rewards in consequence of their mutual actions. In
the zero-sum setting, the reward of one player is the loss
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

of the other. Chess, Checkers, multi-agent systems can be
modeled as an MG. Notice that MGs are natural extensions of Markov Decision Processes (MDP) and thus any
MDP can be modeled as an MG (results thus also hold
for MDPs). In this paper, we are interested in ﬁnding a
minmax strategy of interaction for both players. Finding
minmax strategies in small MGs is possible with exact Dynamic Programming (DP) algorithms. However, when the
state space is too large or when the game is only known
through logs of interactions, one needs to use Approximate
DP (ADP). This paper focuses on ADP techniques with linear function approximation.
MGs were ﬁrst introduced by Shapley (1953) (although
MGs are referred to as Stochastic Games) who provided the
ﬁrst algorithm that solves zero-sum two-player MGs. This
algorithm is analogous to Value Iteration (VI), very popular in the MDP literature. Following this, two extensions
of Howard’s Policy Iteration (PI) (Puterman, 1994) to zerosum two-player MGs were developed. First, the Hoffman
and Karp (1966) algorithm that requires solving an MDP
as a subroutine at each iteration and is proven to converge.
Second, the Pollatschek and Avi-Itzhak (1969) algorithm
performs well in practice but is not proven to converge in
general. Actually, Van Der Wal (1978) published a simple counterexample showing that this algorithm is unstable.
To our knowledge, ﬁnding necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for its convergence is still an open problem. However, in their enlightening paper, Filar & Tolwinski (1991)
introduce a slight modiﬁcation of the Pollatschek & AviItzhak algorithm aimed at ﬁxing its convergence issues. In
fact, the Pollatschek & Avi-Itzhak algorithm is a Newton’s
method on the L2 -norm of the Optimal Bellman Residual
(OBR). The modiﬁcation of Filar & Tolwinski amounts to
use a quasi-Newton method on the L2 -norm of the OBR in1

Now with Google DeepMind

