Robust Monte Carlo Sampling using
Riemannian Nosé-Poincaré Hamiltonian Dynamics

Anirban Roychowdhury
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210

ROYCHOWDHURY.7@ OSU . EDU

Brian Kulis
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215

BKULIS @ BU . EDU

Srinivasan Parthasarathy
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210

Abstract
We present a Monte Carlo sampler using a modified Nosé-Poincaré Hamiltonian along with Riemannian preconditioning. Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo samplers allow better exploration of the
state space as opposed to random walk-based
methods, but, from a molecular dynamics perspective, may not necessarily provide samples
from the canonical ensemble. Nosé-Hoover samplers rectify that shortcoming, but the resultant dynamics are not Hamiltonian. Furthermore, usage of these algorithms on large real-life
datasets necessitates the use of stochastic gradients, which acts as another potentially destabilizing source of noise. In this work, we propose
dynamics based on a modified Nosé-Poincaré
Hamiltonian augmented with Riemannian manifold corrections. The resultant symplectic sampling algorithm samples from the canonical ensemble while using structural cues from the Riemannian preconditioning matrices to efficiently
traverse the parameter space. We also propose
a stochastic variant using additional terms in the
Hamiltonian to correct for the noise from the
stochastic gradients. We show strong performance of our algorithms on synthetic datasets
and high-dimensional Poisson factor analysisbased topic modeling scenarios.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SRINI @ CSE . OHIO - STATE . EDU

1. Introduction
Bayesian inference in high dimensional models often requires one to draw samples from posterior distributions
of variables which cannot be computed in closed form.
Monte Carlo techniques are the primary tool in one’s arsenal for this purpose; they allow one to draw samples from a
sequence of probability distributions that form a Markov
chain with the target distribution as its stationary distribution. The Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) technique,
first proposed in (Duane et al., 1987) as “Hybrid Monte
Carlo”, improves on this by using ideas from statistical
physics to avoid the random walk behavior that normally
arises in these Markov chains. HMC sets the target distribution as the “potential energy” of the simulated system,
and uses auxiliary “momentum” variables to augment the
potential with a kinetic energy term. Hamiltonian dynamics are then used to create a sampler that conserves this
quantity, and the samples generated by this technique are
provably less correlated among themselves which leads to
faster convergence to the target distribution. The dynamics are usually specified with a set of differential equations
which then have to be discretized; however one can derive
discrete-time numeric integrators (Neal, 2011; Leimkuhler & Reich, 2004), usually called “leapfrog” methods, that
preserve the detailed balance and time reversibility properties of the continuous-time formulations.
In the statistical physics literature, dynamics-based techniques are used to sample from a canonical ensemble,
where the possible states of the system remain at a constant
temperature. One technique that has been used for this purpose uses the Nosé Hamiltonian (Nosé, 1984), which generates sequence of states from the canonical ensemble under the standard ergodicity assumptions. The Nosé-Hoover
system (Hoover, 1985) proposes a change of variables that
allows evenly spaced samples from the canonical ensem-

