Boolean Matrix Factorization and Noisy Completion via Message Passing

Siamak Ravanbakhsh
Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15217 USA

MRAVANBA @ CS . CMU . EDU
BAPOCZOS @ CS . CMU . EDU

Russell Greiner
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, Canada

RGREINER @ UALBERTA . CA

Abstract
Boolean matrix factorization and Boolean matrix completion from noisy observations are desirable unsupervised data-analysis methods due
to their interpretability, but hard to perform due
to their NP-hardness. We treat these problems
as maximum a posteriori inference problems in
a graphical model and present a message passing approach that scales linearly with the number of observations and factors. Our empirical study demonstrates that message passing is
able to recover low-rank Boolean matrices, in
the boundaries of theoretically possible recovery
and compares favorably with state-of-the-art in
real-world applications, such collaborative filtering with large-scale Boolean data.

1. Introduction
A body of problems in machine learning, communication
theory and combinatorial optimization involve the product
form Z = X Y where operation corresponds to a type
of matrix multiplication and
Z = {Zm,n }M ×N , X = {Xm,k }M ×K , Y = {Yk,n }K×N .
Here, often one or two components (out of three) are (partially) known and the task is to recover the unknown component(s). A subset of these problems, which are most
closely related to Boolean matrix factorization and matrix
completion, can be expressed over the Boolean domain –
i.e., Zm,n , Xm,k , Yk,n ∈ {false, true} ∼
= {0, 1}. The
two most common Boolean matrix products used in such
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

applications are
Z = X • Y ⇒ Zm,n =
Z = X ∗ Y ⇒ Zm,n ≡

K
_
k=1

Xm,k ∧ Yk,n

K
X
k=1

(1a)


Xm,k ∧ Yk,n mod 2 (1b)

where we refer to Equation (1a) simply as Boolean product
and we distinguish Equation (1b) as exclusive-OR (XOR)
Boolean product. One may think of Boolean product as
ordinary matrix product where the values that are larger
than zero in the product matrix are set to one. Alternatively,
in XOR product, the odd (even) numbers are identically set
to one (zero) in the product matrix.
This model can represent Low Density Parity Check
(LDPC) coding using the XOR product, with N = 1. In
LDPC, the objective is to transmit the data vector Y ∈
{0, 1}K though a noisy channel. For this, it is encoded by
Equation (1b), where X ∈ {0, 1}m×k is the parity check
matrix and vector Z{0, 1}M is then sent though the channel with a noise model pO (O | Z), producing observation
O. Message passing decoding has been able to transmit
Z and recover Y from O at rates close to the theoretical
capacity of the communication channel (Gallager, 1962).
LDPC codes are in turn closely related to the compressed
sensing (Donoho, 2006) – so much so that successful binary LDPC codes (i.e., matrix X) have been reused for
compressed sensing (Dimakis et al., 2012). In this setting, the column-vector Y is known to be `-sparse (i.e., `
non-zero values) and approximate message passing (AMP;
Donoho et al., 2009) is used to recover Y using few noisy
measurements O – that is M  K and similar to LDPC
codes, the measurement matrix X is known. When the
underlying domain and algebra is Boolean (i.e., Equation (1a)), the compressed sensing problem reduces to the
problem of (noisy) group testing (Du & Hwang, 1993) 1
where message passing has been successfully applied in
1

The intuition is that the non-zero elements of the vector Y

