Fast K-Means with Accurate Bounds
James Newling
Idiap Research Institute & EPFL, Switzerland

JAMES . NEWLING @ IDIAP. CH

François Fleuret
Idiap Research Institute & EPFL, Switzerland

FRANCOIS . FLEURET @ IDIAP. CH

Abstract
We propose a novel accelerated exact k-means
algorithm, which outperforms the current stateof-the-art low-dimensional algorithm in 18 of 22
experiments, running up to 3× faster. We also
propose a general improvement of existing stateof-the-art accelerated exact k-means algorithms
through better estimates of the distance bounds
used to reduce the number of distance calculations, obtaining speedups in 36 of 44 experiments, of up to 1.8×. We have conducted experiments with our own implementations of existing
methods to ensure homogeneous evaluation of
performance, and we show that our implementations perform as well or better than existing available implementations. Finally, we propose simplified variants of standard approaches and show
that they are faster than their fully-fledged counterparts in 59 of 62 experiments.

1. Introduction
The k-means problem is to compute a set of k centroids to
minimise the sum over data-points of the squared distance
to the nearest centroid. It is an NP-hard problem for which
various effective approximation algorithms exist. The most
popular is often referred to as Lloyd’s algorithm, or simply
as the k-means algorithm. It has applications in data compression, data classification, density estimation and many
other areas, and was recognised in Wu et al. (2008) as one
of the top-10 algorithms in data mining.
Lloyd’s algorithm relies on a two-step iterative process: In
the assignment step, each sample is assigned to the cluster
whose centroid is nearest. In the update step, cluster centroids are updated in accordance with their assigned samples. Lloyd’s algorithm is also called the exact k-means
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

algorithm, as there is no approximation in either of the two
steps. This name can lead to confusion as the algorithm
does not solve the k-means problem exactly.
The linear dependence on the number of clusters, the number of samples and the dimension of the space, means that
Lloyd’s algorithm requires upwards of a billion floating
point operations per round on standard datasets such as
those used in our experiments (§4). This, coupled with
slow convergence and the fact that several runs are often
performed to find improved solutions, can make it slow.
Lloyd’s algorithm does not state how the assignment and
update steps should be performed, and as such provides
a scaffolding on which more elaborate algorithms can be
constructed. These more elaborate algorithms, often called
accelerated exact k-means algorithms, are the primary focus of this paper. They can be dropped-in wherever Lloyd’s
algorithm is used.
1.1. Approximate k-means
Alternatives to exact k-means have been proposed. Certain of these rely on a relaxation of the assignment step,
for example by only considering certain clusters according
to some hierarchical ordering (Nister & Stewenius, 2006),
or by using an approximate nearest neighbour search as
in Philbin et al. (2007). Others rely on a relaxation of the
update step, for example by using only a subset of data to
update centroids (Frahling & Sohler, 2006; Sculley, 2010).
When comparing approximate k-means clustering algorithms such as those just mentioned, the two criteria of interest are the quality of the final clustering, and the computational requirements. The two criteria are not independent,
making comparison between algorithms difficult and often
preventing their adoption. When comparing accelerated exact k-means algorithms on the other hand, all algorithms
produce the same final clustering, and so comparisons can
be made based on speed alone. Once an accelerated exact
k-means algorithm has been confirmed to provide a speedup, it is rapidly adopted, automatically inheriting the trust
which the exact algorithm has gained through its simplicity

