Low-Rank Matrix Approximation with Stability

Dongsheng Li§
Chao Chen†
Qin Lv‡
Junchi Yan§
Li Shang‡
Stephen M. Chu§
§
IBM Research - China, 399 Keyuan Road, Shanghai P. R. China 201203
†
Tongji University, 4800 Caoan Road, Shanghai P.R. China 201804
‡
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado USA 80309

Abstract
Low-rank matrix approximation has been widely
adopted in machine learning applications with sparse data, such as recommender systems. However, the sparsity of the data, incomplete and
noisy, introduces challenges to the algorithm stability – small changes in the training data may
significantly change the models. As a result, existing low-rank matrix approximation solutions yield low generalization performance, exhibiting high error variance on the training dataset,
and minimizing the training error may not guarantee error reduction on the testing dataset. In
this paper, we investigate the algorithm stability problem of low-rank matrix approximations.
We present a new algorithm design framework,
which (1) introduces new optimization objectives
to guide stable matrix approximation algorithm
design, and (2) solves the optimization problem
to obtain stable low-rank approximation solutions with good generalization performance. Experimental results on real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed work can achieve better
prediction accuracy compared with both state-ofthe-art low-rank matrix approximation methods
and ensemble methods in recommendation task.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix approximation (LRMA) has been widely
adopted in machine learning applications with sparse data, e.g., recommender systems (Paterek, 2007; Koren et al.,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

LDSLI @ CN . IBM . COM
CHENCH . RESCH @ GMAIL . COM
QIN . LV @ COLORADO . EDU
YANJC @ CN . IBM . COM
LI . SHANG @ COLORADO . EDU
SCHU @ US . IBM . COM

2009). In LRMA-based recommender systems (Paterek,
2007; Koren et al., 2009), a given user-item rating matrix
is approximated using observed ratings (often sparse), then
user ratings on unrated items are predicted using the dot
product of corresponding user and item feature vectors. LRMA methods have the capability of reducing the dimensionality of user/item rating vectors, hence are suitable to
handle applications with sparse data (Koren et al., 2009).
Indeed, LRMA-based solutions have been widely used in
existing recommender systems (Paterek, 2007; Koren et al.,
2009; Lee et al., 2013; Beutel et al., 2015).
The sparsity of the data, incomplete and noisy (Keshavan
et al., 2010; Candès & Recht, 2012), introduces challenges
to the algorithm stability. In LRMA, models are biased to
the limited training data (sparse), so that small changes in
the training data (noisy) may significantly change the models. As demonstrated in this work, existing LRMA methods cannot provide stable matrix approximations. Such unstable matrix approximations will introduce high training
error variance, and minimizing the training error may not
guarantee consistent error reduction on the testing dataset,
i.e., low generalization performance (Bousquet & Elisseeff,
2001; Srebro et al., 2004a;b). In other words, the algorithm
stability has direct impact on generalization performance,
and an unstable LRMA algorithm has low generalization
performance (Srebro et al., 2004a).
Heuristic techniques, such as cross-validation and ensemble learning (Koren, 2008; Mackey et al., 2011; Lee et al.,
2013; Chen et al., 2015), can be adopted to improve the
generalization performance of LRMA. However, cross validation methods have the drawback that the amount of data available for model learning is reduced (Kohavi, 1995;
Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2001). Ensemble LRMA methods (Lee et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2015) are computationally expensive due to the training of sub-models. Recently,

