Normalization Propagation: A Parametric Technique for Removing Internal
Covariate Shift in Deep Networks

Devansh Arpit
Yingbo Zhou
Bhargava U. Kota
Venu Govindaraju
SUNY Buffalo

DEVANSHA @ BUFFALO . EDU
YINGBOZH @ BUFFALO . EDU
BURALAKO @ BUFFALO . EDU
GOVIND @ BUFFALO . EDU

Abstract
While the authors of Batch Normalization (BN)
identify and address an important problem involved in training deep networks– Internal Covariate Shift– the current solution has certain
drawbacks. For instance, BN depends on batch
statistics for layerwise input normalization during training which makes the estimates of mean
and standard deviation of input (distribution)
to hidden layers inaccurate due to shifting parameter values (especially during initial training
epochs). Another fundamental problem with BN
is that it cannot be used with batch-size 1 during training. We address these drawbacks of BN
by proposing a non-adaptive normalization technique for removing covariate shift, that we call
Normalization Propagation. Our approach does
not depend on batch statistics, but rather uses
a data-independent parametric estimate of mean
and standard-deviation in every layer thus being
computationally faster compared with BN. We
exploit the observation that the pre-activation before Rectified Linear Units follow Gaussian distribution in deep networks, and that once the first
and second order statistics of any given dataset
are normalized, we can forward propagate this
normalization without the need for recalculating
the approximate statistics for hidden layers.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Ioffe & Szegedy (2015) identified an important problem involved in training deep networks, viz., Internal Covariate
Shift. It refers to the problem of shifting distribution of
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

the input of every hidden layer in a deep neural network.
This idea is borrowed from the concept of covariate shift
(Shimodaira, 2000), where this problem is faced by a single input-output learning system. Consider the last layer of
a deep network being used for classification; this layer essentially tries to learn P (Y |X), where Y is the class label
random variable (r.v.) and X is the layer input r.v. However, learning a fixed P (Y |X) becomes a problem if P (X)
changes continuously. As a result, this slows down training
convergence.
Batch Normalization (BN) addresses this problem by normalizing the distribution of every hidden layers’ input. In
order to do so, it approximates the pre-activation mean and
standard deviation using mini-batch statistics at each iteration of training and uses these estimates to normalize the
input to the next layer. While this approach leads to a significant performance jump by addressing internal covariate
shift, its estimates of mean and standard-deviation of hidden layer input rely on mini-batch statistics which makes
these estimates an approximation (especially during initial
training iterations). This is because the mini-batch statistics of input to hidden layers depends on the output from
previous layers, which in turn depend on the previous layer
parameters that keep shifting during training. Validation
and testing get affected for the same reason since they use
a running average estimate of these statistics. Finally, due
to involvement of batch statistics, BN is inapplicable with
batch-size 1.
In this paper, we propose a simple parametric normalization technique for addressing internal covariate shift that
does not depend on batch statistics for normalizing the input to hidden layers and is less severely affected by the
problem of shifting parameters during training. In fact,
we show that it is unnecessary to explicitly calculate mean
and standard-deviation from mini-batches for normalizing
the input to hidden layers. Instead, a data independent
estimate of these normalization components are available
in closed form for every hidden layer, assuming the pre-

