Exploiting Cyclic Symmetry in Convolutional Neural Networks

Sander Dieleman
Jeffrey De Fauw
Koray Kavukcuoglu
Google DeepMind

SEDIELEM @ GOOGLE . COM
DEFAUW @ GOOGLE . COM
KORAYK @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
Many classes of images exhibit rotational symmetry. Convolutional neural networks are sometimes trained using data augmentation to exploit
this, but they are still required to learn the rotation equivariance properties from the data. Encoding these properties into the network architecture, as we are already used to doing for translation equivariance by using convolutional layers,
could result in a more efficient use of the parameter budget by relieving the model from learning
them. We introduce four operations which can
be inserted into neural network models as layers,
and which can be combined to make these models partially equivariant to rotations. They also
enable parameter sharing across different orientations. We evaluate the effect of these architectural modifications on three datasets which exhibit rotational symmetry and demonstrate improved performance with smaller models.

1. Introduction
For many machine learning applications involving sensory
data (e.g. computer vision, speech recognition), neural networks have largely displaced traditional approaches based
on handcrafted features. Such features require considerable
engineering effort and a lot of prior knowledge to design.
Neural networks however are able to automatically extract
a lot of this knowledge from data, which previously had to
be incorporated into models using feature engineering.
Nevertheless, this evolution has not exempted machine
learning practitioners from getting to know their datasets
and problem domains: prior knowledge is now encoded
in the architecture of the neural networks instead. The
most prominent example of this is the standard architecture of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which typProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Slice

Pool

Roll

Stack

Figure 1. The four operations that constitute our proposed framework for building rotation equivariant neural networks.

ically consist of alternating convolutional layers and pooling layers. The convolutional layers endow these models
with the property of translation equivariance: patterns that
manifest themselves at different spatial positions in the input will be encoded similarly in the feature representations
extracted by these layers. The pooling layers provide local translation invariance, by combining the feature representations extracted by the convolutional layers in a way
that is position-independent within a local region of space.
Together, these layers allow CNNs to learn a hierarchy of
feature detectors, where each successive layer sees a larger
part of the input and is progressively more robust to local
variations in the layer below.
CNNs have seen widespread use for computer vision tasks,
where their hierarchical structure provides a strong prior
that is especially effective for images. They owe their success largely to their scalability: the parameter sharing implied by the convolution operation allows for the capacity
of the model to be used much more effectively than would
be the case in a fully connected neural network with a similar number of parameters, and significantly reduces overfitting. It also enables them to be used for very large images
without dramatically increasing the number of parameters.
In this paper, we investigate how this idea can also be applied to rotation invariance and equivariance. Many types
of data exhibit these properties, and exploiting them to increase parameter sharing may allow us to further regularise
and scale up neural networks. We propose four new neural
network layers, represented in Figure 1, which can be be

