Representational Similarity Learning with Application to Brain Networks

Urvashi Oswal
Christopher Cox
Matthew A. Lambon Ralph†
Timothy Rogers
Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
†

UOSWAL @ WISC . EDU
CRCOX @ WISC . EDU
MATT. LAMBON - RALPH @ MANCHESTER . AC . UK
TTROGERS @ WISC . EDU
RDNOWAK @ WISC . EDU

University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK

Abstract
Representational Similarity Learning (RSL)
aims to discover features that are important in
representing (human-judged) similarities among
objects. RSL can be posed as a sparsityregularized multi-task regression problem. Standard methods, like group lasso, may not select
important features if they are strongly correlated
with others. To address this shortcoming we
present a new regularizer for multitask regression
called Group Ordered Weighted `1 (GrOWL).
Another key contribution of our paper is a novel
application to fMRI brain imaging. Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA) is a tool for testing whether localized brain regions encode perceptual similarities. Using GrOWL, we propose
a new approach called Network RSA that can discover arbitrarily structured brain networks (possibly widely distributed and non-local) that encode similarity information. We show, in theory
and fMRI experiments, how GrOWL deals with
strongly correlated covariates.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the following learning task. Suppose
we have a set of items along with human-judged pairwise
similarities among them. For instance, the items could
be visual stimuli such as advertisements, pictures, or diagrams. Assume that we also have a high-dimensional feature associated with each item. These could be numerical
features quantifying the characteristics of each item or, in
the case of fMRI, the features are voxel responses to stimProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

uli. The learning task is to determine the subset of features that is most predictive of the human-judged similarities. This can be posed mathematically as follows. Let S
be an n×n matrix of pairwise similarities between n items.
Let X be an n × p matrix where the ith row is the 1 × p
vector of the features for item i. We then wish to find a
weight matrix W such XW X T ≈ S. The weight matrix
reveals which features are most important and how they are
combined to represent the human-judged similarities. We
call this Representational Similarity Learning (RSL). This
problem can be viewed as special case of regression metric
learning, see (Kulis, 2012), but the focus of RSL is to identify the subset of features that are most strongly influencing
human-judged similarities. The theory and methods developed in this paper may also be applicable to other metric
learning problems (Atzmon et al., 2015; Ying et al., 2009).
Let us illustrate this learning problem with two applications. First, suppose the items are diagrams of chemical
molecules, and each diagram is also described by a vector
comprised of many visual features (e.g., counts of different atom types, bonds, bond angles, etc). Novice chemistry students may miss critical similarities and differences
when comparing different diagrams. After gathering pairwise similarity judgments from the students, RSL could be
used to identify which features they are attending to and,
thus, which important features they may be overlooking
(Rau et al., 2016). Second, consider Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA) in fMRI brain imaging (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008). In RSA a person is scanned while viewing
n different visual stimuli. Pairwise similarities are obtained
through other experiments, such as asking people to look
at pairs of stimuli and rate the similarity. In this case, the
features are the stimuli responses of p voxels in the brain,
and the goal is to determine which voxels (and hence brain
regions) are encoding the similarities. RSA is depicted in
Figure 1, and it is the focus of our application in Section 4.

