BASC: Applying Bayesian Optimization to the Search
for Global Minima on Potential Energy Surfaces

Shane Carr
Roman Garnett
Cynthia Lo
Washington University, 1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130 USA

Abstract
We present a novel application of Bayesian optimization to the field of surface science: rapidly
and accurately searching for the global minimum on potential energy surfaces. Controlling
molecule–surface interactions is key for applications ranging from environmental catalysis to gas
sensing. We present pragmatic techniques, including exploration/exploitation scheduling and a
custom covariance kernel that encodes the properties of our objective function. Our method, the
Bayesian Active Site Calculator (BASC), outperforms differential evolution and constrained minima hopping — two state-of-the-art approaches —
in trial examples of carbon monoxide adsorption
on a hematite substrate, both with and without a
defect.

1. Introduction
The study of chemical processes on solid surfaces, which
was recently recognized with the 2007 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, is important for cleaner energy and environmental
applications ranging from catalysis to gas sensing.
In particular, heterogeneous catalysis is the study of how
solid materials can influence the rates of chemical reactions. These materials provide binding sites for the reacting
gas molecules and orient them to facilitate chemical bond
breaking and forming. A few examples include the work of
Sivula et al. (2011), who used hematite (α-Fe2 O3 ) for water
splitting, Song (2006), who compared several CO2 -selective
catalysts for treating flue gases of power plants via carbon
capture, and Xu et al. (2012), who reviewed the use of iron
oxide for wastewater treatment.
rd

Proceedings of the 33 International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SHANE . CARR @ WUSTL . EDU
GARNETT @ WUSTL . EDU
CLO @ WUSTL . EDU

The process of a molecule binding to a surface (called adsorption) involves searching for energetically favorable binding sites. Although any site on the surface is theoretically
possible, the most likely sites are the most thermodynamically stable (i.e., those that have the lowest potential energy).
This gives rise to an important question: given a solid surface and a gas molecule, which adsorption configuration
corresponds to the globally minimized potential energy?
From a mathematical point of view, this boils down to an optimization problem — efficiently performing global energy
minimization in a multidimensional space, while simultaneously ensuring that the identities of the molecule and surface
remain unchanged.
Researchers have attempted several different approaches
to solving this problem. One of the more popular solutions to date, constrained minima hopping (Peterson, 2014),
enforces molecular identity by placing constraints on the
distance between atoms, and uses a stochastic global optimization algorithm based on basin hopping (Wales & Doye,
1997) to explore different molecule–surface configurations.
However, constrained minima hopping is computationally
expensive, often requiring several hundred density functional theory (DFT) calculations in an average run.1
In this paper, we present the Bayesian Active Site Calculator (BASC), a novel method for predicting adsorption
configurations. We enforce the identity of the molecule
and surface by formulating the problem as the minimization
of a low-dimensional objective function (Section 2). We
model this objective using a Gaussian process with a custom
covariance kernel function that enforces the periodicity of
and relationship between the dimensions of the objective
function (Section 3). We then use Bayesian optimization
(Section 4) to converge to the global solution with relatively
few function evaluations (Sections 5 and 6).
1
DFT is a computational method for calculating the total electronic energy given a particular atomic configuration by selfconsistently solving a nonlinear system of equations related to
the Schrödinger equation; see Section 4.3.

