From Softmax to Sparsemax:
A Sparse Model of Attention and Multi-Label Classification

André F. T. Martins†]
ANDRE . MARTINS @ UNBABEL . COM
Ramón F. Astudillo†
RAMON @ UNBABEL . COM
†
Unbabel Lda, Rua Visconde de Santarém, 67-B, 1000-286 Lisboa, Portugal
]
Instituto de Telecomunicações (IT), Instituto Superior Técnico, Av. Rovisco Pais, 1, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal

Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores (INESC-ID), Rua Alves Redol, 9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal

Abstract
We propose sparsemax, a new activation function similar to the traditional softmax, but able
to output sparse probabilities. After deriving
its properties, we show how its Jacobian can be
efficiently computed, enabling its use in a network trained with backpropagation. Then, we
propose a new smooth and convex loss function
which is the sparsemax analogue of the logistic loss. We reveal an unexpected connection
between this new loss and the Huber classification loss. We obtain promising empirical results in multi-label classification problems and in
attention-based neural networks for natural language inference. For the latter, we achieve a similar performance as the traditional softmax, but
with a selective, more compact, attention focus.

1. Introduction
The softmax transformation is a key component of several
statistical learning models, encompassing multinomial logistic regression (McCullagh & Nelder, 1989), action selection in reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998),
and neural networks for multi-class classification (Bridle,
1990; Goodfellow et al., 2016). Recently, it has also been
used to design attention mechanisms in neural networks,
with important achievements in machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015), image caption generation (Xu et al.,
2015), speech recognition (Chorowski et al., 2015), natural
language understanding (Hermann et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar
et al., 2015; Rocktäschel et al., 2015), and computation
learning (Graves et al., 2014; Grefenstette et al., 2015).
There are a number of reasons why the softmax transforProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

mation is so appealing: it is simple to evaluate and differentiate, and it can be turned into a (concave) log-likelihood
function by taking the logarithm of its output. Alternatives
proposed in the literature, such as the Bradley-Terry model
(Bradley & Terry, 1952; Zadrozny, 2001), the multinomial
probit (Albert & Chib, 1993), the spherical softmax (Ollivier, 2013; de Brébisson & Vincent, 2015), or softmax
approximations (Bouchard, 2007), while advantageous in
certain scenarios, lack some of these convenient properties.
In this paper, we propose the sparsemax transformation.
Sparsemax has the distinctive feature that it can return
sparse posterior distributions, assigning zero probability to
some output variables. This property makes it appealing
for filtering large output spaces, predicting multiple labels,
or as a component to identify which of a group of variables
are relevant for a decision, making the model more interpretable. Crucially, this is done while preserving most of
the attractive properties of softmax: we show that sparsemax is also simple to evaluate, it is even cheaper to differentiate, and that it can be turned into a convex loss function.
To sum up, our contributions are as follows:
• We formalize the new sparsemax transformation, derive
its properties, and show how it can be efficiently computed (§2.1–2.3). We show that in the binary case sparsemax reduces to a hard sigmoid (§2.4).
• We derive the Jacobian of sparsemax, comparing it to the
softmax case, and show that it can lead to faster gradient
backpropagation (§2.5).
• We propose the sparsemax loss, a new loss function that
is the sparsemax analogue of logistic regression (§3). We
show that it is convex, everywhere differentiable, and
can be regarded as a multi-class generalization of the Huber classification loss (Huber, 1964; Zhang, 2004).
• We apply the sparsemax loss to train multi-label linear
classifiers (which predict a set of labels instead of a single label) on benchmark datasets (§4.1–4.2).

