Group Equivariant Convolutional Networks

Taco S. Cohen
University of Amsterdam

T. S . COHEN @ UVA . NL

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam
University of California Irvine
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research

M . WELLING @ UVA . NL

Abstract
We introduce Group equivariant Convolutional
Neural Networks (G-CNNs), a natural generalization of convolutional neural networks that reduces sample complexity by exploiting symmetries. G-CNNs use G-convolutions, a new type of
layer that enjoys a substantially higher degree of
weight sharing than regular convolution layers.
G-convolutions increase the expressive capacity
of the network without increasing the number of
parameters. Group convolution layers are easy
to use and can be implemented with negligible
computational overhead for discrete groups generated by translations, reflections and rotations.
G-CNNs achieve state of the art results on CIFAR10 and rotated MNIST.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs, convnets)
have proven to be very powerful models of sensory data
such as images, video, and audio. Although a strong theory of neural network design is currently lacking, a large
amount of empirical evidence supports the notion that both
convolutional weight sharing and depth (among other factors) are important for good predictive performance.
Convolutional weight sharing is effective because there is
a translation symmetry in most perception tasks: the label function and data distribution are both approximately
invariant to shifts. By using the same weights to analyze
or model each part of the image, a convolution layer uses
far fewer parameters than a fully connected one, while preserving the capacity to learn many useful transformations.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Convolution layers can be used effectively in a deep network because all the layers in such a network are translation equivariant: shifting the image and then feeding
it through a number of layers is the same as feeding the
original image through the same layers and then shifting
the resulting feature maps (at least up to edge-effects). In
other words, the symmetry (translation) is preserved by
each layer, which makes it possible to exploit it not just
in the first, but also in higher layers of the network.
In this paper we show how convolutional networks can be
generalized to exploit larger groups of symmetries, including rotations and reflections. The notion of equivariance is
key to this generalization, so in section 2 we will discuss
this concept and its role in deep representation learning.
After discussing related work in section 3, we recall a number of mathematical concepts in section 4 that allow us to
define and analyze the G-convolution in a generic manner.
In section 5, we analyze the equivariance properties of standard CNNs, and show that they are equivariant to translations but may fail to equivary with more general transformations. Using the mathematical framework from section 4, we can define G-CNNs (section 6) by analogy to
standard CNNs (the latter being the G-CNN for the translation group). We show that G-convolutions, as well as various kinds of layers used in modern CNNs, such as pooling, arbitrary pointwise nonlinearities, batch normalization
and residual blocks are all equivariant, and thus compatible
with G-CNNs. In section 7 we provide concrete implementation details for group convolutions.
In section 8 we report experimental results on MNIST-rot
and CIFAR10, where G-CNNs achieve state of the art results (2.28% error on MNIST-rot, and 4.19% resp. 6.46%
on augmented and plain CIFAR10). We show that replacing planar convolutions with G-convolutions consistently
improves results without additional tuning. In section 9 we
provide a discussion of these results and consider several
extensions of the method, before concluding in section 10.

