Pareto Frontier Learning with Expensive Correlated Objectives

Amar Shah
Zoubin Ghahramani
Machine Learning Group, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge

Abstract
There has been a surge of research interest
in developing tools and analysis for Bayesian
optimization, the task of finding the global
maximizer of an unknown, expensive function
through sequential evaluation using Bayesian
decision theory. However, many interesting
problems involve optimizing multiple, expensive
to evaluate objectives simultaneously, and relatively little research has addressed this setting
from a Bayesian theoretic standpoint. A prevailing choice when tackling this problem, is to
model the multiple objectives as being independent, typically for ease of computation. In practice, objectives are correlated to some extent. In
this work, we incorporate the modelling of intertask correlations, developing an approximation
to overcome intractable integrals. We illustrate
the power of modelling dependencies between
objectives on a range of synthetic and real world
multi-objective optimization problems.

1. Introduction
Most engineering problems require making design choices
which aim to simultaneously optimize multiple objectives.
For example, in designing a new drug, a pharmaceutical
scientist may strive to simultaneously maximize the
likelihood of curing an illness, minimize the chance of
unwanted side-effects and minimize the cost of drug development. Typically there would not exist a particular option
for which each objective is fully optimized. Subsequently,
the scientist would wish to consider a range of options
which trade off the multiple objectives. The ultimate
choice should be Pareto optimal; there should not exist an
alternative option which can improve on the chosen option
in every objective simultaneously.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

AS 793@ CAM . AC . UK
ZOUBIN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

The objective functions are often unknown, and can
only be ascertained through pointwise evaluation. However, it can be expensive to evaluate these objectives, in
the sense that they may necessitate large computational,
economical or other resource. The challenge is to find a set
of Pareto optimal points in as few sequential evaluations
of the multiple objective functions as possible, so as to
minimize the total expense.
A Bayesian theoretic approach to this task would be
to probabilistically model the multiple unknown objective
functions. Where the function should be evaluated next
is decided by maximizing the expected value of a chosen
acquisition, or utility function, based on the posterior
distribution of the objective functions given evaluations.
In the single objective scenario, this approach is called
Bayesian optimization (Mockus, 1989), and has been
successful in a variety of difficult, expensive global
optimization tasks including drug discovery (Negoescu
et al., 2011) and robot gait control (Lizotte et al., 2007).
Two key choices must be made under this Bayesian
theoretic framework: (i) a choice of prior over the objective functions and (ii) a choice of acquisition function
which instructs where the functions should be evaluated
next. Gaussian processes (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006)
are the popular choice for modelling objective functions,
since they are nonparameteric and permit analytic calculations. Other models have also shown promising results
in Bayesian optimization e.g. Student-t processes (Shah
et al., 2014) and deep neural networks (Snoek et al., 2015).
A commonly used acquisition function is the expected
improvement (Mockus et al., 1978), and alternative options
are discussed in the next section.
Whilst Bayesian optimization techniques have been
developed to decide on multiple locations in which a single
objective should be evaluated next (Contal et al., 2013;
Shah and Ghahramani, 2015), relatively little research
has focussed on Bayesian approaches to decide on where
to evaluate multiple objectives next (Picheny, 2014;
Hernández-Lobato et al., 2016). This is in part due to it

