Meta-Learning with Memory-Augmented Neural Networks
Adam Santoro
Google DeepMind

ADAMSANTORO @ GOOGLE . COM

Sergey Bartunov
Google DeepMind, National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE)
Matthew Botvinick
Daan Wierstra
Timothy Lillicrap
Google DeepMind

SBOS @ SBOS . IN

BOTVINICK @ GOOGLE . COM
WIERSTRA @ GOOGLE . COM

COUNTZERO @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
Despite recent breakthroughs in the applications
of deep neural networks, one setting that presents
a persistent challenge is that of “one-shot learning.” Traditional gradient-based networks require
a lot of data to learn, often through extensive iterative training. When new data is encountered,
the models must inefﬁciently relearn their parameters to adequately incorporate the new information without catastrophic interference. Architectures with augmented memory capacities, such as
Neural Turing Machines (NTMs), offer the ability to quickly encode and retrieve new information, and hence can potentially obviate the downsides of conventional models. Here, we demonstrate the ability of a memory-augmented neural network to rapidly assimilate new data, and
leverage this data to make accurate predictions
after only a few samples. We also introduce a
new method for accessing an external memory
that focuses on memory content, unlike previous
methods that additionally use memory locationbased focusing mechanisms.

1. Introduction
The current success of deep learning hinges on the ability to apply gradient-based optimization to high-capacity
models. This approach has achieved impressive results on
many large-scale supervised tasks with raw sensory input,
such as image classiﬁcation (He et al., 2015), speech recogProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

nition (Yu & Deng, 2012), and games (Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016). Notably, performance in such tasks is
typically evaluated after extensive, incremental training on
large data sets. In contrast, many problems of interest require rapid inference from small quantities of data. In the
limit of “one-shot learning,” single observations should result in abrupt shifts in behavior.
This kind of ﬂexible adaptation is a celebrated aspect of human learning (Jankowski et al., 2011), manifesting in settings ranging from motor control (Braun et al., 2009) to the
acquisition of abstract concepts (Lake et al., 2015). Generating novel behavior based on inference from a few scraps
of information – e.g., inferring the full range of applicability for a new word, heard in only one or two contexts – is
something that has remained stubbornly beyond the reach
of contemporary machine intelligence. It appears to present
a particularly daunting challenge for deep learning. In situations when only a few training examples are presented
one-by-one, a straightforward gradient-based solution is to
completely re-learn the parameters from the data available
at the moment. Such a strategy is prone to poor learning,
and/or catastrophic interference. In view of these hazards,
non-parametric methods are often considered to be better
suited.
However, previous work does suggest one potential strategy for attaining rapid learning from sparse data, and
hinges on the notion of meta-learning (Thrun, 1998; Vilalta & Drissi, 2002). Although the term has been used
in numerous senses (Schmidhuber et al., 1997; Caruana,
1997; Schweighofer & Doya, 2003; Brazdil et al., 2003),
meta-learning generally refers to a scenario in which an
agent learns at two levels, each associated with different
time scales. Rapid learning occurs within a task, for example, when learning to accurately classify within a particular dataset. This learning is guided by knowledge

