Additive Approximations in High Dimensional
Nonparametric Regression via the SALSA

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
Yaoliang Yu
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Abstract
High dimensional nonparametric regression is an
inherently difficult problem with known lower
bounds depending exponentially in dimension. A
popular strategy to alleviate this curse of dimensionality has been to use additive models of first
order, which model the regression function as
a sum of independent functions on each dimension. Though useful in controlling the variance of
the estimate, such models are often too restrictive
in practical settings. Between non-additive models which often have large variance and first order additive models which have large bias, there
has been little work to exploit the trade-off in
the middle via additive models of intermediate
order. In this work, we propose SALSA, which
bridges this gap by allowing interactions between
variables, but controls model capacity by limiting the order of interactions. SALSA minimises the residual sum of squares with squared
RKHS norm penalties. Algorithmically, it can
be viewed as Kernel Ridge Regression with an
additive kernel. When the regression function is
additive, the excess risk is only polynomial in dimension. Using the Girard-Newton formulae, we
efficiently sum over a combinatorial number of
terms in the additive expansion. Via a comparison on 15 real datasets, we show that our method
is competitive against 21 other alternatives.

1. Introduction
Given i.i.d samples (Xi , Yi )ni=1 from some distribution
PXY , on X × Y ⊂ RD × R, the goal of least squares
regression is to estimate the regression function f∗ (x) =
E[Y |X = x]. A popular approach is linear regression
which models f∗ as a linear combination of the variables
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

KANDASAMY @ CS . CMU . EDU
YAOLIANG @ CS . CMU . EDU

x, i.e. f (x) = β > x for some β ∈ RD . Linear Regression is typically solved by minimising the sum of squared
errors on the training set subject to a complexity penalty
on β. Such parametric methods are conceptually simple
and have desirable statistical properties when the problem
meets the assumption. However, the parametric assumption
is generally too restrictive for many real problems.
Nonparametric regression refers to a suite of methods that
typically only assume smoothness on f∗ . They present a
more compelling framework for regression since they encompass a richer class of functions than parametric models do. However they suffer from severe drawbacks in
high dimensional settings. The excess risk of nonparametric methods has exponential dependence on dimension. Current lower bounds (Györfi et al., 2002) suggest
that this dependence is unavoidable. Therefore, to make
progress stronger assumptions on f∗ beyond just smoothness are necessary. In this light, a common simplification
has been to assume that f∗ decomposes into the additive
(1)
(2)
(D)
form f∗ (x) = f∗ (x1 )+f∗ (x2 )+· · ·+f∗ (xD ) (Hastie
& Tibshirani, 1990; Lafferty & Wasserman, 2005; Ravikumar et al., 2009). In this exposition, we refer to such models as first order additive models. Under this assumption,
the excess risk improves significantly.
That said, the first order assumption is often too biased in
practice since it ignores interactions between variables. It
is natural to ask if we could consider additive models which
permit interactions. For instance, a second order model has
(1)
(2)
the expansion f∗ (x) = f∗ (x1 , x2 ) + f∗ (x1 , x3 ) + . . . .
In general,
 we may consider d orders of interaction which
have D
d terms in the expansion. If d  D, we may allow
for a richer class of functions than first order models, and
hopefully still be able to control the excess risk.
Even when f∗ is not additive, using an additive approximation has its advantages. It is a well understood statistical
concept that when we only have few samples, using a simpler model to fit our data gives us a better trade-off for variance against bias. Since additive models are statistically
simpler they may give us better estimates due to reduced

