Dynamic Capacity Networks

Amjad Almahairi∗
Nicolas Ballas∗
Tim Cooijmans∗
Yin Zheng†
Hugo Larochelle?
Aaron Courville∗
∗
MILA, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada
†
Hulu LLC. Beijing, China
?
Twitter, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
We introduce the Dynamic Capacity Network
(DCN), a neural network that can adaptively
assign its capacity across different portions of
the input data. This is achieved by combining modules of two types: low-capacity subnetworks and high-capacity sub-networks. The
low-capacity sub-networks are applied across
most of the input, but also provide a guide to
select a few portions of the input on which to
apply the high-capacity sub-networks. The selection is made using a novel gradient-based attention mechanism, that efficiently identifies input regions for which the DCN’s output is most
sensitive and to which we should devote more
capacity. We focus our empirical evaluation on
the Cluttered MNIST and SVHN image datasets.
Our findings indicate that DCNs are able to
drastically reduce the number of computations,
compared to traditional convolutional neural networks, while maintaining similar or even better
performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently exhibited state-of-theart performance across a wide range of tasks, including object recognition (Szegedy et al., 2014) and speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014). Top-performing systems,
however, are based on very deep and wide networks that
are computationally intensive. One underlying assumption
of many deep models is that all input regions contain the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

AMJAD . ALMAHAIRI @ UMONTREAL . CA
NICOLAS . BALLAS @ UMONTREAL . CA
TIM . COOIJMANS @ UMONTREAL . CA
YIN . ZHENG @ HULU . COM
HLAROCHELLE @ TWITTER . COM
AARON . COURVILLE @ UMONTREAL . CA

same amount of information. Indeed, convolutional neural
networks apply the same set of filters uniformly across the
spatial input (Szegedy et al., 2014), while recurrent neural networks apply the same transformation at every time
step (Graves & Jaitly, 2014). Those networks lead to timeconsuming training and inference (prediction), in large part
because they require a large number of weight/activation
multiplications.
Task-relevant information, however, is often not uniformly
distributed across input data. For example, objects in images are spatially localized, i.e. they exist only in specific
regions of the image. This observation has been exploited
in attention-based systems (Mnih et al., 2014), which can
reduce computations significantly by learning to selectively
focus or “attend” to few, task-relevant, input regions. Attention employed in such systems is often referred to as
“hard-attention”, as opposed to “soft-attention” which integrates smoothly all input regions. Models of hard-attention
proposed so far, however, require defining an explicit predictive model, whose training can pose challenges due to
its non-differentiable cost.
In this work we introduce the Dynamic Capacity Network
(DCN) that can adaptively assign its capacity across different portions of the input, using a gradient-based hardattention process. The DCN combines two types of modules: small, low-capacity, sub-networks, and large, highcapacity, sub-networks. The low-capacity sub-networks
are active on the whole input, but are used to direct the
high-capacity sub-networks, via our attention mechanism,
to task-relevant regions of the input.
A key property of the DCN’s hard-attention mechanism is
that it does not require a policy network trained by reinforcement learning. Instead, we can train DCNs end-to-end
with backpropagation. We evaluate a DCN model on the
attention benchmark task Cluttered MNIST (Mnih et al.,

