Learning Privately from Multiparty Data

Jihun Hamm
HAMMJ @ CSE . OHIO - STATE . EDU
Dept. Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Paul Cao
Dept. Computer Science and Engineering, UC-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

YIC 242@ ENG . UCSD . EDU

Mikhail Belkin
MBELKIN @ CSE . OHIO - STATE . EDU
Dept. Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
Learning a classifier from private data collected
by multiple parties is an important problem that
has many potential applications. How can we
build an accurate and differentially private global
classifier by combining locally-trained classifiers
from different parties, without access to any
party’s private data? We propose to transfer the
‘knowledge’ of the local classifier ensemble by
first creating labeled data from auxiliary unlabeled data, and then train a global -differentially
private classifier. We show that majority voting
is too sensitive and therefore propose a new risk
weighted by class probabilities estimated from
the ensemble. Relative to a non-private solution,
our private solution has a generalization error
bounded by O(−2 M −2 ) where M is the number of parties. This allows strong privacy without performance loss when M is large, such as in
crowdsensing applications. We demonstrate the
performance of our method with realistic tasks of
activity recognition, network intrusion detection,
and malicious URL detection.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of performing machine learning with
data collected by multiple parties. In many settings, the
parties may not wish to disclose the private information.
For example, the parties can be medical institutions who
aim to perform collaborative research using sensitive patient information they hold. For another example, the parties can be computer users who aim to collectively build
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

a malware detector without sharing their usage data. A
conventional approach to learning from multiparty data is
to first collect data from all parties and then process them
centrally. When privacy is a major concern, this approach
is not always an appropriate solution since it is vulnerable to attacks during transmission, storage, and processing
of data. Instead, we will consider a setting in which each
party trains a local classifier from its private data without
sending the data. The goal is to build a global classifier
by combining local classifiers efficiently and privately. We
expect the global classifier to be more accurate than individual local classifiers, as it has access to more information
than individual classifiers.
This problem of aggregating classifiers was considered in
(Pathak et al., 2010), where the authors proposed averaging
of the parameters of local classifiers to get a global classifier. To prevent the leak of private information from the averaged parameters, the authors used a differentially private
mechanism. Differential privacy measures maximal change
in the probability of any outcome of a procedure when any
item is added to or removed from a database. It provides
a strict upper bound on the privacy loss against any adversary (Dwork & Nissim, 2004; Dwork et al., 2006; Dwork,
2006). Parameter averaging is a simple and practical procedure that can be implemented by Secure Multiparty Computation (Yao, 1982). However, averaging is not applicable
to classifiers with non-numerical parameters such as decision trees, nor to a collection of different classifier types.
This raises the question if there are more flexible and perhaps better ways of aggregating local classifiers privately.
In this paper, we propose a method of building a global
differentially private classifier from an ensemble of local classifier in two steps (see Fig. 1.) In the first step,
locally-trained classifiers are collected by a trusted entity.
A naive approach to use the collected classifiers is to release (the parameters of) the classifiers after sanitization
by differentially private mechanisms, which is impractical

