No penalty no tears: Least squares in high-dimensional linear models

Xiangyu Wang
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University

XW 56@ STAT. DUKE . EDU

David Dunson
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University

DUNSON @ STAT. DUKE . EDU

Chenlei Leng
Department of Statistics, University of Warwick

C.L ENG @ WARWICK . AC . UK

Abstract
Ordinary least squares (OLS) is the default
method for fitting linear models, but is not applicable for problems with dimensionality larger
than the sample size. For these problems, we
advocate the use of a generalized version of
OLS motivated by ridge regression, and propose
two novel three-step algorithms involving least
squares fitting and hard thresholding. The algorithms are methodologically simple to understand intuitively, computationally easy to implement efficiently, and theoretically appealing for
choosing models consistently. Numerical exercises comparing our methods with penalizationbased approaches in simulations and data analyses illustrate the great potential of the proposed
algorithms.

1. INTRODUCTION
Long known for its consistency, simplicity and optimality
under mild conditions, ordinary least squares (OLS) is the
most widely used technique for fitting linear models. Developed originally for fitting fixed dimensional linear models, unfortunately, classical OLS fails in high dimensional
linear models where the number of predictors p far exceeds
the number of observations n. To deal with this problem, Tibshirani (1996) proposed `1 -penalized regression,
a.k.a, lasso, which triggered the recent overwhelming exploration in both theory and methodology of penalizationbased methods. These methods usually assume that only
a small number of coefficients are nonzero (known as the
sparsity assumption), and minimize the same least squares
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

loss function as OLS by including an additional penalty on
the coefficients, with the typical choice being the `1 norm.
Such “penalization” constrains the solution space to certain
directions favoring sparsity of the solution, and thus overcomes the non-unique issue with OLS. It yields a sparse
solution and achieves model selection consistency and estimation consistency under certain conditions. See Zhao
and Yu (2006); Fan and Li (2001); Zhang (2010); Zou and
Hastie (2005).
Despite the success of the methods based on regularization,
there are important issues that can not be easily neglected.
On the one hand, methods using convex penalties, such as
lasso, usually require strong conditions for model selection consistency (Zhao and Yu, 2006; Lounici, 2008). On
the other hand, methods using non-convex penalties (Fan
and Li, 2001; Zhang, 2010) that can achieve model selection consistency under mild conditions often require huge
computational expense. These concerns have limited the
practical use of regularized methods, motivating alternative strategies such as direct hard thresholding (Jain et al.,
2014).
In this article, we aim to solve the problem of fitting highdimensional sparse linear models by reconsidering OLS
and answering the following simple question: Can ordinary least squares consistently fit these models with some
suitable algorithms? Our result provides an affirmative answer to this question under fairly general settings. In particular, we give a generalized form of OLS in high dimensional linear regression, and develop two algorithms that
can consistently estimate the coefficients and recover the
support. These algorithms involve least squares type of fitting and hard thresholding, and are non-iterative in nature.
Extensive empirical experiments are provided in Section 4
to compare the proposed estimators to many existing penalization methods. The performance of the new estimators is
very competitive under various setups in terms of model
selection, parameter estimation and computational time.

