Distributed Clustering of Linear Bandits in Peer to Peer Networks
Nathan Korda
MLRG, University of Oxford

NATHAN @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

Balázs Szörényi
EE, Technion & MTA-SZTE Research Group on Artificial Intelligence
Shuai Li
DiSTA, University of Insubria

Abstract
We provide two distributed confidence ball algorithms for solving linear bandit problems in peer
to peer networks with limited communication capabilities. For the first, we assume that all the
peers are solving the same linear bandit problem,
and prove that our algorithm achieves the optimal asymptotic regret rate of any centralised algorithm that can instantly communicate information between the peers. For the second, we assume that there are clusters of peers solving the
same bandit problem within each cluster, and we
prove that our algorithm discovers these clusters,
while achieving the optimal asymptotic regret
rate within each one. Through experiments on
several real-world datasets, we demonstrate the
performance of proposed algorithms compared
to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Bandits are a class of classic optimisation problems that
are fundamental to several important application areas. The
most prominent of these is recommendation systems, and
they can also arise more generally in networks (see, e.g.,
(Li et al., 2013; Hao et al., 2015)).
We consider settings where a network of agents are trying to solve collaborative linear bandit problems. Sharing
experience can improve the performance of both the whole
network and each agent simultaneously, while also increasing robustness. However, we want to avoid putting too
much strain on communication channels. Communicating
every piece of information would just overload these chanProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SZORENYI . BALAZS @ GMAIL . COM

SHUAILI . SLI @ GMAIL . COM

nels. The solution we propose is a gossip-based information sharing protocol which allows information to diffuse
across the network at a small cost, while also providing robustness.
Such a set-up would benefit, for example, a small start-up
that provides some recommendation system service but has
limited resources. Using an architecture that enables the
agents (the client’s devices) to exchange data between each
other directly and to do all the corresponding computations
themselves could significantly decrease the infrastructural
costs for the company. At the same time, without a central
server, communicating all information instantly between
agents would demand a lot of bandwidth.
Multi-Agent Linear Bandits In the simplest setting we
consider, all the agents are trying to solve the same underlying linear bandit problem. In particular, we have a set
of nodes V , indexed by i, and representing a finite set of
agents. At each time, t:
• a set of actions (equivalently, the contexts) arrives for
each agent i, Dti ⇢ D and we assume the set D is a
subset of the unit ball in Rd ;
• each agent, i, chooses an action (context) xit 2 Dti ,
and receives a reward
rti = (xit )T ✓ + ⇠ti ,
where ✓ is some unknown coefficient vector, and ⇠ti is
some zero mean, R-subGaussian noise;
• last, the agents can share information according to
some protocol across a communication channel.
We define the instantaneous regret at each node i, and, respectively, the cumulative regret over the whole network to
be:
|V |
t X
⇣
⌘T
X
i
⇢it := xi,⇤
✓
Er
,
and
R
:=
⇢it ,
t
t
t
k=1 i=1

