Multi-Player Bandits – a Musical Chairs Approach

Jonathan Rosenski
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

JONATHAN . ROSENSKI @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Liran Szlak
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

LIRAN . SZLAK @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Abstract
We consider a variant of the stochastic multiarmed bandit problem, where multiple players simultaneously choose from the same set of arms
and may collide, receiving no reward. This
setting has been motivated by problems arising
in cognitive radio networks, and is especially
challenging under the realistic assumption that
communication between players is limited. We
provide a communication-free algorithm (Musical Chairs) which attains constant regret with
high probability, as well as a sublinear-regret,
communication-free algorithm (Dynamic Musical Chairs) for the more difficult setting of players dynamically entering and leaving throughout
the game. Moreover, both algorithms do not require prior knowledge of the number of players.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the first
communication-free algorithms with these types
of formal guarantees.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a
classic and well-studied setting of sequential decisionmaking, which exemplifies the dilemma of exploration vs.
exploitation (see (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012) for a
comprehensive review). In this problem, a player sequentially chooses from a set of actions, denoted as ‘arms’. At
every round, each arm produces a reward sampled from
some unknown distribution in [0, 1], and the player receives
that reward, but does not observe the reward of other arms.
The player’s goal, of course, is to maximize the cumulaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

tive reward. The dilemma of exploration vs. exploitation
here is that the more the player ‘explores’ by trying different arms, she will have a better understanding of each
machine’s expected reward. The more the player ‘exploits’
the machine which she thinks is best, the less rounds are
wasted on exploring bad machines.
In this work, we study a variant of this problem, where
there are many players who choose from the same set of
arms. If two or more choose the same arm then there is a
‘collision’ and no reward is provided by that arm. Moreover, we assume that players may not communicate. The
goal is to find a distributed algorithm for players that will
maximize the sum of their rewards. One motivation for this
setting (as discussed in the Related Work section below)
comes from the field of cognitive radio networks, where
several users utilize the same set of channels, in a situation
where the quality of the different channels varies, and direct coordination between the players is not possible. We
use the standard notion of (expected) regret to measure our
performance, namely the difference between the expected
cumulative reward of the arm with highest mean reward,
and the expected cumulative rewards of the players.
We focus on a particularly challenging situation, where the
players cannot communicate, there is no central control,
and the players cannot even know how many other players
are also participating. At every round each player decides
which arm to sample. After the round is over the player
receives the reward associated with the chosen arm, or an
indication that the arm was chosen by at least one other
player, in which case they receive no reward. The event
that more than one player chooses the same arm will be
referred to as a collision.
We will consider two variants in this work - a static setting
in which all players start the game simultaneously and play
for T rounds, and a dynamic setting, in which players may
enter and exit throughout the game. Our main results are

