On Graduated Optimization for Stochastic
Non-Convex Problems
Elad Hazan
Princeton University

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Kfir Y. Levy
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

KFIRYL @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
The graduated optimization approach, also
known as the continuation method, is a popular heuristic to solving non-convex problems
that has received renewed interest over the last
decade. Despite being popular, very little is
known in terms of its theoretical convergence
analysis.
In this paper we describe a new first-order algorithm based on graduated optimization and analyze its performance. We characterize a family of non-convex functions for which this algorithm provably converges to a global optimum. In particular, we prove that the algorithm
converges to an ε-approximate solution within
O(1/ε2 ) gradient-based steps. We extend our
algorithm and analysis to the setting of stochastic non-convex optimization with noisy gradient
feedback, attaining the same convergence rate.
Additionally, we discuss the setting of “zeroorder optimization”, and devise a variant of our
algorithm which converges at rate of O(d2 /ε4 ).

1. Introduction
Non-convex optimization programs are ubiquitous in machine learning and computer vision. Of particular interest
are non-convex optimization problem that arise in the training of deep neural networks (Bengio, 2009). Often, such
problems admit a multimodal structure, and therefore, the
use of convex optimization machinery may lead to poor local optima.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SHAIS @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

Graduated optimization (a.k.a. continuation), (Blake &
Zisserman, 1987), is a methodology that attempts to overcome such numerous local optima. Initially, a simpler
coarse-grained version of the objective is generated and
minimized. Then, the method progresses in stages, gradually refining the versions of the objective, and using the
solution of the previous stage as an initial point for the optimization in the next stage.
Despite its popularity, there are still many gaps concerning both theoretical and practical aspects of graduated optimization, and in particular we are not aware of a rigorous
running time analysis to find a global optimum, or even
conditions in which a global optimum is reached. Nor are
we familiar with graduated optimization in the stochastic
setting, in which only a noisy gradient or value oracle to
the objective is given. Moreover, any practical application
of graduated optimization requires to efficiently construct
coarse-grained versions of the original objective. For some
special cases this construction can be made analytically
(Chapelle et al., 2006; Chaudhuri & Solar-Lezama, 2011) .
However, in the general case, it is commonly suggested in
the literature to convolve the original function with a gaussian kernel (Wu, 1996). Yet, this operation is prohibitively
inefficient in high dimensions.
Here we take an algorithmic / analytic approach to graduated optimization and show the following:
• We characterise σ-niceness (Def. 3.2), a property
of non-convex multimodal functions which captures
non-convex structure that appears in challenging optimization problems.
• We provide a stochastic algorithm inspired by graduated optimization, that performs only gradient updates
and is ensured to find an ε-optimal solution of σ-nice
functions within O(1/σ 2 ε2 ) iterations. Our algorithm

