Provable Algorithms for Inference in Topic Models
Sanjeev Arora
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

ARORA @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Rong Ge
Computer Science Department, Duke Unversity

RONGGE @ CS . DUKE . EDU

Frederic Koehler
Department of Mathematics, Princeton University

FKOEHLER @ PRINCETON . EDU

Tengyu Ma
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

TENGYU @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Ankur Moitra
Department of Mathematics and CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Recently, there has been considerable progress
on designing algorithms with provable guarantees — typically using linear algebraic methods
— for parameter learning in latent variable models. But designing provable algorithms for inference has proven to be more challenging. Here
we take a first step towards provable inference in
topic models. We leverage a property of topic
models that enables us to construct simple linear
estimators for the unknown topic proportions that
have small variance, and consequently can work
with short documents. Our estimators also correspond to finding an estimate around which the
posterior is well-concentrated. We show lower
bounds that for shorter documents it can be information theoretically impossible to find the hidden topics. Finally, we give empirical results that
demonstrate that our algorithm works on realistic topic models. It yields good solutions on synthetic data and runs in time comparable to a single iteration of Gibbs sampling.

1. Introduction
Generative models of data are ubiquitous in unsupervised
learning, and lead to two types of computational problems:
In parameter learning, the goal is find the parameters of
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MOITRA @ MIT. EDU

the model that best fits a given collection of data. In inference, the goal is to learn the values of latent variables for a
specific datapoint. A wide range of approaches are empirically effective for both tasks, including Gibbs sampling and
variational inference. However, for the most part we lack
strong provable guarantees — on running time, or quality
of solution — for these approaches.
Recently, there has been considerable progress on designing new algorithms for parameter learning with such provable guarantees. Since the usual maximum likelihood estimator is often NP-hard to compute even in simple models,
these new algorithms use alternative estimators based on
the method of moments and linear algebra. Their analysis usually involves making a structural assumption about
the parameters of the problem, which can often be justified in applications. Some highlights include algorithms
for topic modeling (Arora et al., 2013b; Anandkumar et al.,
2012), learning mixture models (Moitra & Valiant, 2010;
Hsu & Kakade, 2013; Ge et al., 2015), community detection (Anandkumar et al., 2014) and (special cases of) deep
learning (Arora et al., 2014; Janzamin et al., 2015).
But there has been comparatively much less progress on designing algorithms with provable guarantees for inference.
The current paper takes a first step in this direction, in context of topic models. Our algorithms leverage a property
of topic models (Definition 3.1) that turns out to hold in
many datasets — the existence of a good approximate inverse matrix. We also give empirical results that demonstrate that our algorithm works on realistic topic models.
On synthetic data, its error is competitive with state-of-theart approaches (which have no such provable guarantees).

