Gossip Dual Averaging for Decentralized Optimization of
Pairwise Functions
Igor Colin
IGOR . COLIN @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Unversité Paris-Saclay, 75013 Paris, France
Aurélien Bellet
Magnet Team, INRIA Lille – Nord Europe, 59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

AURELIEN . BELLET @ INRIA . FR

Joseph Salmon
JOSEPH . SALMON @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
Stéphan Clémençon
STEPHAN . CLEMENCON @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Unversité Paris-Saclay, 75013 Paris, France

Abstract
In decentralized networks (of sensors, connected
objects, etc.), there is an important need for efficient algorithms to optimize a global cost function, for instance to learn a global model from
the local data collected by each computing unit.
In this paper, we address the problem of decentralized minimization of pairwise functions of the
data points, where these points are distributed
over the nodes of a graph defining the communication topology of the network. This general
problem finds applications in ranking, distance
metric learning and graph inference, among others. We propose new gossip algorithms based
on dual averaging which aims at solving such
problems both in synchronous and asynchronous
settings. The proposed framework is flexible
enough to deal with constrained and regularized
variants of the optimization problem. Our theoretical analysis reveals that the proposed algorithms preserve the convergence rate of centralized dual averaging up to an additive bias term.
We present numerical simulations on Area Under
the ROC Curve (AUC) maximization and metric
learning problems which illustrate the practical
interest of our approach.

1. Introduction
The increasing popularity of large-scale and fully decentralized computational architectures, fueled for instance by
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

the advent of the “Internet of Things”, motivates the development of efficient optimization algorithms adapted to this
setting. An important application is machine learning in
wired and wireless networks of agents (sensors, connected
objects, mobile phones, etc.), where the agents seek to minimize a global learning objective which depends of the data
collected locally by each agent. In such networks, it is typically impossible to efficiently centralize data or to globally
aggregate intermediate results: agents can only communicate with their immediate neighbors (e.g., agents within a
small distance), often in a completely asynchronous fashion. Standard distributed optimization and machine learning algorithms (implemented for instance using MapReduce/Spark) require a coordinator node and/or to maintain
synchrony, and are thus unsuitable for use in decentralized
networks.
In contrast, gossip algorithms (Tsitsiklis, 1984; Boyd et al.,
2006; Kempe et al., 2003; Shah, 2009) are tailored to
this setting because they only rely on simple peer-to-peer
communication: each agent only exchanges information
with one neighbor at a time. Various gossip algorithms
have been proposed to solve the flagship problem of decentralized optimization, namely to find a parameter vector θ P
which minimizes an average of convex functions
n
(1/n) i=1 f (θ; xi ), where the data xi is only known
to agent i. The most popular algorithms are based on
(sub)gradient descent (Johansson et al., 2010; Nedić &
Ozdaglar, 2009; Ram et al., 2010; Bianchi & Jakubowicz, 2013), ADMM (Wei & Ozdaglar, 2012; 2013; Iutzeler
et al., 2013) or dual averaging (Duchi et al., 2012; Yuan
et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2015; Tsianos et al., 2015), some
of which can also accommodate constraints or regularization on θ. The main idea underlying these methods is that
each agent seeks to minimize its local function by applying
local updates (e.g., gradient steps) while exchanging infor-

