Persistence weighted Gaussian kernel for topological data analysis
Genki Kusano1
Kenji Fukumizu2
Yasuaki Hiraoka1
1
Tohoku University, 2 The Institute of Statistical Mathematics

Abstract
Topological data analysis (TDA) is an emerging
mathematical concept for characterizing shapes
in complex data. In TDA, persistence diagrams
are widely recognized as a useful descriptor of
data, and can distinguish robust and noisy topological properties. This paper proposes a kernel
method on persistence diagrams to develop a statistical framework in TDA. The proposed kernel
satisfies the stability property and provides explicit control on the effect of persistence. Furthermore, the method allows a fast approximation technique. The method is applied into practical data on proteins and oxide glasses, and the
results show the advantage of our method compared to other relevant methods on persistence
diagrams.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in utilizing methods of algebraic topology for statistical data
analysis. This line of research is called topological data
analysis (TDA) (Carlsson, 2009), which has been successfully applied to various areas including information science (Carlsson et al., 2008; de Silva & Ghrist, 2007), biology (Kasson et al., 2007; Xia & Wei, 2014), brain science
(Lee et al., 2011; Petri et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2008), biochemistry (Gameiro et al., 2013), and material science
(Nakamura et al., 2015a;b). In many of these applications,
it is not straightforward to provide feature vectors or descriptors of data from their complicated geometric configurations. The aim of TDA is to detect informative topological properties (e.g., connected components, rings, and
cavities) from such data, and use them as descriptors.
A key mathematical apparatus in TDA is persistent homolProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

GENKSN @ GMAIL . COM
FUKUMIZU @ ISM . AC . JP

HIRAOKA @ WPI - AIMR . TOHOKU . AC . JP

ogy, which is an algebraic method for extracting robust
topological information from data. To provide some intuition for the persistent homology, let us consider a typical
way of constructing persistent homology from data points
in a Euclidean space, assuming that the data lie on a submanifold. The aim is to make inference on the topology
of the underlying manifold from finite data. We consider
the r-balls (balls with radius r) to recover the topology
of the manifold, as popularly employed in constructing an
r-neighbor graph in many manifold learning algorithms.
While it is expected that, with an appropriate choice of r,
the r-ball model can represent the underlying topological
structures of the manifold, it is also known that the result is
sensitive to the choice of r. If r is too small, the union of
r-balls consists simply of the disjoint r-balls. On the other
hand, if r is too large, the union becomes a contractible
space. Persistent homology (Edelsbrunner et al., 2002) can
consider all r simultaneously, and provides an algebraic expression of topological properties together with their persistence over r. We give a brief explanation of persistent
homology in Supplementary material A.3.

Figure 1. The union Xr of r-balls at points sampled from annuli
with noise.

The persistent homology can be visualized in a compact
form called a persistence diagram D = {(bi , di ) ∈ R2 |
i ∈ I, bi ≤ di }, and this paper focuses on persistence diagrams, since the contributions of this paper can be fully
explained in terms of persistence diagrams. Every point
(bi , di ) ∈ D, called a generator of the persistent homology,
represents a topological property (e.g., connected components, rings, and cavities) which appears at Xbi and disappears at Xdi in the r-ball model. Then, the persistence

