Uprooting and Rerooting Graphical Models

Adrian Weller
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

Abstract
We show how any binary pairwise model may be
‘uprooted’ to a fully symmetric model, wherein
original singleton potentials are transformed to
potentials on edges to an added variable, and then
‘rerooted’ to a new model on the original number
of variables. The new model is essentially equivalent to the original model, with the same partition function and allowing recovery of the original marginals or a MAP configuration, yet may
have very different computational properties that
allow much more efficient inference. This metaapproach deepens our understanding, may be applied to any existing algorithm to yield improved
methods in practice, generalizes earlier theoretical results, and reveals a remarkable interpretation of the triplet-consistent polytope.

1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models, also called Markov random
fields (MRFs), have become a central tool in machine
learning, providing a powerful and compact way to model
relationships between variables. However, many key problems, such as identifying a configuration with highest probability (termed maximum a posteriori or MAP inference),
estimating marginal probabilities of subsets of variables
(marginal inference) or calculating the normalizing partition function, are typically computationally intractable,
leading to much work to identify settings where exact
polynomial-time methods apply, or to create approximate
algorithms that perform well.
Focusing on binary pairwise models (see §2 for definitions
and details), we provide a general meta-method for inference that generalizes and strengthens existing theoretical
results, deepens our understanding, and can help significantly in practice. Suppose a model M has n variables
X1 , . . . Xn with various singleton and edge potentials. We
start by uprooting this model to a uniquely determined ‘parProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ADRIAN . WELLER @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

ent’ model M + where all previous singleton potentials are
converted to edge potentials to a newly added variable X0 .
This M + model is elegantly symmetric: no singleton potentials, and all edge potentials give a score only if incident
variables are different. This uprooting is not a novel idea
for MAP inference (Barahona et al., 1988; Sontag, 2007)
but we believe the other ideas presented here are new.
The uprooted M + model is interesting in itself; for example, its partition function is exactly twice that of the original model M , which we may consider as the parent M +
model rooted at X0 . A key idea is that we can reroot M +
at any other variable, for example X2 , to yield an equivalent model on n variables X0 , X1 , X3 , . . . , Xn , which has
new singleton potentials determined by the edge potentials
to X2 in M + . In effect, this is a different view or ‘crystallization’ of the parent symmetric M + model. Call this
X2 -rooted model M2 (we could root at any variable Xi to
obtain Mi ; note that the original model M is M0 ).
We make the following observations.
• M2 indeed represents essentially the same model as M .
It lies in the equivalence class of models that map to the
same unique symmetric representation M + .
• M2 has the same partition function as M but may have
very different computational properties. The original
model M might be hard but M2 could be easy.
• Using any existing inference method for M2 , it is not
hard also to recover all the original singleton marginals
or a MAP configuration of M , see §4.1.
• Hence we have a general meta-method for inference:
given any inference approach, instead of applying it to
M , we can instead consider various equivalent rerooted
models and apply the approach to one of them instead,
which may work much better.
• Many existing methods and bounds apply only to particular ranges of edge and singleton potentials, which are
changed after rerooting. Hence, we can generalize existing approaches. We discuss various implications in §5.
For example, we can use the very efficient max flow/min
cut method for MAP inference in a model if all edges
are attractive with no conditions on singleton potentials
(more generally if the model is balanced, see §2.1). This
might not be possible in the original model M but will

